 = = Organization = = 
 The Brigade is a subordinate unit of U.S. Army Pacific and the Eighth Theater Sustainment Command It falls under the direct command of the 8th Theater Sustainment Command . 
 Currently , the 8th Military Police Brigade consists of one battalion : 728th Military Police Battalion , which contains the 57th , 58th , 552nd , <unk> Military Police companies and the 39th and 13th Military Police detachments . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Vietnam War = = = 
 The 8th Military Police Group was originally constituted on 8 April 1967 in the regular army and activated on 26 July at Fort Riley , Kansas . After seeing only five months of duty , the group was again deactivated on 18 December of that year . 
 On 24 August 1968 the group was again activated , this time in Vietnam . Its activation was part of a larger activation of several military police groups in the region to provide greater command and control for Military Police operating throughout the region . As such , the headquarters element took command of military police units already operating in the country . The Brigade provided policing duties , based in Long Binh along with the 89th Military Police Group . During that time it was a subordinate unit of the 18th Military Police Brigade . It received its distinctive unit insignia on 12 November 1969 . The group operated in Vietnam until the pullout of U.S. forces from the nation , receiving ten campaign streamers for its role in the conflict . 
 = = = Reactivation and South Korea = = = 
 The 8th Military Police Brigade ( Provisional ) was constituted in South Korea in September 1984 in response to the need for cohesive command and control element in the event of war , for the numerous non @-@ divisional Military Police units on the peninsula . At the time it consisted of the 94th Military Police Battalion in Yongsan ( Seoul ) and the 728th Military Police Battalion in Taegu ( Camp Walker ) . However , the brigade would remain provisional and would not be officially activated for another ten years while it operated in this capacity . 
 In 1995 , the concept plan was approved for the activation of a military police brigade headquarters in Korea . The 8th MP Brigade was officially activated on 16 April 1996 to provide command and control for the 728th Military Police Battalion and the 94th Military Police Battalion in armistice and to serve as the theater military police brigade during hostilities . The same day , it received its shoulder sleeve insignia . 
 In July 2006 , the 8th MP Brigade Headquarters and the 728th MP Battalion were reassigned to U.S. Army Pacific and moved from Korea to Schofield Barracks , Hawaii . It was placed under the command of the newly created 8th Theater Sustainment Command . The command is responsible for preparing the 25th Infantry Division and other 8th Army units for worldwide deployment . 
 = = = Global War on Terrorism = = = 
 = = = = Iraq War = = = = 
 Subordinate units of the brigade 's 728th MP Battalion deployed to Iraq in October 2004 to provide military police duties while the Army formed a clear rotational schedule for MP units coming and going from the country during Operation Iraqi Freedom . In October 2007 , the Brigade again deployed elements of the 728th MP Battalion to Iraq for 15 months in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom . The units suffered several casualties , including soldiers killed in ambushes and vehicle accidents . 
 Brigade headquarters are scheduled to deploy to the Iraq War in fall 2008 to partake in Operation Iraqi Freedom . In July 2008 , the 8th MP Brigade began its move into Iraq with a pre @-@ deployment site survey to support the upcoming deployment into the country . The brigade headquarters was set to replace the 18th Military Police Brigade , which ended its deployment in fall of 2008 . The 8th MP brigade will continue the training and expansion of the national Iraqi Police force in the Baghdad area . On 2 December , the brigade officially took control from the 18th MP brigade and began its deployment . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Campaign Participation Credit = = = 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 = Deus Ex = 
 Deus Ex [ <unk> <unk> ] is a cyberpunk @-@ themed action role @-@ playing video game — combining first @-@ person shooter , stealth and role @-@ playing elements — developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos Interactive in 2000 . First published for personal computers running Microsoft Windows , Deus Ex was later ported to Mac OS systems and PlayStation 2 . Set in a dystopian world during the year 2052 , the central plot follows rookie United Nations Anti @-@ Terrorist Coalition agent JC Denton , as he sets out to combat terrorist forces , which have become increasingly prevalent in a world slipping ever further into chaos . As the plot unfolds , Denton becomes entangled in a deep and ancient conspiracy , encountering organizations such as Majestic 12 , the Illuminati and the Hong Kong Triads during his journey . 
 The game received universal critical acclaim , including repeatedly being named " Best PC Game of All Time " in PC Gamer 's " Top 100 PC Games " in 2011 and in a poll carried out by UK gaming magazine PC Zone . It was a frequent candidate for and winner of Game of the Year awards , drawing praise for its pioneering designs in player choice and multiple narrative paths . It has sold more than 1 million copies , as of April 23 , 2009 . The game has spawned both a sequel , Deus Ex : Invisible War , released in 2003 , and three prequels : Deus Ex : Human Revolution , released in 2011 , Deus Ex : The Fall , released in 2013 , and Deus Ex : Mankind Divided , to be released in August 2016 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Deus Ex incorporates elements from four video game genres : role @-@ playing , first @-@ person shooter , adventure , and " immersive simulation " , the last of which being a game where " nothing reminds you that you 're just playing a game " . For example , the game uses a first @-@ person camera during gameplay and includes exploration and character interaction as primary features . 
 The player assumes the role of JC Denton , a nanotech @-@ augmented operative of the United Nations Anti @-@ Terrorist Coalition ( UNATCO ) . This nanotechnology is a central gameplay mechanism , and allows players to perform superhuman feats . 
 = = = Role @-@ playing elements = = = 
 As the player accomplishes objectives , the player character is rewarded with " skill points " . Skill points are used to enhance a character 's abilities in eleven different areas , and were designed to provide players with a way to customize their characters ; a player might create a combat @-@ focused character by increasing proficiency with pistols or rifles , while a more furtive character can be created by focusing on lock picking and computer hacking abilities . There are four different levels of proficiency in each skill , with the skill point cost increasing for each successive level . 
 Weapons may be customized through " weapon modifications " , which can be found or purchased throughout the game . The player might add scopes , silencers , or laser sights ; increase the weapon 's range , accuracy , or magazine size ; or decrease its recoil and reload time . Not all modifications are available to all weapons ; for example , a rocket launcher cannot be silenced , and recoil cannot be reduced on a flamethrower . 
 Players are further encouraged to customize their characters through nano @-@ augmentations — cybernetic devices that grant characters superhuman powers . While the game contains eighteen different nano @-@ augmentations , the player can install a maximum of nine , as each must be used on a certain part of the body : one in the arms , legs , eyes , and head ; two underneath the skin ; and three in the torso . This forces the player to choose carefully between the benefits offered by each augmentation . For example , the arm augmentation requires the player to decide between boosting their character 's skill in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat or his ability to lift heavy objects . 
 Interaction with non @-@ player characters ( NPCs ) was a large design focus . When the player interacts with a non @-@ player character , the game will enter a cutscene @-@ like conversation mode where the player advances the conversation by selecting from a list of dialogue options . The player 's choices often have a substantial effect on both gameplay and plot , as non @-@ player characters will react in different ways depending on the selected answer ( e.g. rudeness makes them less likely to provide assistance ) . 
 = = = Combat elements = = = 
 Deus Ex features combat similar to first @-@ person shooters , with real @-@ time action , a first @-@ person perspective , and reflex @-@ based gameplay . As the player will often encounter enemies in groups , combat often tends toward a tactical approach , including the use of cover , strafing , and " hit @-@ and @-@ run " . A USA Today reviewer found " At the easiest difficulty setting , your character is puréed again and again by an onslaught of human and robotic terrorists until you learn the value of stealth . " However , through the game 's role @-@ playing systems , it is possible to develop a character 's skills and augmentations to create a tank @-@ like combat specialist with the ability to deal and absorb large amounts of damage . Non @-@ player characters will praise or criticize the main character depending on his use of force , incorporating a moral element into the gameplay . 
 Deus Ex features a head @-@ up display crosshair , whose size dynamically shows where shots will fall based on movement , aim , and the weapon in use ; the reticle expands while the player is moving or shifting his or her aim , and slowly shrinks to its original size while no actions are taken . How quickly the reticle shrinks depends on the character 's proficiency with the equipped weapon , the number of accuracy modifications added to the weapon , and the level of the " targeting " nano @-@ augmentation . 
 Deus Ex features twenty @-@ four weapons , ranging from crowbars , electroshock weapons , and riot baton , to laser guided anti @-@ tank rockets and assault rifles ; both lethal and non @-@ lethal weapons are available . The player can also make use of several weapons of opportunity , such as fire extinguishers . 
 = = = Player choice = = = 
 Gameplay in Deus Ex emphasizes player choice . Objectives can be completed in numerous ways , including stealth , sniping , heavy frontal assault , dialogue , or engineering and computer hacking . This level of freedom requires that levels , characters , and puzzles be designed with significant redundancy , as a single play @-@ through of the game will miss large sections of dialogue , areas , and other content . In some missions the player is encouraged to avoid using deadly force , and certain aspects of the story may change depending on how violent or non @-@ violent the player chooses to be . The game is also unusual in that two of its boss villains can be killed off early in the game , or left alive to be defeated later , and this too affects how other characters interact with the player . 
 Because of its design focus on player choice , Deus Ex has been compared with System Shock , a game that inspired its design . Together , these factors give the game a great degree of replayability , as the player will have vastly different experiences , depending on which methods he or she uses to accomplish objectives . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 Deus Ex was designed as a single player game , and the initial releases of the Windows and Macintosh versions of the game did not include multiplayer functionality . Support for multiplayer modes was later incorporated through patches . The component includes three game modes : deathmatch , basic team deathmatch , and advanced team deathmatch . Only five maps , based on levels from the single @-@ player portion of the game , were included with the original multiplayer patch , but many user @-@ created maps now exist . The PlayStation 2 release of Deus Ex does not offer a multiplayer mode . In April 2014 it was announced that Gamespy would cease their <unk> services , also affecting Deus Ex . A community @-@ made patch for the multiplayer mode has been created as a response to this . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Deus Ex takes place in the year 2052 in a world that draws heavily upon popular real world conspiracy theories for many of its plot elements . These include speculations regarding black helicopters , vaccinations , and FEMA , as well as Area 51 , the <unk> network , Men in Black , <unk> ( in the form of " <unk> " ) , and grey aliens . Mysterious groups such as Majestic 12 , the Illuminati , the Knights Templar , the Bilderberg Group , and the Trilateral Commission also either play a central part in the plot , or are alluded to during the course of the game . This dark setting is enhanced by the fact that the entire game takes place at night , a backdrop that adds to the atmosphere of conspiracies and stealth . 
 The game contradicts itself in several instances regarding the exact year in which the events of the story take place , but information in the sequel Deus Ex : Invisible War reconciles this inconsistency via retroactive continuity , placing the events of Deus Ex in the year 2052 . Most of the game takes place in fictionalized versions of real @-@ world locations , including New York City , Hong Kong , Paris , Vandenberg Air Force Base , and Area 51 . 
 The plot of Deus Ex depicts a society on a slow spiral into chaos . There is a massive division between the rich and the poor , not only socially , but in some cities physically . A lethal pandemic known as the " Gray Death " ravages the world 's population , especially within the United States , and has no cure . A synthetic vaccine , " Ambrosia " , manufactured by the company VersaLife , nullifies the effects of the virus , but is in critically short supply . Because of its scarcity , Ambrosia is available only to those deemed " vital to the social order " , and finds its way primarily to government officials , military personnel , the rich and influential , scientists , and the intellectual elite . With no hope for the common people of the world , riots occur worldwide , and a number of terrorist organizations have formed with the professed intent of assisting the downtrodden , among them the National Secessionist Forces of the U.S. and a French group known as Silhouette . 
 In order to combat these threats to the world order , the United Nations has greatly expanded its governmental influence around the globe . The United Nations Anti @-@ Terrorist Coalition ( UNATCO ) is formed , with the intent of maintaining peace internationally and combating the world 's ever @-@ growing number of terrorist groups . It is headquartered near New York City in a bunker beneath Liberty Island , placed there after a terrorist strike on the Statue of Liberty . Alex Jacobson 's character model and name are based on Warren Spector 's own nephew , Alec Jacobson . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The player assumes the identity of JC Denton , a <unk> @-@ augmented ( " nano @-@ aug " ) UNATCO agent . After completing his training , JC takes several missions given by Director Joseph Manderley to track down members of the National Secessionist Forces ( NSF ) and their stolen shipments of the " Ambrosia " vaccine , the treatment for the " Gray Death " virus . Through these missions , JC is reunited with his brother , Paul , who is also nano @-@ augmented . JC tracks the Ambrosia shipment to a private terminal at LaGuardia Airport . Paul meets JC outside the plane , and explains that he has defected from UNATCO and is now working with the NSF after learning that the Gray Death is a man @-@ made virus , with UNATCO using its power to make sure only the elite receive the vaccine . 
 JC returns to UNATCO headquarters and is told by Manderley that both he and Paul have been outfitted with a 24 @-@ hour kill switch , and that Paul 's has been activated due to his betrayal . Manderley orders JC to fly to Hong Kong to eliminate Tracer Tong , a hacker whom Paul has contact with , and who can disable the kill switches . Instead , JC returns to Paul 's apartment to find Paul hiding inside . Paul further explains his defection and encourages JC to also defect by sending out a distress call to alert the NSF 's allies . Upon doing so , JC becomes a wanted man by UNATCO , and his own kill switch is activated by Federal Emergency Management Agency ( FEMA ) Director Walton Simons . JC is unable to escape UNATCO forces , and both he and Paul ( provided he survived the raid on the apartment ) are taken to a secret prison below UNATCO headquarters . An entity named " Daedalus " contacts JC and informs him that the prison is part of Majestic 12 , and arranges for him and Paul to escape . The two flee to Hong Kong to meet with Tong , who deactivates their kill switches . Tong requests JC infiltrate the VersaLife building . Doing so , JC discovers that the corporation is the source for the Gray Death , and he is able to steal the plans for the virus and destroy the " universal constructor " ( UC ) that produces it . 
 Analysis of the virus shows it was manufactured by the Illuminati , prompting Tong to send JC to Paris to try to make contact with the organization and obtain their help fighting Majestic 12 . JC eventually meets with Illuminati leader Morgan Everett , and learns that the Gray Death virus was intended to be used for augmentation technology , but Majestic 12 , led by <unk> businessman and former Illuminatus Bob Page , was able to steal and repurpose it into its current viral form . Everett recognizes that without VersaLife 's universal constructor , Majestic 12 can no longer create the virus , and will likely target Vandenberg Air Force Base , where X @-@ 51 , a group of former Area 51 scientists , has built another one . After aiding the base personnel in repelling a Majestic 12 attack , JC meets X @-@ 51 leader Gary Savage , who reveals that Daedalus is an artificial intelligence ( AI ) borne out of the <unk> program . Everett attempts to gain control over Majestic 12 's communications network by releasing Daedalus onto the U.S. military networks , but Page counters by releasing his own AI , Icarus , which merges with Daedalus to form a new AI , Helios , with the ability to control all global communications . After this , Savage enlists JC 's help in procuring schematics for reconstructing components for the UC that were damaged during Majestic 12 's raid of Vandenberg . JC finds the schematics and electronically transmits them to Savage . Page intercepts the transmission and launches a nuclear missile at Vandenberg to ensure that Area 51 ( now Majestic 12 's headquarters ) , will be the only location in the world with an operational UC . However , JC is able to reprogram the missile to strike Area 51 . JC then travels there himself to confront Page . 
 When JC locates him , Page reveals that he seeks to merge with Helios and gain full control over all nanotechnology , essentially becoming a god . JC is contacted by Tong , Everett , and the Helios AI simultaneously . All three factions ask for his help in defeating Page , while furthering their own objectives , and JC is forced to choose between them . Tong seeks to plunge the world into a second Dark Age by destroying the global communications hub and preventing anyone from taking control of the world . Everett offers Denton the chance to bring the Illuminati back to power by killing Bob Page and using the technology of Area 51 to rule the world with an invisible hand . Helios wishes to merge with Denton and rule the world as a benevolent dictator with infinite knowledge and reason . The player 's decision determines the course of the future , and brings the game to a close . 
 = = Development = = 
 After Looking Glass Technologies and Origin Systems released Ultima Underworld II : Labyrinth of Worlds in January 1993 , producer Warren Spector began to plan Troubleshooter , the game that would become Deus Ex . Spector found himself burnt out on fantasy and science fiction settings , and hoped to make a game set in the real world . In his 1994 proposal , he described the concept as " Underworld @-@ style first @-@ person action " in a real world setting with " big @-@ budget , nonstop action " . Spector later commented that Origin did not have the interest , nor Looking Glass the funding , to produce the game . He eventually left Origin for Looking Glass and continued to develop the game 's concept , but his project Junction Point , which was inspired by ideas from Troubleshooter , was cancelled . After Spector and his team were laid off from Looking Glass , John Romero of Ion Storm offered him the chance to make his " dream game " without any restrictions . Spector quickly joined the company . 
 Preproduction for Deus Ex began around August 1997 and lasted roughly six months . The six @-@ person team came from Looking Glass 's Austin studio . Spector , the team 's director and producer , saw their work as improving upon the game design ideas of Origin , Looking Glass , and Valve Corporation by doing what those companies did not . The game 's " ironic " working title was Shooter : Majestic Revelations , and it was scheduled for release on Christmas 1998 . The team developed the setting before the game mechanics . Noticing his wife 's fascination with The X @-@ Files , Spector connected the " real world , millennial weirdness , [ and ] conspiracy " topics on his mind and decided to make a game about them that would appeal to a wide audience . Shooter 's fiction was based in part on conspiracy theories related to Area 51 , CIA drug trafficking , the John F. Kennedy assassination , the Majestic 12 , and a Masonic bunker beneath Denver International Airport . The team designed over 200 characters without associated in @-@ game roles , which was both helpful when designing missions and unhelpful as they attempted to reduce their scope . Later in 1997 , Spector wrote a " manifesto " on his ideal game and the structure of role @-@ playing video games . His principles included " problems , not puzzles " , " no forced failure " , " players do ; NPCs watch " , and " areas with multiple entrance and exit points " . In retrospect , Spector believed that Deus Ex accomplished the intent of his manifesto . 
 The Shooter design document cast the player as an augmented agent working against an elite cabal in the " dangerous and chaotic " 2050s . It cited Half @-@ Life , Fallout , Thief : The Dark Project , and GoldenEye 007 as game design influences , and used the stories and settings of Colossus : The Forbin Project , The Manchurian Candidate , Robocop , The X @-@ Files and Men in Black as reference points . According to the document , the game would engage with " the millennial madness that 's gripping the world ... and a general fascination with conspiracy theories and the desire to play with high @-@ tech espionage toys " . The team designed a skill system that featured " special powers " derived from nanotechnological augmentation , and avoided the inclusion of die rolling and skills that required micromanagement . Augmentations were unique to the player character . By March 1998 , preproduction had generated 300 pages of documentation . The document grew to 500 pages , with " radically different " content , by the game 's April 1999 Alpha 1 deadline . Of Spector 's original design document , the marketing section was the only part left unedited . 
 In early 1998 , the Deus Ex team grew to 20 people and the game entered a 28 @-@ month production phase . Spector hired new staff for his Austin studio , and was assigned an art team from Ion Storm 's Dallas branch . The development team consisted of three programmers , six designers , seven artists , a writer , an associate producer , a " tech " , and Warren Spector , the producer and director . Two writers and four testers were hired as contractors . Chris Norden was the lead programmer and assistant director , Harvey Smith the lead designer , Jay Lee the lead artist , and Sheldon Pacotti the lead writer . However , Spector 's initial management structure , which involved two competing design teams and the matrix management of the Dallas art team , was a failure . According to Spector , the team was interested in multiple video game genres , and it contained both design <unk> who wanted to " do everything " and design minimalists who wanted to do a few things well . Close friends of the team who understood the intentions behind the game were invited to playtest and give feedback . The wide range of input led to debates in the office and changes to the game . Spector later concluded that the team was " blinded by promises of complete creative freedom " , and by their belief that the game would have no budget , marketing or time restraints . By mid @-@ 1998 , the game 's title had become Deus Ex , derived from the Latin literary device deus ex machina ( " god from the machine " ) in which a plot is resolved by an unpredictable intervention . Spector acknowledged its grammatical faults as a title , but he liked it because of its relevance to the in @-@ game struggle for power , to the medium 's storytelling difficulties , to the game being played on a computer , and to the " self @-@ referential " acceptance of trying one 's best to resolve affairs . 
 Spector felt that the best aspects of Deus Ex 's development were the " high @-@ level vision " and length of preproduction , flexibility within the project , testable " proto @-@ missions " , and Unreal Engine license . The team 's pitfalls included the management structure , unrealistic goals , underestimating risks with artificial intelligence , their handling of proto @-@ missions , and weakened morale from bad press . He referred to that period of Ion Storm as " Sturm und Drang " , because of the degree of hype and the vitriol following Daikatana 's trash talk marketing , alongside negative press in 1998 and 1999 . He said that his Austin team had " frequent " slumps in morale from taking the company 's coverage personally and seeing their private emails posted online . Eventually , the Deus Ex Austin team developed a " ' we 'll show them ' mentality " to distinguish their work and reputation from those of the Dallas branch . Deus Ex was published by Eidos Interactive and released on June 23 , 2000 for Microsoft Windows . The team planned third @-@ party ports for Mac OS 9 and Linux . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The original 1997 design document for Deus Ex privileges character development over all other features , including experimental sequences and technology demos . The game was designed to be " genre @-@ busting " : in parts simulation , role @-@ playing game , first @-@ person shooter , and adventure . The team wanted players to consider " who they wanted to be " in the game , and for that to alter how they behaved in the game . In this way , the game world was " deeply simulated " , or realistic and believable enough that the player would solve problems in creative , emergent ways without noticing distinct puzzles . The developers also wanted to include " choice " and " consequence " , which Spector called the team 's " two most frequently uttered words " . However , the team 's simulation ultimately failed to maintain the desired level of openness , and they had to brute force " skill " , " action " , and " character interaction " paths through each level . <unk> also revealed that their idea of a role @-@ playing game based in the real world was more interesting in theory than in reality . The team chose two real @-@ world bases for levels : " highly interconnected , multi @-@ level " spaces , and places that most cannot visit ( e.g. , the White House ) . In practice , the team found that certain aspects of the real world , such as hotels and office buildings , were not compelling in a game . Ion Storm saw Deus Ex as being about " player expression " rather than making the developers appear " clever " . They treated the player as a " collaborator " , who they sought to empower to " make choices and ... deal with the consequences " . Spector credited the 1995 role @-@ playing video game Suikoden as an inspiration , stating that the limited choices in Suikoden inspired him to expand on the idea with more meaningful choices in Deux Ex . 
 The game 's story changed greatly during production , but the idea of an augmented <unk> protagonist named JC Denton remained throughout . Though Spector originally pictured Deus Ex as akin to The X @-@ Files , lead writer Sheldon Pacotti felt that it ended up more like James Bond . Spector wrote that the team overextended itself by planning highly elaborate scenes , including a replica of downtown Austin , a reconstruction of Area 51 from satellite data , a sunken post @-@ earthquake Los Angeles , a raid to free thousands of prisoners of war from a Federal Emergency Management Agency @-@ controlled United Nations concentration camp , and over 25 missions throughout Siberia , western Europe , and the United States . Designer Harvey Smith pushed for the removal of a subplot in which Mexico invaded Texas , in order to make development easier and the narrative more personal . He also removed a largely complete White House level due to its complexity and production needs . Finished digital assets were repurposed or , in the cases of Texas and the Denver airport , abandoned by the team . Pete Davison of USgamer referred to the White House and presidential bunker as " the truly deleted scenes of Deus Ex 's lost levels " . 
 One of the things that Spector wanted to achieve in Deus Ex was to make JC Denton a cypher for the player , in order to create a better immersion and gameplay experience . He did not want the character to force any emotion so that whatever feelings the player may be experiencing comes from themselves rather than from JC Denton . To do this , Spector instructed voice actor Jay Anthony Franke to record his dialogue without any emotion but in a monotone voice , which is unusual for a voice acting role . 
 Once coded , the team 's game systems did not work as intended . Prototypes of the systems and of certain missions were built near the beginning of development , which revealed some of the team 's planning mistakes . For example , the early tests of the conversation system and user interface were flawed , but the team had time to revise them before the game 's release . The team also found augmentations and skills to be less interesting than they had seemed in the design document . Colleagues from other companies — such as Doug Church , Rob Fermier , Marc LeBlanc , and Gabe Newell — noticed and pointed out these deficiencies in game " tension " when they played the prototype . In response , Harvey Smith substantially revised the augmentations and skills . Production milestones served as wake @-@ up calls for the game 's direction . A May 1998 milestone that called for a functional demo revealed that the size of the game 's maps caused frame rate issues , which was one of the first signs that maps needed to be cut . A year later , the team reached a milestone for finished game systems that Spector nicknamed the " Wow , these missions suck " milestone , which led to better estimates for their future mission work and to the reduction of the 500 @-@ page design document to 270 pages . Spector recalled Smith 's mantra on this point : " less is more " . 
 One of the team 's biggest blind spots was the AI programming for NPCs . Spector wrote that they considered it in preproduction , but that they did not figure out how to handle it until " relatively late in development " . This led to wasted time when the team had to discard their early AI code . The team built atop their game engine 's shooter @-@ based AI instead of writing new code that would allow characters to exhibit convincing emotions . As a result , NPC behavior was variable until the very end of development . Spector felt that the team 's " sin " was their inconsistent display of a trustable " human AI " . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 The game was developed on systems including dual @-@ processor Pentium Pro 200s and Athlon 800s with eight and nine gigabyte hard drives , some using SCSI . The team used " more than 100 video cards " throughout development . Deus Ex was built using Visual Studio , Lightwave , and Lotus Notes . They also built a custom dialogue editor , <unk> . The team used <unk> atop the Unreal game engine for map design , which Spector wrote was " superior to anything else available " . Their trust in <unk> led them to code " special @-@ cases " for their immediate mission needs instead of more generalized multi @-@ case code . Even as concerned team members expressed misgivings , the team only addressed this later in the project . To Spector , this was a lesson to always prefer " general solutions " over " special casing " , such that the tool set works predictably . 
 They waited to license a game engine until after preproduction , expecting the benefits of licensing to be more time for the content and gameplay , which Spector reported to be the case . They chose the Unreal engine as it did 80 % of what they needed from an engine and was more economical than building from scratch . Their small programming team allowed for a larger design group . The programmers also found the engine accommodating , though it took about nine months to acclimate to the software . Spector felt that they would have understood the code better had they built it themselves , instead of " treating the engine as a black box " and coding conservatively . He acknowledged that this precipitated into the Direct3D issues in their final release , which slipped through their quality assurance testing . Spector also noted that the artificial intelligence , pathfinding , and sound propagation were designed for shooters and should have been rewritten from scratch instead of relying on the engine . He thought the licensed engine worked well enough that he expected to use the same for the game 's sequel and Thief 3 . He added that developers should not attempt to force their technology to perform in ways it was not intended , and should find a balance between perfection and pragmatism . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The soundtrack of Deus Ex , composed by Alexander Brandon ( primary contributor , including main theme ) , Dan <unk> ( " Naval Base " and " Vandenberg " ) , Michiel van den Bos ( " UNATCO " , " Lebedev 's Airfield " , " Airfield Action " , " <unk> Chateau " plus minor contribution to some of Brandon 's tracks ) , and Reeves Gabrels ( " NYC Bar " ) , was praised by critics for complementing the gritty atmosphere predominant throughout the game with melodious and ambient music incorporated from a number of genres , including techno , jazz , and classical . The music sports a basic dynamic element , similar to the iMUSE system used in early 1990s LucasArts games ; during play , the music will change to a different iteration of the currently playing song based on the player 's actions , such as when the player starts a conversation , engages in combat , or transitions to the next level . All the music in the game is tracked - Gabrels ' contribution , " NYC Bar " , was converted to a module by Brandon . 
 A compact disc of the Deus Ex soundtrack was included in the Game of the Year edition and is not available for separate purchase . Notably , the soundtrack is not a direct audio rip from the game itself , however ; it is a " remastering " of the soundtrack with added instruments and audio production . Originally only thirty tracks were included with the re @-@ release , with tracks thirty @-@ one through forty @-@ one considered as extras . The PlayStation 2 port featured live , orchestral renditions of some tracks . 
 = = Release = = 
 Deus Ex has been re @-@ released in several iterations since its original publication , and has also been the basis of a number of mods developed by its fan community . 
 The Deus Ex : Game of the Year Edition , which was released on May 8 , 2001 , contains the latest game updates and a software development kit , a separate soundtrack CD , and a page from a fictional newspaper featured prominently in Deus Ex titled The Midnight Sun , which recounts recent events in the game 's world . However , later releases of said version do not include the soundtrack CD , and contain a PDF version of the newspaper on the game 's disc . 
 The Macintosh version of the game , released shortly after the PC version , was shipped with the same capabilities and can also be patched to enable multiplayer support . However , publisher Aspyr Media did not release any subsequent editions of the game or any additional patches . As such , the game is only supported in Mac OS 9 and the " Classic " environment in Mac OS X , neither of which are compatible with Intel @-@ based Macs . The PC version will run on Intel @-@ based Macs using Crossover , Boot Camp , or other software to enable a compatible version of Microsoft Windows to run on a Mac . 
 A PlayStation 2 port of the game , retitled Deus Ex : The Conspiracy outside of Europe , was released on March 26 , 2002 . Along with pre @-@ rendered introductory and ending cinematics that replaced the original versions , it features a simplified interface with optional auto aim and motion captured character models . There are many minor changes in level design , some for the purpose of balancing gameplay , but most to accommodate loading transition areas , due to the memory limitations of the PlayStation 2 . The PlayStation 2 version was rereleased in Europe on the PlayStation 3 as a PlayStation 2 Classic on May 16 , 2012 . 
 Loki Games worked on a Linux version of the game , but the company went out of business before releasing it . The OpenGL layer they wrote for the port however was sent out to Windows gamers through an online patch , which also makes the game far more compatible with Wine on Linux than it would have been with only Direct3D . 
 Though their quality assurance did not see major Direct3D issues , players noted " dramatic slowdowns " immediately following launch , and the team did not understand the " black box " of the Unreal engine well enough to make it do exactly what they needed . Spector characterized Deus Ex reviews into two categories based on how they begin with either how " Warren Spector makes games all by himself " or that " Deus Ex couldn 't possibly have been made by Ion Storm " . He has said that the game won over 30 " best of " awards in 2001 , and concluded that their final game was not perfect , but that they were much closer for having tried to " do things right or not at all " . 
 = = = Mods = = = 
 Deus Ex is built on Unreal Engine , previous games of which saw active community involvement in modding . On September 20 , 2000 , Eidos Interactive and Ion Storm announced in a press release that they would be releasing the software development kit ( SDK ) . According to the announcement , the SDK includes all the tools used to create the original game . Several team members as well as project director Warren Spector said that they were " really looking forward to seeing what [ the community ] does with our tools " . The kit was released on September 22 , 2000 , and soon gathered community interest , followed by release of tutorials , small mods , up to announcements of large mods and conversions . While ION Storm did not hugely alter the engine 's rendering and core functionality , they introduced role @-@ playing elements . 
 In 2009 , a fan @-@ made mod called The Nameless Mod ( TNM ) was released by Off Topic Productions . The game 's protagonist is a user of an Internet forum , with digital places represented as physical locations . The mod offers roughly the same amount of gameplay as Deus Ex and adds several new features to the game , with a more open world structure than Deus Ex and new weapons such as the player character 's fists . The mod was developed over 7 years and has thousands of lines of recorded dialogue and two different parallel story arcs . Upon its release , TNM earned a 9 / 10 overall from <unk> magazine . In <unk> 's 2009 Mod of the Year awards , The Nameless Mod won the Editor 's Choice award for Best Singleplayer Mod . 
 In 2013 , a fan @-@ made mod called <unk> was released . It fixes many balance mistakes ( like the " Regeneration ' augmentation ) , adds important detail to maps , passive <unk> and improves AI . It gained <unk> 2014 mod of the year award . In 2015 eight promotional videos were released . [ 1 ] 
 In 2015 , during the 15th anniversary of the game 's release , Square Enix ( who had acquired Eidos earlier ) endorsed a free fan @-@ created mod , Deus Ex : Revision which was released through Steam . The mod , created by Caustic Creative , is a graphical overhaul of the original game , adding in support for newer versions of DirectX , improving the textures and the soundtrack from the original game , and adding in more world @-@ building aesthetics . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Deus Ex received critical acclaim , attaining a score of 90 out of 100 from 28 critics on Metacritic . Thierry Nguyen from Computer Gaming World said that the game " delivers moments of brilliance , idiocy , ingenuity , and frustration . " Computer Games Magazine praised the title for its deep gameplay and its use of multiple solutions to situations in the game . 
 Former GameSpot reviewer Greg Kasavin , though awarding the game a score of 8 @.@ 2 of 10 , was disappointed by the security and lockpicking mechanics . " Such instances are essentially <unk> " , he wrote . " You simply stand there and spend a particular quantity of electronic picks or modules until the door opens or the security goes down . " Kasavin made similar complaints about the hacking interface , noting that , " Even with basic hacking skills , you 'll still be able to bypass the encryption and password protection ... by pressing the ' hack ' button and waiting a few seconds . " 
 The game 's graphics and sounds were also met with muted enthusiasm . Kasavin complained of Deus Ex 's relatively sub @-@ par graphics , blaming them on the game 's " incessantly dark industrial environments . " GamePro reviewer Chris Patterson took time to note that despite being " solid acoustically , " Deus Ex had moments of weakness . He poked fun at JC 's " Joe Friday , ' just the facts , deadpan , " and the " truly cheesy accents " of minor characters in Hong Kong and New York City . IGN called the graphics " blocky " , adding that " the animation is stiff , and the dithering is just plain awful in some spots , " referring to the limited capabilities of the Unreal Engine used to design the game. the website later on stated that " overall Deus Ex certainly looks better than your average game . " 
 Reviewers and players also complained about the size of Deus Ex 's save files . An Adrenaline Vault reviewer noted that , " Playing through the entire adventure , [ he ] accumulated over <unk> of save game data , with the average file coming in at over <unk> . " 
 The game developed a strong cult following , leading to a core modding and playing community that is still active over 15 years after its release . In an interview with IGN in July 2015 , game director Warren Spector said he never expected Deus Ex to sell many copies , but he did expect it to become a cult classic among a smaller strong community , and he continues to receive fan mail from players to date regarding their experiences and thoughts about Deus Ex . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Deus Ex received over 30 " best of " awards in 2001 , from outlets such as IGN , GameSpy , PC Gamer , Computer Gaming World , and The Adrenaline Vault . It won " Excellence in Game Design " and " Game Innovation Spotlight " at the 2001 Game Developers Choice Awards , and it was nominated for " Game of the Year " . At the Interactive Achievement Awards , it won in the " Computer Innovation " and " Computer Action / Adventure " categories and received nominations for " Sound Design " , " PC Role @-@ Playing " , and " Game of the Year " in both the PC and overall categories . The British Academy of Film and Television Arts named it " PC Game of the Year " . The game also collected several " Best Story " accolades , including first prize in Gamasutra 's 2006 " Quantum Leap " awards for storytelling in a video game . 
 Since its release , Deus Ex has appeared in a number of " Greatest Games of All Time " lists and Hall of Fame features . It was included in IGN 's " 100 Greatest Games of All Time " ( # 40 , # 21 and # 34 in 2003 , 2005 and 2007 , respectively ) , " Top 25 Modern PC Games " ( 4th place in 2010 ) and " Top 25 PC Games of All Time " ( # 20 and # 21 in 2007 and 2009 respectively ) lists . GameSpy featured the game in its " Top 50 Games of All Time " ( 18th place in 2001 ) and " 25 Most Memorable Games of the Past 5 Years " ( 15th place in 2004 ) lists , and in the site 's " Hall of Fame " . PC Gamer placed Deus Ex on its " Top 100 PC Games of All Time " ( # 2 , # 2 , # 1 by staff and # 4 by readers in 2007 , 2008 , 2010 and 2010 respectively ) and " 50 Best Games of All Time " ( # 10 and # 27 in 2001 and 2005 ) lists , and it was awarded 1st place in PC Zone 's " 101 Best PC Games Ever " feature . It was also included in Yahoo ! UK Video Games ' " 100 Greatest Computer Games of All Time " ( 28th place ) list , and in Edge 's " The 100 Best Videogames " [ sic ] ( 29th place in 2007 ) and " 100 Best Games to Play Today " ( 57th place in 2009 ) lists . Deus Ex was named the second @-@ best game of the 2000s by Gamasutra . In 2012 , Time named it one of the 100 greatest video games of all time , and G4tv ranked it as the 53rd best game of all time for its " complex and well @-@ crafted story that was really the start of players making choices that genuinely affect the outcome . " 1UP.com listed it as one of the most important games of all time , calling its influence " too massive to properly gauge . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A film adaptation based on the game was originally announced in May 2002 by Columbia Pictures . The film was being produced by Laura Ziskin , along with Greg Pruss attached with writing the screenplay . Peter Schlessel , president of production for Columbia Pictures , and Paul Baldwin , president of marketing for Eidos Interactive , stated that they were confident in that the adaptation would be a successful development for both the studios and the franchise . In March 2003 , during an interview with Greg Pruss , he informed IGN that the character of JC Denton will be " a little bit <unk> than he was in the game . " He further stated that the script was shaping up to be darker in tone than the original game . Although a release date was scheduled for 2006 , the film never got past the scripting stage . 
 In 2012 , CBS films revived the project , buying the rights and commissioning a film inspired by the Deux Ex series ; its direct inspiration will be the 2011 game Human Revolution . C. Robert Cargill and Scott Derrickson are writing the screenplay , and Derrickson will direct the film . 
 A sequel to the game , entitled Deus Ex : Invisible War , was released in the United States on December 2 , 2003 , and then in Europe in early 2004 for both the PC and the Xbox game console . A second sequel , entitled Deus Ex : Clan Wars , was originally conceived as a multiplayer @-@ focused third game for the series . After the commercial performance and public reception of Deus Ex : Invisible War failed to meet expectations , the decision was made to set the game in its own universe , and Deus Ex : Clan Wars was eventually published under the title Project : Snowblind . 
 On March 29 , 2007 , Valve Corporation announced Deus Ex and its sequel would be available for purchase from their Steam service . Among the games announced are several other Eidos franchise titles , including Thief : Deadly Shadows and Tomb Raider . 
 Eidos Montreal produced a prequel to Deus Ex called Deus Ex : Human Revolution . This was confirmed on November 26 , 2007 when Eidos Montreal posted a teaser trailer for the title on their website . The game was released on August 23 , 2011 for the PC , PlayStation 3 , and Xbox 360 platforms and received critical acclaim . 
 On April 7 , 2015 , Eidos announced a sequel to Deus Ex : Human Revolution and second prequel to Deus Ex entitled Deus Ex : Mankind Divided . 
 = Michigan Avenue Bridge = 
 The Michigan Avenue Bridge ( officially DuSable Bridge ) is a bascule bridge that carries Michigan Avenue across the main stem of the Chicago River in downtown Chicago , Illinois , United States . The bridge was proposed in the early 20th century as part of a plan to link Chicago 's south side and north side parks with a grand boulevard . Construction of the bridge started in 1918 , it opened to traffic in 1920 , and decorative work was completed in 1928 . The bridge provides passage for vehicles and pedestrians on two levels ; it is an example of a fixed trunnion bascule bridge , which is also known as a " Chicago style bascule bridge " . The bridge is included in the Michigan – Wacker Historic District and has been designated as a Chicago Landmark . 
 The location is significant in the early history of Chicago . Events from the city 's past are commemorated with sculptures and plaques on the bridge , and exhibits in the McCormick Bridgehouse & Chicago River Museum — housed in one of the bridge tender houses — detail the history of the Chicago River . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Michigan Avenue Bridge has a north – south orientation , spanning the main stem of the Chicago River between the Near North Side and Loop community areas of Chicago . Its northern portal lies at the foot of the Magnificent Mile , between the Wrigley Building and Tribune Tower . Its southern portal is at the intersection of Michigan Avenue and Wacker Drive , overlooked by the London Guarantee Building and 333 North Michigan . The neighboring bridges are Columbus Drive Bridge to the east and Wabash Avenue Bridge to the west . 
 The bridge is situated in a historically significant area . The northern end of the bridge covers part of the Jean Baptiste Point Du Sable Homesite , which is commemorated by a National Historic plaque in Pioneer Court . The southern half of the bridge passes over the site of Fort Dearborn , which was constructed in 1803 . The Fort is commemorated by a large relief above the entrance of the London Guarantee Building , and brass markers positioned in the sidewalks on the south side of the bridge delineate the posited outline of the original blockhouse . 
 = = Name = = 
 The historical significance of the location has been used as the basis for a number of proposals to rename the bridge . In 1921 the Chicago Historical Society suggested that the bridge should be named Marquette – Joliet Bridge , and in 1939 it was proposed to rename the bridge as Fort Dearborn Bridge . These proposals were not adopted . 
 In October 2010 , the bridge was renamed DuSable Bridge in honor of Jean Baptiste Point du Sable , Chicago 's first permanent resident . A fur trader of African descent who married into the Potawatomi tribe , he established a permanent homestead and trading post near the mouth of the Chicago River in the 1780s . 
 = = History = = 
 A boulevard to link the parks on Chicago 's north and south sides was proposed as early as 1891 . An early plan called for a tunnel to link Michigan Avenue south of the river with Pine Street ( now Michigan Avenue ) north of the river . In 1903 an editorial in the Chicago Tribune proposed a new bascule bridge across the river at Michigan Avenue . Other plans suggested that the bridge should be a replica of the Pont Alexandre III that spans the Seine in Paris , or that , rather than constructing an entirely new bridge , the existing Rush Street bridge should be double @-@ decked . 
 Plans for the boulevard and the construction of a Michigan Avenue Bridge were further elaborated upon in Daniel Burnham 's 1909 Plan of Chicago . In 1911 a plan was selected that included the widening of Michigan Avenue from Randolph Street to the river , replacing the Rush Street bridge with a new bridge at Michigan Avenue and the construction of a double @-@ decked boulevard along Pine Street as far as Ohio Street . An ordinance to fund construction was passed in 1913 , but was declared void by the Supreme Court of Illinois . A second ordinance was passed in 1914 , but legal battles continued until the end of 1916 . Construction finally started on April 15 , 1918 , and the bridge was officially opened in a ceremony on May 14 , 1920 . 
 The bridge is one of the contributing properties of the Michigan – Wacker Historic District , which was listed as on the National Register of Historic Places on November 15 , 1978 . It was also designated as a Chicago Landmark on October 2 , 1991 . In 2009 the sidewalks and railings on the bridge were replaced , and the bridge was repainted ; the design of the new ornamental railings was based on the original 1920 design for the bridge 's railings , replacing more utilitarian ones that had been substituted at a later date . 
 = = Design and operation = = 
 Michigan Avenue Bridge is a double @-@ leaf , double @-@ deck , fixed counterweight , trunnion bascule bridge . It was engineered by the Chicago Department of Public Works , Bureau of Engineering ; Edward H. Bennett was the consulting architect and William A. Mulcahy the chief engineer of construction . At the time of construction it was believed to be the first double @-@ deck bridge ever built to have roadway on both levels ; faster non @-@ commercial traffic using the upper deck and slower commercial traffic that served the various industries and docks in the vicinity of the river using the lower deck . 
 Each of the bridge 's leaves are divided into two along the axis of the bridge such that it functions as two parallel bridges that can be operated independently of one another ; at the time of construction bridges over the Chicago River were frequently struck by vessels , and this duplex arrangement allows for leaves damaged in such a collision to be opened for repair without needing to completely close the bridge to traffic . The counterweights are below the level of the lower deck and when the bridge is opened they swing down into 40 @-@ foot @-@ deep ( 12 m ) reinforced concrete <unk> that descend 34 @.@ 5 feet ( 10 @.@ 5 m ) below the surface of the river . Each of the two <unk> is supported on nine cylindrical foundation piers . One of these piers was sunk to bedrock , 108 feet ( 33 m ) below the river surface , the other 17 piers are sunk to the hardpan , which is 80 to 90 feet ( 24 to 27 m ) below the water level . On the south side of the river one of the freight tunnels of the Chicago Tunnel Company had to be re @-@ routed to make room for the <unk> . The counterweights are composed partly of concrete and partly of a concrete composite with rivet <unk> ; each of the four counterweights weighs 1 @,@ 595 short tons ( 1 @,@ 447 t ) . The Michigan Avenue Bridge is made of steel . 
 The bridge abutments and the facing of the bridge tender houses are made of Bedford stone . There are four bridge tender houses : the northwest and southeast bridgehouses house the controls for operating the bridge ; the northeast and southwest bridgehouses are purely decorative . Two 108 horsepower ( 81 kW ) motors open and close each of the 3 @,@ 750 @-@ short @-@ ton ( 3 @,@ 400 t ) bridge leaves . Originally the bridge was staffed 24 hours a day , and opened up to 3000 times a year to allow ships through , but since the 1970s bridge lifting has been scheduled in the spring and fall , when the bridge is raised twice weekly to allow sailboats to pass between Lake Michigan and inland boat yards where they are stored for the winter . 
 = = Decoration = = 
 In 1928 sculptures depicting scenes from Chicago 's history were added to the outward @-@ facing walls of the four bridgehouses . The sculptures on the northern bridgehouses were commissioned by William Wrigley , Jr . , and are by James Earle Fraser : The Discoverers depicts Louis Joliet , Jacques Marquette , René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle and Henri de Tonti ; The Pioneers depicts John Kinzie leading a group through the wilderness . The sculptures on the southern bridgehouses were commissioned by the B. F. Ferguson Monument Fund , and are by Henry Hering : Defense depicts Ensign George Ronan in a scene from the 1812 Battle of Fort Dearborn ; Regeneration depicts workers rebuilding Chicago after the Great Chicago Fire of 1871 . 
 The bridge is also bedecked with 28 flagpoles , usually flying the flags of the United States , Illinois and Chicago . On special occasions other banners may be displayed . 
 = = McCormick Bridgehouse & Chicago River Museum = = 
 The southwest <unk> has been converted into a museum . The McCormick Bridgehouse & Chicago River Museum is a 5 @-@ floor , 1 @,@ 613 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 149 @.@ 9 m2 ) museum that opened on June 10 , 2006 ; it is named for Robert R. McCormick , formerly owner of the Chicago Tribune and president of the Chicago Sanitary District . The Robert R. McCormick Foundation was the major donor that helped to provide the $ 950 @,@ 000 cost of the formation of the museum . It is run by the Friends of the Chicago River , and includes exhibits on the history of the Chicago River and the bridge . Visitors are also allowed to access the bridge 's gear room ; during the spring and fall bridge lifting visitors can see the bridge gears in operation as the leaves are raised and lowered . Due to its small size and tight access stairway only 79 people are allowed inside the museum at any one time . 
 = Negative resistance = 
 In electronics , negative resistance ( NR ) is a property of some electrical circuits and devices in which an increase in voltage across the device 's terminals results in a decrease in electric current through it . 
 This is in contrast to an ordinary resistor in which an increase of applied voltage causes a proportional increase in current due to Ohm 's law , resulting in a positive resistance . While a positive resistance consumes power from current passing through it , a negative resistance produces power . Under certain conditions it can increase the power of an electrical signal , amplifying it . 
 Negative resistance is an uncommon property which occurs in a few nonlinear electronic components . In a nonlinear device , two types of resistance can be defined : ' static ' or ' absolute resistance ' , the ratio of voltage to current <formula> , and differential resistance , the ratio of a change in voltage to the resulting change in current <formula> . The term negative resistance refers to negative differential resistance ( NDR ) , <formula> . In general , a negative differential resistance is a two @-@ terminal component which can amplify , converting DC power applied to its terminals to AC output power to amplify an AC signal applied to the same terminals . They are used in electronic oscillators and amplifiers , particularly at microwave frequencies . Most microwave energy is produced with negative differential resistance devices . They can also have hysteresis and be bistable , and so are used in switching and memory circuits . Examples of devices with negative differential resistance are tunnel diodes , Gunn diodes , and gas discharge tubes such as neon lamps . In addition , circuits containing amplifying devices such as transistors and op amps with positive feedback can have negative differential resistance . These are used in oscillators and active filters . 
 Because they are nonlinear , negative resistance devices have a more complicated behavior than the positive " ohmic " resistances usually encountered in electric circuits . Unlike most positive resistances , negative resistance varies depending on the voltage or current applied to the device , and negative resistance devices can have negative resistance over only a limited portion of their voltage or current range . Therefore , there is no real " negative resistor " analogous to a positive resistor , which has a constant negative resistance over an arbitrarily wide range of current . 
 = = Negative resistance devices = = 
 Electronic components with negative differential resistance include these devices : 
 tunnel diode , resonant tunneling diode and other semiconductor diodes using the tunneling mechanism 
 Gunn diode and other diodes using the transferred electron mechanism 
 IMPATT diode , <unk> diode and other diodes using the impact ionization mechanism 
 <unk> transistor ( <unk> ) 
 thyristors 
 triode and <unk> vacuum tubes operating in the dynatron mode 
 Some magnetron tubes and other microwave vacuum tubes 
 maser 
 parametric amplifier 
 Electric discharges through gases also exhibit negative differential resistance , including these devices 
 electric arc 
 <unk> tubes 
 neon lamp 
 fluorescent lamp 
 other gas discharge tubes 
 In addition , active circuits with negative differential resistance can also be built with amplifying devices like transistors and op amps , using feedback . A number of new experimental negative differential resistance materials and devices have been discovered in recent years . The physical processes which cause negative resistance are diverse , and each type of device has its own negative resistance characteristics , specified by its current – voltage curve . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 The resistance between two terminals of an electrical device or circuit is determined by its current – voltage ( I – V ) curve ( characteristic curve ) , giving the current <formula> through it for any given voltage <formula> across it . Most materials , including the ordinary ( positive ) resistances encountered in electrical circuits , obey Ohm 's law ; the current through them is proportional to the voltage over a wide range . So the I – V curve of an ohmic resistance is a straight line through the origin with positive slope . The resistance is the ratio of voltage to current , the inverse slope of the line ( in I – V graphs where the voltage <formula> is the independent variable ) and is constant . 
 Negative resistance occurs in a few nonlinear ( <unk> ) devices . In a nonlinear component the I – V curve is not a straight line , so it does not obey Ohm 's law . Resistance can still be defined , but the resistance is not constant ; it varies with the voltage or current through the device . The resistance of such a nonlinear device can be defined in two ways , which are equal for ohmic resistances : 
 Static resistance ( also called chordal resistance , absolute resistance or just resistance ) – This is the common definition of resistance ; the voltage divided by the current : 
 <formula> . 
 It is the inverse slope of the line ( chord ) from the origin through the point on the I – V curve . In a power source , like a battery or electric generator , positive current flows out of the positive voltage terminal , opposite to the direction of current in a resistor , so from the passive sign convention <formula> and <formula> have opposite signs , representing points lying in the 2nd or 4th quadrant of the I – V plane ( diagram right ) . Thus power sources formally have negative static resistance ( <formula> However this term is never used in practice , because the term " resistance " is only applied to passive components . Static resistance determines the power dissipation in a component . Passive devices , which consume electric power , have positive static resistance ; while active devices , which produce electric power , do not . 
 Differential resistance ( also called dynamic , or incremental resistance ) – This is the derivative of the voltage with respect to the current ; the ratio of a small change in voltage to the corresponding change in current , the inverse slope of the I – V curve at a point : 
 <formula> . 
 Differential resistance is only relevant to time @-@ varying currents . Points on the curve where the slope is negative ( declining to the right ) , meaning an increase in voltage causes a decrease in current , have negative differential resistance ( <formula> ) . Devices of this type can amplify signals , and are what is usually meant by the term " negative resistance " . 
 Negative resistance , like positive resistance , is measured in ohms . 
 <unk> is the reciprocal of resistance . It is measured in siemens ( formerly <unk> ) which is the conductance of a resistor with a resistance of one ohm . Each type of resistance defined above has a corresponding conductance 
 Static conductance 
 <formula> 
 Differential conductance 
 <formula> 
 It can be seen that the conductance has the same sign as its corresponding resistance : a negative resistance will have a negative conductance while a positive resistance will have a positive conductance . 
 = = Operation = = 
 One way in which the different types of resistance can be distinguished is in the directions of current and electric power between a circuit and an electronic component . The illustrations below , with a rectangle representing the component attached to a circuit , summarize how the different types work : 
 = = Types and terminology = = 
 In an electronic device , the differential resistance <formula> , the static resistance <formula> , or both , can be negative , so there are three categories of devices ( fig . 1 – 3 above , and table ) which could be called " negative resistances " . 
 The term " negative resistance " almost always means negative differential resistance <formula> . Negative differential resistance devices have unique capabilities : they can act as one @-@ port amplifiers , increasing the power of a time @-@ varying signal applied to their port ( terminals ) , or excite oscillations in a tuned circuit to make an oscillator . They can also have hysteresis . It is not possible for a device to have negative differential resistance without a power source , and these devices can be divided into two categories depending on whether they get their power from an internal source or from their port : 
 Passive negative differential resistance devices ( fig . 1 above ) : These are the most well @-@ known type of " negative resistances " ; passive two @-@ terminal components whose intrinsic I – V curve has a downward " kink " , causing the current to decrease with increasing voltage over a limited range . The I – V curve , including the negative resistance region , lies in the 1st and 3rd quadrant of the plane so the device has positive static resistance . Examples are gas @-@ discharge tubes , tunnel diodes , and Gunn diodes . These devices have no power source and in general work by converting external DC power from their port to time varying ( AC ) power , so they require a DC bias current applied to the port in addition to the signal . To add to the confusion , some authors call these " active " devices , since they can amplify . This category also includes a few three @-@ terminal devices , such as the <unk> transistor . They are covered in the Negative differential resistance section below . 
 Active negative differential resistance devices ( fig . 3 ) : Circuits can be designed in which a positive voltage applied to the terminals will cause a proportional " negative " current ; a current out of the positive terminal , the opposite of an ordinary resistor , over a limited range , Unlike in the above devices , the downward @-@ sloping region of the I – V curve passes through the origin , so it lies in the 2nd and 4th quadrants of the plane , meaning the device sources power . <unk> devices like transistors and op @-@ amps with positive feedback can have this type of negative resistance , and are used in feedback oscillators and active filters . Since these circuits produce net power from their port , they must have an internal DC power source , or else a separate connection to an external power supply . In circuit theory this is called an " active resistor " . Although this type is sometimes referred to as " linear " , " absolute " , " ideal " , or " pure " negative resistance to distinguish it from " passive " negative differential resistances , in electronics it is more often simply called positive feedback or regeneration . These are covered in the Active resistors section below . 
 Occasionally ordinary power sources are referred to as " negative resistances " ( fig . 2 ) . Although the " static " or " absolute " resistance <formula> of active devices ( power sources ) can be considered negative ( see Negative static resistance section below ) most ordinary power sources ( AC or DC ) , such as batteries , generators , and ( non positive feedback ) amplifiers , have positive differential resistance ( their source resistance ) . Therefore , these devices cannot function as one @-@ port amplifiers or have the other capabilities of negative differential resistances . 
 = = Negative static or " absolute " resistance = = 
 A point of some confusion is whether ordinary resistance ( " static " or " absolute " resistance , <formula> ) can be negative . In electronics , the term " resistance " is customarily applied only to passive materials and components – such as wires , resistors and diodes . These cannot have <formula> as shown by Joule 's law <formula> . A passive device consumes electric power , so from the passive sign convention <formula> . Therefore , from Joule 's law <formula> . In other words , no material can conduct electric current better than a " perfect " conductor with zero resistance . For a passive device to have <formula> would violate either conservation of energy or the second law of thermodynamics , ( diagram ) . Therefore , some authors state that static resistance can never be negative . 
 However it is easily shown that the ratio of voltage to current v / i at the terminals of any power source ( AC or DC ) is negative . For electric power ( potential energy ) to flow out of a device into the circuit , charge must flow through the device in the direction of increasing potential energy , conventional current ( positive charge ) must move from the negative to the positive terminal . So the direction of the instantaneous current is out of the positive terminal . This is opposite to the direction of current in a passive device defined by the passive sign convention so the current and voltage have opposite signs , and their ratio is negative 
 <formula> 
 This can also be proved from Joule 's law 
 <formula> 
 This shows that power can flow out of a device into the circuit ( <formula> ) if and only if <formula> . Whether or not this quantity is referred to as " resistance " when negative is a matter of convention . The absolute resistance of power sources is negative , but this is not to be regarded as " resistance " in the same sense as positive resistances . The negative static resistance of a power source is a rather abstract and not very useful quantity , because it varies with the load . Due to conservation of energy it is always simply equal to the negative of the static resistance of the attached circuit ( right ) . 
 Work must be done on the charges by some source of energy in the device , to make them move toward the positive terminal against the electric field , so conservation of energy requires that negative static resistances have a source of power . The power may come from an internal source which converts some other form of energy to electric power as in a battery or generator , or from a separate connection to an external power supply circuit as in an amplifying device like a transistor , vacuum tube , or op amp . 
 = = = Eventual passivity = = = 
 A circuit cannot have negative static resistance ( be active ) over an infinite voltage or current range , because it would have to be able to produce infinite power . Any active circuit or device with a finite power source is " eventually passive " . This property means if a large enough external voltage or current of either polarity is applied to it , its static resistance becomes positive 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the maximum power the device can produce . 
 Therefore , the ends of the I – V curve will eventually turn and enter the 1st and 3rd quadrants . Thus the range of the curve having negative static resistance is limited , confined to a region around the origin . For example , applying a voltage to a generator or battery ( graph , above ) greater than its open @-@ circuit voltage will reverse the direction of current flow , making its static resistance positive so it consumes power . Similarly , applying a voltage to the negative impedance converter below greater than its power supply voltage Vs will cause the amplifier to saturate , also making its resistance positive . 
 = = Negative differential resistance = = 
 In a device or circuit with negative differential resistance ( NDR ) , in some part of the I – V curve the current decreases as the voltage increases : 
 <formula> 
 The I – V curve is <unk> ( having peaks and troughs ) with regions of negative slope representing negative differential resistance . 
 Passive negative differential resistances have positive static resistance ; they consume net power . Therefore , the I – V curve is confined to the 1st and 3rd quadrants of the graph , and passes through the origin . This requirement means ( excluding some asymptotic cases ) that the region ( s ) of negative resistance must be limited , and surrounded by regions of positive resistance , and cannot include the origin . 
 = = = Types = = = 
 Negative differential resistances can be classified into two types : 
 Voltage controlled negative resistance ( VCNR , short @-@ circuit stable , or " N " type ) : In this type the current is a single valued , continuous function of the voltage , but the voltage is a multivalued function of the current . In the most common type there is only one negative resistance region , and the graph is a curve shaped generally like the letter " N " . As the voltage is increased , the current increases ( positive resistance ) until it reaches a maximum ( i1 ) , then decreases in the region of negative resistance to a minimum ( i2 ) , then increases again . Devices with this type of negative resistance include the tunnel diode , resonant tunneling diode , lambda diode , Gunn diode , and dynatron oscillators . 
 Current controlled negative resistance ( CCNR , open @-@ circuit stable , or " S " type ) : In this type , the dual of the VCNR , the voltage is a single valued function of the current , but the current is a multivalued function of the voltage . In the most common type , with one negative resistance region , the graph is a curve shaped like the letter " S " . Devices with this type of negative resistance include the IMPATT diode , <unk> , <unk> and other thyristors , electric arc , and gas discharge tubes like <unk> tubes , fluorescent lamps and neon lights . 
 Most devices have a single negative resistance region . However devices with multiple separate negative resistance regions can also be fabricated . These can have more than two stable states , and are of interest for use in digital circuits to implement multivalued logic . 
 An intrinsic parameter used to compare different devices is the peak @-@ to @-@ valley current ratio ( PVR ) , the ratio of the current at the top of the negative resistance region to the current at the bottom ( see graphs , above ) : 
 <formula> 
 The larger this is , the larger the potential AC output for a given DC bias current , and therefore the greater the efficiency 
 = = = Amplification = = = 
 A negative differential resistance device can amplify an AC signal applied to it if the signal is biased with a DC voltage or current to lie within the negative resistance region of its I – V curve . 
 The tunnel diode circuit is an example . The tunnel diode TD has voltage controlled negative differential resistance . The battery <formula> adds a constant voltage ( bias ) across the diode so it operates in its negative resistance range , and provides power to amplify the signal . Suppose the negative resistance at the bias point is <formula> . For stability <formula> must be less than <formula> . Using the formula for a voltage divider , the AC output voltage is 
 <formula> so the voltage gain is <formula> 
 In a normal voltage divider , the resistance of each branch is less than the resistance of the whole , so the output voltage is less than the input . Here , due to the negative resistance , the total AC resistance <formula> is less than the resistance of the diode alone <formula> so the AC output voltage <formula> is greater than the input <formula> . The voltage gain <formula> is greater than one , and increases without limit as <formula> approaches <formula> . 
 = = = Explanation of power gain = = = 
 The diagrams illustrate how a biased negative differential resistance device can increase the power of a signal applied to it , amplifying it , although it only has two terminals . Due to the superposition principle the voltage and current at the device 's terminals can be divided into a DC bias component ( <formula> ) and an AC component ( <formula> ) . 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 Since a positive change in voltage <formula> causes a negative change in current <formula> , the AC current and voltage in the device are 180 ° out of phase . This means in the AC equivalent circuit ( right ) , the instantaneous AC current <unk> flows through the device in the direction of increasing AC potential <unk> , as it would in a generator . Therefore , the AC power dissipation is negative ; AC power is produced by the device and flows into the external circuit . 
 <formula> 
 With the proper external circuit , the device can increase the AC signal power delivered to a load , serving as an amplifier , or excite oscillations in a resonant circuit to make an oscillator . Unlike in a two port amplifying device such as a transistor or op amp , the amplified signal leaves the device through the same two terminals ( port ) as the input signal enters . 
 In a passive device , the AC power produced comes from the input DC bias current , the device absorbs DC power , some of which is converted to AC power by the nonlinearity of the device , amplifying the applied signal . Therefore , the output power is limited by the bias power 
 <formula> 
 The negative differential resistance region cannot include the origin , because it would then be able to amplify a signal with no applied DC bias current , producing AC power with no power input . The device also dissipates some power as heat , equal to the difference between the DC power in and the AC power out . 
 The device may also have reactance and therefore the phase difference between current and voltage may differ from 180 ° and may vary with frequency . As long as the real component of the impedance is negative ( phase angle between 90 ° and 270 ° ) , the device will have negative resistance and can amplify . 
 The maximum AC output power is limited by size of the negative resistance region ( <formula> in graphs above ) 
 <formula> 
 = = = Reflection coefficient = = = 
 The reason that the output signal can leave a negative resistance through the same port that the input signal enters is that from transmission line theory , the AC voltage or current at the terminals of a component can be divided into two oppositely moving waves , the incident wave <formula> , which travels toward the device , and the reflected wave <formula> , which travels away from the device . A negative differential resistance in a circuit can amplify if the magnitude of its reflection coefficient <formula> , the ratio of the reflected wave to the incident wave , is greater than one . 
 <formula> where <formula> 
 The " reflected " ( output ) signal has larger amplitude than the incident ; the device has " reflection gain " . The reflection coefficient is determined by the AC impedance of the negative resistance device , <formula> , and the impedance of the circuit attached to it , <formula> . If <formula> and <formula> then <formula> and the device will amplify . On the Smith chart , a graphical aide widely used in the design of high frequency circuits , negative differential resistance corresponds to points outside the unit circle <formula> , the boundary of the conventional chart , so special " expanded " charts must be used . 
 = = = Stability conditions = = = 
 Because it is nonlinear , a circuit with negative differential resistance can have multiple equilibrium points ( possible DC operating points ) , which lie on the I – V curve . An equilibrium point will be stable , so the circuit converges to it within some neighborhood of the point , if its poles are in the left half of the s plane ( LHP ) , while a point is unstable , causing the circuit to oscillate or " latch up " ( converge to another point ) , if its poles are on the jω axis or right half plane ( RHP ) , respectively . The equilibrium points are determined by the DC bias circuit , and their stability is determined by the AC impedance <formula> of the external circuit . However , because of the different shapes of the curves , the condition for stability is different for VCNR and CCNR types of negative resistance : 
 In a CCNR ( S @-@ type ) negative resistance , the resistance function <formula> is single @-@ valued . Therefore , stability is determined by the poles of the circuit 's impedance equation : <formula> . 
 For nonreactive circuits ( <formula> ) a sufficient condition for stability is that the total resistance is positive <formula> 
 so the CCNR is stable for 
 Since CCNRs are stable with no load at all , they are called " open circuit stable " . 
 In a VCNR ( N @-@ type ) negative resistance , the conductance function <formula> is single @-@ valued . Therefore , stability is determined by the poles of the admittance equation <formula> . For this reason the VCNR is sometimes referred to as a negative conductance . 
 As above , for nonreactive circuits a sufficient condition for stability is that the total conductance in the circuit is positive <formula> 
 <formula> 
 so the VCNR is stable for 
 Since VCNRs are even stable with a short @-@ circuited output , they are called " short circuit stable " . 
 For general negative resistance circuits with reactance , the stability must be determined by standard tests like the Nyquist stability criterion . Alternatively , in high frequency circuit design , the values of <formula> for which the circuit is stable are determined by a graphical technique using " stability circles " on a Smith chart . 
 = = = Operating regions and applications = = = 
 For simple nonreactive negative resistance devices with <formula> and <formula> the different operating regions of the device can be illustrated by load lines on the I – V curve ( see graphs ) . 
 The DC load line ( DCL ) is a straight line determined by the DC bias circuit , with equation 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> is the DC bias supply voltage and R is the resistance of the supply . The possible DC operating point ( s ) ( Q points ) occur where the DC load line intersects the I – V curve . For stability 
 VCNRs require a low impedance bias ( <formula> ) , such as a voltage source . 
 CCNRs require a high impedance bias ( <formula> ) such as a current source , or voltage source in series with a high resistance . 
 The AC load line ( L1 − L3 ) is a straight line through the Q point whose slope is the differential ( AC ) resistance <formula> facing the device . Increasing <formula> rotates the load line counterclockwise . The circuit operates in one of three possible regions ( see diagrams ) , depending on <formula> . 
 Stable region ( green ) ( illustrated by line L1 ) : When the load line lies in this region , it intersects the I – V curve at one point Q1 . For nonreactive circuits it is a stable equilibrium ( poles in the LHP ) so the circuit is stable . Negative resistance amplifiers operate in this region . However , due to hysteresis , with an energy storage device like a capacitor or inductor the circuit can become unstable to make a nonlinear relaxation oscillator ( <unk> multivibrator ) or a <unk> <unk> are stable when <formula> . 
 CCNRs are stable when <formula> . 
 Unstable point ( Line L2 ) : When <formula> the load line is tangent to the I – V curve . The total differential ( AC ) resistance of the circuit is zero ( poles on the jω axis ) , so it is unstable and with a tuned circuit can oscillate . Linear oscillators operate at this point . Practical oscillators actually start in the unstable region below , with poles in the RHP , but as the amplitude increases the oscillations become nonlinear , and due to eventual passivity the negative resistance r decreases with increasing amplitude , so the oscillations stabilize at an amplitude where <formula> . 
 <unk> region ( red ) ( illustrated by line L3 ) : In this region the load line can intersect the I – V curve at three points . The center point ( Q1 ) is a point of unstable equilibrium ( poles in the RHP ) , while the two outer points , Q2 and Q3 are stable equilibria . So with correct biasing the circuit can be bistable , it will converge to one of the two points Q2 or Q3 and can be switched between them with an input pulse . Switching circuits like flip @-@ flops ( bistable <unk> ) and Schmidt triggers operate in this region . 
 VCNRs can be bistable when <formula> 
 CCNRs can be bistable when <formula> 
 = = Active resistors – negative resistance from feedback = = 
 In addition to the passive devices with intrinsic negative differential resistance above , circuits with amplifying devices like transistors or op amps can have negative resistance at their ports . The input or output impedance of an amplifier with enough positive feedback applied to it can be negative . If <formula> is the input resistance of the amplifier without feedback , <formula> is the amplifier gain , and <formula> is the transfer function of the feedback path , the input resistance with positive shunt feedback is 
 <formula> 
 So if the loop gain <formula> is greater than one , <formula> will be negative . The circuit acts like a " negative linear resistor " over a limited range , with I – V curve having a straight line segment through the origin with negative slope ( see graphs ) . It has both negative differential resistance and is active 
 <formula> 
 and thus obeys Ohm 's law as if it had a negative value of resistance − R , over its linear range ( such amplifiers can also have more complicated negative resistance I – V curves that do not pass through the origin ) . 
 These are often called " active resistors " . Applying a voltage across the terminals causes a proportional current out of the positive terminal , the opposite of an ordinary resistor . For example , connecting a battery to the terminals would cause the battery to charge rather than discharge . 
 Considered as one @-@ port devices , these circuits function similarly to the passive negative differential resistance components above , and like them can be used to make one @-@ port amplifiers and oscillators with the advantages that : 
 because they are active devices they do not require an external DC bias to provide power , and can be DC coupled , 
 the amount of negative resistance can be varied by adjusting the loop gain , 
 they can be linear circuit elements ; the voltage is proportional to the current , so they do not cause harmonic distortion . 
 The I – V curve can have voltage @-@ controlled ( " N " type ) or current @-@ controlled ( " S " type ) negative resistance , depending on whether the feedback loop is connected in " shunt " or " series " . 
 Negative reactances ( below ) can also be created , so feedback circuits can be used to create " active " linear circuit elements , resistors , capacitors , and inductors , with negative values . They are widely used in active filters because they can create transfer functions that cannot be realized with positive circuit elements . Examples of circuits with this type of negative resistance are the negative impedance converter ( NIC ) , gyrator , Deboo integrator , frequency dependent negative resistance ( <unk> ) , and generalized immittance converter ( GIC ) . 
 = = = Feedback oscillators = = = 
 If an LC circuit is connected across the input of a positive feedback amplifier like that above , the negative differential input resistance <formula> can cancel the positive loss resistance <formula> inherent in the tuned circuit . If <formula> this will create in effect a tuned circuit with zero AC resistance ( poles on the jω axis ) . Spontaneous oscillation will be excited in the tuned circuit at its resonant frequency , sustained by the power from the amplifier . This is how feedback oscillators such as Hartley or Colpitts oscillators work . This negative resistance model is an alternate way of analyzing feedback oscillator operation . All linear oscillator circuits have negative resistance although in most feedback oscillators the tuned circuit is an integral part of the feedback network , so the circuit does not have negative resistance at all frequencies but only near the oscillation frequency . 
 = = = Q enhancement = = = 
 A tuned circuit connected to a negative resistance which cancels some but not all of its parasitic loss resistance ( so <formula> ) will not oscillate , but the negative resistance will decrease the damping in the circuit ( moving its poles toward the jω axis ) , increasing its Q factor so it has a narrower bandwidth and more selectivity . Q enhancement , also called regeneration , was first used in the regenerative radio receiver invented by Edwin Armstrong in 1912 and later in " Q multipliers " . It is widely used in active filters . For example , RF integrated circuits use integrated inductors to save space , consisting of a spiral conductor fabricated on chip . These have high losses and low Q , so to create high Q tuned circuits their Q is increased by applying negative resistance . 
 = = = Chaotic circuits = = = 
 Circuits which exhibit chaotic behavior can be considered quasi @-@ periodic or <unk> oscillators , and like all oscillators require a negative resistance in the circuit to provide power . Chua 's circuit , a simple nonlinear circuit widely used as the standard example of a chaotic system , requires a nonlinear active resistor component , sometimes called Chua 's diode . This is usually synthesized using a negative impedance converter circuit . 
 = = = Negative impedance converter = = = 
 A common example of an " active resistance " circuit is the negative impedance converter ( NIC ) shown in the diagram . The two resistors <formula> and the op amp constitute a negative feedback non @-@ inverting amplifier with gain of 2 . The output voltage of the op @-@ amp is 
 <formula> 
 So if a voltage <formula> is applied to the input , the same voltage is applied " backwards " across <formula> , causing current to flow through it out of the input . The current is 
 <formula> 
 So the input impedance to the circuit is 
 <formula> 
 The circuit converts the impedance <formula> to its negative . If <formula> is a resistor of value <formula> , within the linear range of the op amp <formula> the input impedance acts like a linear " negative resistor " of value <formula> . The input port of the circuit is connected into another circuit as if it was a component . An NIC can cancel undesired positive resistance in another circuit , for example they were originally developed to cancel resistance in telephone cables , serving as repeaters . 
 = = = Negative capacitance and inductance = = = 
 By replacing <formula> in the above circuit with a capacitor ( <formula> ) or inductor ( <formula> ) , negative capacitances and inductances can also be synthesized . A negative capacitance will have an I – V relation and an impedance <formula> of 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> . Applying a positive current to a negative capacitance will cause it to discharge ; its voltage will decrease . Similarly , a negative inductance will have an I – V characteristic and impedance <formula> of 
 <formula> 
 A circuit having negative capacitance or inductance can be used to cancel unwanted positive capacitance or inductance in another circuit . NIC circuits were used to cancel reactance on telephone cables . 
 There is also another way of looking at them . In a negative capacitance the current will be 180 ° opposite in phase to the current in a positive capacitance . Instead of leading the voltage by 90 ° it will lag the voltage by 90 ° , as in an inductor . Therefore , a negative capacitance acts like an inductance in which the impedance has a reverse dependence on frequency ω ; decreasing instead of increasing like a real inductance Similarly a negative inductance acts like a capacitance that has an impedance which increases with frequency . Negative capacitances and inductances are " non @-@ Foster " circuits which violate Foster 's reactance theorem . One application being researched is to create an active matching network which could match an antenna to a transmission line over a broad range of frequencies , rather than just a single frequency as with current networks . This would allow the creation of small compact antennas that would have broad bandwidth , exceeding the Chu – Harrington limit . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Negative differential resistance devices are widely used to make electronic oscillators . In a negative resistance oscillator , a negative differential resistance device such as an IMPATT diode , Gunn diode , or microwave vacuum tube is connected across an electrical resonator such as an LC circuit , a quartz crystal , dielectric resonator or cavity resonator with a DC source to bias the device into its negative resistance region and provide power . A resonator such as an LC circuit is " almost " an oscillator ; it can store oscillating electrical energy , but because all resonators have internal resistance or other losses , the oscillations are damped and decay to zero . The negative resistance cancels the positive resistance of the resonator , creating in effect a lossless resonator , in which spontaneous continuous oscillations occur at the resonator 's resonant frequency . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 Negative resistance oscillators are mainly used at high frequencies in the microwave range or above , since feedback oscillators function poorly at these frequencies . Microwave diodes are used in low- to medium @-@ power oscillators for applications such as radar speed guns , and local oscillators for satellite receivers . They are a widely used source of microwave energy , and virtually the only solid @-@ state source of millimeter wave and terahertz energy Negative resistance microwave vacuum tubes such as magnetrons produce higher power outputs , in such applications as radar transmitters and microwave ovens . Lower frequency relaxation oscillators can be made with <unk> and gas @-@ discharge lamps such as neon lamps . 
 The negative resistance oscillator model is not limited to one @-@ port devices like diodes but can also be applied to feedback oscillator circuits with two port devices such as transistors and tubes . In addition , in modern high frequency oscillators , transistors are increasingly used as one @-@ port negative resistance devices like diodes . At microwave frequencies , transistors with certain loads applied to one port can become unstable due to internal feedback and show negative resistance at the other port . So high frequency transistor oscillators are designed by applying a reactive load to one port to give the transistor negative resistance , and connecting the other port across a resonator to make a negative resistance oscillator as described below . 
 = = = Gunn diode oscillator = = = 
 The common Gunn diode oscillator ( circuit diagrams ) illustrates how negative resistance oscillators work . The diode D has voltage controlled ( " N " type ) negative resistance and the voltage source <formula> biases it into its negative resistance region where its differential resistance is <formula> . The choke RFC prevents AC current from flowing through the bias source . <formula> is the equivalent resistance due to damping and losses in the series tuned circuit <formula> , plus any load resistance . Analyzing the AC circuit with Kirchhoff 's Voltage Law gives a differential equation for <formula> , the AC current 
 <formula> 
 Solving this equation gives a solution of the form 
 <formula> where <formula> 
 This shows that the current through the circuit , <formula> , varies with time about the DC Q point , <formula> . When started from a nonzero initial current <formula> the current oscillates <unk> at the resonant frequency ω of the tuned circuit , with amplitude either constant , increasing , or decreasing exponentially , depending on the value of α . Whether the circuit can sustain steady oscillations depends on the balance between <formula> and <formula> , the positive and negative resistance in the circuit : 
 <formula> : ( poles in left half plane ) If the diode 's negative resistance is less than the positive resistance of the tuned circuit , the damping is positive . Any oscillations in the circuit will lose energy as heat in the resistance <formula> and die away exponentially to zero , as in an ordinary tuned circuit . So the circuit does not oscillate . 
 <formula> : ( poles on jω axis ) If the positive and negative resistances are equal , the net resistance is zero , so the damping is zero . The diode adds just enough energy to compensate for energy lost in the tuned circuit and load , so oscillations in the circuit , once started , will continue at a constant amplitude . This is the condition during steady @-@ state operation of the oscillator . 
 <formula> : ( poles in right half plane ) If the negative resistance is greater than the positive resistance , damping is negative , so oscillations will grow exponentially in energy and amplitude . This is the condition during startup . 
 Practical oscillators are designed in region ( 3 ) above , with net negative resistance , to get oscillations started . A widely used rule of thumb is to make <formula> . When the power is turned on , electrical noise in the circuit provides a signal <formula> to start spontaneous oscillations , which grow exponentially . However , the oscillations cannot grow forever ; the nonlinearity of the diode eventually limits the amplitude . 
 At large amplitudes the circuit is nonlinear , so the linear analysis above does not strictly apply and differential resistance is undefined ; but the circuit can be understood by considering <formula> to be the " average " resistance over the cycle . As the amplitude of the sine wave exceeds the width of the negative resistance region and the voltage swing extends into regions of the curve with positive differential resistance , the average negative differential resistance <formula> becomes smaller , and thus the total resistance <formula> and the damping <formula> becomes less negative and eventually turns positive . Therefore , the oscillations will stabilize at the amplitude at which the damping becomes zero , which is when <formula> . 
 Gunn diodes have negative resistance in the range − 5 to − 25 ohms . In oscillators where <formula> is close to <formula> ; just small enough to allow the oscillator to start , the voltage swing will be mostly limited to the linear portion of the I – V curve , the output waveform will be nearly sinusoidal and the frequency will be most stable . In circuits in which <formula> is far below <formula> , the swing extends further into the nonlinear part of the curve , the clipping distortion of the output sine wave is more severe , and the frequency will be increasingly dependent on the supply voltage . 
 = = = Types of circuit = = = 
 Negative resistance oscillator circuits can be divided into two types , which are used with the two types of negative differential resistance – voltage controlled ( VCNR ) , and current controlled ( CCNR ) 
 Negative resistance ( voltage controlled ) oscillator : Since VCNR ( " N " type ) devices require a low impedance bias and are stable for load impedances less than r , the ideal oscillator circuit for this device has the form shown at top right , with a voltage source <unk> to bias the device into its negative resistance region , and parallel resonant circuit load LC . The resonant circuit has high impedance only at its resonant frequency , so the circuit will be unstable and oscillate only at that frequency . 
 Negative conductance ( current controlled ) oscillator : CCNR ( " S " type ) devices , in contrast , require a high impedance bias and are stable for load impedances greater than r . The ideal oscillator circuit is like that at bottom right , with a current source bias <unk> ( which may consist of a voltage source in series with a large resistor ) and series resonant circuit LC . The series LC circuit has low impedance only at its resonant frequency and so will only oscillate there . 
 = = = Conditions for oscillation = = = 
 Most oscillators are more complicated than the Gunn diode example , since both the active device and the load may have reactance ( X ) as well as resistance ( R ) . Modern negative resistance oscillators are designed by a frequency domain technique due to K. Kurokawa . The circuit diagram is imagined to be divided by a " reference plane " ( red ) which separates the negative resistance part , the active device , from the positive resistance part , the resonant circuit and output load ( right ) . The complex impedance of the negative resistance part <formula> depends on frequency ω but is also nonlinear , in general declining with the amplitude of the AC oscillation current I ; while the resonator part <formula> is linear , depending only on frequency . The circuit equation is <formula> so it will only oscillate ( have nonzero I ) at the frequency ω and amplitude I for which the total impedance <formula> is zero . This means the magnitude of the negative and positive resistances must be equal , and the reactances must be conjugate 
 <formula> and <formula> 
 For steady @-@ state oscillation the equal sign applies . During startup the inequality applies , because the circuit must have excess negative resistance for oscillations to start . 
 Alternately , the condition for oscillation can be expressed using the reflection coefficient . The voltage waveform at the reference plane can be divided into a component V1 travelling toward the negative resistance device and a component V2 travelling in the opposite direction , toward the resonator part . The reflection coefficient of the active device <formula> is greater than one , while that of the resonator part <formula> is less than one . During operation the waves are reflected back and forth in a round trip so the circuit will oscillate only if 
 <formula> 
 As above , the equality gives the condition for steady oscillation , while the inequality is required during startup to provide excess negative resistance . The above conditions are analogous to the <unk> criterion for feedback oscillators ; they are necessary but not sufficient , so there are some circuits that satisfy the equations but do not oscillate . Kurokawa also derived more complicated sufficient conditions , which are often used instead . 
 = = Amplifiers = = 
 Negative differential resistance devices such as Gunn and IMPATT diodes are also used to make amplifiers , particularly at microwave frequencies , but not as commonly as oscillators . Because negative resistance devices have only one port ( two terminals ) , unlike two @-@ port devices such as transistors , the outgoing amplified signal has to leave the device by the same terminals as the incoming signal enters it . Without some way of separating the two signals , a negative resistance amplifier is bilateral ; it amplifies in both directions , so it suffers from sensitivity to load impedance and feedback problems . To separate the input and output signals , many negative resistance amplifiers use <unk> devices such as isolators and directional couplers . 
 = = = Reflection amplifier = = = 
 One widely used circuit is the reflection amplifier in which the separation is accomplished by a circulator . A circulator is a <unk> solid @-@ state component with three ports ( connectors ) which transfers a signal applied to one port to the next in only one direction , port 1 to port 2 , 2 to 3 , and 3 to 1 . In the reflection amplifier diagram the input signal is applied to port 1 , a biased VCNR negative resistance diode N is attached through a filter F to port 2 , and the output circuit is attached to port 3 . The input signal is passed from port 1 to the diode at port 2 , but the outgoing " reflected " amplified signal from the diode is routed to port 3 , so there is little coupling from output to input . The characteristic impedance <formula> of the input and output transmission lines , usually <unk> , is matched to the port impedance of the circulator . The purpose of the filter F is to present the correct impedance to the diode to set the gain . At radio frequencies NR diodes are not pure resistive loads and have reactance , so a second purpose of the filter is to cancel the diode reactance with a conjugate reactance to prevent standing waves . 
 The filter has only reactive components and so does not absorb any power itself , so power is passed between the diode and the ports without loss . The input signal power to the diode is 
 <formula> 
 The output power from the diode is 
 <formula> 
 So the power gain <formula> of the amplifier is the square of the reflection coefficient 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> 
 <formula> is the negative resistance of the diode − r . Assuming the filter is matched to the diode so <formula> then the gain is 
 <formula> 
 The VCNR reflection amplifier above is stable for <formula> . while a CCNR amplifier is stable for <formula> . It can be seen that the reflection amplifier can have unlimited gain , approaching infinity as <formula> approaches the point of oscillation at <formula> . This is a characteristic of all NR amplifiers , contrasting with the behavior of two @-@ port amplifiers , which generally have limited gain but are often unconditionally stable . In practice the gain is limited by the backward " leakage " coupling between circulator ports . 
 Masers and parametric amplifiers are extremely low noise NR amplifiers that are also implemented as reflection amplifiers ; they are used in applications like radio telescopes . 
 = = Switching circuits = = 
 Negative differential resistance devices are also used in switching circuits in which the device operates <unk> , changing abruptly from one state to another , with hysteresis . The advantage of using a negative resistance device is that a relaxation oscillator , flip @-@ flop or memory cell can be built with a single active device , whereas the standard logic circuit for these functions , the Eccles @-@ Jordan multivibrator , requires two active devices ( transistors ) . Three switching circuits built with negative resistances are 
 <unk> multivibrator – a circuit with two unstable states , in which the output periodically switches back and forth between the states . The time it remains in each state is determined by the time constant of an RC circuit . Therefore , it is a relaxation oscillator , and can produce square waves or triangle waves . 
 <unk> multivibrator – is a circuit with one unstable state and one stable state . When in its stable state a pulse is applied to the input , the output switches to its other state and remains in it for a period of time dependent on the time constant of the RC circuit , then switches back to the stable state . Thus the <unk> can be used as a timer or delay element . 
 <unk> multivibrator or flip flop – is a circuit with two stable states . A pulse at the input switches the circuit to its other state . Therefore , <unk> can be used as memory circuits , and digital counters . 
 = = Other applications = = 
 = = = Neuronal models = = = 
 Some instances of neurons display regions of negative slope conductances ( <unk> ) in voltage @-@ clamp experiments . The negative resistance here is implied were one to consider the neuron a typical Hodgkin – Huxley style circuit model . 
 = = History = = 
 Negative resistance was first recognized during investigations of electric arcs , which were used for lighting during the 19th century . In 1881 Alfred <unk> had observed that the voltage across arc electrodes decreased temporarily as the arc current increased , but many researchers thought this was a secondary effect due to temperature . The term " negative resistance " was applied by some to this effect , but the term was controversial because it was known that the resistance of a passive device could not be negative . Beginning in 1895 Hertha Ayrton , extending her husband William 's research with a series of meticulous experiments measuring the I – V curve of arcs , established that arcs had negative resistance , igniting controversy . Frith and Rodgers in 1896 with the support of the <unk> introduced the concept of differential resistance , <unk> / di , and it was slowly accepted that arcs had negative differential resistance . In recognition of her research , Hertha Ayrton became the first woman voted for induction into the Institute of Electrical Engineers . 
 = = = Arc transmitters = = = 
 George Francis Fitzgerald first realized in 1892 that if the damping resistance in a resonant circuit could be made zero or negative , it would produce continuous oscillations . In the same year Elihu Thomson built a negative resistance oscillator by connecting an LC circuit to the electrodes of an arc , perhaps the first example of an electronic oscillator . William Duddell , a student of Ayrton at London Central Technical College , brought Thomson 's arc oscillator to public attention . Due to its negative resistance , the current through an arc was unstable , and arc lights would often produce hissing , humming , or even howling noises . In 1899 , investigating this effect , Duddell connected an LC circuit across an arc and the negative resistance excited oscillations in the tuned circuit , producing a musical tone from the arc . To demonstrate his invention Duddell wired several tuned circuits to an arc and played a tune on it . Duddell 's " singing arc " oscillator was limited to audio frequencies . However , in 1903 Danish engineers Valdemar Poulsen and P. O. Pederson increased the frequency into the radio range by operating the arc in a hydrogen atmosphere in a magnetic field , inventing the Poulsen arc radio transmitter , which was widely used until the 1920s . 
 = = = Vacuum tubes = = = 
 By the early 20th century , although the physical causes of negative resistance were not understood , engineers knew it could generate oscillations and had begun to apply it . Heinrich <unk> in 1907 showed that oscillators must have negative resistance . Ernst <unk> and Adolf Pieper discovered that mercury vapor lamps could produce oscillations , and by 1912 AT & T had used them to build amplifying repeaters for telephone lines . 
 In 1918 Albert Hull at GE discovered that vacuum tubes could have negative resistance in parts of their operating ranges , due to a phenomenon called secondary emission . In a vacuum tube when electrons strike the plate electrode they can knock additional electrons out of the surface into the tube . This represents a current away from the plate , reducing the plate current . Under certain conditions increasing the plate voltage causes a decrease in plate current . By connecting an LC circuit to the tube Hull created an oscillator , the dynatron oscillator . Other negative resistance tube oscillators followed , such as the magnetron invented by Hull in 1920 . 
 The negative impedance converter originated from work by Marius Latour around 1920 . He was also one of the first to report negative capacitance and inductance . A decade later , vacuum tube NICs were developed as telephone line repeaters at Bell Labs by George <unk> and others , which made transcontinental telephone service possible . Transistor NICs , pioneered by <unk> in 1953 , initiated a great increase in interest in NICs and many new circuits and applications developed . 
 = = = Solid state devices = = = 
 Negative differential resistance in semiconductors was observed around 1909 in the first point @-@ contact junction diodes , called cat 's whisker detectors , by researchers such as William Henry Eccles and G. W. Pickard . They noticed that when junctions were biased with a DC voltage to improve their sensitivity as radio detectors , they would sometimes break into spontaneous oscillations . However the effect was not pursued . 
 The first person to exploit negative resistance diodes practically was Russian radio researcher Oleg Losev , who in 1922 discovered negative differential resistance in biased zincite ( zinc oxide ) point contact junctions . He used these to build solid @-@ state amplifiers , oscillators , and amplifying and regenerative radio receivers , 25 years before the invention of the transistor . Later he even built a superheterodyne receiver . However his achievements were overlooked because of the success of vacuum tube technology . After ten years he abandoned research into this technology ( dubbed " <unk> " by Hugo Gernsback ) , and it was forgotten . 
 The first widely used solid @-@ state negative resistance device was the tunnel diode , invented in 1957 by Japanese physicist Leo Esaki . Because they have lower parasitic capacitance than vacuum tubes due to their small junction size , diodes can function at higher frequencies , and tunnel diode oscillators proved able to produce power at microwave frequencies , above the range of ordinary vacuum tube oscillators . Its invention set off a search for other negative resistance semiconductor devices for use as microwave oscillators , resulting in the discovery of the IMPATT diode , Gunn diode , <unk> diode , and others . In 1969 Kurokawa derived conditions for stability in negative resistance circuits . Currently negative differential resistance diode oscillators are the most widely used sources of microwave energy , and many new negative resistance devices have been discovered in recent decades . 
 = David A. Johnston = 
 David Alexander Johnston ( December 18 , 1949 – May 18 , 1980 ) was an American USGS volcanologist who died during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens in Washington . A principal scientist on the monitoring team , Johnston perished while manning an observation post 6 miles ( 10 km ) away on the morning of May 18 , 1980 . He was the first to report the eruption , transmitting " Vancouver ! Vancouver ! This is it ! " before he was swept away by a lateral blast . Johnston 's remains were never found , but state highway workers discovered remnants of his USGS trailer in 1993 . 
 Johnston 's career took him across the United States , where he studied Augustine Volcano in Alaska , the San Juan volcanic field in Colorado , and long @-@ extinct volcanoes in Michigan . Johnston was a meticulous and talented scientist , known for his analyses of volcanic gases and their relationship to eruptions . This , along with his enthusiasm and positive attitude , made him liked and respected by many co @-@ workers . After his death , other scientists lauded his character , both verbally and in dedications and letters . Johnston felt scientists must do what is necessary , including taking risks , to help protect the public from natural disasters . His work , and that of fellow USGS scientists convinced authorities to close Mount St. Helens to the public before the 1980 eruption . They maintained the closure despite heavy pressure to re @-@ open the area ; their work saved thousands of lives . His story became intertwined within the popular image of volcanic eruptions and their threat to society , and a part of volcanology 's history . To date , Johnston , along with Harry Glicken , is one of two American volcanologists known to have died in a volcanic eruption . 
 Following his death , Johnston was commemorated in several ways , including a memorial fund established in his name at the University of Washington to fund graduate @-@ level research . Two volcano observatories were established and named after him : one in Vancouver , Washington , and another on the ridge where he died . Johnston 's life and death are featured in several documentaries , films , docudramas and books . Along with others who died during the eruption , Johnston 's name is inscribed on memorials dedicated to their memory . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Johnston was born at the University of Chicago Hospital on December 18 , 1949 , to Thomas and Alice Johnston . They originally lived in Hometown , Illinois , but moved to Oak Lawn shortly after Johnston 's birth . Johnston grew up with one sister . His father worked as an engineer at a local company and his mother as a newspaper editor . Johnston often took photographs for his mother 's newspaper and contributed articles to his school 's newspaper . He never married . 
 After graduating from high school , Johnston attended the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign . He planned to study journalism , but became discouraged after a poor grade in a large lecture class . He was intrigued by an introductory geology class , and changed his major . His first geologic project was a study of the Precambrian rock that forms Michigan 's Upper Peninsula . There he investigated the remains of an ancient volcano : a suite of metamorphosed basalts , a <unk> sill , and volcanic roots in the form of a <unk> and <unk> intrusion . The experience planted the seed of Johnston 's passion for volcanoes . After working hard to learn the subject , he graduated with " Highest Honors and Distinction " in 1971 . 
 Johnston spent the summer after college in the San Juan volcanic field of Colorado working with volcanologist Pete Lipman in his study of two extinct calderas . This work became the inspiration for the first phase of his graduate work at the University of Washington in Seattle , in which he focused on the Oligocene Cimarron andesitic volcanic complex in the western San <unk> . Johnston 's reconstruction of the eruptive history of the extinct volcanoes prepared him to study active volcanoes . Johnston 's first experience with active volcanoes was a geophysical survey of Mount Augustine in Alaska in 1975 . When Mount Augustine erupted in 1976 , Johnston raced back to Alaska , shunting his former work on the <unk> Volcano into a master 's thesis , and making Mount Augustine the focus of his Ph.D. work . He graduated in 1978 with his Ph.D. , having shown that ( 1 ) the emplacement mechanism of the pyroclastic flows had changed over time , as they became less <unk> , ( 2 ) the magmas contained high quantities of volatile water , chlorine , and sulfur , and ( 3 ) underground mixing of the felsic ( silicic ) magmas with less @-@ viscous mafic ( basaltic ) magmas could have triggered eruptions . Mount Augustine was also the site of an early near @-@ disaster for Johnston , when he became trapped on the mountain during an eruption after high winds grounded the first two evacuation aircraft . 
 During the summers of 1978 and 1979 , Johnston led studies of the ash @-@ flow sheet emplaced in the 1912 eruption of Mount Katmai in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes . The gas phase is extremely important in propelling volcanic eruptions . Because of this , Johnston mastered the many techniques required to analyze glass @-@ vapor inclusions in phenocrysts embedded in lavas , which provide information about gases present during past eruptions . His work at Mount Katmai and other volcanoes in the Valley of Ten Thousand Smokes paved the way for his career , and his " agility , nerve , patience , and determination around the jet @-@ like summit fumaroles in the crater of Mt . <unk> " impressed his colleagues . 
 Later in 1978 , Johnston joined the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) , where he monitored volcanic emission levels in the Cascades and Aleutian Arc . There he helped to strengthen the theory that eruptions can be predicted , to some degree , by changes in the makeup of volcanic gases . Fellow volcanologist Wes Hildreth said of Johnston , " I think Dave 's dearest hope was that systematic monitoring of fumarolic emissions might permit detection of changes characteristically precursory to eruptions ... Dave wanted to formulate a general model for the behavior of magmatic volatiles prior to explosive outbursts and to develop a corollary rationale for the evaluation of hazards . " During this time , Johnston continued to visit Mount Augustine every summer and also assessed the geothermal energy potential of the Azores and Portugal . In the last year of his life , Johnston developed an interest in the health , agricultural , and environmental effects of both volcanic and anthropogenic emissions to the atmosphere . 
 Johnston was based at the branch of the USGS in Menlo Park , California , but his work on volcanoes took him all over the Pacific Northwest region . When the first earthquakes shook Mount St. Helens on March 16 , 1980 , Johnston was nearby at the University of Washington , where he had pursued his doctorate . Intrigued by the possible advent of an eruption , Johnston contacted Stephen Malone , a professor of geology at the university . Malone had been his mentor when Johnston had worked at the San Juan complex in Colorado , and Johnston admired his work . Malone stated that he " put him to work " almost instantly , allowing Johnston to escort interested reporters to a place near the volcano . Johnston was the first geologist on the volcano , and soon became a leader within the USGS team , taking charge of monitoring of volcanic gas emissions . 
 = = Eruption = = 
 = = = Precursor activity = = = 
 Since its last eruptive activity in the mid @-@ 19th century , Mount St. Helens had been largely dormant . <unk> were not installed until 1972 . This period of more than 100 years of inactivity ended in early 1980 . On March 15 , a cluster of tiny earthquakes rocked the area around the mountain . For six days , more than 100 earthquakes clustered around Mount St. Helens , an indication that magma was moving . There was initially some doubt as to whether the earthquakes were precursors to an eruption . By March 20 , a magnitude 4 @.@ 2 earthquake shook the wilderness around the volcano . The next day , seismologists installed three seismic recorder stations . By March 24 , volcanologists at the USGS — including Johnston — became more confident that the seismic activity was a sign of an impending eruption . After March 25 , seismic activity drastically increased . By March 26 , more than seven earthquakes over magnitude 4 @.@ 0 had been recorded , and the next day , hazard warnings were publicly issued . On March 27 , a phreatic eruption took place , ejecting a plume of ash nearly 7 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 134 m ) into the air . 
 Similar activity continued at the volcano over the following weeks , excavating the crater , forming an adjacent caldera , and erupting small amounts of steam , ash , and tephra . With each new eruption , the plumes of steam and ash from the volcano rose , eventually climbing to 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 000 m ) . By late March , the volcano was erupting up to 100 times per day . Spectators congregated in the vicinity of the mountain , hoping for a chance to see its eruptions . They were joined by reporters on helicopters , as well as mountain climbers . 
 On April 17 , a bulge was discovered on the mountain 's north flank , suggesting that Mount St. Helens could produce a lateral blast . Johnston was one of few people who believed this , along with a professor of geology at a Tacoma community college , Jack Hyde . Observing that Mount St. Helens did not possess visible vents , Hyde suggested that pressure would increase until the mountain exploded . Because Hyde was not a part of the USGS or in a position of responsibility , his opinion was generally dismissed . However , both were to be proven correct . Rising magma under Mount St. Helens had veered off to the north flank , creating a growing bulge on the surface . 
 = = = Final signs and primary blast = = = 
 Given the increasing seismic and volcanic activity , Johnston and the other volcanologists working for the USGS in its Vancouver branch prepared to observe any impending eruption . Geologist Don Swanson and others placed reflectors on and around the growing domes , and established the Coldwater I and II observation posts to use laser ranging to measure how the distances to these reflectors changed over time as the domes deformed . Coldwater II , where Johnston died , was located just 6 miles ( 10 km ) north of the mountain . To the astonishment of the USGS geologists , the bulge was growing at a rate of 5 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 4 meters ) per day . 
 <unk> installed on the volcano 's north side displayed a northwest trending tilt for that side of the mountain , and a southwest trending tilt was observed on the south side . Worried that the amount of pressure on the magma underground was increasing , scientists analyzed gases by the crater , and found high traces of sulfur dioxide . After this discovery , they began to regularly check the fumarolic activity and monitor the volcano for dramatic changes , but none were observed . Disheartened , they instead opted to study the growing bulge and the threat an avalanche could have for humans relatively near the volcano . An evaluation of the threat was carried out , concluding that a landslide or avalanche in the Toutle River could spawn lahars , or mudflows , downstream . 
 At that point , the previously consistent phreatic activity had become intermittent . Between May 10 and May 17 , the only change occurred on the volcano 's north flank , as the bulge increased in size . On May 16 and 17 , the mountain stopped its phreatic eruptions completely . 
 The active Mount St. Helens was radically different from its dormant form , now featuring an enormous bulge and several craters . In the week preceding the eruption , cracks formed in the north sector of the volcano 's summit , indicating a movement of magma from the bulge and towards the caldera . 
 At 8 : 32 a.m. local time the next day ( 18 May ) , an earthquake measuring magnitude 5 @.@ 1 rocked the area , triggering the landslide that started the main eruption . In a matter of seconds , vibrations from the earthquake loosened 2 @.@ 7 cubic kilometers ( 0 @.@ 6 cu mi ) of rock on the mountain 's north face and summit , creating a massive landslide . With the loss of the confining pressure of the overlying rock , the caldera of Mount St. Helens began to rapidly emit steam and other volcanic gases . A few seconds later , it erupted laterally , sending swift pyroclastic flows down its flanks at near supersonic speeds . These flows were later joined by lahars . Before being struck by a series of flows that , at their fastest , would have taken less than a minute to reach his position , Johnston managed to radio his USGS co @-@ workers with the message : " Vancouver ! Vancouver ! This is it ! " Seconds later , the signal from the radio went silent . Initially , there was some debate as to whether Johnston had survived ; records soon showed a radio message from fellow eruption victim and amateur radio operator Gerry Martin , located near the Coldwater peak and farther north of Johnston 's position , reporting his sighting of the eruption enveloping the Coldwater II observation post . As the blast overwhelmed Johnston 's post , Martin declared solemnly , " Gentlemen , the uh ... camper and the car sitting over to the south of me is covered . It 's gonna get me , too . I can 't get out of here ... " before his radio went silent . 
 The extent , speed and direction of the avalanche and pyroclastic flows that overwhelmed Johnston , Martin , and others were later described in detail in a paper titled ' Chronology and Character of the 18 May 1980 Explosive Eruptions of Mount St. Helens ' , published in 1984 in a collection published by the National Research Council 's Geophysics Study Committee . In this paper , the authors examined photographs and satellite images of the eruption to construct a chronology and description of the first few minutes . Included in the paper is figure 10 @.@ 3 , a series of timed photographs taken from Mount Adams , 33 miles ( 53 km ) east of Mount St. Helens . These six photographs , taken sideways on to the lateral blast , vividly show the extent and size of the avalanche and flows as they reached northwards over and beyond Johnston 's position . Figure 10 @.@ 7 from the same paper is an overhead diagram showing the position of the pyroclastic surge front at half @-@ minute intervals , with the positions of Johnston ( Coldwater II ) and Martin included . 
 The eruption was heard hundreds of miles away , but some of those who survived the eruption declared that the landslide and pyroclastic flows were silent as they raced down the mountain . <unk> Kilpatrick , an employee of the United States Forest Service , recalled , " There was no sound to it , not a sound . It was like a silent movie and we were all in it . " The reason for this discrepancy is a " quiet zone " , created as a result of the motion and temperature of air and , to a lesser extent , upon local topography . 
 Famous for telling reporters that being on the mountain was like " standing next to a dynamite keg and the fuse is lit " , Johnston had been among the first volcanologists at the volcano when eruptive signs appeared , and shortly after was named the head of volcanic gas monitoring . Though a careful analyst , Johnston strongly believed that scientists needed to take this risk for themselves in order to prevent civilian deaths , and therefore chose to take part in dangerous on @-@ site monitoring . He and several other volcanologists prevented people from being near the volcano during the few months of pre @-@ eruptive activity , and successfully fought pressure to re @-@ open the area . Their work kept the death toll at a few tens of individuals , instead of the thousands who possibly could have died had the region not been closed off . Johnston supported the lateral blast theory : he believed the explosive eruption would be ejected sideways out of the volcano , not upward . He also believed that the eruption would originate from the bulge . Because of this , he was more aware than most of the threat of a north @-@ directed eruption . 
 = = = USGS team and rescue efforts = = = 
 Many USGS scientists worked on the team monitoring the volcano , but it was graduate student Harry Glicken who had been manning the Coldwater II observation post for the two and a half weeks immediately preceding the eruption . The evening before the eruption he was scheduled to be relieved by USGS geologist Don Swanson in order to visit the graduate school at the University of California . Swanson , however , wanted to meet with a German graduate student who was returning to Germany on May 18 . Two days before the eruption , Swanson ran into Johnston in the hallway and asked him to take his place . Johnston hesitantly agreed to man the base for one day . That Saturday , the day before the eruption took place , Johnston ascended the mountain and went on a patrol of the volcano with geologist Carolyn Driedger . Tremors shook the mountain . Driedger was supposed to camp on one of the ridges overlooking the volcano that night , but Johnston told her to head home and said that he would stay on the volcano alone . While at Coldwater II , Johnston was to observe the volcano for any further signs of an eruption . Just prior to his departure , at 7 p.m. on the evening of May 17 , 13 ½ hours before the eruption , Glicken took the famous photograph of Johnston sitting by the observation post trailer with a notebook on his lap , smiling . 
 The following morning , May 18 , at 8 : 32 a.m. , the volcano erupted . Immediately , rescue workers were dispatched to the area . The official USGS pilot , Lon Stickney , who had been flying the scientists to the mountain , conducted the first rescue attempt . He flew his helicopter over the scarred remains of trees , valleys , and the Coldwater II observation post ridge , where he saw bare rock and uprooted trees . Because he saw no sign of Johnston 's trailer , Stickney began to panic , becoming " emotionally distraught " . 
 Frantic and guilt @-@ stricken , Harry Glicken convinced three separate helicopter pilots to take him up on flights over the devastated area in a rescue attempt , but the eruption had so changed the landscape that they were unable to locate any sign of the Coldwater II observation post , which had been swept away and buried in the blast . He and the helicopter crew did manage to find a car with people in it at a logging camp , but when they landed to attempt an evacuation , skin fell off the dead victims ' hands . Shortly after the eruption , Don Swanson found Johnston 's backpack and parka buried in the rubble , but he hid the discovery from all but a few people for fear that scavengers ( who were already removing and selling souvenirs of victims of the volcano ) would find and remove his friend 's body or belongings . In 1993 , while building a 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) extension of Washington State Route 504 ( also called " Spirit Lake Memorial Highway " ) to lead to the Johnston Ridge Observatory , construction workers discovered pieces of Johnston 's trailer . His body , however , has never been recovered . 
 = = = Consequences and response = = = 
 The public was shocked by the extent of the eruption , which had lowered the elevation of the summit by 1 @,@ 313 feet ( 400 m ) , destroyed 230 square miles ( 596 km2 ) of woodland , and spread ash into other states and Canada . The lateral blast that killed Johnston started at 220 miles per hour ( 354 km / h ) and accelerated to 670 miles per hour ( 1 @,@ 078 km / h ) . Even USGS scientists were awed . With a Volcanic Explosivity Index value of 5 , the eruption was catastrophic . More than 50 people were killed or missing , including Johnston , mountain resident Harry Randall Truman , and National Geographic photographer Reid Blackburn . 
 The disaster was the deadliest and most destructive volcanic eruption in the history of the United States of America . A total of 57 people are known to have died , and more were left homeless when the ash falls and pyroclastic flows destroyed or buried 200 houses . In addition to the human fatalities , thousands of animals perished . The official estimate from the USGS was 7 @,@ 000 game animals , 12 million salmon fingerlings , and 40 @,@ 000 salmon . 
 Two years after the eruption , the United States government set aside 110 @,@ 000 acres ( 450 km2 ) of land for the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument . This protected area , which includes the Johnston Ridge Observatory and several other research and visitor centers , serves as an area for scientific research , tourism , and education . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Scientific = = = 
 Johnston , known to his friends as Dave , was commemorated by both his fellow scientists and by the government . Known for his diligent and particular nature , he was called " an exemplary scientist " by a USGS dedication paper , which also described him as " <unk> genuine , with an infectious curiosity and enthusiasm " . He was quick to " dissipate cynicism " and believed that " careful evaluation and interpretation " was the best approach to his work . An obituary notice for Johnston stated that at the time of his death he had been " among the leading young volcanologists in the world " and that his " enthusiasm and warmth " would be " missed at least as much as his scientific strength " . Co @-@ worker Andrew Alden states that Johnston had great potential , declaring that he " had many friends and a bright future " . Following the eruption , Harry Glicken and other geologists at the USGS dedicated their work to Johnston . 
 Because Johnston was believed to be safe at the Coldwater II observation post , the fact that he died shocked his friends and co @-@ workers alike . However , most of his colleagues and family asserted that Johnston died " doing what he wanted to do . " His mother stated in an interview shortly after the eruption , " Not many people get to do what they really want to do in this world , but our son did . ... He would tell us he may never get rich but he was doing what he wanted . He wanted to be near if the eruption came . In a phone call on Mother 's Day , he told us it 's a sight very few geologists get to see . " Dr. Stephen Malone agreed that Johnston died doing what he loved , and stated that he " was very good at his work " . 
 Johnston 's role in the study of the volcano in the weeks leading up to the eruption was acknowledged in 1981 in a chronology of the eruption , published as part of the USGS report titled ' The 1980 Eruptions of Mount St. Helens , Washington ' : 
 Among the many contributors of data , none was more essential to the systematic reconstruction of the events of 1980 at Mount St. Helens than David Johnston , to whose memory this report is dedicated . Dave , who was present through all of the activity up to the climactic eruption and who lost his life in that eruption , provided far more than data . His insights and his thoroughly scientific attitude were crucial to the entire effort ; they still serve as a model for us all . 
 Since Johnston 's death , his field of volcanic eruption prediction has advanced significantly , and volcanologists are now able to predict eruptions based on a number of precursors that become apparent between days and months in advance . Geologists can now identify characteristic patterns in seismic waves that indicate particular magmatic activity . In particular , volcanologists have used deep , long @-@ period earthquakes that indicate that magma is rising through the crust . They can also use carbon dioxide emission as a proxy for magma supply rate . Measurements of surface deformation due to magmatic intrusions , like those that were conducted by Johnston and the other USGS scientists at the Coldwater I and II outposts , have advanced in scale and precision . Ground deformation monitoring networks around volcanoes now consist of <unk> ( interferometry ) , surveys of networks of GPS monuments , microgravity surveys in which scientists measure the change in gravitational potential or acceleration because of the intruding magma and resulting deformation , strain meters , and tiltmeters . Though there is still work to be done , this combination of approaches has greatly improved scientists ' abilities to forecast volcanic eruptions . 
 In addition to his work , Johnston himself has become part of the history of volcanic eruptions . With Harry Glicken , he is one of two volcanologists from the United States to die in a volcanic eruption . Glicken was being mentored by Johnston , who relieved Glicken of his watch at the Coldwater II observation post 13 hours before Mount St. Helens erupted . Glicken died in 1991 , eleven years later , when a pyroclastic flow overran him and several others at Mount Unzen in Japan . Despite the deaths of other volcanologists in later eruptions at Mount Unzen and Galeras , prediction methods similar to Johnston 's allowed scientists to convince residents of settlements near the Mount Pinatubo volcano to evacuate , preventing thousands of deaths . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 Early acts of commemoration included two trees that were planted in Tel Aviv , Israel , and the renaming of a community center in Johnston 's hometown as the " Johnston Center " . These actions were reported in newspapers during the first anniversary of the eruption in May 1981 . 
 On the second anniversary of the eruption , the USGS office in Vancouver ( which had been permanently established following the 1980 eruption ) was renamed the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory ( CVO ) in his memory . This volcano observatory is the one most responsible for monitoring Mount St. Helens , and helped to predict all of the volcano 's eruptions between 1980 and 1985 . In a 2005 open day , the lobby area of the CVO included a display and painting commemorating Johnston . 
 Johnston 's connections with the University of Washington ( where he had carried out his masters and doctoral research ) are remembered by a memorial fund that established an endowed graduate @-@ level fellowship within what is now the department of Earth and Space Sciences . By the time of the first anniversary of his death , the fund had exceeded $ 30 @,@ 000 . Known as the ' David A. Johnston Memorial Fellowship for Research Excellence ' , a number of awards of this fellowship have been made over the years since it was launched . 
 Following the eruption , the area where the Coldwater II observation post had been was sectioned off . Eventually , an observatory was built in the area in Johnston 's name , and opened in 1997 . Located just over 5 miles ( 8 km ) from the north flank of Mount St. Helens , the Johnston Ridge Observatory ( JRO ) allows the public to admire the open crater , new activity , and the creations of the 1980 eruption , including an extensive basalt field . Part of the Mount St. Helens National Volcanic Monument , the JRO was constructed for $ 10 @.@ 5 million , equipped with monitoring equipment . Visited by thousands of tourists annually , it also includes tours , a theater , and an exhibit hall . 
 There are several public memorials where Johnston 's name is inscribed in a list of those known to have died in the eruption . These memorials include a large curved granite monument at an outside viewing area at the Johnston Ridge Observatory , which opened in 1997 , and a plaque at the <unk> Bluffs Visitor Center , which was unveiled in a memorial grove in May 2000 . 
 = = = Depictions = = = 
 There have been several tellings of Johnston 's story in documentaries , films and docudramas about the eruption . Documentaries such as The Eruption of Mount St. Helens ! ( 1980 ) appeared the same year , while a movie was filmed in the year following the eruption and released to coincide with the first anniversary . The story of Mount St. Helens and Johnston continues to be told in documentaries and reconstructions several decades after the eruption took place . 
 In the 1981 film St. Helens , actor David Huffman starred as a renamed Johnston ( David Jackson ) . Controversially , Huffman 's character became involved in a love affair and was killed by the blast while on top of the mountain . Johnston 's parents criticized the production of the film , arguing that it possessed not " an ounce of David in it " and portrayed " him as a daredevil rather than a careful scientist " . They threatened to sue over the fact that they felt their son 's memory had been contaminated . Johnston 's mother stated that the film had changed many true aspects of the eruption , and depicted her son as " a rebel " with " a history of disciplinary trouble " . 
 Prior to the film 's release during the one @-@ year anniversary of the eruption , 36 scientists who knew Johnston signed a letter of protest . They wrote that , " Dave 's life was too meritorious to require fictional embellishments , " and that , " Dave was a superbly conscientious and creative scientist . " Don Swanson , a USGS geologist who was Johnston 's friend and who , due to other commitments , had convinced Johnston to take his place at the Coldwater II observation post on the day of the eruption , believed that a movie based on Johnston 's true life and exploits would have been a hit because of his friend 's character . 
 Several documentaries and docudramas have covered the history of the eruption , including archive footage and dramatisations of Johnston 's story . These include Up From the Ashes ( 1990 ) by KOMO @-@ TV , an episode of the 2005 second series of Seconds From Disaster broadcast by the National Geographic Channel , and an episode of the 2006 series Surviving Disaster , broadcast on the BBC and Discovery Channel . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Johnston , David A. ; Donnelly @-@ Nolan , Julie , eds . ( 1981 ) . Guides to Some Volcanic <unk> in Washington , Idaho , Oregon , and Northern California . U.S. Geological Survey Circular 838 . United States Geological Survey . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 04 @-@ 10 . 
 Johnston , David A. ( 1979 ) . " Volcanic gas studies at Alaskan volcanoes " . U. S. Geological Survey Circular ( Report ) ( Reston , Virginia , US : United States Geological Survey ) . C 0804 @-@ B : B83 – <unk> . ISSN 0364 @-@ 6017 . 
 Johnston , David A. ( 1979 ) . " Revision of the recent eruption history of Augustine Volcano ; elimination of the " 1902 eruption " " . U. S. Geological Survey Circular ( Report ) ( Reston , Virginia , US : United States Geological Survey ) . C 0804 @-@ B : <unk> – <unk> . ISSN 0364 @-@ 6017 . 
 Johnston , David A. ( 1979 ) . " Onset of volcanism at Augustine Volcano , lower Cook Inlet " . U. S. Geological Survey Circular ( Report ) ( Reston , Virginia , US : United States Geological Survey ) . C 0804 @-@ B : <unk> – <unk> . ISSN 0364 @-@ 6017 . 
 Johnston , David A. ( 1978 ) . <unk> , magma mixing , and the mechanism of eruption of Augustine Volcano , Alaska . Ph.D. Thesis . Seattle , Washington , US : University of Washington . 
 Johnston , David A. ( 1978 ) . <unk> facies and implications for the eruptive history of the Cimarron Volcano , San Juan Mountains , SW Colorado . Master 's Thesis . Seattle , Washington , US : University of Washington . 
 = Tupolev Tu @-@ 70 = 
 The Tupolev Tu @-@ 70 ( NATO reporting name : Cart ) was a Soviet passenger variant of the Tu @-@ 4 bomber ( which was a reverse @-@ engineered copy of the American @-@ made Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress ) designed immediately after the end of World War II . It used a number of components from Boeing B @-@ 29s that had made emergency landings in the Soviet Union after running out of fuel after bombing Japan . It had the first pressurized fuselage in the Soviet Union and first flew on 27 November 1946 . The aircraft was successfully tested , recommended for serial production , but ultimately not produced because of more pressing military orders and because Aeroflot had no requirement for such an aircraft . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 After basic design work was completed on the Tu @-@ 4 bomber Tupolev decided to design a passenger variant with a pressurized fuselage given the internal designation of Tu @-@ 70 . It was intended to use as many Tu @-@ 4 components as possible to reduce costs and save development time . It was a low @-@ wing cantilever monoplane with a tricycle landing gear powered by four Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> radial engines . Design work on a mock @-@ up began in February 1946 and the Council of Ministers confirmed an order for a single prototype the following month . A production decision for the Tu @-@ 12 , as it was to be known , would be made after testing . 
 To speed up construction of the prototype a number of components were utilized from two B @-@ 29s . These included the outer wing panels , the engine cowlings , the flaps , the undercarriage , the tail assembly and some of the internal equipment . The wing center section was redesigned and its span increased . The pressurized fuselage was entirely new and changed the wing 's position from mid @-@ wing to low @-@ wing . The aircraft 's windscreen was changed to a more conventional " stepped " configuration . Three different configurations were proposed for the cabin layout , a government VIP version , a mixed @-@ class 40 – 48 passenger model and an airliner configuration with 72 seats . The prototype appears to have been built in the mixed @-@ class configuration , but that cannot be confirmed . 
 The Tu @-@ 70 was completed in October 1946 , but did not make its first flight until 27 November . It began manufacturer 's trials in October , but an engine fire on the fourth flight caused it to make a crash @-@ landing . This was traced to a design defect in the American @-@ built supercharger control system , but identifying the problem and fixing it prolonged the manufacturer 's trials through October 1947 . It was redesignated as the Tu @-@ 70 when it went through the State acceptance trials which ended on 14 December . It met all the design goals , but was not accepted for production as all the factories were already committed to building aircraft with a higher priority and Aeroflot had no requirement for the type , being fully satisfied with its existing Lisunov Li @-@ 2 and Ilyushin Il @-@ 12 airliners . 
 It was sent to the NII VVS ( Russian : <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> – Scientific @-@ Research Institute of the Air Forces ) for evaluation as a military transport aircraft in December 1951 . Afterward it was used during a variety of tests before being scrapped in 1954 . Its design was modified into a military transport as the Tupolev Tu @-@ 75 , but this was not placed into production either . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Gunston , Tupolev Aircraft since 1922 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 6 
 Capacity : up to 72 passengers 
 Length : 35 @.@ 4 m ( 116 ft 1 ¾ in ) 
 Wingspan : 44 @.@ 25 m ( 145 ft 2 ⅛ in ) 
 Height : ( ) 
 Wing area : 166 @.@ 1 m ² ( 1 @,@ 788 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 38 @,@ 290 kg ( 84 @,@ 414 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 51 @,@ 400 kg ( 113 @,@ 316 lb ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 60 @,@ 000 kg ( 132 @,@ 275 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Shvetsov ASh @-@ <unk> radial engines , 1 @,@ 800 kW ( 2 @,@ 400 hp ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 568 km / h ( 307 kn , 353 mph ) 
 Range : 4 @,@ 900 km ( 2 @,@ 646 nmi , 3 @,@ 045 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 11 @,@ 000 m ( 36 @,@ 090 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 361 kg / m ² ( 74 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 120 W / kg ( 0 @.@ 070 hp / lb ) 
 = Russian monitor Veschun = 
 Veshchun ( Russian : <unk> ) was an Uragan @-@ class monitor built for the Imperial Russian Navy in Belgium in the mid @-@ 1860s . The design was based on the American Passaic @-@ class monitor , but was modified to suit Russian engines , guns and construction techniques . She was one of two ships of the class to be built in Belgium and assembled in Russia . Spending her entire career with the Baltic Fleet , the ship was only active when the Gulf of Finland was not frozen , but very little is known about her service . She was stricken in 1900 from the Navy List , converted into a coal barge in 1903 and renamed Barzha No. 44 then Barzha No. 327 . Abandoned by the Soviets in Finland in 1918 , the ship was later scrapped by the Finns . 
 = = Description = = 
 Veshchun was 201 feet ( 61 @.@ 3 m ) long overall , with a beam of 46 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 m ) and a draft of 10 @.@ 16 – 10 @.@ 84 feet ( 3 @.@ 1 – 3 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 long tons ( 1 @,@ 500 – 1 @,@ 600 t ) , and her crew numbered eight officers and 88 enlisted men in 1865 . They numbered 10 officers and 100 crewmen in 1877 . 
 The ship was fitted with a two @-@ cylinder , horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine built by the Belgian Cockerill Company . It drove a single propeller using steam that was provided by two rectangular boilers . Specific information on the output of the ship 's engine has not survived , but it ranged between 340 – 500 indicated horsepower ( 254 – 373 kW ) for all the ships of this class . During Veshchun 's sea trials on 21 July 1864 , she reached a maximum speed of 6 @.@ 75 knots ( 12 @.@ 50 km / h ; 7 @.@ 77 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 190 long tons ( 190 t ) of coal , which gave her a theoretical endurance of 1 @,@ 440 nmi ( 2 @,@ 670 km ; 1 @,@ 660 mi ) at 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . 
 Veshchun was designed to be armed with a pair of 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading guns purchased from Krupp of Germany and rifled in Russia , but the rifling project was seriously delayed and the ship was completed with nine @-@ inch smoothbores . These lacked the penetration power necessary to deal with ironclads and they were replaced by license @-@ built 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) smoothbore muzzle @-@ loading Rodman guns in 1867 – 68 . The Rodman guns were replaced around 1876 with the originally intended nine @-@ inch rifled guns . 
 All of the wrought @-@ iron armor that was used in the Uragan @-@ class monitors was in 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) plates , just as in the Passaic @-@ class ships . The side of the ship was entirely covered with three to five layers of armor plates , of which the three innermost plates extended 42 inches ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) below the waterline . This armor was backed by a wooden beam that had a maximum thickness of 36 inches ( 914 mm ) . The gun turret and the pilothouse above it was protected by eleven layers of armor . Curved plates six layers thick protected the base of the funnel up to a height of 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) above the deck . Unlike their predecessors , the Uragans were built without deck armor to save weight , but Veshchun 's deck was later prepared for the addition of 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) armor plates , although they were never installed . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Construction of Veshchun began on 9 November 1863 by the Belgian firm of Cockerill for assembly in Saint Petersburg . The ship was laid down on 9 December 1863 and she was launched on 8 May 1864 . She entered service on 1865 and cost a total of 1 @,@ 237 @,@ 000 rubles , almost double her contract cost of 600 @,@ 000 rubles . The ship was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion and she , and all of her sister ships except Latnik , made a port visit to Stockholm , Sweden in July – August 1865 while under the command of General Admiral Grand Duke Konstantin Nikolayevich . 
 Sometime after Veshchun was completed , an armored ring , 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and 15 inches ( 381 mm ) tall , was fitted around the base of the turret to prevent splinters from jamming it . Later , an armored , outward @-@ curving bulwark was fitted around the top of the turret to protect any crewmen there . Three sponsons were later added , probably during the 1870s , to the upper portion of the turret . Each sponson , one above the gun ports and one on each side of the turret , mounted a light gun , probably a 1 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 44 mm ) Engstrem gun , for defense against torpedo boats . A fourth gun was mounted on a platform aft of the funnel when a hurricane deck was built between the funnel and the turret , also probably during the 1870s . 
 Little is known about the ship 's career other than that she was laid up each winter when the Gulf of Finland froze . Veshchun was reclassified as a coast @-@ defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal on 6 July 1900 , although she was not stricken until 17 August . During 1903 , the ship was converted into a coal barge by the removal of her turret , her side armor , and its wooden backing , and by the division of her hull into three holds . She was redesignated as Barzha No. 44 and , in 1914 , Barzha No. 327 . The ship was abandoned by the Soviets when they were forced to withdraw from Finland in April 1918 according to the terms of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk and was later scrapped by the Finns . 
 = Storm surge = 
 A storm surge is a coastal flood or tsunami @-@ like phenomenon of rising water commonly associated with low pressure weather systems ( such as tropical cyclones and strong extratropical cyclones ) , the severity of which is affected by the shallowness and orientation of the water body relative to storm path , and the timing of tides . Most casualties during tropical cyclones occur as the result of storm surges . 
 The two main meteorological factors contributing to a storm surge are a long fetch of winds spiraling inward toward the storm , and a low @-@ pressure @-@ induced dome of water drawn up under and trailing the storm 's center . 
 = = Historic storm surges = = 
 The deadliest storm surge on record was the 1970 Bhola cyclone , which killed up to 500 @,@ 000 people in the area of the Bay of Bengal . The low @-@ lying coast of the Bay of Bengal is particularly vulnerable to surges caused by tropical cyclones . The deadliest storm surge in the twenty @-@ first century was caused by the Cyclone Nargis , which killed more than 138 @,@ 000 people in Myanmar in May 2008 . The next deadliest in this century was caused by the Typhoon Haiyan ( Yolanda ) , which killed more than 6 @,@ 000 people in the central Philippines in 2013 and resulted in economic losses estimated at $ 14 billion ( USD ) . 
 The Galveston Hurricane of 1900 , a Category 4 hurricane that struck Galveston , Texas , drove a devastating surge ashore ; between 6 @,@ 000 and 12 @,@ 000 lives were lost , making it the deadliest natural disaster ever to strike the United States . 
 The highest storm tide noted in historical accounts was produced by the 1899 Cyclone <unk> , estimated at almost 44 ft ( 13 metres ) at Bathurst Bay , Australia , but research published in 2000 saw the majority of this was likely wave run @-@ up , due to the steep coastal topography . In the United States , one of the greatest recorded storm surges was generated by 2005 's Hurricane Katrina , which produced a maximum storm surge of more than 25 ft ( 8 metres ) in the communities of Waveland ( 41 @.@ 5 ft ) , Bay St. Louis ( 38 ft ) , <unk> ( 30 ft ) and Pass Christian ( 35 ft ) in Mississippi . Another record storm surge occurred in this same area from Hurricane Camille in August 1969 , with the highest storm tide of record noted from a high water mark as 24 @.@ 6 ft ( 7 @.@ 5 m ) , also found in Pass Christian ( the back side of St. Louis Bay got up to 35 ft ) . A high storm surge occurred in New York City from Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 , with a high tide of 14 ft ( 4 @.@ 2 m ) . 
 = = Mechanics = = 
 At least five processes can be involved in altering tide levels during storms : the pressure effect , the direct wind effect , the effect of the Earth 's rotation , the effect of waves , and the rainfall effect . The pressure effects of a tropical cyclone will cause the water level in the open ocean to rise in regions of low atmospheric pressure and fall in regions of high atmospheric pressure . The rising water level will counteract the low atmospheric pressure such that the total pressure at some plane beneath the water surface remains constant . This effect is estimated at a 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) increase in sea level for every millibar ( hPa ) drop in atmospheric pressure . 
 Strong surface winds cause surface currents at a 45 degree angle to the wind direction , by an effect known as the Ekman Spiral . Wind stresses cause a phenomenon referred to as " wind set @-@ up " , which is the tendency for water levels to increase at the downwind shore , and to decrease at the upwind shore . Intuitively , this is caused by the storm simply blowing the water towards one side of the basin in the direction of its winds . Because the Ekman Spiral effects spread vertically through the water , the effect is inversely proportional to depth . The pressure effect and the wind set @-@ up on an open coast will be driven into bays in the same way as the astronomical tide . 
 The Earth 's rotation causes the Coriolis effect , which bends currents to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in the Southern Hemisphere . When this bend brings the currents into more perpendicular contact with the shore it can amplify the surge , and when it bends the current away from the shore it has the effect of lessening the surge . 
 The effect of waves , while directly powered by the wind , is distinct from a storm 's wind @-@ powered currents . Powerful wind whips up large , strong waves in the direction of its movement . Although these surface waves are responsible for very little water transport in open water , they may be responsible for significant transport near the shore . When waves are breaking on a line more or less parallel to the beach , they carry considerable water shoreward . As they break , the water particles moving toward the shore have considerable momentum and may run up a sloping beach to an elevation above the mean water line which may exceed twice the wave height before breaking . 
 The rainfall effect is experienced predominantly in estuaries . Hurricanes may dump as much as 12 in ( 300 mm ) of rainfall in 24 hours over large areas , and higher rainfall densities in localized areas . As a result , watersheds can quickly surge water into the rivers that drain them . This can increase the water level near the head of tidal estuaries as storm @-@ driven waters surging in from the ocean meet rainfall flowing from the estuary . 
 Surge and wave heights on shore are affected by the configuration and bathymetry of the ocean bottom . A narrow shelf , or one that has a steep drop from the shoreline and subsequently produces deep water in proximity to the shoreline tends to produce a lower surge , but a higher and more powerful wave . This situation well exemplified by the southeast coast of Florida . The edge of the Floridian Plateau , where the water depths reach 91 metres ( 299 ft ) , lies just 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) offshore of Palm Beach , Florida ; just 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) offshore , the depth increases to over 180 m ( 590 ft ) . The 180 m ( 590 ft ) depth contour followed southward from Palm Beach County lies more than 30 @,@ 000 m ( 98 @,@ 000 ft ) to the east of the upper Keys . 
 Conversely , coastlines along North America such as those along the Gulf of Mexico coast from Texas to Florida , and Asia such as the Bay of Bengal , have long , gently sloping shelves and shallow water depths . On the Gulf side of Florida , the edge of the Floridian Plateau lies more than 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) offshore of Marco Island in Collier County . Florida Bay , lying between the Florida Keys and the mainland , is also very shallow ; depths typically vary between 0 @.@ 3 m ( 0 @.@ 98 ft ) and 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . These areas are subject to higher storm surges , but smaller waves . This difference is because in deeper water , a surge can be dispersed down and away from the hurricane . However , upon entering a shallow , gently sloping shelf , the surge cannot be dispersed , but is driven ashore by the wind stresses of the hurricane . Topography of the land surface is another important element in storm surge extent . Areas where the land lies less than a few meters above sea level are at particular risk from storm surge inundation . 
 For a given topography and bathymetry the surge height is not solely affected by peak wind speed ; the size of the storm also affects the peak surge . With any storm the piled up water has an exit path to the sides and this escape mechanism is reduced in proportion to the surge force ( for the same peak wind speed ) as the storm covers more area . 
 In the Asian region , the Philippines are one of the most affected by storm surges of typhoons as it lies in the path of <unk> @-@ entrained typhoons heading toward Japan , Taiwan , China , Vietnam , and Cambodia . 
 = = = Extratropical storms = = = 
 Similar to tropical cyclones , extra @-@ tropical storms cause an offshore rise of water . However , unlike most tropical cyclone storm surge , extra @-@ tropical storms can cause higher water levels across a large area for longer periods of time , depending on the system . This is due to many factors , such as storm size and different steering winds , which could keep a system in a storm @-@ surge prone area for longer periods of time . 
 Another component of extra @-@ tropical storm surge is the phenomenon of negative water levels . If strong winds are blowing offshore , situations can arise where mean water levels in a bay fall significantly , which poses a serious threat for ships tied up at piers . If negative water levels are severe enough , ships tied up at docks can actually sit on the seafloor , preventing them from leaving port . 
 In North America , extra @-@ tropical storm surges may occur on the Pacific and Alaska coasts , and north of 31 ° N on the Atlantic Coast . Extra @-@ tropical storm surges may be possible for the Gulf coast mostly during the wintertime , when extra @-@ tropical cyclones affect the coast , such as in the March 1993 Storm of the Century . 
 November 9 – 13 , 2009 marked a significant extratropical storm surge event on the US east coast when the remnants of Hurricane Ida developed into a Nor 'easter off the Southeast US coast . During the event , storm force winds from the east were present along the northern periphery of the low pressure center for a number of days , forcing water into locations such as Chesapeake Bay . Water levels rose significantly , and remained as high as 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal in numerous locations throughout the Chesapeake for a number of days as water was continually built @-@ up inside the estuary from the onshore winds and freshwater rains flowing into the bay . In many locations , water levels were shy of records by only 0 @.@ 1 feet ( 3 cm ) . 
 = = Measuring surge = = 
 Surge can be measured directly at coastal tidal stations as the difference between the forecast tide and the observed rise of water . Another method of measuring surge is by the deployment of pressure transducers along the coastline just ahead of an approaching tropical cyclone . This was first tested for Hurricane Rita in 2005 . These types of sensors can be placed in locations that will be submerged , and can accurately measure the height of water above them . 
 After surge from a cyclone has receded , teams of surveyors map high @-@ water marks ( <unk> ) on land , in a rigorous and detailed process that includes photos and written descriptions of the marks . HWMs denote the location and elevation of flood waters from a storm event . When HWMs are analyzed , if the various components of the water height can be broken out so that the portion attributable to surge can be identified , then that mark can be classified as storm surge . Otherwise , it is classified as storm tide . HWMs on land are referenced to a vertical datum ( a reference coordinate system ) . During evaluation , HWMs are divided into four categories based on the confidence in the mark ; only HWMs evaluated as " excellent " are used by NHC in post storm analysis of the surge . 
 Two different measures are used for storm tide and storm surge measurements . Storm tide is measured using a geodetic vertical datum ( <unk> 29 or <unk> 88 ) . Since storm surge is defined as the rise of water beyond what would be expected by the normal movement due to tides , storm surge is measured using tidal predictions , with the assumption that the tide prediction is well @-@ known and only slowly varying in the region subject to the surge . Since tides are a localized phenomenon , storm surge can only be measured in relationship to a nearby tidal station . Tidal bench mark information at a station provides a translation from the geodetic vertical datum to mean sea level ( MSL ) at that location , then subtracting the tidal prediction yields a surge height above the normal water height . 
 = = SLOSH = = 
 The National Hurricane Center in the US , forecasts storm surge using the SLOSH model , which stands for Sea , Lake and Overland Surges from Hurricanes . The model is accurate to within 20 percent . SLOSH inputs include the central pressure of a tropical cyclone , storm size , the cyclone 's forward motion , its track , and maximum sustained winds . Local topography , bay and river orientation , depth of the sea bottom , astronomical tides , as well as other physical features are taken into account , in a predefined grid referred to as a SLOSH basin . Overlapping SLOSH basins are defined for the southern and eastern coastline of the continental U.S. Some storm simulations use more than one SLOSH basin ; for instance , Katrina SLOSH model runs used both the Lake Ponchartrain / New Orleans basin , and the Mississippi Sound basin , for the northern Gulf of Mexico landfall . The final output from the model run will display the maximum envelope of water , or <unk> , that occurred at each location . To allow for track or forecast uncertainties , usually several model runs with varying input parameters are generated to create a map of <unk> , or Maximum of <unk> . And for hurricane evacuation studies , a family of storms with representative tracks for the region , and varying intensity , eye diameter , and speed , are modeled to produce worst @-@ case water heights for any tropical cyclone occurrence . The results of these studies are typically generated from several thousand SLOSH runs . These studies have been completed by USACE , under contract to the Federal Emergency Management Agency , for several states and are available on their Hurricane Evacuation Studies ( HES ) website . They include coastal county maps , shaded to identify the minimum SSHS category of hurricane that will result in flooding , in each area of the county . 
 = = Mitigation = = 
 Although meteorological surveys alert about hurricanes or severe storms , in the areas where the risk of coastal flooding is particularly high , there are specific storm surge warnings . These have been implemented , for instance , in the Netherlands , Spain , the United States , and the United Kingdom . 
 A prophylactic method introduced after the North Sea Flood of 1953 is the construction of dams and floodgates ( storm surge barriers ) . They are open and allow free passage but close when the land is under threat of a storm surge . Major storm surge barriers are the <unk> and <unk> in the Netherlands which are part of the Delta Works project , the Thames Barrier protecting London and the Saint Petersburg Dam in Russia . 
 Another modern development ( in use in the Netherlands ) is the creation of housing communities at the edges of wetlands with floating structures , restrained in position by vertical pylons . Such wetlands can then be used to accommodate runoff and surges without causing damage to the structures while also protecting conventional structures at somewhat higher low @-@ lying elevations , provided that dikes prevent major surge intrusion . 
 For mainland areas , storm surge is more of a threat when the storm strikes land from seaward , rather than approaching from landwards . 
 = Marbled electric ray = 
 Not to be confused with Torpedo <unk> , also known as the marbled electric ray . 
 The marbled electric ray ( Torpedo marmorata ) is a species of electric ray in the family Torpedinidae found in the coastal waters of the eastern Atlantic Ocean from the North Sea to South Africa . This benthic fish inhabits rocky reefs , seagrass beds , and sandy and muddy flats in shallow to moderately deep waters . It can survive in environments with very little dissolved oxygen , such as tidal pools . The marbled electric ray has a nearly circular pectoral fin disc and a muscular tail that bears two dorsal fins of nearly equal size and a large caudal fin . It can be identified by the long , finger @-@ like projections on the rims of its spiracles , as well as by its dark brown mottled color pattern , though some individuals are plain @-@ colored . Males and females typically reach 36 – 38 cm ( 14 – 15 in ) and 55 – 61 cm ( 22 – 24 in ) long respectively . 
 Nocturnal and solitary , the marbled electric ray can often be found lying the sea floor buried except for its eyes and spiracles . This slow @-@ moving predator feeds almost exclusively on small bony fishes , which it ambushes from the bottom and subdues with strong electric bursts . It defends itself by turning towards the threat , swimming in a loop , or curling up with its underside facing outward , while emitting electric shocks to drive off the prospective predator . Its paired electric organs are capable of producing 70 – 80 volts of electricity . This species is aplacental viviparous , with the developing embryos sustained by yolk and histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Mating takes place from November to January , and females bear litters of 3 – 32 pups every other year after a gestation period of 9 – 12 months . The newborn ray is immediately capable of using electricity to hunt . 
 The electric shock delivered by a marbled electric ray can be severe but is not directly life @-@ threatening . Its electrogenic properties have been known since classical antiquity , when live rays were used to treat conditions such as chronic headaches . This and other electric ray species are used as model organisms in biomedical research . Various coastal demersal fisheries take the marbled electric ray as bycatch ; captured rays are usually discarded as they have little commercial value . The impact of fishing on its population is uncertain , and thus International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed this ray under Data Deficient . In the Mediterranean Sea , it remains the most common electric ray and in some areas may be increasing in number . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 French naturalist Antoine Risso described the marbled electric ray as Torpedo marmorata in his 1810 <unk> de Nice , ou histoire naturelle des <unk> du département des Alpes maritimes ( Ichthyology of Nice , or natural history of fishes in the Alpes @-@ Maritimes ) . The specific epithet marmorata means " marbled " in Latin , and refers to the ray 's color pattern . Because no type specimens are known , in 1999 Ronald Fricke designated Risso 's original illustration as the species lectotype . 
 Within the genus Torpedo , the marbled electric ray belongs to the subgenus Torpedo , which differs from the other subgenus Tetronarce in having fringed margins on their spiracles and generally ornate dorsal coloration . Other common names for this species include common crampfish , marbled torpedo , numbfish , and spotted torpedo . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Widely distributed in the eastern Atlantic Ocean , the marbled electric ray is found from Scotland and the southern North Sea southward to the Cape of Good Hope , South Africa , including all around the Mediterranean Sea . It prefers temperatures cooler than 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) . This species is typically found at depths of 10 – 30 m ( 33 – 98 ft ) off Britain and Ireland , 20 – 100 m ( 66 – 328 ft ) off Italy , and down to 200 m ( 660 ft ) off Tunisia . It has been recorded from as deep as 370 m ( 1 @,@ 210 ft ) . The marbled electric ray tends to be found deeper than the common torpedo ( T. torpedo ) , which shares the southern portion of its range . 
 Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , the marbled electric ray inhabits rocky reefs and seagrass beds , as well as nearby areas with sandy or muddy bottoms . During warm summer months , pregnant females are known to migrate into <unk> Bay in northwestern France , where they are commonly found in very shallow , muddy pools near oyster beds . This species may conduct a northward migration in summer and autumn , into the waters of the British Isles . 
 = = Description = = 
 The body of the marbled electric ray is soft and flabby , and entirely lacks dermal denticles . The thick pectoral fin disc is nearly circular and comprises about 59 – 67 % of the total length ; the paired kidney @-@ shaped electric organs are visible beneath the skin , outside of the small eyes . Immediately posterior to each eye is a large , oval spiracle , which bears 6 – 8 long , finger @-@ like projections on the rim that almost meet at the center . On the " nape " behind the spiracles , there are 5 – 7 prominent mucous pores . Between the nostrils , there is a quadrangular curtain of skin much broader than long , that almost reaches the small , arched mouth . The teeth are small with a single pointed cusp , and are arranged with a quincunx pattern into a pavement @-@ like band in either jaw . The five pairs of gill slits are small and located beneath the disc . 
 The two dorsal fins have rounded apexes and are placed close together ; the base of each fin measures about two @-@ thirds its height . The rear of the first dorsal fin base is located behind the rear of the pelvic fin bases . The second dorsal fin is only slightly smaller than the first . The short , robust tail has skin folds running along either side , and terminates in a large caudal fin shaped like a triangle with blunt corners . The upper surface has a dark mottled pattern on a light to dark brown background ; some individuals are uniformly brown . The underside is plain off @-@ white with darker fin margins . This species can grow up to 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long , though few exceed 36 – 38 cm ( 14 – 15 in ) long for males and 55 – 61 cm ( 22 – 24 in ) long for females . The much larger sizes attained by females can be attributed to the resource investment needed for reproduction . There seems to be little geographic variation in maximum size . The maximum weight on record is 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Solitary and slow @-@ moving , the marbled electric ray may remain motionless for several days at a time . It is more active at night and spends much of the day buried in sediment with only the eyes and spiracles showing . Consistent with its sluggish nature , the marbled electric ray has a low blood oxygen carrying capacity and heart rate ( 10 – 15 beats / min ) , and consumes less oxygen than other sharks and rays of similar size . It is highly tolerant of being deprived of oxygen ( hypoxia ) , allowing it to cope with deoxygenated bottom waters or being stranded in small pools by the falling tide . The ray stops breathing entirely when the oxygen partial pressure in the water drops below 10 – 15 Torr , and can survive such a state for at least five hours . It deals with extreme hypoxia by coupling anaerobic glycolysis to additional energy @-@ producing pathways in its mitochondria , which serves to slow down the accumulation of potentially harmful lactate within its cells . 
 Like other members of its family , the marbled electric ray can produce a strong electric shock for attack and defense , produced by a pair of electric organs derived from muscle tissue . Each electric organ consists of 400 – 600 vertical columns , with each column composed of a stack of roughly 400 jelly @-@ filled " <unk> " that essentially act like a battery . This ray has been measured producing up to 70 – 80 volts , and the maximum potential of the electric discharge has been estimated to be as high as 200 volts . The strength of the electric shock declines progressively as the ray becomes fatigued . Experiments in vitro have found that the nerves innervating the electric organ essentially stop functioning at temperatures below 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . As the water temperature in the wild regularly drops below this threshold in winter , it is possible that the ray does not use its electric organ for part of the year . Alternately , the ray may have a yet @-@ unknown physiological mechanism to adapt electric organ function to the cold . 
 Known parasites of the marbled electric ray include the tapeworms Anthocephalum gracile and <unk> <unk> , the leeches <unk> muricata and <unk> lubrica , the monogeneans Amphibdella torpedinis , Amphibdelloides <unk> , A. maccallumi , A. <unk> , Empruthotrema <unk> , E. torpedinis , and <unk> torpedinis , and the nematodes Ascaris torpedinis and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The marbled electric ray is an ambush predator that employs electricity to capture prey . Vision is of little importance in hunting , as the ray 's eyes are often obscured as it lies buried on the bottom . Instead , it likely relies on the mechanoreceptors of its lateral line , as it only attacks moving prey . The electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini may also contribute to prey detection . 
 Small , benthic bony fishes constitute over 90 % of the marbled electric ray 's diet by weight ; these include gobies , hake , sea bass , mullets , jack mackerel , sea breams , goatfish , damselfish , wrasses , conger eels , and flatfish . Cephalopods such as European squid ( Loligo vulgaris ) and elegant cuttlefish ( Sepia elegans ) are a minor secondary food source . There is a single record of an individual that had swallowed a penaeid prawn , <unk> <unk> , and a study of captive rays found that they reject live <unk> crabs . Off southern France , by far the most important prey species is the leaping mullet ( Liza <unk> ) . Food items are swallowed whole ; there is a record of a ray 41 cm ( 16 in ) long that had consumed a three @-@ bearded <unk> ( <unk> vulgaris ) 34 cm ( 13 in ) long . 
 Two distinct types of prey capture behavior have been observed in the marbled electric ray . The first is " jumping " , used by the ray to attack prey fish that swim close to its head , typically no farther than 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) . In the " jump " , the ray pulls back its head and then thrusts its disc upwards , reaching about two or three times as high as the prey fish is from the bottom . Simultaneously , it makes a single tail stroke and produces a high @-@ frequency ( 230 – 430 Hz , increasing with temperature ) burst of electricity . The initial electric burst is very short , containing only 10 – 64 pulses , but is still strong enough to cause <unk> contraction in the body of the prey fish , often breaking its vertebral column . As the ray glides forward , the motion of the jump sweeps the now @-@ paralyzed prey beneath it , whereupon it is enveloped by the disc and maneuvered to the mouth . Electric bursts continues to be produced during this process ; the total number of electric pulses over a single jump increases with size , ranging from 66 in a newborn 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long to 340 in an adult 45 cm ( 18 in ) long . The jump lasts no more than two seconds . 
 The second type of prey capture behavior is " creeping " , used by the ray for stationary or slow @-@ moving prey ; this includes stunned prey that may have drifted out of reach from a jumping attack . In creeping , the ray makes small up and down motions of its disc coupled with small beats of its tail . The raising of the disc draws water beneath it and pulls the prey towards the ray , while the lowering of the disc and the tail beats move the ray towards the prey in small increments . When it reaches the prey , the ray opens its mouth to suck it in . Short electric bursts are produced as necessary , depending on the movement of the prey , and continue through ingestion . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Because of its size and electrical defenses , the marbled electric ray does not often fall prey to other animals such as sharks . This species exhibits different defensive behaviors depending on whether a prospective predator grasps it by the disc or the tail . A ray touched on the disc will quickly turn toward the threat while producing electric shocks ; this is followed by it fleeing in a straight line , after which it may re @-@ bury itself . A ray touched on the tail will propel itself upward into a loop ; if it has not escaped after the maneuver , the ray will curl into a ring with the belly facing outward , so as to present the area of its body with the highest electric field gradient ( the underside of the electric organs ) towards the threat ; these behaviors are accompanied by short , strong electric shocks . The ray tends to produce more electric bursts when protecting its tail than when protecting its disc . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 The marbled electric ray exhibits aplacental viviparity , in which the developing embryos are nourished initially by yolk , which is later supplemented by nutrient @-@ rich histotroph ( " uterine milk " ) produced by the mother . Adult females have two functional ovaries and uteruses ; the inner lining of the uterus bears a series of parallel lengthwise folds . The reproductive cycle for females is probably biennial , while males are capable of mating every year . Mating occurs from November to January , and the young are born the following year after a gestation period of 9 – 12 months . The litter size ranges from 3 to 32 , increasing with the size of the female . 
 The electric organs first appear when the embryo is 1 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 75 – 0 @.@ 91 in ) long , at which time it has distinct eyes , pectoral and pelvic fins , and external gills . At an embryonic length of 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 079 – 0 @.@ 106 in ) , the gill clefts close dorsally , leaving the gill slits beneath the disc as in all rays . At the same time , the four blocks of primordial cells that make up each electric organ rapidly coalesce together . The embryo 's pectoral fins enlarge and fuse with the snout at a length of 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 in ) , giving it the typical circular electric ray shape . When the embryo is 3 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 2 in ) long , the external gills are resorbed and pigmentation develops . The embryo can produce electric discharges by a length of 6 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 3 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 9 in ) . The strength of the discharge increases by a magnitude of 105 over the course of gestation , reaching 47 – 55 volts by an embryonic length of 8 @.@ 6 – 13 cm ( 3 @.@ 4 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) , close to that of an adult . 
 Newborns measure approximately 10 – 14 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long , and are immediately capable of performing characteristic predatory and defensive behaviors . Males mature sexually at approximately 21 – 29 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 – 11 @.@ 4 in ) long and five years of age , while females mature significantly larger and older at 31 – 39 cm ( 12 – 15 in ) long and twelve years of age . The maximum lifespan is 12 – 13 years for males and around 20 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The shock delivered by the marbled electric ray can be painful but is seldom life @-@ threatening , although there is a danger of a shocked diver becoming disoriented underwater . Its electrogenic properties have been known since classical antiquity , leading it and other electric fishes to be used in medicine . The ancient Greeks and Romans applied live rays to those afflicted with conditions such as chronic headaches and gout , and recommended that its meat be eaten by epileptics . 
 The marbled electric ray is caught incidentally in bottom trawls , trammel nets , and bottom longlines ; it has little economic value and is mostly discarded at sea when captured . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) presently lacks enough population and fishery data to assess its conservation status beyond Data Deficient . At least in the northern Mediterranean , surveys have found that it remains the most common electric ray , and is perhaps becoming more abundant in Italian waters . This and other electric ray species are used as model organisms in biomedical research because their electric organs are rich in acetylcholine receptors , which play an important role in the human nervous system . 
 = Saskatchewan Highway 2 = 
 Highway 2 is a provincial highway in the Canadian province of Saskatchewan . It is the longest Saskatchewan Highway , at 809 km ( 503 mi ) . The highway is partially divided and undivided . However , only about 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) near Moose Jaw , 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) near Chamberlain , and 21 kilometres ( 13 mi ) near Prince Albert are divided highway . Highway 2 is a major north @-@ south route , beginning at the Canadian @-@ American border at the Port of West Poplar River , and <unk> , Montana customs checkpoints . Montana Highway 24 continues south . The town of La Ronge delimits the northern terminus with Highway 102 continuing north . It passes through the major cities of Moose Jaw in the south and Prince Albert in the north . Highway 2 overlaps Highway 11 between the towns of Chamberlain and Findlater . This 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) section of road is a wrong @-@ way concurrency . The highway ends at La Ronge , where it becomes Highway 102 . 
 The highway started as a graded road in the 1920s which followed the grid lines of the early survey system and was maintained by early homesteaders of each rural municipality . Paving projects of the 1950s created all weather roads . Technological advances have paved the way for cost @-@ effective methods of improvements to highway surfaces to meet the wear and tear of increased tourist and commercial highway traffic . The stretch of Highway 2 from Moose Jaw to Prince Albert was designated in 2005 as Veterans Memorial Highway . The designation coincided with Veterans Week 2005 . The CanAm Highway comprises Saskatchewan Highways 35 , 39 , 6 , 3 , and 2 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Saskatchewan Highway 2 departs the Canada – United States border in a northerly direction . Montana Highway 24 continues in a southerly direction in the United States . The United States border crossing is in <unk> , Montana and the Canadian is at West Poplar River . 
 Nearby there are campgrounds available , and a point of information regarding the crossing of Poplar River . The area is rich in history , this is the Big Muddy Badlands area which featured the hideouts of outlaws and rum runners of the nineteenth and early twentieth century . This area remained above the Quaternary age ice sheets , being pushed and folded by the glacier movement resulting in <unk> hills . The highway winds up , down and around these hills along the way . The Big Muddy Badlands are within the Missouri Coteau . At km 12 @.@ 2 the highway reaches <unk> , and the intersection with Highway 18 . Access to Wood Mountain Post Provincial Historical Park is obtained by following Highway 18 north for 17 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 8 mi ) . This section of Highway 2 begins as a Class 4 highway and is under the jurisdiction of the Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation ( <unk> ) South West Transportation Planning Council . The highway is a secondary weight highway with a thin membrane surface type as it only has an average of 390 vehicles per day ( vpd ) according to the 2007 Average Annual Daily Traffic ( AADT ) count which was taken north of Rockglen . Highway 2 begins a concurrency with Highway 18 in a northeasterly direction . Alfalfa and alfalfa mixtures , hay and fodder crops and spring wheat are the main crops in Old Post rural municipality ( RM ) . There is a point of information at km 42 @.@ 3 . This area is known as the Wood Mountain Uplands where there are mining endeavours undertaken such as coal , bentonite , <unk> and ceramic clays . Paleontological digs have uncovered a 63 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old sea turtle which has been excavated in the <unk> region . Rockglen is located at km 49 @.@ 7 , and Highway 2 now extends in a northerly direction again . Rockglen ( Population 450 in 2001 and 360 in 2006 ) and Assiniboia ( 2 @,@ 483 in 2001 and 2 @,@ 305 in 2006 ) are the two largest centers between the border and the city of Moose Jaw . This geographical region of Highway 2 from Rockglen to Assiniboia has been upgraded to a Class 3 highway as it carries approximately 800 vehicles per day counted to the south of Assiniboia . Therefore , the surface type before Assiniboia is a granular road surface which is a structural pavement with a hot mix surface coating . The highway type , surface , maintenance and construction projects are looked after by the SHS South Central Traffic Planning Committee . Fife Lake is located to the north east of the highway . The St. Victor Petroglyph Historic Park is located just to the west of Highway 2 by 10 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) . These unique petroglyph features carved into the sandstone are slowly disappearing . 
 At 104 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 65 @.@ 1 mi ) is the town of Assiniboia where 1 @,@ 260 vpd results in the highway designated as an asphalt concrete ( AS ) Class 2 primary weight highway all the way to Moose Jaw . Junction with Highway 13 , the Redcoat Trail occurs at km 106 @.@ 4 , providing access to <unk> . Vantage is located to the west of the highway along this stretch , with access provided at km 129 @.@ 2 . <unk> is located at the intersection with Highway 718 . Here is the southeast portion of Old Wives Lake , which is a part of the Chaplin , Old Wives Lake , Reed Lakes ( Hemispheric ) - Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network ( <unk> ) Site , a designated Hemispheric Shorebird Reserve Network , protecting three saline lakes , saline and freshwater marshes . <unk> is located near the northern extremity of Lake of the Rivers . Highway 36 is located at km 176 @.@ 4 , which provides access to <unk> , and the Jean Louis <unk> Regional Park . At km 184 @.@ 5 , is the junction with Highway 716 west providing access to <unk> . 
 = = = Veteran 's Memorial Highway = = = 
 The home of the <unk> , the Canadian Forces 431 Air Demonstration Squadron is at CFB Moose Jaw , Bushell Park at the km 204 @.@ 4 junction with Highway 363 . Before entering the city of Moose Jaw is an 18 kilometres ( 11 mi ) divided or twinned highway section . The city of Moose Jaw does not have a cloverleaf , and highway 2 goes through the centre of the city . Moose Jaw , a city of 32 @,@ 132 features large roadside attractions such as Capone 's Car , Moose Family and Mac the moose . Temple Gardens Mineral Spa Resort , Tunnels of Moose Jaw , and History of Transportation Western Development Museum. are major sites of interest of this city . The Saskatchewan Highway 1 intersection with Highway 2 is north of Moose Jaw . At km 230 @.@ 9 , access to Buffalo Pound Provincial Park is provided to the east of Highway 2 by traveling another 11 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 3 mi ) . Access to the small town of <unk> is provided at km 232 @.@ 8 , at the Highway 42 junction . The SHS Central Area Transportation Planning Committee monitors this primary weight highway between Moose Jaw and Meacham . Between the two national highway systems of the Trans Canada Saskatchewan Highway 1 and Saskatchewan Highway 11 , Highway 2 is also designated as a Class 1 AC national connector highway . There is a point of information on the south side of the Qu 'Appelle Valley , km 246 @.@ 3 . A second point of information is on the northern bank of the Qu 'Appelle Valley at km 250 @.@ 0 . Buffalo Pound Lake , a eutrophic prairie lake was formed by glaciation 10 @,@ 000 years ago . At the junction of highway 11 , is the town of Chamberlain where the highway which travels north begins a southeast 11 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) wrong @-@ way concurrency at Chamberlain . Where these two national highways overlap , a divided highway segment handles the AADT which is about 4500 vpd . There is a rest area at km 281 @.@ 1 south of Chamberlain with an historical marker . To the west of the highway are afforded views of the Arm River valley . At km 276 @.@ 1 , the highway takes a sharp turn to continue north as it leaves the Highway 11 concurrency . After the concurrency , Highway 2 is a class 3 AC primary weight highway until Watrous . The junction of Highway 733 in 11 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) provides access to Last Mountain Lake ( Long Lake ) traveling east . Holdfast is accessed at the Highway 732 junction . Penzance is east of the highway at km 305 @.@ 0 , where Highway 732 turns north , forming the beginning of a 18 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 11 @.@ 3 mi ) concurrency . Liberty is a small community at km 320 @.@ 5 . Located near Stalwart is the Stalwart National Wildlife Area , a wetlands region . Watertown ( 1903 – 1910 ) provides easy access to Etter 's Beach on Long Lake . The settlers of Watertown established a post office named Harkness Post Office , Assiniboia , North West Territories . With the arrival of the rail , the village became known as Imperial . The town of Imperial is the largest center west of Last Mountain Lake with a population around 300 and an AADT of close to 650 vpd . The village of Simpson is also along the highway which runs parallel to Last Mountain Lake . There are several roadside turnouts to access Last Mountain Lake from Highway 2 . The Last Mountain Lake Sanctuary was the first federal bird sanctuary . Highway 15 provides access to Nokomis to the east , and Kenaston to the west . 
 The small hamlet of Amazon is located before Watrous . Watrous is a tourist destination due to its proximity to Manitou Beach and the <unk> Little Manitou Lake . Watrous , in the Land of Living Waters , is a tourist destination due to its proximity to Manitou Beach , home of the world @-@ famous Mineral Spa and <unk> dance hall ( known as the " Home of the World Famous Dance Floor Built on <unk> " ) . The AADT near this tourist town of 1 @,@ 800 people raises to about 1 @,@ 250 vpd which ranks it as a class 2 highway . Highway 2 continues in a northwest direction to circumnavigate around Little Manitou until it gets to the Young and the junction of Highway 670 . Young and Zelma were two communities that were part of the alphabet railway of the Canadian National Railway ( CNR ) . The Yellowhead Highway is at km 426 @.@ 3 . Colonsay is located to the west , and Plunkett to the east . Colonsay is the location of one of several potash mines in Saskatchewan , a major employer of the region . Potash evaporites were laid down during the geological formation of the Western Canadian Sedimentary Basin . The SHS North Central Transportation Planning Committee tends to highway maintenance and construction decisions north of the Yellowhead highway . Highway 2 from the Yellowhead through to Prince Albert is a class 2 primary weight AC highway . Over 1 @,@ 000 vehicles travel Highway 2 between Watrous and Meacham , and of these less than 100 of them are trucks . The majority of commercial trucks near the Highway 2 and 5 intersection travel Highway 5 . The AADT after the intersection is under 350 vpd . 
 Highway 5 provides access to the city of Saskatoon , the largest city in the province . There is a 5 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) concurrency between Highway 5 and 2 upon which there are close to 2 @,@ 000 vpd . Highway 5 east provides access to the city of Humboldt . Meacham at km 442 @.@ 0 is located in the Aspen Parkland ecoregion . Throughout the Aspen Parkland ecoregion are trembling aspen ( Populus tremuloides ) bluffs ( small islands or shelter belts ) within the prairie region . Deer and other large ungulates are a hazard to traffic resulting in potential animal or human deaths , especially in the autumn mating months or when deer are searching for feeding grounds in the spring . The defense mechanism of deer in the face of a threat is to freeze . There are over 3 @,@ 500 deer - auto collisions per year in Saskatchewan . A number of measures have been implemented to increase awareness such as fencing , feeding programs , automobile whistles . Deer mirrors along the edges of highways were installed for reducing deer @-@ vehicle collisions . The Wildlife Warning System is triggered by highway vehicles , setting off lights , sounds and or odours ahead of the approaching vehicle to frighten away animals . Some systems that detect vehicles , where others detect large animals and sets off a warning system to drivers of vehicles alerting them that an animal is on or near the highway ahead of time . The junction with Highway 27 occurs at km 468 @.@ 0 providing access west to the village of Prud 'homme and off to the east is <unk> Lake . Cudworth is located at the Highway 777 intersection , bearing east on highway 777 provides access to Middle Lake . The intersection of Highway 41 is located at Wakaw , which features a golf course , campground and recreation site at Wakaw Lake . The community considered a proposal to construct a canal between the lake and the town to be developed into a marina - resort - tourism area . Traffic around this tourist town of 864 increases between 650 and 1050 vpd . 
 At the junction of Highway 25 is the town of St. Louis where there is a historical paranormal phenomenon called the St. Louis Light or the St. Louis Ghost Train . <unk> , located at the junction of Highway 320 and Highway 225 , constructed a park to commemorate the province 's centennial celebrations . Highway 225 provides access to the Batoche National Historical Site , which was the site of the last stand of Metis rights activist Louis Riel prior to his subsequent trial and death in 1885 . The village of Hoey is located at km 529 @.@ 6 . St. Louis was recently the site of the discovery of a large archaeological site of aboriginal artifacts . 
 The South Saskatchewan River is crossed at this point via the St. Louis Bridge . Traffic around St. Louis averaged about 1 @,@ 500 and escalates to 6 @,@ 000 after the junction with the Highway 11 , the Louis Riel Trail occurs just south of Prince Albert at km 562 @.@ 9 . 
 = = = CanAm Highway = = = 
 Highway 3 joins with Highway 2 at km 568 @.@ 4 , becoming a concurrency for 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 99 mi ) After crossing the North Saskatchewan River the concurrency of Highway 2 and 3 end at the interchange with Highway 55 . There is a 11 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) divided or twinned highway segment north of Prince Albert . Highway 2 continues northward as an AC primary weight CanAm international highway from this point northward taking over from the highway 3 segment . Prince Albert , a city of over 34 @,@ 000 , is a part of the boreal transition ecoregion , agricultural fields and forested areas border the highway rural areas . At km 593 @.@ 9 , Highway 2 meets with the intersection of Highway 325 . To the northwest of this intersection is Little Red River Indian Reserve <unk> and Montreal Lake 106B Indian Reserves . Christopher Lake is at the km 610 @.@ 0 junction of Highway 791 east and Highway 263 west . Highway 263 provides access to the Prince Albert National Park . 
 This ecoregion is a part of the mid @-@ boreal upland . At km 646 @.@ 9 , Highway 2 meets with Highway 264 which provides access to <unk> Lake in the Prince Albert National Park . At km 660 @.@ 5 there is an intersection with Highway 969 , another access to the Park westerly , and eastern access to Montreal Lake 106 Indian Reserve . There are fewer roads in the southern boreal forest . Highway 2 makes the next highway connection at km 693 @.@ 1 with Highway 916 . 
 There are over 10 @,@ 000 lakes across Saskatchewan , with the main lake region being north of the tree line in the Canadian Shield . Montreal Lake is located west of Highway 2 , its northern shores near <unk> at km 716 @.@ 2 , then at km 758 @.@ 5 Highway 2 meets with Highway 165 which travels north to Morin Lake 217 Indian Reserve . Lac la Ronge 156 Indian Reserve is at km 805 @.@ 9 before the ending terminus in the northern boreal forest at La Ronge and the junction with Highway 102 . 
 = = History = = 
 From 1876 , the South Saskatchewan river crossing at St. Louis was via ferry . In 1912 , the railway built a rail bridge across the river , and in 1928 , the vehicle lanes were added . After 1907 , the highway was constructed south of Chamberlain and reached Buffalo Pound . At this time two horse scrapers and walking plows were the implements of road construction technology . This highway received an improvement in 1926 which then used an elevating grader , 16 horses and a dump wagon . 
 The Saskatchewan Highway Act was established in 1922 , in compliance with the 1919 Canadian highway act . At the initial stages of the Saskatchewan Highway Act , 10 miles ( 16 km ) of highway were gravel and the rest were earth roads . The road allowances were laid out as a part of the Dominion Land survey system for homesteading . In 1929 , the R.M. of Wood Creek # 281 conducted roadwork with three graders , 53 slush scrapers , 15 wheel scrapers and five ploughs . Development of highways began in the 1920s and was virtually halted in the depression years of the 1930s . Early homesteaders , such as John <unk> , would do road maintenance work themselves in this era . In the 1930s seeing a car was rare , Alexander Black remembers taking 150 bushels on a grain tank with a four horse hitch . When they reached highway 2 , the horses bolted through town until they snagged on the railway switch by the elevators . Travel along the Provincial Highway 5 before the 1940s would have been traveling on the square following the township road allowances , barbed wire fencing and rail lines . As the surveyed township roads were the easiest to travel , the first highway was designed on 90 @-@ degree , right @-@ angle corners as the distance traversed the prairie along range roads and township roads . 
 The two industrial revolutions first and second combined with advancements made during the war years resulted in the largest impetus in highway construction of all weather roads following World War II . The creation of the highway south of Chamberlain to Moose Jaw was completed in 1953 . Paving projects followed within a short time period . In 1955 parts of Highway 2 were already paved ; Between Vantage and <unk> , either side of Moose Jaw ; north of Watrous along the Little Manitou Lake shoreline ; and north of the junction with Highway 27 to Montreal Lake , either side of Prince Albert . In 1956 a North @-@ South International Highway proposal regarding a highway between El Paso , Texas , and <unk> via Wakaw was discussed . The CanAm Highway northern segment into La Ronge finished construction in 1977 ; however , the CanAm didn 't go through Wakaw , rather it comprised several different routes making the CanAm . Highway 2 , which does go through Wakaw , does link to the CanAm highway at Prince Albert when Highway 2 becomes the last portion of the CanAm highway . In 1952 , Highway 2 was re @-@ routed ; rather than winding its way through the town of Wakaw , the highway 's new route went straight along the western limit of town . 
 Agriculture is Saskatchewan 's main industry and taking grain to elevators was first accomplished by horse and cart , to be replaced around World War I by truck travel . Long haul trucking flourished between 1950 and 1970 . Since the 1970s , 17 times the number of grain trucks and 95 percent of goods transported now are hauled by truck across the Saskatchewan . 
 In 1999 , the granular pavement section of Highway 2 south of Watrous was tested with a cold in @-@ place recycling or “ CIR ” method to rehabilitate highways . This CIR process is a cost @-@ effective method which recycles the top surface of a road . This pulverized material is mixed with asphalt emulsion and spread and compacted back onto the highway surface . This surface is then recovered with a new seal dependent on traffic volume . 
 In 2001 , 6 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 1 mi ) were resurfaced near the Cudworth access road , as well 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) km north of the Highway 27 junction . " Highway 2 near Cudworth has seen an increase in truck traffic that is leading to deterioration on this highway ... It 's important to keep our highways in good driving condition to ensure the safety of the travelling public . " <unk> and Transportation Minister Maynard Sonntag . As recently as 2002 , this section of Highway 2 was improved 10 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 5 mi ) south of the Yellowhead . At km 398 @.@ 1 is access to Zelma . ' Highway 2 has seen an increase in truck traffic , leading to wear and tear on this highway ... We are paving a section of this highway as it has deteriorated over the past number of years . Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation is working hard to fix roads across the province to improve driver safety . - " Highways and Transportation Minister Mark Wartman 
 = = = Veterans Memorial Highway = = = 
 Veterans Memorial Highway is the official name of Highway 2 between Moose Jaw and Prince Albert . 
 As a tribute to Saskatchewan veterans , Premier Lorne Calvert , Highways and Transportation Minister Eldon <unk> and Past Provincial President of the Royal Canadian Legion , Saskatchewan Command , John Henderson together unveiled the new highway sign on November 10 , 2005 . The ceremony was held during veteran 's week , November 5 – 11th , and also commemorates The Year of the Veteran , 2005 . The highway designation coincides with Veterans Week ( November 5 – 11 ) and was one of several significant honours bestowed to veterans in 2005 , The Year of the Veteran . The Year of the Veteran commemorates the 60th Anniversary of the end of the World War II . The Royal Canadian Legion , Saskatchewan Command and Saskatchewan Remembers Committee came together to select this particular highway of Saskatchewan because of the history of a military presence along the route . Royal Canadian Legion branches are located at Moose Jaw , Penance - Holdfast , Young - Zelma , Watrous , Simpson , and Prince Albert . A military history museum is located at the Watrous , as well military memorabilia is held at Prince Albert Royal Canadian Legion branch . Moose Jaw Royal Canadian Air Force RCAF and 15 Wing military base is located 5 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 4 mi ) south @-@ southwest of Moose Jaw . 
 = = = CanAm Highway = = = 
 The northern 176 @.@ 3 miles ( 283 @.@ 7 km ) of Saskatchewan Highway 2 contribute to the CanAm Highway . The Highway 2 segment designated as the CanAm Highway is located between Prince Albert and La Ronge . 
 The entire length of the CanAm Highway route is 4 @,@ 122 kilometres ( 2 @,@ 561 mi ) and extends from El Paso , TX at Mexican Border ( MX 45 ) to La Ronge at the Saskatchewan Highway 2 - SK 102 intersection . The North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) super corridors connect Mexico , United States , and Canada . The CanAm highway was a concept that began in the 1920s . A stretch of highway between Amazon and Watrous is slated for maintenance between 208 and 2009 , as well as the Highway 5 - Highway 2 concurrency which carries about 2 @,@ 000 vpd on average through the year . Also the 14 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) segment between Highways 264 and 969 is a 2008 @-@ 09 maintenance project . 
 = = Intersections from south to north = = 
 = Banner of Poland = 
 Throughout most of the history of Poland , the banner of Poland was one of the main symbols of the Polish State , normally reserved for use by the head of state . Although its design changed with time , it was generally a heraldic banner , i.e. , one based directly on the national coat of arms : a crowned White Eagle on a red field ( Gules an eagle Argent crowned Or ) . The banner should not be confused with the flag of Poland , a white and red horizontal bicolor , officially adopted in 1919 . 
 Derived from early Slavic flag @-@ like objects , a royal banner of arms dates as far back as the 11th century CE . A symbol of royal authority , it was used at coronations and in battles . In the interwar period , it was replaced with the Banner of the Republic of Poland , which was part of the presidential insignia . A national banner is not mentioned in the current ( 2007 ) regulations on Polish national symbols , although today 's presidential jack is based directly on the pre @-@ war design for the Banner of the Republic . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = From stanica to chorągiew = = = 
 The banner of Poland traces its origins to the early Slavic <unk> known as stanice ( pronounced [ <unk> ͡ sɛ ] ; singular : stanica ) , probably used at least as early as the 10th century CE . Although no specimens or images are preserved , a stanica was probably a cloth draped vertically from a horizontal crosspiece attached to a wooden pole or spear , resembling the Roman vexillum . It was both a religious and military symbol ; the stanice were kept either inside or outside pagan temples in peacetime and were taken to war as military insignia . 
 With Poland 's conversion to Christianity in the late 10th century , the pagan stanice were probably Christianized by replacing pagan symbols with Christian ones such as images of patron saints , or a Chi @-@ Rho or dove symbolizing the Holy Spirit . In 1000 CE , during his pilgrimage to the tomb of Saint Adalbert in Gniezno , the capital of Poland until about 1040 , Emperor Otto III officially recognized Duke Boleslaus the Brave as King of Poland ( see Congress of Gniezno ) , crowning him and presenting him with a replica of the Holy Lance , also known as Saint Maurice 's Spear . This relic , together with the vexillum attached to it , was probably the first insignia of the nascent Kingdom of Poland , a symbol of King Boleslaus 's rule , and of his allegiance to the Emperor . It remains unknown what images , if any , were painted or embroidered on the vexillum . 
 A royal banner was used as early as the reign of Boleslaus the Generous ( r . 1076 @-@ 1079 ) . The earliest mention of a banner ( Polish : chorągiew , pronounced [ <unk> ] ) bearing the sign of an eagle is found in Wincenty Kadłubek 's Chronicle which says that Duke Casimir the Just fought the Ruthenians in 1182 " under the sign of the victorious eagle " . A seal of Duke Premislaus II from 1290 shows the ruler holding a banner emblazoned with a crowned eagle . Five years later , Premislaus was crowned King of Poland , and he made the crowned White Eagle a national coat of arms . During the reign of King Ladislaus the Elbow @-@ High ( r . 1320 – 1333 ) , the red cloth with the White Eagle was finally established as the Banner of the Kingdom of Poland ( Polish : chorągiew <unk> Polskiego ) . The orientation of the eagle on the banner varied ; its head could point either upwards or towards the hoist . The actual rendering of the eagle changed with time according to new artistic styles . 
 The national banner was identical with that of Lesser Poland , the territory where Kraków , the capital of Poland until 1596 , is located . It was therefore carried by the Standard @-@ bearer of Kraków until that office was replaced by the Grand Standard @-@ Bearer of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland ( Polish : chorąży wielki koronny , Latin : vexillifer regni ) . 
 = = = Polish @-@ Lithuanian union = = = 
 One of the most famous standard @-@ bearers of Kraków was Marcin of <unk> ( d . 1442 ) who carried the national banner in the Battle of Grunwald ( Tannenberg ) in 1410 . The military unit ( chorągiew ) that went to the battle under that banner comprised the elite of Polish knights , including such chivalrous celebrities as Zawisza the Black , which is a clear sign that the banner , described by the chronicler Jan Długosz as " the great banner of Kraków Territory " , was also the insignia of the entire kingdom . During the course of the battle , according to Długosz , the national banner slipped out of Marcin 's hand and fell to the ground , but it was quickly picked up and saved from destruction by the Polish army 's most valiant knights , which further motivated the Poles to strive for victory over the Teutonic Knights . 
 With the establishment of a dynastic union with the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1386 , it became customary to use two banners — Polish and Lithuanian — as equally important insignia of royal authority . In the mid @-@ 16th century , before the creation of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth ( real union ) in 1569 , a single banner for the entire entity also came into use . The Commonwealth banner was initially plain white emblazoned with the arms of the Commonwealth which combined the heraldic charges of Poland ( White Eagle ) and Lithuania ( Pursuer ) . During the 17th century , the banner was often divided into three or four horizontal stripes of white and red , ending with swallowtails . Elective kings ' dynastic arms were often placed in an inescutcheon . Variants with the White Eagle and the Pursuer placed side by side without an escutcheon directly in the field or with the Eagle on the obverse and the Pursuit on the reverse side of the banner were also used . 
 During royal coronations , however , separate banners for each of the two constituent nations of the Commonwealth were still used . Crown ( i.e. , Polish ) and Lithuanian standard @-@ bearers carried the furled banners in a procession to the royal cathedral where , shortly after the anointment and just before the crowning of the king @-@ elect , they handed the banners to the primate who unfurled them and handed them to the kneeling king . The king would then stand up and give the unfurled banners back to the standard @-@ bearers . 
 = = = Time of partitions = = = 
 Partitions of Poland at the end of the 18th century brought an end to the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . In 1815 , the Congress of Vienna established a semi @-@ independent Kingdom of Poland ( known as Congress Kingdom ) under control of and in personal union with the Russian Empire . The King ( Tsar ) of Poland at that time used a white royal banner emblazoned with the arms of the Congress Kingdom — a black double @-@ headed Russian eagle with the Polish White Eagle in an inescutcheon . 
 = = = Interbellum = = = 
 In August 1919 , the Sejm ( lower house of parliament ) of the renascent Republic of Poland adopted a law defining the Banner of the Republic of Poland ( chorągiew Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej ) . The banner was part of the insignia of the head of state — the State Leader ( Naczelnik <unk> ) and , later , President of the Republic . It was plain red emblazoned with the crowned White Eagle and bordered with a <unk> <unk> , a wavy line used in the Polish military as a symbol of general 's rank . It was modified on December 27 , 1927 to reflect the adoption of a new official rendering of the national coat of arms . 
 As a symbol of presidential authority , the banner was carried or flown to mark the presence of the head of state and , at the same time , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief . It was flown on the president 's official residence , and used as a car flag and instead of number plates on the president 's vehicle . The banner was also used on special national occasions including the welcome ceremony for Ignacy Paderewski in Poznań in 1918 and Poland 's wedding to the Baltic Sea in Puck in 1920 . It also draped the coffins of Henryk Sienkiewicz in 1924 , the Unknown Soldier in 1925 , and Marshal Józef Piłsudski in 1935 . 
 = = = Second World War and People 's Poland = = = 
 Following the German @-@ Soviet invasion of Poland in September 1939 , President Ignacy Mościcki fled to Romania , taking the presidential insignia , including two specimens of the Banner of the Republic , with him . The banners were kept by the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile in London until after the fall of Communism in Poland in 1989 . 
 Meanwhile , the new Communist authorities at home used a modified version of the banner with a <unk> White Eagle and a wider border . It was first used during the celebrations of the anniversary of the battle of Grunwald in 1945 . Officially abandoned in 1955 , the banner continued to be used in practice by the prime minister and , during the 1960s , by the Council of State , a collective head of state of the time . 
 = = = Third Republic = = = 
 On December 22 , 1990 , the last Polish president @-@ in @-@ exile , Ryszard Kaczorowski , handed the presidential insignia , including one of the banners rescued by Mościcki in 1939 , to Lech Wałęsa , the first democratically elected president of post @-@ war Poland . The ceremony , held at the Royal Castle in Warsaw was seen as a symbol of the Third Republic 's continuity with the pre @-@ war Second Republic . However , since legal regulations on national symbols did not recognize a national banner at that time , the banner brought by Kaczorowski did not become the presidential insignia again but was instead donated to the Royal Castle museum where it is now on display . The other of the two banners remains in the Sikorski Institute in London . Today , a kilim embroidered with the design of the pre @-@ war Banner of the Republic is hanging in the Senate chamber , above the chair reserved for the President of Poland . 
 In 1996 , the Minister of National Defense established a jack of the President of the Republic of Poland with the purpose of flying it on Polish Navy ships while the commander @-@ in @-@ chief is on board . The jack is identical in its design to the former Banner of the Republic of Poland . In 2005 , the use of the presidential jack was extended to all branches of the Polish Armed Forces . It was first flown on land during a Constitution Day ceremony at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Warsaw on May 3 , 2005 . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = River Welland = 
 The River Welland is a lowland river in the east of England , some 65 miles ( 105 km ) long . It drains part of the Midlands eastwards to The Wash . The river rises in the Hothorpe Hills , at <unk> in Northamptonshire , then flows generally northeast to Market Harborough , Stamford and Spalding , to reach The Wash near Fosdyke . It is a major waterway across the part of the Fens called South Holland , and is one of the Fenland rivers which were laid out with washlands . There are two channels between widely spaced embankments with the intention that flood waters would have space in which to spread while the tide in the estuary prevented free egress . However , after the floods of 1947 , new works such as the Coronation Channel were constructed to control flooding in Spalding and the washes are no longer used solely as pasture , but may be used for arable farming . 
 Significant improvements were made to the river in the 1660s , when a new cut with 10 locks was constructed between Stamford and Market Deeping , and two locks were built on the river section below Market Deeping . The canal section was known as the Stamford Canal , and was the longest canal with locks in Britain when it was built . The river provided the final outlet to the sea for land drainage schemes implemented in the seventeenth century , although they were not completely successful until a steam @-@ powered pumping station was built at Pode Hole in 1827 . Navigation on the upper river , including the Stamford Canal , had ceased by 1863 , but Spalding remained an active port until the end of the Second World War . 
 The Environment Agency is the navigation authority for the river , which is navigable as far upstream as Crowland , and with very shallow draught to West Deeping Bridge , where further progress is hindered by the derelict lock around the weir . The traditional head of navigation was Wharf Road in Stamford . The management of the lower river has been intimately tied up with the drainage of Deeping Fen , and the river remains important to the Welland and Deepings Internal Drainage Board , for whom it provides the final conduit to the sea for pumped water . 
 Wildlife in the river varies along its length , the faster headwaters being a habitat for trout and the slower lower reaches for perch . The estuary conditions and flat landscapes beyond Fosdyke favour wading birds and migratory species . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The River Welland , with its tributaries , form a river system with a catchment area of 609 square miles ( 1 @,@ 580 km2 ) . Within this area , 257 miles ( 414 km ) of waterway are designated as " main river " , and are therefore managed for flood control by the Environment Agency under the River Welland Catchment Flood Management Plan ( <unk> ) . Of this total , the 14 miles ( 23 km ) below Spalding are tidal , and have sea walls to protect the adjacent land from flooding , while 56 miles ( 90 km ) are fresh water , but run through low @-@ lying land , and are therefore embanked . Within the catchment area , 179 square miles ( 460 km2 ) are below sea level , and would be flooded without such defences . 
 The basin runs in a broadly south @-@ west to north @-@ east direction , with an extension to the north around the West Glen and East Glen rivers . The underlying geology consists of Lias clays at the western end of the catchment , with Lincolnshire limestone in the centre , including the valleys of the Glen . The eastern third is mostly alluvial soils , and it is this part that relies on artificial pumping to prevent flooding . Rainfall over the area varies between 26 and 30 inches ( 660 and 760 mm ) per year , which is quite light , and because the land is efficiently drained during the winter months , there are few reserves , making the area prone to drought in the summer months . 
 For much of its length the Welland forms the county boundary between Northamptonshire and Leicestershire or Rutland , and lower down between Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Welland rises in the Hothorpe Hills , close to the 540 @-@ foot ( 160 m ) contour , near Welland Rise , <unk> in Northamptonshire . Within 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , the small stream forms the border between Northamptonshire and Leicestershire . It flows westwards , before looping round , passing through the grounds of Hothorpe Hall in <unk> , now a conference centre , to flow generally eastwards through Lubenham to Market Harborough . One of the driveways to Thorpe Lubenham Hall is carried over the river by an early nineteenth century ashlar bridge which is a Grade II listed structure . To the east of Lubenham , the river passes Old Lubenham Hall , part of an H @-@ plan house built in the late sixteenth century and modified in the early eighteenth century . King Charles I is believed to have stayed there before the Battle of Naseby . Three arms of a square moat surround the house , and the site is a scheduled ancient monument . 
 = = = Market Harborough to Stamford = = = 
 The county border leaves the river on the west side of Market Harborough , as the town is wholly in Leicestershire , and picks it up again on the east side . The River Jordan joins the Welland in the centre of Market Harborough , flowing northwards to the railway station . Langton Brook and <unk> Brook join from the west near Welham . The county border meanders from side to side across relatively straight sections of the river , suggesting that the channel has been engineered . A three @-@ arched bridge , built in 1881 of fine ashlar masonry , with a causeway to the south , carries the Welham to Weston by Welland road over the river , while a four @-@ arched bridge dating from the early nineteenth century carries the Ashley to <unk> road . Macmillan Way , a long distance footpath , crosses on its way from Abbotsbury in Dorset to Boston , Lincolnshire . <unk> Brook joins from the north , after which the river approaches a dismantled railway and is joined by the Stoke Albany Brook , approaching from the south . The river remains on the south side of the railway , while the county border follows a meandering course to the north of it , but rejoins the river near the Bringhurst to Cottingham road . The bridge over the river is plain , but to the north of it is an eighteenth @-@ century causeway , some 110 yards ( 100 m ) long , which is made of stone and pierced by seven large arches and numerous smaller arches for drainage pipes . The causeway has two large semi @-@ circular passing places on its western side . 
 The Welland passes to the north of Corby near Rockingham , and then to the south of Caldecott , where it becomes the county border between Northamptonshire and Rutland , and the Eye Brook , which has been dammed to form the <unk> Reservoir , joins from the north . As it flows past <unk> , the river forms two channels , with the county border following the smaller , northern channel . It is crossed by the 1 @,@ 275 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 166 m ) Welland Viaduct , with its 82 brick arches , which was completed in 1879 , and carries the Oakham to Kettering Line over the valley . Apart from viaducts carrying suburban lines into London , it is the longest railway viaduct to be built in Britain . Uppingham Brook flows eastwards from Uppingham to join on the north bank , and the Jurassic Way long distance footpath crosses the river at Turtle Bridge . This probably dates from the fourteenth century , although it was widened in 1793 , and a parapet has been added subsequently . On the road from <unk> to <unk> , there is a medieval bridge with five pointed arches , which was widened in the eighteenth century . Gretton Brook flows from the south to join the river near <unk> , where there is a well @-@ known mill building of earliest known date 1664 . A limestone ashlar bridge with four arches crosses the river , dating from the fifteenth century but widened in 1919 . After the river passes under a railway bridge at Ketton , its flow is swelled by the River Chater . The county border again leaves the river to the west of Stamford while below the town the river forms the border between Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire . 
 = = = Stamford to Spalding = = = 
 Just before Stamford , the Great North Road , now labelled the A1 , crosses the river , and a pumping station on the north bank at Stamford Meadows has pumped large quantities of water to the Rutland Water reservoir since its construction in 1975 . Stamford was the lowest point at which the river could be forded so the Roman Ermine Street crossed the Welland there . The <unk> road crosses the river by a three @-@ arched stone bridge designed by Edward Browning in 1845 . Below it , Albert Bridge is made of iron with stone piers , and was erected by Stamford Town Council in July 1881 , to replace an earlier bridge which was washed away in a flood . Beyond Stamford , the river passes the site and ruins of the Benedictine St Leonard 's Priory . Hudd 's Mill marks the point at which the Stamford Canal left the river . The present mill building dates from 1751 and 1771 . The River Gwash , which the canal crossed on the level , joins from the north , and the remains of the canal follow the river on its north bank . Below Uffington , the county border follows the old course of the river , first to the south to Tallington and then to the north , while the main course now flows along the Maxey Cut to <unk> . The old course consists of two streams , fed by sluices from the Maxey Cut , which meander to The Deepings . The eastern stream supplied power to Lolham and Maxey mills , while the western stream did the same for Tallington Mill , which dates from around 1700 , West Deeping mill , and <unk> 's mill , which still retains its seventeenth @-@ century undershot waterwheel , modified in the 19th century to Poncelet 's improved design , and the only surviving waterwheel of its type in Lincolnshire . At the western edge of Market Deeping the two streams join , and they are also joined by the <unk> Cut , which has carried the diverted waters of the West Glen river since the early 1950s . 
 This section is crossed by King Street , which follows the course of a Roman road . Where it crosses the Maxey Cut , to the south of the original channels , there are a series of 14 arches which comprise Lolham Bridges . They are grouped into five structures to cross the channels in the area , and were funded by the County of Northamptonshire in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries . The longest span is 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) , and the cutwaters carry inscribed stones recording the County 's involvement . To the north , an early nineteenth century stone rubble arched bridge carries the road over a drainage ditch near Lolham Mill , while an eighteenth @-@ century bridge , probably rebuilt in the following century , crosses the mill stream . Another pair of early nineteenth @-@ century bridges , built of coursed limestone with ashlar dressings , carry the road over the northernmost channel . 
 The bridge at Deeping Gate carries the date 1651 , and is a Grade II * listed stone structure with three round arches . After the remains of Deeping High lock and Deeping Low lock , there is a junction where the old course , the Maxey Cut , the South Drain and the Folly River , also a drain , meet . The river is officially navigable below this point . Through Crowland and Cowbit to the edge of Spalding , the river is laid out with washlands , which were historically used as pasture , because the river was allowed to flood the land when tidal levels prevented the water discharging into the sea . The river is bounded on the north and west by a bank , while the New River , a drainage channel to the south and east of it , is bounded by another bank . The land between the channels forms Crowland High Wash , Crowland Fodder Lots and Cowbit Wash . The southern bank is variously named Corporation Bank , Wash Bank and Barrier Bank . These wash lands were designed to be flooded in extremis , although the building of the Coronation flood relief channel has made this purpose obsolete . 
 = = = Spalding to the Wash = = = 
 Passing through Spalding , where most of the flow is diverted through the Coronation channel , the town is protected by Marsh Road sluice and a sea lock to the east . Below the town , it is approached by Vernatt 's Drain , which runs parallel to the river carrying water pumped from Deeping Fen , and is crossed by the <unk> road bridge . Nearby is Pinchbeck Marsh Pumping Station , which houses the last beam engine and scoop wheel to be used in the Fens for land drainage . It was built in 1833 , and ran until 1952 , when it was replaced by electric pumps . It now forms part of a museum of land drainage run by the Welland and Deepings Internal Drainage Board , in partnership with South Holland District Council . Vernatt 's Drain passes through a sluice to join the river , while the sluice that protects the entrance to the River Glen is navigable , to allow boats to reach Tongue End , some 11 @.@ 5 miles ( 18 @.@ 5 km ) upstream from its mouth . There are pumping stations for Sea Dike and Lords Drain , and the outfalls of the <unk> Eau and Five Towns drainage channels before the final bridge at Fosdyke is reached . After it is joined by the Holbeach River , it is bordered by salt marshes , and finally flows into The Wash at The <unk> in Fosdyke Wash . 
 Beyond the river banks , much of the fertile arable land is composed of marine silt , which suits the bulb @-@ growing for which Spalding is famous . The commercial growing of bulbs was pioneered in the 1880s , with the first large @-@ scale tulip fields introduced by Sam <unk> in 1907 . At its peak in 1939 , there were 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) of bulb fields , and 3000 tons of flowers were exported through Spalding railway station . Tulips were grown on around 3 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 200 ha ) in 1965 , but this had reduced to less than 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 ha ) by 1999 . 
 = = = Points on course = = = 
 = = History = = 
 The origin of the name for the river is unknown but appears to be Pre @-@ English . In Old English the form was <unk> and may have changed to the Middle English form due to folk @-@ etymology or Scandinavian influence . The Welland ( <unk> ) is first mentioned in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle for 921 AD . 
 Richard de <unk> , who was Lord of Deeping Fen during the reign of William the Conqueror erected a strong embankment to prevent flooding of the meadows adjoining the river , which then became fertile fields and a pleasure garden . During the reign of Henry III ( 1207 – 1272 ) , complaints were made that of the two channels below Crowland , the one to Spalding was more favourable to the passage of barges , but the Abbot of Crowland had obstructed and narrowed its course by planting willow trees . In the fourteenth century , Spalding was charged with failing to scour and repair the river , causing damage to the king 's liege people , but argued that because it was tidal at this point , it was an arm of the sea , and so they were not responsible . 
 The river was one of the earlier rivers to be granted an act of parliament for improvements , to allow navigation to Stamford . The act was granted in the reign of Elizabeth I in 1571 , and detailed how Stamford had prospered as a result of the river , but also stated that mills built between Stamford and Deeping had resulted in it no longer being navigable , as they had diverted the water . Powers were granted to restore the river using either the old channel or the new one , although it is not clear exactly what was meant by this . There is no evidence that any work was carried out under the terms of the act . 
 The powers were revived in 1620 , when Stamford Corporation was given permission by the Commission of Sewers to build a new 9 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 15 @.@ 3 km ) artificial cut , which would run from the eastern edge of Stamford near Hudd 's Mill , to Market Deeping , where it would rejoin the river . The decision was ratified in 1623 by a grant of James I , and the corporation expected to have the work completed by 1627 . However , they were unable to find a suitable contractor to carry out the work , and failed to reach agreement on terms with David Cecil in 1636 , and two other potential contractors after that . Finally in 1664 , an alderman from Stamford called Daniel Wigmore took the job . He built the cut and 12 locks , which included the High Lock and the Low Lock on the river at Deeping St James , at a cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 . In return for his expenditure , he was given the lease of the tolls for the next 80 years , for which he paid a rent of one shilling ( five pence ) . The cut , known as the Stamford Canal , is one of the earliest post @-@ Roman canals in England . It opened in 1670 , around 100 years before the start of the Industrial Revolution which brought about the " golden age for canals " in Britain . When built , it was the longest canal with locks in Britain , and was very busy with barges carrying flour , malt , coal , timber and limestone . 
 The people of Market Deeping , Deeping Gate and Deeping St James , together with other villages along the river presented a petition to Elizabeth I , requesting that the fens should be drained , as the banks of the river and of the neighbouring Glen were in a poor state of repair . They suggested that Thomas Lovell should undertake the work , which he did , at a cost of £ 12 @,@ 000 , for which he received 15 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 100 ha ) of the land which was reclaimed as a result of the work . Unrest in the early 1600s resulted in most of the works being destroyed , but in 1632 a group of adventurers led by the Earl of Bedford were granted permission to drain Deeping Fen , South Fen and Crowland . The work included making the Welland deeper and wider from Deeping St James to its outfall beyond Spalding , and the construction of side drains . These included a drain running from Pode Hole to below Spalding , which is still known as Vernatt 's Drain , after one of the adventurers called Sir Philibert <unk> . Although declared completed in 1637 , efficient drainage would have to wait until the construction of Pode Hole pumping station in 1827 . 
 At Crowland the river used to split into two channels , one broadly following the present course of the river , and the other joining the old South Ea to reach the River Nene near Wisbech . Dugdale , writing in 1662 , described the Spalding channel as " a most slow course " . The river no longer flows through Crowland , but the unique triangular Trinity Bridge , which spanned the junction , remains in the centre of the town . 
 Spalding had been a port from before any of the river improvements were made . The townspeople had refused to repair the river during the reign of Henry III , as they claimed it was part of the sea here . Its importance as a port increased with the river improvements and the Stamford Canal , and although it did not have a customs house , by 1695 it had various officials who acted as customs officers for goods arriving at the quays and warehouses . Exports included oats , <unk> , rape oil , hides and wool , with a much greater variety of imports , including stone , timber , coal , groceries , glass and beeswax . More exotic imports included French and Spanish wines , and some of the first imports of tea , coffee and chocolate . 
 = = = Deeping Fen = = = 
 The drainage of Deeping Fen was again addressed in 1664 , when the Deeping Fen Act awarded the Earl of Manchester and others 10 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 000 ha ) of land in return for the drainage works . They were also obliged to maintain the banks of the river , to ensure that both the Welland and the Glen were kept clean and free @-@ flowing , and to ensure that no tolls were charged for navigation on any part of the river below East Deeping . The inadequacy of the outfall and a spate of bad weather stopped them from completing their task . They tried renting out the land they had been granted , but many tenants were unable to pay the rent , due to the poor state of the drainage which reduced crop yields . In April 1729 , the Deeping Fen Adventurers received a letter from Captain John Perry , expressing the opinion that the only way to improve the drainage was to improve the river outfalls , and proposing the construction of scouring sluices on the river at Spalding , on Vernatt 's drain at its outfall , and on the River Glen at Surfleet . Perry was an engineer of some repute , who had set the standard for engineering reports in 1727 , when he published his recommendations for the North Level of the Fens . His plans were approved , and the Adventurers offered to give him land covering nearly 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 2 @,@ 400 ha ) in payment for the work . He sold one @-@ third of the land to finance the project , and began work in 1730 . Cowbit sluice on the Welland had six 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) wide gates which were operated by chains connected to a treadwheel . At high tide , water was penned in Cowbit Wash , between banks which were set well back from the main channel . The bed of the river below the sluice was loosened by dragging wooden rollers with iron spikes over it . At low tide , the sluice gates were opened , and the flow scoured out the silt for some 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) downstream . A navigation lock was constructed beside the sluice , so that vessels could still gain access to the river above . Perry died in February 1733 , and was buried in Spalding churchyard . The lock lasted until it was removed by the Welland commissioners in 1813 . 
 Perry was succeeded by John Grundy , Sr. , who published a paper in 1734 on flow in open drains . He calculated theoretic flow rates , and then used observation in the field to modify the results . He oversaw a programme of repairs to the Deeping Bank , which ran for 12 miles ( 19 km ) along the north and west side of the river , while John <unk> was employed to do the same for the Country Bank , which ran for 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) on the south and east . Grundy made the river deeper above Spalding , and also constructed a sluice and reservoir at the mouth of the Glen . The reservoir covered 8 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) and provided water to scour the channel below the sluice . His son , John Grundy , Jr . , took over after the death of his father in 1748 , and spent nearly £ 10 @,@ 000 on bank repairs between then and 1764 . He rebuilt Perry 's sluice soon after 1750 , with taller doors and a set of tide gates to prevent the tide moving upstream , and rebuilt the navigation lock in 1754 . After 1764 , Thomas Hogard became the surveyor of works , but Grundy continued to act as a consultant engineer . 
 Hogard devised a scheme to cut a new channel from the junction of the Welland and the Glen to Wyberton , on the estuary of the River Witham below Boston . At the end of the 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) cut , there would be a huge sluice and a navigation lock . The Adventurers asked Thomas Tofield for a second opinion , who suggested a shorter 5 @-@ mile ( 8 km ) cut from Spalding to Fosdyke . They requested help from Grundy , who proposed a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) cut to Fosdyke , and that the outfall of Vernatt 's drain should be moved 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) downstream . Improvements to the drain were carried out under an act of parliament obtained in 1774 , and an act was obtained in 1794 to sanction the Wyberton cut , although the work was not carried out , and Grundy 's cut was built under a new act of 1801 . 
 Several prominent civil engineer considered the problems of Deeping Fen and the river outfall at the end of the 1700s . Two reports were produced , one by George Maxwell , and the second by Edward Hare , who had been assisted by William Jessop and John Rennie . They formed the basis for the Deeping Fen Act of 1801 . The channel above Spalding was made deeper , the north bank was made stronger , and the North and South Drove Drains were enlarged through the fen . One of Rennie 's recommendations had been to replace the windmills which drove the drainage pumps with a steam pumping station at Pode Hole , but this was not implemented . After reports by Rennie and Thomas Pear in 1815 , and by Rennie alone in 1818 and 1820 , the provision of steam engines was authorised by an act in 1823 . The trustees appointed by the 1801 act continued to manage Deeping Fen until they were replaced in 1939 by the Deeping Fen , Spalding and Pinchbeck Internal Drainage Board , subsequently renamed the Welland & Deepings Internal Drainage Board . 
 = = = The Outfall = = = 
 Plans to re @-@ route the outfall along a new channel which would meet the River Witham at The Scalp , near Boston , were authorised in 1794 , but the money could not be raised at the time , due to the financial crisis caused by the French Wars . Grundy 's shorter channel had been finished by 1810 , improving both drainage and navigation . James Walker reported in 1835 on further improvements , making the recommendation that the river below Spalding should be constrained between high banks , so that the scouring action of the water would dredge its own channel . Rather than excavating , which he estimated would cost £ 70 @,@ 000 , he suggested using fascines made of thorn branches , around which silt would be deposited . Such a scheme would only cost £ 13 @,@ 000 , and the work went on for many years . The effects of the embankments had resulted in the bed of the river below Fosdyke being around 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) lower by 1845 . In 1867 , the River Welland Outfall Act enabled the trustees to raise money to repair the walls where the tide had washed away some of the fill behind the fascines . A dredger was employed between 1889 and 1890 , which had been invented by a Mr Harrison , the superintendent of works . 
 With the passing of the Land Drainage Act 1930 , the Welland Catchment Board was created . They had spent £ 91 @,@ 537 on the outfall by 1937 . Towards the end of the Second World War , E. G. Taverner , the chief engineer for the drainage board , devised a plan to relieve flooding in Spalding by creating a bypass channel , and building the <unk> Cut to divert the waters of the West Glen river into the Welland upstream of Market Deeping . The scheme cost £ 723 @,@ 000 , with much of the work being carried out by W. & C. French , and the Coronation Channel around Spalding was opened in September 1953 . Fulney lock was constructed at the same time to exclude the tide from the upper river , as was the Maxey Cut , an embanked channel that bypasses the villages of Market Deeping , Deeping Gate and Deeping St James . During the 1960s and 1970s , several sections of the river above Stamford were made straighter and deeper , to reduce the risk of flooding of agricultural land . To address the habitat and environmental issues causes by such engineering work , the Welland Rivers Trust , a limited company and charitable trust , was set up in 2010 . They are seeking to direct regeneration of the river by co @-@ ordinating various organisations , which are known collectively as the Welland Valley Partnership . They published a major document outlining their proposals in February 2013 . 
 = = Navigation = = 
 The river as far as Stamford was used by the Romans for navigation , as it formed part of a system including the Car Dyke , which ran along the western edge of the Fens and crossed the river near the modern Folly River . Navigation to Stamford was improved by the canal . Boats used on the canal were small lighters , around 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) wide , capable of carrying from seven to fourteen tons , and normally worked in trains of four vessels . With the arrival of the railways , river trade declined . The Midland Railway reached Peterborough in 1846 , and opened their line to Melton Mowbray , passing through Stamford , in 1848 . Carriage of coal on the upper river stopped , and the locks deteriorated . By April 1863 , all traffic had ceased , and Stamford Corporation tried to sell the line at auction , but failed because their ownership of it was disputed . 
 Trade on the lower river was carried in barges and keels . During the early 1800s as trade was increasing , so the river was simultaneously silting up . Around 1800 , vessels carrying 60 tons could reach the port facilities at Spalding ; however , by the 1820s , ships could only be loaded with 40 tons each as the river silting had worsened . Trade records indicate that in 1829 , vessels carried just under 20 @,@ 000 tons to and from Spalding , and by 1835 this had increased to over 34 @,@ 000 tons . There was pressure from merchants to cater for larger vessels , and with later improvements , carried out under an act of parliament obtained in 1837 , barges and sloops of up to 120 tons could use the port . Because the river was maintained for drainage , some commercial traffic continued despite the railways , and tolls of £ 478 were collected on 11 @,@ 690 tons in 1888 . Coal for Spalding gasworks arrived by boat until the early 1900s , and the last regular trade was the carriage of corn , hay and straw from Spalding to Fosdyke , where the cargo was transferred to larger ships . All commercial carrying had ceased by the end of the Second World War . 
 In July 2005 a water taxi service was launched in Spalding . Its route is from just off Spalding 's High Street upstream along the river , turning onto the Coronation Channel , and going to Springfields Outlet Shopping & Festival Gardens , and back . 
 Vessels of 110 by 30 feet ( 33 @.@ 5 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) and drawing 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) can still proceed along the estuary at high water , and can travel inland as far as Fulney lock . They cannot pass through the lock as it is only 62 @.@ 3 by 27 @.@ 8 feet ( 19 @.@ 0 by 8 @.@ 5 m ) and at normal summer water levels , can accommodate boats drawing 2 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 79 m ) . The river is officially navigable to the point at which the Folly River joins it , but the length of boats allowed on this section is restricted to 35 feet ( 11 m ) long , considerably less than the lock dimensions would suggest . Navigation on this stretch was severely restricted by Four Mile Bar footbridge , which provided just 5 @.@ 25 feet ( 1 @.@ 60 m ) of headroom , but this was increased when a new single @-@ span arched bridge was installed in early 2007 by the Lincolnshire Waterways Partnership . Smaller boats such as canoes , which can be carried around obstructions , can continue up to Stamford , but they must use the old course of the river through the Deepings , rather than the Maxey cut . 
 Below Spalding , there were no restrictions on headroom , which allowed small coasters to reach the town . The bridge at Fosdyke was a swing bridge , to comply with the provisions of the Fosdyke Bridge Act of 1870 . The demise of such traffic allowed it to be replaced by a fixed bridge with headroom of 16 @.@ 5 feet ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) , but the powers of the original act had to be rescinded , and the Port of Fosdyke Act was obtained in 1987 to allow this to happen . The redundant wharfs at Fosdyke have been developed to provide moorings for yachts and other pleasure craft . The lock at Fulney has three sets of gates , two pointing towards the sea , and a third between them which points upriver . The lock can thus only be used when the level below it is higher than the level above it , and as the tide falls , the intermediate gate closes to prevent its use . 
 The principle of there being no tolls for use of the river was established by the 1664 act of parliament . This was reversed by the 1794 act , which imposed high tolls , until they were reduced by the provisions of an act of Parliament obtained in 1824 . The river is now managed by the Environment Agency between Stamford and just below Fosdyke bridge , and a licence is required to use it . From there to the Wash , it was managed by the Port of Fosdyke Authority , but since they went into administration , the Environment Agency have also managed the section from Fosdyke Bridge to below the Holbeach River . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 The river , in its upper reaches , supports a wild brown trout population . Chub and perch dominate the middle reaches around Stamford , with pike , perch and <unk> inhabiting the lower lengths around Spalding . 
 A collaboration between the Welland Rivers Trust , the Wild Trout Trust and the Environment Agency has resulted in the construction of a rock ramp , to allow migrating sea trout to pass up the river beyond the weir on the Maxey Cut , which was acting as a barrier . Some 300 tons of rock , with 50 tons of finer material forming a top layer , were used to create the ramp . The finer material ensures that water mainly flows over the ramp , rather than through it . The ramp also enables young eels or elvers to move up the river , and provides habitat for stone loach and <unk> . 
 Large numbers of swans and geese use the river around Crowland , and out to sea . Smaller populations of each can be seen around the Stamford Meadows , and further upstream . 
 In 2015 a common grey seal found its way from the Wash up the river and spent a few weeks sleeping in gardens next to the river in Deeping St James . The seal was spotted further downstream in Spalding as it eventually made its way back to the sea . 
 On the south bank of the river below Fosdyke bridge , the Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust have established Moulton Marsh nature reserve , on a strip of land where soil was excavated to raise the banks in 1981 . Habitat is provided by some broad @-@ leafed woodland , covering 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) , several salt @-@ water lagoons and tidal scrapes , covering 35 acres ( 14 ha ) , and 40 acres ( 16 ha ) of saltmarsh . A variety of birds can be seen , including little grebe and water rail , which spend the winter on the lagoons , while the scrapes , which consist of shallow pools and muddy shorelines , are visited by common redshank and little egret . 
 Between the river mouth and the River Witham , a large expanse of saltmarsh provides breeding grounds for common redshank , Eurasian oystercatcher and reed bunting in the summer , and Eurasian wigeon , mallard , common shelduck and common teal in the winter . Birds of prey such as hen harrier and merlin feed on the flocks of linnet and twite , while the mudflats support dunlin , whimbrel , and bar @-@ tailed godwit . The Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust have a reserve there , which is next to RSPB Frampton Marsh , a reserve managed by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds . 
 = Guitar Hero : Metallica = 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica is a music rhythm game developed by Neversoft , published by Activision and distributed by RedOctane . The game was released in North America on the PlayStation 3 , Wii , and Xbox 360 on March 29 , 2009 and on PlayStation 2 on April 14 , 2009 , with an Australian and European release in May 2009 . Guitar Hero : Metallica is the second game of the Guitar Hero series to focus on the career and songs of one band following Guitar Hero : Aerosmith . 
 The game is based on Guitar Hero World Tour , with support for lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . The game has many of the same features from World Tour , including single @-@ player and band Career modes , online competitive modes , and the ability to create and share songs through " GHTunes " . In addition to the normal difficulty levels presented in Guitar Hero World Tour , Guitar Hero : Metallica provides an " Expert + " difficulty for drums that allows the use of a second bass drum pedal to match the drumming style of Metallica 's Lars Ulrich . The game features 28 master recordings spanning Metallica 's career and an additional 21 songs selected by members of Metallica . The band performed extensive motion capture for the game for their in @-@ game avatars and performances . The game includes several extras including behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos of the motion capture sessions , tour and concert videos of the band , and Pop @-@ Up Video @-@ like facts for many of the songs on the game disc . 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica received positive reviews , with critics stating it to be a strong tribute to the band and Neversoft 's best work on the Guitar Hero series to date . The difficulty throughout the game was praised , found to be more enjoyable to players of all skill levels than the more @-@ difficult Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock . Reviewers noted the lack of additional downloadable content , save for the pre @-@ existing Death Magnetic songs , the cartoonish storyline for the Career mode , and the overall value of the game as some of the negatives to the experience . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica , like other games in the Guitar Hero series , allows players to simulate the playing of rock music using special instrument controllers . The game is based on the band approach presented in Guitar Hero World Tour , and features parts of lead and bass guitar , drums , and vocals . To successfully complete songs and score , players must use the instruments to play notes that scroll on @-@ screen in time with the music . For lead and bass guitar players , this is done by holding down colored fret buttons on the guitar neck while striking a strum bar ; for the drum players , this requires the player to strike the appropriate drum pad or kick with the bass drum pedal ; for vocals , the player must attempt to match the pitch of the notes through a microphone . Players earn scoring multipliers for playing several consecutive notes or phrases correctly , and by correctly completing marked phrases , players can earn Star Power which can be released for a higher scoring multiplier . If players miss too many notes , they will eventually fail the song and will have to retry it . 
 Lead developer Alan Flores has stated that the difficulty of the game is much harder than previous games and is designed to challenge the hard @-@ core player . To meet the " ferocity " of Metallica 's songs , the game features , in addition to the same five difficulty levels in World Tour , an " Expert + " mode for drummers that allows them to add a second bass drum pedal , though results of this mode is not tracked through online modes . Additional drum pedals and a splitter , to allow two pedals to be used , were made available upon the game 's release and as part of pre @-@ ordering bonuses . While the game allows two guitar players to play lead and bass guitar , it does not give the players the option to play lead and rhythm guitar , which does not allow for notable " Hetfield / Hammett riff @-@ trading " on certain songs . Lead designer Alan Flores explained that the decision not to track the lead and rhythm ( in addition to the single player guitar , bass , drums , and vocals ) " was simply a workload issue . " 
 Similar to Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , Metallica presents songs from Metallica 's history roughly in chronological order , but it focuses more on the group today than the band 's history . The songs in the game are presented in a linear series of sets as with older Guitar Hero games such as Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , instead of the gig progression used in World Tour . However , instead of being required to finish a certain number of songs in each set , the player has to earn a total number of stars ( earned from their performance on the individual songs ) in a given set to progress to next one . The game 's story is based on a band that wants to follow in Metallica 's footsteps , and the group accepting them as leading acts for them on a tour ; as such , they are better able to order the songs in difficulty comparable to other Guitar Hero games , as Metallica 's earlier works frustrate the player enough to " throw the controller against the wall and stop playing " . Flores described the difficulty for most of the game to be comparable to Guitar Hero : Aerosmith and World Tour after the complaints of the difficulty level in Guitar Hero III , but further noted that the most difficult songs in the games will be very challenging . Real @-@ life venues are used for the game , including The Stone nightclub in San Francisco , the Hammersmith Odeon in London , Tushino Airfield in Moscow , and The Forum in Los Angeles , and one final venue representing the pinnacle of Metallica 's success . The game was completed before Metallica 's induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , and thus does not include reference to this event . The game 's interface remain similar to World Tour with some Metallica @-@ based artwork added to it . Two changes have been made from World Tour ; individual performance and Star Power meters are now located next to each track on screen instead of grouped together to make it easier to keep track of one 's own performance , and when the band 's performance is failing , the edges of the screen glow red to indicate this . 
 The music creation mode from World Tour is available , giving the player the option of using tones from <unk> ' ESP <unk> guitar and Slayer 's Tom Araya 's ESP Bass in addition to Metallica drum sounds . The " GHTunes " services , which allows players to share songs created in the music creation mode , is cross @-@ compatible with both World Tour and Metallica . In the new " Drum Over " mode for this game , players can select any song , and play drums without any fixed drum track or without any failure , allowing them to create their own drum line using the song 's existing drum kit sounds . 
 The Battle mode of the game , based on that from Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , has been slightly altered to add Metallica influences ; for example , a power @-@ up named " Fade to Black " completely blackens the note tracks for the opposing player , " Trapped Under Ice " , which freezes the whammy bar , and an electrical attack called " Ride the Lightning " ( based on the " Amp Overload " attack from Guitar Hero III ) is added . 
 = = Development = = 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica was revealed to be in production when an analyst for Wedbush Morgan Securities discovered mention of the game in Activision 's 2008 SEC filings , slated to be released in " fiscal 2009 " . The band was approached in April 2008 , who quickly agreed to the game as a " no brainer " . Development for the game began in the second quarter of 2008 , according to lead designer Alan Flores . Two posts made to Metallica 's website in June 2008 also referred to the " not so top secret GH thing " , and that Guitar Hero players could expect " a pile of ' <unk> songs . " Lars Ulrich , when asked about the game during an interview with MTV , stated that " the people at ‘ Guitar Hero ’ and Activision are rapidly becoming our best new friends in the world . You can put the rest of it together yourself . " Ulrich stated that the idea for the Metallica @-@ themed Guitar Hero game came from the influence the original Guitar Hero games had on Ulrich and James Hetfield 's children , learning about music and older bands such as Deep Purple and Black Sabbath . 
 The game was officially announced at the 2008 E3 conference during Microsoft 's presentation , along with the announcement that Metallica 's newest album , Death Magnetic , would be made as content for download for both Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock and Guitar Hero World Tour . A trailer for the game is included as an extra feature in Guitar Hero World Tour with " Master of Puppets " playing in the background and " Ride the Lightning " as the tagline . 
 As with Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , members of Metallica , including Kirk Hammett , Lars Ulrich , James Hetfield and Robert Trujillo performed six songs and band and audience chatter for motion capture for their in @-@ game avatars ; the detailed motion capture included the band 's lip syncing to the lyrics and the motion of Trujillo 's hair braids . Ulrich and Hetfield performed additional motion capturing sessions to help the developers . Metallica members appear as their modern day incarnations , but unlockable skins are available to reflect the band 's history . Former band members Jason Newsted and the late Cliff Burton are not represented in the game as the band felt their inclusion would slight Trujillo . However , the game still includes trivia about both former members . The game includes DVD @-@ style content such as photos , videos , and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage , as well as " <unk> " , Pop @-@ up Video @-@ style trivia displayed on screen during the various Metallica tracks . Some Metallica songs in the game have an accompanying video of the band performing the song , with the quality ranging from fan @-@ made videos at small clubs to large @-@ scale video productions . Both Motörhead vocalist / bassist Lemmy and Mercyful Fate singer King Diamond have contributed to the game in both providing motion capture for unlockable player characters and providing re @-@ recorded tracks of their songs " Ace of Spades " and " Evil " , respectively due to the original master tapes not being located for use in the game 's production . King Diamond 's notable face makeup and jewellery was altered with direct input from King Diamond to avoid offending the religion of any of the business partners involved with the game . 
 During the game 's development , the team encountered problems trying to create the drum tracks . Flores noted they normally try to map a note for every drum beat but could not easily replicate it for the double bass often used in Metallica 's songs . As a result , they decided to create a splitter for the bass drum pedal and offer a second pedal with the game to allow the double bass kicks to be retained . The game 's career mode , in which the players are part of an opening band for Metallica , is based on a real @-@ life group that followed Metallica during a European tour , eventually becoming enamored by the band and performing in an opening act with them . 
 No plans have been announced for special bundled versions of Guitar Hero : Metallica with the instrument controllers within North America , though Activision does plan to release Metallica @-@ branded faceplates for existing instrument controllers as well as a double @-@ bass pedal attachment for the drum controller . Guitar Hero : Metallica will also support the wireless microphones from Lips through a future title patch . A European @-@ exclusive bundle includes the game , wireless guitar controller , and Metallica faceplate . 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 Players that pre @-@ ordered Guitar Hero : Metallica through GameStop stores received a second <unk> with pre @-@ orders . Other stores offered Guitar Hero : Metallica @-@ branded drumsticks with pre @-@ orders . 
 A demo version of the game was released on Xbox Live on March 20 , 2009 , with four playable songs : Metallica 's " Sad but True " and " Seek & Destroy " , Alice in Chains ' " No Excuses " and Queen 's " Stone Cold Crazy " . All four instruments are playable . There is no Expert + for the drums in the demo . Metallica made an appearance at the 2009 SXSW Music Festival held a week before the game 's release for a " not @-@ so @-@ secret " performance , with demonstration stations set up to allow attendees to play the game . The game was the primary sponsor for Aric Almirola 's Number 8 car in the 2009 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series Goody 's Fast Relief 500 run during the weekend of the game 's release . Two television commercials , in the same style as those for Guitar Hero World Tour that parody the scene from Risky Business where Tom Cruise dances in his underwear during Bob Seger 's song " Old Time Rock and Roll " , were prepared for the game and were directed by Brett Ratner . The ads , which first aired during the 2009 NCAA Basketball Tournament , features NCAA coaches Bob Knight , Mike Krzyzewski , Roy Williams , and Rick Pitino along with the current members of Metallica . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica features 49 songs based on master recordings , 28 by Metallica , and the other 21 songs by bands that are " their personal favorites and influences from over the years " , including those that appeared on their Garage Inc. album . All of the Metallica songs in the game are from original masters , though locating some masters proved troublesome . Though Metallica were prepared to re @-@ record songs as Aerosmith had done for Guitar Hero : Aerosmith , they were able to find the masters for their debut album Kill ' Em All in the basement of their former manager Johny Zazula . While other downloadable content from Guitar Hero III or Guitar Hero World Tour is not usable in Guitar Hero : Metallica , the game will detect and incorporate the songs from the Death Magnetic downloadable content into the game 's setlist ( however , the song " All Nightmare Long " is available in the game as part of its main setlist ) . The PlayStation 2 and Wii versions of the game do not support downloadable content , but include " Broken , Beat & Scarred " , " Cyanide " and " My Apocalypse " from Death Magnetic in addition to the game 's existing tracks . The 1998 medley of covers of the band Mercyful Fate 's songs " Mercyful Fate " is the longest track included in the game , running at around 11 minutes . 
 Metallica selected songs from their catalog that " pretty evenly represent all the different phases " of the band . Lars Ulrich noted that the band stood up for the inclusion of the band Slayer against Microsoft 's concerns on the explicit lyrical content of the group 's songs . Alan Flores , lead designer for the game , noted that they had originally cleared Slayer 's " Angel of Death " but had to pull it at a late date due to pressure on the song 's background , instead , at the urging of Ulrich , successfully cleared " War Ensemble " and rushed to include it in the game . Ulrich also sought Mercyful Fate 's " Evil " and " Curse of the Pharaohs " directly by King Diamond , but the latter was unable to find the masters ; instead , King Diamond was able to bring the band together , though with Bjarne T. Holm replacing Kim Ruzz on drums , to record new masters for both songs . " Evil " was ultimately used over " Curse of the Pharaohs " due to gameplay @-@ friendliness . Kirk Hammett stated that the band wanted to have songs from UFO and The Misfits , but could not get these groups due to legal reasons , and instead settled on songs from Michael Schenker Group and Samhain , bands that were started by former members of those respective bands . 
 Thirty @-@ nine songs from the on @-@ disc soundtrack of Guitar Hero : Metallica will be importable as playable tracks for Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guitar Hero : Metallica has received favorable reviews from game critics , and has been described as the best Guitar Hero game in the series since Neversoft took over development of the franchise . Ben Kuchera of Ars Technica noted that with numerous other Guitar Hero titles , Guitar Hero : Metallica could have been " just another way to cash @-@ in on the hype cheaply " , but the overall quality of the game shows that " the design team adores Metallica " . Simon Parkin of Eurogamer stated that Guitar Hero : Metallica " sets the benchmark " for future band @-@ specific games from either Guitar Hero or Rock Band . 
 Reviews have primarily praised the game for a " stellar " set list that " [ reads ] like the quintessential ' Best Of ' track list for the band " , and consider " the best hit to miss ratio of any music game to date " . The difficulty of the songs was also warmly received , with reviews noting that Metallica 's songs can " [ translate ] really well to a plastic guitar " , and that " the songs here are a treat on any skill level " . However , the game still provides a difficult challenge for experienced players , and the introduction of the Expert + difficulty for drums and the Drum Over mode were seen as good additions . Reviews commented favorable on the new career progression , noting that one can complete the career mode without having to play " Metallica ’ s earliest , <unk> , most brutal stuff " , and allows the player to " skip right past the early stuff and quickly get to the big tracks " . 
 The overall presentation of the game was highly praised , noting that " a lot of care was put into making sure this was a die @-@ hard fan 's game " and praising the devotion to the motion capture work done by the band . The added features such as <unk> and additional behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos were attributed to " ensuring that this isn 't just a slapped @-@ together take on World Tour with Metallica songs " . 
 The game was criticized for the lack of downloadable content beyond the existing Death Magnetic album , and its price was also called into question , costing the same as World Tour but with fewer songs . The career mode 's " cartoon storyline " describing the player 's Metallica 's @-@ wannabe band was seen as being out of place in the game and was considered as the game 's " biggest weakness " . Chris Roper of IGN noted that the PlayStation 2 version of the game suffers from several graphical problems , including poor video compression , the inability to read or zoom in on handwritten tour and lyric sheets , and some stuttering on the display on the note highway , and considers it the weakest release across all the game 's platforms . Roper also cites video compression and problems with viewing the extras in the Wii version . 
 As of March 2010 , the game has sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide , with approximately 1 million copies from North American sales . 
 Pushead has designed the faceplate that comes with the solo guitar edition of the game . 
 = Mega Man ( video game ) = 
 Mega Man , known as Rockman ( ロックマン , Rokkuman ) in Japan , is an action @-@ platform video game developed and published by Capcom for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . The first game of the Mega Man franchise and original video game series , it was released on December 17 , 1987 in Japan , and localized for North America in December 1987 and Europe in May 1990 , respectively . Mega Man was produced by a small team specifically for the home console market , a first for Capcom , who previously focused on arcade titles . 
 The game begins the struggle of the humanoid robot and player @-@ character Mega Man against the mad scientist Dr. Wily and the six Robot Masters under his control . Mega Man 's nonlinear gameplay lets the player choose the order in which to complete its initial six stages . Each culminates in a " Robot Master " boss battle that awards the player @-@ character a unique weapon . 
 Critics praised Mega Man for its overall design , though the game was not a commercial success . Mega Man established many of the gameplay , story , and graphical conventions that define the ensuing sequels , subseries , and spin @-@ offs . It is also known for its high difficulty . The game has since been included in game compilations and rereleased on mobile phones , console emulation services , and PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the year 200X , robots developed to assist mankind are commonplace thanks to the efforts of renowned robot designer Dr. Light . However , one day these robots go out of control and start attacking the populace , among them six advanced humanoid robots made by Dr. Light for industrial purposes : Cut Man , Guts Man , Ice Man , Bomb Man , Fire Man , and Elec Man . He realizes the culprit is his old rival Dr. Wily ( who plots to take over the world ) , but is unsure of what to do . His helper robot Rock , having a strong sense of justice , offers to be converted into a fighting robot to stop Dr. Wily 's plan , becoming Mega Man . In time , he defeats the six robots and recovers their central cores , then confronts Dr. Wily within his Pacific @-@ based robot factory ( which happens to be mass @-@ producing Light 's robots ) . After a final showdown , Wily is defeated and Mega Man returns to his family . 
 The initial Western release of the game , while keeping the basic plot the same , significantly changed some details from the original Japanese manual . In this version , Dr. Light and Dr. Wily ( here Light 's assistant turned disloyal ) co @-@ create the humanoid robot Mega Man alongside the six advanced robots , each of whom were designed for the benefit of <unk> 's citizens ( no such place existed in the original plot ) . Dr. Wily grows disloyal of his partner and reprograms these six robots to aid himself in taking control of the world . Dr. Light sends Mega Man to defeat his fellow creations and stop Dr. Wily . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Mega Man consists of six side @-@ scrolling platformer levels freely chosen by the player . In each level , the player @-@ character , Mega Man , fights through various enemies and obstacles before facing a " Robot Master " boss at the level 's end . Upon defeating the boss , the player assimilates the Robot Master 's signature attack , or " Special Weapon " , into Mega Man 's arsenal for the rest of the game . Unlike the standard Mega Buster , the Robot Master powers have limited ammunition replenished by collecting ammunition cells dropped by defeated enemies at random . Enemies also drop energy cells that replenish Mega Man 's health gauge . While the player is free to proceed through the game in any order , each Robot Master is especially vulnerable to a specific weapon , which encourages the player to complete certain stages before others . The player can also revisit cleared levels . 
 Besides the weapons taken from the Robot Masters , the player is able to pick up a platform generator item known as the " Magnet Beam " in Elec Man 's stage . Mega Man also features a scoring system where players score points for defeating enemies , and earn extra points for collecting power @-@ ups from fallen enemies and for clearing each stage . When all six Robot Master stages are completed , the seventh and last stage appears in the middle of the stage select menu . This stage , in which the player traverses Dr. Wily 's robot factory , is a chain of four regular stages linked together , each containing at least one new boss . During these final stages , the six Robot Masters must also be fought again in a predetermined order before the final confrontation against Dr. Wily . 
 = = Development = = 
 Before Mega Man , Capcom primarily made arcade games , and their console releases were mostly ports of these titles . In the mid @-@ 1980s , Capcom made plans to develop Mega Man specifically for the Japanese home console market . They decided to bring in fresh , young talent for the small team , including artist Keiji Inafune , a recent college graduate who started on the Street Fighter team . Inafune recalled that the Mega Man development team worked extremely hard to complete the final product , with a project supervisor and lead designer who sought perfection in every possible aspect of the game . 
 The development team for Mega Man consisted of only six people . Inafune ( credited as " <unk> " ) designed and illustrated nearly all of the game 's characters and enemies , as well as the Japanese Rockman logo , box art , and instruction manual . He was also responsible for rendering these designs into graphical sprite form . " We didn ’ t have [ a lot of ] people , so after drawing character designs , I was actually doing the dotting ( pixelation ) for the Nintendo , " Inafune stated . " Back then , people weren ’ t specialized and we had to do a lot of different things because there was so few people , so I really ended up doing all the characters . " Inafune was influenced by the eponymous protagonist of Osamu Tezuka 's manga Astro Boy in his Mega Man designs . Mega Man is colored blue due to the NES console 's technical limitations : the color has the most shades in the console 's limited 56 @-@ color palette , and the expanded selection was used to enhance Mega Man 's detail . Although he is often credited for designing the character , Inafune insists that he " only did half of the job in creating him " , as his mentor developed the basic character concept before Inafune 's arrival . The basic sprites for Roll and Dr. Light were created before Inafune joined the project , and the designs for Cut Man , Ice Man , Fire Man , and Guts Man were in process . Aside from normal enemies , Inafune 's first character was Elec Man , inspired by American comic book characters . The artist has commented that Elec Man has always been his favorite design . The designs for Dr. Light and Dr. Wily were based on Santa Claus and Albert Einstein , respectively ; the latter character was meant to represent an archetypal " mad scientist " . 
 The team decided to incorporate anime elements for the game 's animation . Inafune explained , " [ Mega Man 's ] hand transforms into a gun and you can actually see it come out of his arm . We wanted to make sure that the animation and the motion was realistic and actually made sense . So with Mega Man , we had this perfect blending of game character with animation ideas . " The gameplay for Mega Man was inspired by the game rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors . The project supervisor wanted a simple system that offered " deep gameplay " . Each weapon deals a large amount of damage to one specific Robot Master , others have little to no effect against them , and there is no single weapon that dominates all the others . Mega Man was originally able to crouch , but the team decided against it since it made players ' ability to determine the height of onscreen projectiles more difficult . Naoya Tomita ( credited as " Tom Pon " ) began work on the Mega Man 's scenic backgrounds immediately after his Capcom training . Tomita proved himself amongst his peers by overcoming the challenges of the console 's limited power through maximizing the use of background elements . 
 Mega Man was scored by Manami Matsumae ( credited as " <unk> Manami " ) , who composed the music , created the sound effects , and programmed the data in three months , using a sound driver programmed by Yoshihiro Sakaguchi ( credited as " <unk> 's Papa " ) . The musical notes were translated one by one into the computer language . Matsumae was challenged by the creative limits of three notes available at any one time , and when she was unable to write songs , she created the sound effects . The production team chose a music motif when naming characters in Mega Man due to the worldwide recognition of music . They began with the main characters : the protagonist 's original name is Rock and his sister 's name is Roll , a play on the term " rock and roll " . This type of naming would later extended to many characters throughout the series . Before finalizing the name , Capcom had considered names such as " Mighty Kid " , " Knuckle Kid " , and " Rainbow Man " . When the game was localized for distribution in America , Capcom changed the title of the game from Rockman to Mega Man . This moniker was created by Capcom 's then @-@ Senior Vice President Joseph <unk> , who claimed it was changed merely because he did not like the original name . " That title was horrible , " <unk> said . " So I came up with Mega Man , and they liked it enough to keep using it for the U.S. games . " 1UP.com 's Nadia Oxford attributed this change to Capcom 's belief that American children would be more interested in a game with the latter title . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critics received Mega Man well , though the game sold poorly . AllGame described the NES version of the game as a " near @-@ perfect blend of action , challenge and audio @-@ visual excellence " and awarded it five stars , their highest rating . Lucas M. Thomas of IGN described the game as an " undeniable classic " for the NES , noting its graphics , innovative weapon @-@ based platform gameplay , and music . IGN editor Matt Casamassina proclaimed , " Mega Man is one of the best examples of great graphics , amazing music and near @-@ perfect gameplay rolled into one cartridge " . GameSpot writers Christian Nutt and Justin Speer identified the game as a " winner in gameplay " granted its " low @-@ key presentation " . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com likewise outlined it as a " charming ( if slightly rough ) start for the series " . Whether positive or negative , Mega Man has been commonly received as very difficult . IGN 's Casamassina found the game the hardest in the franchise , and among the hardest titles on the NES . IGN 's Thomas observed that its combination of high difficulty and short length hurt its replayability . According to 1UP.com , the " Nintendo @-@ hard " Mega Man bosses set the game apart from its two immediate and more popular sequels . Total ! retrospectively characterized the game as " an <unk> and <unk> frustrating platform nightmare " . 
 Mega Man has additionally received various honors from video game journals and websites . IGN listed the game at number 30 on its " Top 100 NES Games of All Time " . Nintendo Power ranked Mega Man at number 20 on its " 100 Best Nintendo Games of All Time " in its September 1997 100th issue , then at number 61 in its " Top 200 Games " in its February 2006 200th issue . 1UP.com included it in their " Top 5 Overlooked Videogame Prequels " and as number 17 on its " Top 25 NES Games " list . British magazine The Games Machine awarded it the " Star Player " accolade after its launch in PAL regions . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While Mega Man 's release sales were low overall , they were higher than Capcom 's expectations . Inafune blamed the game 's poor performance in North American markets on its region @-@ specific cover art , which visualized elements not found in the game : Mega Man himself resembles a middle @-@ aged man rather than a boy , his costume is colored yellow and blue instead of being entirely blue , and he is holding a handgun instead of having his arm cannon . Over the years , the cover art became infamous in the gaming community . It has been considered one of the worst game covers of all time by publications including GameSpy , Wired , and OC Weekly . The cancelled Mega Man Universe featured a " Bad Box Art " Mega Man playable character alongside the classic 8 @-@ bit Mega Man . The " Bad Box Art " Mega Man design has since become a playable character in Street Fighter X Tekken . 
 With little press coverage save for a full @-@ page advertisement in Nintendo Fun Club News , the game became a sleeper hit overseas spread by word of mouth . While Mega Man was not a large commercial accomplishment for Capcom , the company decided to allow the development team to create a sequel , Mega Man 2 , for a 1988 Japanese release . Many of the design elements cut from the original Mega Man were included in the follow @-@ up game . Mega Man 2 proved to be such a success that it solidified Mega Man as one of Capcom 's longest @-@ running franchises . Due to " overwhelming demand " , Capcom reissued the original Mega Man in North America in September 1991 . Capcom carried the same 8 @-@ bit graphics and sprites present in the original Mega Man into the next five games in the main series . Even though the sequels feature more complex storylines , additional gameplay mechanics , and better graphics , the core elements initiated by Mega Man remain the same throughout the series . Mega Man 9 and Mega Man 10 would later revert to the familiar graphical style set forth by this title . The scoring system in Mega Man has not been present in any of its sequels . 
 According to GamesRadar , Mega Man was the first game to feature a nonlinear " level select " option , as a stark contrast to linear games like Super Mario Bros. and open world games like The Legend of Zelda and Metroid . GamesRadar credits the " level select " feature of Mega Man as the basis for the nonlinear mission structure found in most multi @-@ mission , open world , sidequest @-@ heavy games , such as Grand Theft Auto , Red Dead Redemption , and Spider @-@ Man : Shattered Dimensions . 
 = = Remakes and re @-@ releases = = 
 Mega Man has been re @-@ released several times since its 1987 debut . A version with enhanced graphics and arranged music was included alongside Mega Man 2 and Mega Man 3 in the Sega Mega Drive compilation Mega Man : The Wily Wars . Another adaptation of the game was released in Japan on the PlayStation as part of the Rockman Complete Works series in 1999 . This version also features arranged music in addition to a special " Navi Mode " that directs the player in certain portions of the levels . Mega Man was compiled with nine other games in the series in the North American Mega Man Anniversary Collection released for the PlayStation 2 and GameCube in 2004 and the Xbox in 2005 . A mobile phone rendition of Mega Man developed by <unk> was released for download in North America in 2004 . A separate , 2007 Japanese mobile phone release received a 2008 update adding the option to play as Roll . Mega Man for the NES was reissued on the Virtual Console service for three different systems : the Wii in Europe in 2007 and in North America and Japan in 2008 , the 3DS in 2012 , and for the Wii U in 2013 . The Complete Works version of the game was made available on the PlayStation Store in both Japan and North America . 
 An enhanced remake titled Mega Man Powered Up — known as Rockman Rockman ( ロックマン ロックマン ) in Japan — was released worldwide for the PSP in 2006 . The game features a graphical overhaul with 3D chibi @-@ style character models with large heads and small bodies . Inafune had originally planned to make Mega Man look this way , but could not due to the hardware constraints of the NES . Producer Tetsuya Kitabayashi stated that redesigning the character models was a result of the PSP 's 16 : 9 widescreen ratio . The larger heads on the characters allowed the development team to create visible facial expressions . " The concept for these designs was ' toys ' . We wanted cute designs geared towards little kids ... the kinds of characters that you 'd see hanging off of keychains and such , " character designer Tatsuya Yoshikawa explained . " Not only that , I made sure to tell the designers not to skimp on any of the original Mega Man details . We wanted their proportions and movements to be accurately reflected in these designs as well . " As the size of the remake 's stages are not proportional to those of the original , the widescreen ratio also presented the developers with more space to fill . 
 Mega Man Powered Up features two styles of gameplay : " Old Style " is comparable to the NES version aside from the updated presentation , and " New Style " uses the PSP 's entire widescreen and contains storyline cutscenes with voice acting , altered stage layouts , remixed music , and three difficulty modes for each stage . This mode also adds two new Robot Masters ( Oil Man and Time Man ) . The NES version was originally intended to have a total of eight Robot Masters , but was cut down to six due to a tight schedule . Additionally , the remake lets players unlock and play through the game as the eight Robot Masters , Roll , and Protoman . The New Style stages differ in structure from that of Old Style , with some pathways only accessible to specific Robot Masters . Mega Man Powered Up also features a Challenge Mode with 100 challenges to complete , a level editor for creating custom stages , and an option to distribute fan @-@ made levels to the PlayStation Network online service . Mega Man Powered Up received generally positive reviews , with aggregate scores of 83 % on GameRankings and 82 out of 100 on Metacritic as of May 2010 . The remake sold poorly at retail , and was later released as a paid download on the Japanese PlayStation Network digital store and as a bundled with Mega Man Maverick Hunter X in Japan and North America . Capcom additionally translated Mega Man Powered Up into Chinese for release in Asia in 2008 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Archie Comics = = = 
 The first story arc of the Mega Man comic series adapts the original Mega Man game , though with certain artistic liberties , such as Dr. Wily 's robot factory reusing the design of Mega Man 2 's Wily Castle , Mega Man becoming obsessed with stopping the reprogrammed Robot Masters to the point of having an identity crisis , and Dr. Light mistaking a Sniper Joe controlled by Dr. Wily for Proto Man . 
 = Cyclone Nadia = 
 Cyclone Nadia was a powerful tropical cyclone that struck both Madagascar and Mozambique in March 1994 . It formed on March 16 and moved westward for the first ten days of its duration . Warm waters and low wind shear allowed for the storm to gradually strengthen . After developing a well @-@ defined eye , Nadia intensified to reach winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 minute sustained ) early on March 22 , according to Météo @-@ France ( MF ) . In contrast , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) estimated winds of about 220 km / h ( 140 mph 1 minute sustained ) . On March 23 , the cyclone struck northern Madagascar , causing flooding and localized damage where it moved ashore . There were 12 deaths in the country . Nadia emerged into the Mozambique Channel as a weakened storm , although it reintensified slightly before making landfall in northeastern Mozambique on March 24 . The storm turned southward through the country , emerging over water on March 26 . It turned to the northeast and meandered over waters before dissipating on April 1 . 
 Damage was heaviest in Mozambique , estimated at about $ 20 million ( 1994 USD ) . Cyclone Nadia severely affected four provinces in the country , primarily Nampula Province where it moved ashore . There , 85 % of the houses were destroyed , and across its path , the cyclone left 1 @.@ 5 million people homeless . High winds caused widespread power outages , left areas without water , and significantly damaged crops , notably the cashew crop . The storm struck before the harvest , and lack of food resulted in 300 deaths in the months after the storm . Across Mozambique , Nadia directly caused 240 deaths and injured thousands . Effects spread as far inland as Malawi . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A disturbance in the Indian Ocean intertropical convergence zone became evident southeast of the Chagos Archipelago on March 16 after two cyclones moved away from the region . Based on analysis from MF , the system slowly organized while moving westward , its movement influenced by a subtropical ridge to the south . On March 17 , the JTWC also began tracking the system . Due to cool , dry air , the system initially did not intensify , although its passage over warmer sea surface temperatures on March 19 allowed for strengthening . On March 19 , MF classified the disturbance as Tropical Storm Nadia after rainbands developed . A day later , the JTWC designated Nadia as Tropical Cyclone 23S . 
 After becoming a tropical storm , Nadia quickly intensified , developing a central dense overcast and later an eye . With minimal wind shear , the storm strengthened into a tropical cyclone early on March 21 . That day , the JTWC estimated winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) , or the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , and late on March 21 , MF upgraded Nadia into an intense tropical cyclone . While the cyclone was approaching northern Madagascar on March 22 , MF estimated Nadia attained maximum sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 10 minute sustained ) early on March 22 . At around the same time , the JTWC estimated winds of about 220 km / h ( 140 mph ( 1 @-@ minute sustained ) ) . While at peak intensity , Nadia had well @-@ defined outflow and an eye no larger than 30 km ( 19 mi ) . At about 0100 UTC on March 23 , Nadia made landfall on northern Madagascar near Vohemar , having weakened slightly from its peak . 
 While located over Madagascar , Nadia weakened into a tropical storm due to the mountainous terrain . With warm temperatures , the storm re @-@ intensified slightly after entering the Mozambique Channel , and it passed about 100 km ( 62 mi ) south of Mayotte at 1900 UTC on March 23 . At 1700 UTC the next day , Nadia made its second landfall on Mozambique , about halfway between Nacala and Moçambique . Shortly thereafter , the JTWC discontinued advisories . Despite moving further inland , Nadia retained a well @-@ organized circulation and convection . The storm turned to the south and re @-@ emerged into the Mozambique Channel late on March 26 near the mouth of the Zambezi River . Nadia gradually re @-@ intensified while curving to the southeast , and it re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on March 28 , the same day the JTWC resumed issuing advisories . The storm strengthened to reach a secondary peak intensity of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ( 10 minute sustained ) ) , according to MF . After reaching a position about halfway between Mozambique and Madagascar , Nadia turned to the southwest on April 1 and lost its remaining convection . The JTWC and MF discontinued advisories that day , and the circulation dissipated a day later . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 While crossing northern Madagascar , Nadia produced widespread flooding . In Vohemar where it moved ashore , the storm destroyed most public buildings , although local churches provided assistance in the aftermath . Across the region , the storm downed power lines and destroyed more than 540 tonnes ( 600 tons ) of rice . The cyclone killed 12 people and caused about $ 200 @,@ 000 damage ( 1994 USD ) . 
 Upon striking Mozambique , Nadia produced heavy rains and strong wind gusts , causing widespread tree damage and flooding . The city of Nampula recorded 126 mm ( 4 @.@ 96 in ) of rainfall in a 24 ‑ hour period . Damage was heaviest in Nampula , Zambezia , Manica , and Sofala provinces . In Nampula Province , Nadia destroyed 85 % of the houses and 75 % of the crops , mostly cashew trees . The city of Nacala was heavily damaged , with about 170 @,@ 000 people losing their houses . Many residents evacuated Nacala , and temporary shelters were provided for those who stayed . At the port in Nacala , the local harbor was wrecked and two ships sank ; one of the damaged ships spilled oil into the Bay of Nacala . The city lost power and water , and its primary hospital was destroyed . About 130 km ( 81 mi ) of power lines were cut between Nampula and Nacala , and widespread road and bridge damage disrupted transportation . In the area along Nadia 's path , over 120 schools were damaged destroyed , affecting over 46 @,@ 864 students . Across the country , roughly 1 @.@ 5 million people were left homeless . A World Food Programme building in the city was destroyed , wrecking 642 tonnes ( 708 tons ) of stored food . Overall , Nadia killed 240 people in Mozambique and injured thousands . Damage was estimated at $ 20 million ( 1994 USD ) . 
 Damage from Nadia extended as far inland as Malawi . 
 After the storm , about 300 @,@ 000 people in Nampula Province in Mozambique required food and other goods . Officials sent relief to the affected areas , including iron sheeting and medical teams . Due to damage to sanitation facilities , there were outbreaks of diarrhea and cholera in the weeks after the storm . By April 20 , most primary roads were cleared , bridge reconstruction had commenced , and power was being restored . Heavy crop damage depleted food supplies , The cyclone struck shortly before the annual harvest , causing heavy crop damage that depleted food supplies . Some residents who evacuated during the country 's civil war returned late to assist in harvesting the remaining crops . In the six months after the storm , about 300 people died due to starvation . Many secondary roads remained blocked in the weeks after the storm , forcing relief supplies to be transported by boat . The country appealed to the international community for assistance , and by Mary 6 , various international agencies and governments donated about $ 1 @.@ 4 million in cash ( 1994 USD ) . The French government sent $ 48 @,@ 000 worth of medicine , blankets , and food , the United Kingdom sent $ 373 @,@ 134 for generators , water tanks , and roofing materials , and the Spanish government sent about $ 117 @,@ 000 worth of food and tents . The charity organization Concern Worldwide sent 54 @,@ 000 sets of clothing to the country . The government of Japan sent 6 @,@ 000 blankets and 1 @,@ 800 bars of soap , while the Italian government sent five generators , eight water tanks , and 1 @,@ 150 agricultural tools . Donated generators assisted in restoring water in Nacala . In June 1994 , the World Bank provided $ 20 million in assistance to the country due to the storm . Cyclone Nadia contributed to fishing exports decreasing by $ 11 million during the year . 
 = Mussie = 
 Mussie , also known as <unk> or <unk> , is a cryptid , an animal whose existence is the subject of folklore but has not been proven , that is rumored to live in Muskrat Lake in the Canadian province of Ontario . The creature 's age , gender , and physical appearance are not agreed upon ; it is variously described , for example , as a walrus or as a three @-@ eyed Loch Ness Monster @-@ like creature . It is also not agreed upon whether Mussie is a single creature or a species . 
 The legend of Mussie likely began around 1916 , though folk tales claim that Canadian pioneer Samuel de Champlain wrote about it in the early seventeenth century . Despite the futility of numerous attempts to locate or capture Mussie , it has become a part of the local culture and a fixture in the local tourism industry . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
