 Mussie 's name is a diminutive form of the name of its reported location : Muskrat Lake , a large , deep lake near the village of Cobden , Ontario , and about 75 miles northwest of Ottawa . Muskrat Lake is home to another paranormal phenomenon : local legends state that an Atomic Energy of Canada bus driver saw an extraterrestrial spacecraft landing on a spot atop a hill and leaving . There is indeed a dark @-@ colored , circular outline on this hill where grass does not grow , with no widely accepted cause . 
 There is no single accepted portrayal of Mussie 's age , its gender , or even whether it is a single , long @-@ lived creature or a species . Some residents claim that a single , very old Mussie — or a member of its species — first arrived in the area , then covered by the ocean , about 10 @,@ 000 years ago . In this tale , glaciers and , later , solid landmasses built up around it , forming the lake , and Mussie was trapped . Mussie 's diet , according to self @-@ proclaimed observer Donnie Humphries , consists at least partially of cattails found near the edge of the lake . 
 Descriptions of Mussie 's physical appearance are inconsistent . In local folklore , it has variously been portrayed as akin to a walrus ; a sturgeon or other fish ; or a Loch Ness Monster with three eyes and sharper teeth . Another oft @-@ cited description from local historian James F. Robison is as follows : 
 = = History = = 
 The presence of a large , unusual creature in Muskrat Lake has been the subject of anecdotes since 1916 . The creature 's name was originally cited as <unk> , alternately spelled <unk> , but changed simply to Mussie , short for The Monster of Muskrat Lake , sometime later . Humphries , a man from Cobden , was a well @-@ known proponent of Mussie 's existence . Around the area , many people 's knowledge of the creature come from his vehement , albeit inconsistent , tales of observing it once . 
 Some residents claim that , independent of the truth of the Mussie legend , the legend 's origins are older : supposedly , early settler Samuel de Champlain wrote of the creature 's existence in the early seventeenth century . However , no concrete evidence of such writings has been uncovered , even though Champlain did write of loud screams from sea monsters living in the Grand Banks of Newfoundland . 
 Author Michael Bradley and friend Deanna <unk> @-@ <unk> searched for Mussie in the <unk> , a boat with sonar technology . With their sonar , they found two creatures they hypothesized could be two marine mammals , three metres long . Bradley concluded that at least one creature compatible with Mussie 's description lived in the lake , though he did not investigate the creatures further . Scientists have also surveyed the area and found nothing , though the definitive nonexistence of a Mussie @-@ like creature is difficult to establish because some of the trenches in Muskrat Lake extend to over 60 metres . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Mussie has become a cultural mascot of the area , appearing on signs welcoming visitors to Cobden and in front of the Home Hardware store in the village . It is not usually portrayed as fearsome ; it is given seasonal accessories to mark holidays , like a Santa Claus hat for Christmas . The creature 's economic value through the tourism industry has caused it to be described as " recession @-@ fighting " in local folk songs . 
 Every year , visitors in the Muskrat Lake area search for Mussie in the lake ; none have yet captured evidence of its existence . In the 1990s , a tourism marketing campaign for the area offered CAN $ 1 million to anyone who could capture a live specimen , but no one did . Mussie is referenced in travel pamphlets for the Whitewater Region area ; one suggests that it can be caught by a fishing rod . 
 = A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again = 
 " A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again " is the 19th episode of the 23rd season of the American animated television sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 29 , 2012 . In the episode , the Simpson family goes on cruise after being convinced by a bored Bart. He enjoys himself on the vacation until Rowan Priddis , the director of the cruise , performs a song called " Enjoy It While You Can " that makes him realize the cruise is soon to be over and he has to return to his boring life . Bart decides to trick the crew and the passengers on the ship that the world is coming to an end back on land because of a pandemic and that the ship therefore has to stay out at sea . He manages to do this with the help of a large television screen , on which he displays a scene from the film The Pandora Strain that features a general officer named William Sullivan warning humanity about a deadly virus . 
 Treat Williams guest starred in the episode as film character William Sullivan , while Steve Coogan made a guest appearance as the cruise director Rowan Priddis . " Enjoy It While You Can " was produced for the episode by Broadway composer Robert Lopez , who also co @-@ wrote the song with the writers of The Simpsons . Other songs played in the episode include " Boy from School " by Hot Chip and " Winter 's Love " by Animal Collective . Since airing , " A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again " has received generally positive reviews from television critics , being praised for showing an emotional side of Bart. Around five million viewers tuned in to watch the episode during its original US broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After another boring week in his life , Bart sees a commercial on television for a fun cruise and begs Homer and Marge for a family vacation . They tell him that the family is low on cash , so Bart chooses to sell everything he owns to fund the vacation himself . He comes up well short of the needed amount , so Marge and Lisa help by selling one valuable item apiece . Together the three have enough money to book the family into an economy cabin ; once the cruise starts , though , a series of free upgrades places them in a deluxe cabin . They enjoy the wide range of activities onboard , but Bart 's spirits sink when he hears the cruise director , Rowan Priddis , sing a song to the passengers telling them to enjoy the rest of the cruise while they can before they go back to their normal lives . Bart fears that the remainder of his life will be painfully boring and decides to make the vacation last forever . 
 Later , a huge onboard television screen displays an emergency message from a military officer , warning the crew and passengers about a deadly virus that has started to spread on the mainland . He says that all ships must remain at sea to ensure that humanity survives . The message is actually taken from a movie in the Simpson cabin 's DVD library , set up by Bart to broadcast all over the ship . He also disables communications with the mainland by pouring hot fudge on a control panel . As the ship stays at sea , conditions deteriorate and the food supply starts to run out . Eventually , the cruise turns into a post @-@ apocalyptic civilization , with gladiator arenas , marauders , capital punishment , and Priddis claiming kingship over the passengers . 
 Marge and Lisa discover Bart 's deception and inform the passengers that the virus is a hoax . As punishment , the furious passengers maroon the Simpsons in Antarctica and head home . While hiking toward a research station for help , they notice a group of penguins ; Lisa is fascinated by the chance to see them up close , but Bart thinks that their lives are boring and says that the ice slide they are riding down is just one isolated moment of fun . Lisa tells him that capturing and enjoying the best moments in life can make it fun , and Bart realizes she is right after Homer pushes him down the ice slide , with the whole family joining in . The final scene is a flash @-@ forward to an elderly Bart in a retirement home , commenting on how much fun his life has been . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again " was written by Matt Warburton and directed by Chris Clements as part of the 23rd season of The Simpsons ( 2011 – 12 ) . The title and parts of the plot are a reference to the 1997 essay " A Supposedly Fun Thing I 'll Never Do Again " by American writer David Foster Wallace that describes his experiences on a cruise . In one scene , a character appears in the background that supposedly resembles Foster Wallace . American actor Treat Williams guest starred in the episode as himself playing William Sullivan , the character in the film The Pandora Strain that Bart uses to trick everyone into believing a deadly virus has actually spread . 
 A guest appearance by English actor and comedian Steve Coogan as Rowan Priddis , the director of the cruise , is also featured . In the episode , when the Simpsons are having dinner at the restaurant on the ship , the character makes a stage performance of a song called " Enjoy It While You Can " that prompts Bart to make sure the cruise lasts forever . This song was a contribution by Tony Award @-@ winning Broadway composer and lyricist Robert Lopez , who produced it in New York City in 2011 for the episode . Coogan recorded the song in New York as well . The writers of the show provided Lopez their suggestion for the song 's lyrics , which " he then tweaked " , according to William Keck of TV Guide . Lopez told Keck that he and the Simpsons staff decided to create something " cheesy that actually could be performed on a cruise ship . We went in a Carnival Cruise , ' Feelin ' Hot Hot Hot ' direction . " According to The Simpsons music editor Chris Ledesma , Lopez produced " Enjoy It While You Can " with a " synthesizer band " and The Simpsons composer Alf Clausen " added a Vegas @-@ style house orchestra arrangement for the final version . " 
 The episode features two songs in addition to " Enjoy It While You Can " . " Boy from School " by English electronic music band Hot Chip is played at the start of the episode during a montage that shows a boring week in the life of Bart , including his time at school . When the Simpsons go down the penguins ' ice slide at the end of the episode , " Winter 's Love " by American neo @-@ psychedelia band Animal Collective is heard . " A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again " also includes two classical music pieces . Warburton decided to use French composer François @-@ Adrien Boieldieu 's " Concerto for Harp and Strings " for the first shot of the cruise ship in the episode . As described by Ledesma on his blog , this piece reappeared in a " more dire and dark treatment " later in the episode during a shot of the rundown ship . Russian composer Mikhail Glinka 's overture from his Ruslan and Lyudmila opera is played over a montage that shows Bart taking part in the fun activities on the cruise . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 29 , 2012 . It was watched by approximately five million people during this broadcast , and in the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 2 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating and a seven percent share . The episode became the second highest @-@ rated broadcast in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of both total viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing higher than new episodes of The Cleveland Show and Bob 's Burgers but lower than a new Family Guy episode ( which acquired a 2 @.@ 8 rating and was seen by 5 @.@ 63 million people ) . For the week of April 23 – 29 , 2012 , " A Totally Fun Thing That Bart Will Never Do Again " placed 17th in the ratings among all prime @-@ time broadcasts in the 18 – 49 demographic , and sixth among all Fox prime @-@ time broadcasts . 
 Reception of the episode by television critics has been generally positive . Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club praised the episode , gave a A- and commented that it is " good to see The Simpsons try an ambitious episode , and great to see those ambitions largely fulfilled . " He added that episodes that " give Bart extra depth ( ' Bart Sells His Soul ' especially ) are among my favorite Simpsons half @-@ hours , " and noted that this episode features " a side of Bart that we rarely see : someone living outside the moment . Imagining himself on his deathbed and thinking of how his whole life outside of the cruise was wasted is the sort of device typically reserved for the Simpson women , particularly Lisa . " Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote that in the episode there " are elements that will be familiar – it 's another episode where a Simpson family vacation verges on disaster – but the main emotional storyline involving Bart is one The Simpsons hasn 't touched on before , as a fantastic luxury cruise makes him uneasy about the state of the rest of his life . " Sepinwall concluded that he is " always a fan of single @-@ story Simpsons episodes , as well as ones built around an emotional issue facing a member of the family , and this has both – in addition to being funny and sweet and clever in its depiction of the Best Cruise Ever . " 
 = Lindsay Merritt Inglis = 
 Major General Lindsay Merritt Inglis CB , CBE , DSO & Bar , MC , ED ( 16 May 1894 – 17 March 1966 ) was a New Zealand military leader , lawyer and magistrate . 
 Born in Mosgiel , Inglis volunteered for service in the New Zealand Expeditionary Force during the First World War . He served on the Western Front and won the Military Cross for his actions during the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette . He ended the war as a company commander and returned to New Zealand in 1919 . In civilian life , he was a solicitor and barrister in Timaru but also served in the Territorial Force . He volunteered for service during the Second World War and commanded the 4th Infantry Brigade in the campaigns in Crete and North Africa . He had two periods in command of the 2nd New Zealand Division . After the war , he was appointed to a military court of the Allied Control Commission , which administered occupied Germany . He later served as chief judge of the Allied Control Commission 's Supreme Court from 1947 to 1950 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Inglis was born in Mosgiel , Otago , New Zealand on 16 May 1894 to a banker and his wife . After completing his education at <unk> Boys ' High School in Oamaru , he commenced legal studies at the University of Otago in 1913 . 
 = = Military career = = 
 In late April 1915 , Inglis volunteered for the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) . He had some military experience , having served as an officer in the Territorial Force with the 2nd ( South Canterbury ) Regiment . Posted to the New Zealand Rifle Brigade , he served in Egypt and on the Western Front . As a company commander in his battalion , he participated in the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette during the Somme Offensive in September 1916 . He was awarded the Military Cross for his part in the battle , after which he was the only surviving officer from his section of the front line . 
 Inglis later transferred to the New Zealand Machine Gun Corps , in which he commanded a company for the remainder of the war . Present at the capture of Le Quesnoy in late 1918 , he was discharged from the NZEF in April 1919 and returned to New Zealand . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 Inglis resumed his legal studies , completing them in 1920 . He also became married to his fiancée , Agnes , and the couple had two children . Now a solicitor , he moved his young family to Timaru and established a legal practice there . He remained involved with the Territorial Force , and in 1926 was commander of 1st Battalion , Canterbury Regiment , with the rank of lieutenant colonel . Promoted to colonel in 1931 , he commanded 3rd New Zealand Infantry Brigade before retiring from the Territorial Force in 1936 . As a long serving member of the territorials , he was awarded the Efficiency Decoration . In 1935 , he was awarded the King George V Silver Jubilee Medal . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 Inglis enlisted in the 2nd New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) following the outbreak of the Second World War . He needed to have treatment on his thyroid before he could go on active service . He commanded the 27th Machine @-@ Gun Battalion , part of the first echelon of the 2NZEF which had been shipped to Egypt , from December 1939 to August 1940 . In early 1941 , Inglis was promoted to brigadier and given command of the 9th Infantry Brigade , composed largely of training battalions . 
 = = = Crete = = = 
 Having missed the Battle of Greece , Inglis was appointed commander of the 4th Infantry Brigade of 2nd New Zealand Division in May 1941 . During the Battle of Crete , his brigade served as the reserve for the Allied forces , codenamed Creforce and commanded by Major General Bernard Freyberg , on Crete . The battle ended in the evacuation of Creforce to Egypt . Freyberg selected Inglis to travel to the War Office in London and provide a report on the battle . When he met with Winston Churchill the month after the evacuation from Crete , Inglis was critical of Freyberg 's conduct of the battle and made a number of inaccurate and misleading statements . However , Inglis ' own conduct in the battle had not been exemplary . At one stage , he disobeyed an order to take over a newly created reserve and remained at divisional headquarters , possibly with hopes of taking over command of the division . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 Despite this show of disloyalty to his commander , Inglis remained in command of 4th Brigade through much of the North African Campaign . He led his brigade in the capture of Belhamed , a hill adjacent to Sidi Rezegh , which resulted in the opening of a corridor to Tobruk during Operation Crusader , for which he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . 
 After being reformed during the early part of 1942 , 4th Brigade spent time in Syria with most of the 2nd New Zealand Division . In June , the New Zealanders were rushed back to Egypt after the Panzer Army Afrika attacked Gazala , near Tobruk , to begin an advance into Egypt in pursuit of the retreating Eighth Army . The division made a stand at Minqar Qaim and was surrounded by German forces on 27 June . As the Germans probed the perimeter of the New Zealand positions , Freyberg was wounded . Inglis assumed temporary command of the division and successfully led it in an outbreak from Minqar Qaim that night . He would remain as divisional commander for the next two months as Freyberg recovered , and was later awarded a bar to his DSO which acknowledged his leadership of the division during this period . 
 However , during this time Inglis ' relationship with his brigade commanders , particularly Brigadier Howard Kippenberger deteriorated . Kippenberger had become highly rated as a field commander during the war and Inglis may have become resentful . This was uncomfortable for Kippenberger , who had served under Inglis in the Territorial Force and considered him a mentor in the art of warfare . This was further exacerbated on 30 June when Inglis went to Cairo without informing his staff who , in his absence , subsequently asked Kippenberger to take temporary command of the division . Inglis returned on 1 July having become lost when returning from Cairo . 
 Prior to the First Battle of Ruweisat Ridge , which commenced on 14 – 15 July , Inglis failed to adjust his artillery support following concerns raised by Kippenberger and Jim Burrows , the commanders of the brigades involved in the planned advance on the defended ridge . Instead , he chose to rely on assurances from his corps commander , Lieutenant General William Gott , that British armour would provide any necessary assistance . This proved to be a mistake ; although the brigades manage to seize the ridge , they were unable to hold it in the face of stronger than expected counterattacks , and the expected armour support never fully eventuated . Afterwards , while Inglis was critical of the conduct of the brigades and laid primary blame for the failure on them and the lack of armour , he overlooked the influence of his own role as divisional commander on the outcome of the battle . An attack mounted a few days later by 6th Brigade was a further failure and highlighted Inglis ' failings as a divisional commander by not ensuring adequate support from his corps commander . 
 In September 1942 , Inglis reverted to command of 4th Brigade , and it was decided that the brigade would be converted to an armoured formation . As an infantry brigade , it had suffered heavy losses at Ruweisat Ridge . Inglis oversaw 4th Brigade 's transition to armour , a process which took a nearly a year . He was again acting divisional commander from June to July 1943 when Freyberg was occupied elsewhere . Afflicted with dysentery , Inglis was repatriated to New Zealand in November 1943 for treatment . 
 = = = Italy = = = 
 Inglis returned to 4th Brigade , now in Italy , in March 1944 . For much of the Italian Campaign the brigade did not participate in large @-@ scale operations ; instead , his armoured regiments were deployed piecemeal in support of infantry operations . In the absence of Inglis while he recovered from his illness the previous three months , Kippenberger had become the preferred acting divisional commander . Kippenberger , commanding the division while Freyberg commanded the New Zealand Corps , was wounded shortly after Inglis arrived in Italy . Command of the division passed to another brigade commander , despite Inglis ' seniority . Again overlooked as temporary divisional commander in September , Inglis requested to be relieved of his command and he was promptly sent home to New Zealand . For his wartime services , he was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the end of the war in Europe , Inglis was one of New Zealand 's delegates for the Allied Control Commission for Germany , which administered the now occupied country . He was appointed president of a military court in the British @-@ controlled area of Germany dealing with crimes committed by the occupying forces . After six months in this role , in February 1947 he was promoted to major general and made chief judge of the Allied Control Commission 's Supreme Court . The following year he was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . 
 In 1950 , Inglis ended his appointment as chief judge and returned to New Zealand . He became a magistrate in Hamilton in 1953 , and retired in 1965 . He died in Hamilton the following year . His collection of military history books was donated to the Kippenberger Research Library in the QEII Army Memorial Museum at Waiouru . 
 = Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children = 
 Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Fainaru Fantajī Sebun <unk> <unk> ) is a 2005 Japanese computer @-@ animated science fantasy film directed by Tetsuya Nomura , written by Kazushige Nojima , and produced by Yoshinori Kitase and Shinji Hashimoto . Developed by Visual Works and Square Enix , Advent Children is part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII series of media , which is based in the world and continuity of the highly successful 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII . Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children was released on DVD and Universal Media Discs with Japanese voice acting in Japan on September 14 , 2005 , and on April 25 , 2006 , with English voice acting in North America and Europe . 
 Advent Children takes place two years after the events of Final Fantasy VII and focuses on the appearance of a trio that kidnaps children infected with an unknown disease . Former Final Fantasy VII hero Cloud Strife , suffering from the same disease , goes to rescue the children . He discovers that the trio plan to resurrect the villain Sephiroth using the remains of the extraterrestrial villain Jenova , and he and his compatriots from the game fight to stop them . The film 's voice acting cast includes Takahiro Sakurai , Ayumi Ito , and Toshiyuki Morikawa in Japanese , and Steve Burton , Rachael Leigh Cook , and George Newbern in English . 
 The film has been released in multiple versions ; Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children Complete , released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in 2009 , is the last version and adds 25 minutes of new and expanded scenes to the 100 @-@ minute original . The film has received mixed reviews . Critics have praised its animation and CGI work , but the plot has been criticized as both incomprehensible to viewers who did not play Final Fantasy VII and as a thin connection between action scenes . It received the " Maria Award " at the Sitges Film Festival in 2005 and the " Best Anime Feature " at the 2007 American Anime Awards . The original release was one of the best @-@ selling animated movies in its release year in both Japan and the United States , and the Complete release was noted as driving a large increase in sales of the PlayStation 3 console in its release week . By May 2009 , the DVD and Universal Media Disc releases had sold over 4 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Advent Children takes place two years following the events of the 1997 role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII , during which the antagonist Sephiroth attempted to absorb the Lifestream ( the lifeblood and soul of the planet ) and be reborn as a god . He was defeated by Cloud Strife and his companions but Sephiroth 's final spell , Meteor , destroyed the city of Midgar . 
 Since the end of the game , the survivors of Midgar founded the new city of Edge where Cloud and his childhood friend Tifa Lockhart now run a courier service and are the caretakers of orphans Denzel and Marlene . Cloud is still haunted by his role in the death of Aerith Gainsborough , who was killed by Sephiroth . In addition , both he and Denzel are infected with a mysterious new ailment known as " Geostigma " , which has no known cure . When the film opens , Cloud has recently moved out and isolated himself from his friends . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Cloud is contacted through Tifa and summoned to a meeting with the Shinra Company 's former president Rufus Shinra , who was presumed killed in Final Fantasy VII . Rufus asks for Cloud 's help to stop Kadaj , Loz , and Yazoo . The trio are physical manifestations of Sephiroth 's surviving spirit , and are seeking to resurrect him using the remains of the extraterrestrial villain Jenova . Cloud refuses to help and leaves . 
 Meanwhile , Kadaj and his colleagues are recruiting children infected with Geostigma . Denzel falls in with the group , attracted by their promises of a cure for the disease . Loz follows Tifa and Marlene to Aerith 's church , where they had gone looking for Cloud , and attacks them . Tifa is knocked unconscious in the fight and Loz kidnapped Marlene . All the kidnapped children are taken to the ruins of the mystical Forgotten City , where Kadaj embraces them as brethren and announces his intention for them all to be reunited with Jenova . When Cloud arrives to rescue them , he is overpowered by Kadaj 's gang , but is rescued by his old comrade Vincent Valentine . Demoralized by his failure , Cloud asks if sin can ever be truly forgiven , to which Vincent nonchalantly replies that he has never tried to forgive . Cloud decides to keep fighting and returns to the city , where Kadaj has summoned Bahamut SIN and other monsters to terrorize the population . With the help of his companions from Final Fantasy VII , Cloud engages and defeats the monsters . 
 Kadaj confronts Rufus Shinra , who reveals he possesses the box containing Jenova 's remains . He attempts to destroy it , but Kadaj manages to save it and flees the city with his companions . Yazoo and Loz are apparently destroyed along the way by an explosive planted by Shinra 's agents . Cloud chases Kadaj down and engages him in battle , ultimately subduing him . <unk> , Kadaj opens Jenova 's box and fuses with its contents , transforming into Sephiroth . He then tells Cloud that he will be able to use the life essences of Geostigma sufferers to achieve complete domination over the planet . He and Cloud then fight , and throughout the whole encounter Sephiroth appears to have the upper hand , flinging Cloud repeatedly into walls and finally impaling him through the shoulder . He asks Cloud to tell him what he most cherishes , so that he can have the pleasure of taking it away . To this , Cloud replies that he cherishes everything , then pulls out Sephiroth 's sword and deals him a hail of devastating blows . Sephiroth 's spirit departs , leaving behind the mortally wounded Kadaj . As he lies dying in Cloud 's arms , a healing rain starts falling across the land , curing the people of their Geostigma . Yazoo and Loz appear and confront Cloud ; he charges at them , and they set off a massive explosion engulfing the three . 
 Cloud has a vision of his deceased friends Aerith and Zack Fair , who say that his time to join them has not yet come . He then awakens in the church , healed of his injuries and surrounded by his friends . Behind them , he sees Aerith and Zack leaving the church and hears Aerith 's voice say , " You see , everything 's all right . " He agrees : " I know . I 'm not alone ... not anymore . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Advent Children was released with a Japanese voice track in Japan , and an English voice track elsewhere . 
 Takahiro Sakurai / Steve Burton as Cloud Strife . Sakurai and Burton had already performed the role in the video game Kingdom Hearts . 
 Ayumi Ito / Rachael Leigh Cook as Tifa Lockhart . Nomura felt that Ito 's " husky " voice would offer a good contrast with Maaya Sakamoto . 
 Maaya Sakamoto / Mena Suvari as Aerith Gainsborough . 
 Shōgo Suzuki / Steve Blum as Vincent Valentine . Nomura wanted Cloud and Vincent to have noticeably different voices because the characters were otherwise quite similar . Since Vincent was older and more mature than Cloud , his role was given to Suzuki , who has a very low voice . 
 Shotaro Morikubo / Steve Staley as Kadaj . Morikubo had difficulties voicing him because of the character 's unstable personality and needed time to adjust to the role . 
 Kenji Nomura / Fred Tatasciore as Loz . Nomura was told by the staff to voice Loz as an " idiot " character . 
 Yūji Kishi / Dave Wittenberg as Yazoo . 
 Toshiyuki Morikawa / George Newbern as Sephiroth . Morikawa was instructed to pronounce Sephiroth 's lines in such a way that his words would convey his feelings of superiority . In tandem with this , the voice director and Morikawa agreed to make Sephiroth 's voice sound always calm , as if he never fears the slightest possibility of defeat . 
 Yumi <unk> / Christy Carlson Romano as Yuffie Kisaragi . 
 Masahiro Kobayashi / Beau Billingslea as Barret Wallace . 
 Keiji Fujiwara / Quinton Flynn as Reno . 
 <unk> Kusunoki / Crispin Freeman as Rude . 
 Tōru <unk> / Wally Wingert as Rufus Shinra . 
 Kenichi Suzumura / Rick Gomez as Zack Fair . 
 Hideo Ishikawa / Greg Ellis as Cait Sith 
 Masachika Ichimura / Liam O 'Brien as Red XIII / Nanaki 
 Kazuhiro <unk> / Chris <unk> as Cid Highwind 
 = = Production = = 
 Advent Children began as a short film by Visual Works , a company used by Square to develop CGI scenes for their video games , based on Final Fantasy VII . Kazushige Nojima , who had written the script for the game , was brought on to write a 20 @-@ minute script , and he decided to write " a story about Cloud and Tifa and the kids " . The film was developed as a part of the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , a set of different media content intended to expand upon the world of Final Fantasy VII . Square 's research and development department worked with Visual Works on the piece , and VII 's director Tetsuya Nomura joined the crew after VII 's producer Yoshinori Kitase called him . Early in pre @-@ production , the team thought about making Advent Children into a game , but Nomura decided against it , partially because Visual Works had no experience with making a full game . The creators had no prior experience working on films , so they fell back on their knowledge of in @-@ game movies . 
 The film was planned to focus on the characters of Cloud and Tifa in a similar way to how other titles from Compilation of Final Fantasy VII centered on certain characters ; for example , Before Crisis focuses on the Turks , Crisis Core on Zack Fair , and Dirge of Cerberus on Vincent . Nomura says the film was , in its first manifestation , only going to be 20 minutes long . The original story featured someone requesting a message to be sent to Cloud ; the message is then relayed to Cloud through several children , and , when the message finally reaches Cloud , it is revealed who the messenger is . Nomura very much liked the original script , and it became the foundation of the final version . He decided to make the project longer and more grand in scope when early word of the film generated great interest amongst Final Fantasy VII fans , the majority of whom wanted something feature length . The film 's length was expanded to 100 minutes . 
 Takeshi Nozue and Nomura , who had first worked together on the video game Kingdom Hearts , split the role of directing , as Nomura felt this would add depth to the film . In designing the battle scenes they first discussed the setting and layout , and then went to the staff with their ideas , deciding which were the best and developing them further . The battle between Cloud 's group and Bahamut was the most difficult to design due to the size of the area and the number of objects the staff had to add to the scene to keep it realistic . The alternating positions of the characters , including Bahamut itself , took the staff a long time to complete in order to give the scene a sense of flow . Nomura stated that the team decided not to worry about making the fight sequences realistic , as they felt this would restrict their ability to give the film a " cool look " . Therefore , they worked by creating their " own rules " . Motion capture was used for many of the film 's battle scenes ; maneuvers that were not physically possible for live actors to perform were constructed digitally . 
 While designing the characters , the staff discovered that it was impossible to directly translate the Final Fantasy VII designs into the film , and thus some identifying characteristics had to be discarded . Cloud 's redesign was a combination of eight different designs , from his super deformed appearance in the game to his more realistic appearance in the film . The difficulties in making Sephiroth led the staff to reduce his appearances in the film , as it took them two years to develop and refine his look . Nozue also had difficulty developing a framework for Tifa 's body that was " balanced , yet showed off her feminine qualities " . In April 2003 , it was decided that Kadaj , Loz , and Yazoo would be manifestations of Sephiroth 's spirit — his cruelty , strength , and allure respectively . In contrast to Sephiroth , the trio was meant to be younger than Cloud , so as to focus on the " next generation " theme . By October 2003 , Nomura said that the film was 10 % complete , stating that while the script was written , not all the characters were designed . 
 Nomura felt that Advent Children differed from Hollywood films where the meaning of most scenes tends to be explained . With Advent Children , however , the staff wanted viewers to be able to interpret scenes themselves , allowing them to come to different conclusions . Nojima described the theme of the film as " survival " . Other themes with which Nomura and Nojima were concerned include Cloud 's feelings of guilt and regret for not being able to save his friends Zack and Aerith . These feelings are symbolized by a grey wolf that appears whenever Cloud thinks about them . The wolf disappears at the end of the film as Cloud comes to terms with his feelings . The word " children " was used in the title to refer to the film 's children , as they represent the " next generation " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Final Fantasy VII Advent Children was composed by Nobuo Uematsu , Keiji Kawamori , Kenichiro Fukui , and Tsuyoshi Sekito , and arranged by Fukui , Sekito , Kawamori , Shirō Hamaguchi , and Kazuhiko Toyama . Upon hearing each track , Nomura would make some changes , and have the composers re @-@ record the piece . The end theme , " Calling " , was written and performed by former Boøwy vocalist Kyosuke Himuro . The soundtrack includes both pieces original to the film and arrangements of works from Final Fantasy VII , originally composed by Uematsu . Some of the arrangements , including " Advent : One @-@ Winged Angel " , are performed by The Black Mages , a rock band formed by Uematsu , Fukui , and Sekito . Both the pieces original to the film and the film arrangements cover a variety of musical styles , including orchestral , choral , classical piano , and rock music ; Variety noted that the styles vary between " sparse piano <unk> , pop metal thrashings and cloying power ballads " . The 2005 soundtrack album Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Original Soundtrack collects 26 tracks of music from the film on two discs . It was published by Square Enix on September 28 , 2005 . In addition to the regular release , a limited edition was produced containing alternative cover art and a booklet of credits and lyrics . The soundtrack album reached position # 15 on the Japanese Oricon music charts , and stayed on the charts for 10 weeks . 
 A mini @-@ album entitled Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete Mini Album was released on April 10 , 2009 , to coincide with the release of the Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete version of the film . This version of the film included a new ending theme , " Safe and Sound " , by Kyosuke Himuro and My Chemical Romance singer Gerard Way . " Water " was replaced with a new song , " Anxious Heart " . Tracks on the album included new versions of " The Chase of Highway " , " Those Who Fight Further " , " Sign " , " Advent : One @-@ Winged Angel " , and " On the Way to a Smile " . A larger album , Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete : Reunion Tracks , was released with 21 tracks on September 16 , 2009 . This album contains the tracks from the mini @-@ album , as well as several pieces that were lengthened for the Complete film version but not rearranged . Reunion Tracks appeared on the Oricon charts for a single week at position # 108 . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 Advent Children and the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII series were first announced at the 2003 Tokyo Game Show in September 2003 . The movie was announced as a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD film . The first trailer for the movie was featured in the international version of the video game Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , released in February 2004 . The trailer used a motion capture that was altered in the final film . Advent Children was initially scheduled for a September 13 , 2005 release in North America and a September 14 , 2005 release in Japan , but the North American release date was pushed back several times . It was first moved to November 2005 , then to January 2006 , and finally scheduled for April 25 , 2006 for release on DVD and Universal Media Discs for the PlayStation Portable . 
 Prior to the film 's release in Japan , Panasonic produced a cell phone identical to the one Cloud uses in the film ; the phone contained several features related to Advent Children such as wallpapers and ringtones . Alongside the film 's release , Shueisha published a 118 @-@ page book about the film 's story titled Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Prologue Book . In 2006 , SoftBank Creative published a guidebook entitled Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Reunion Files , which contains interviews with the film 's staff and information regarding development of the film . 
 A limited edition of the film titled Final Fantasy VII Advent Pieces was released in Japan at the same time as Advent Children ; only 77 @,@ 777 sets were produced . The edition contains various pieces of merchandising , a copy of the script , the original Final Fantasy VII game , a strategy guidebook for the game , and a disc containing the original video animation ( OVA ) Last Order : Final Fantasy VII . Nomura stated that meaning of the name Advent Pieces was that " advent " means " the recognition and commemoration of something " , while " pieces " was added in order to bring special meaning to the release . A special one @-@ time @-@ only theatrical screening of the English version of the film took place on April 3 , 2006 , at the Arclight Theatre in Los Angeles . The event was promoted via email to those who subscribed to the Square Enix mailing list . The screening included trailers of the video games Kingdom Hearts II and Dirge of Cerberus , and featured appearances from the English language cast and the Japanese developers . 
 The DVD release of the film is a 2 @-@ disc set that contains several bonus features , including Last Order . Sony later announced Final Fantasy VII Advent Children ( Limited Edition Collector 's Set ) for release in North America on February 20 , 2007 . The set included more bonus material than the previous DVD releases , including a copy of the script , several postcards with imagery from the film , and the first three stories from the On the Way to a Smile short story series . 
 = = = Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children Complete = = = 
 At the 2006 Tokyo Game Show , Square Enix showed a trailer of a director 's cut of the film , entitled Final Fantasy VII Advent Children Complete , for release on the Blu @-@ ray format sometime in 2007 . No more specific release date was announced until the 2008 Square Enix DKΣ3713 Party , where a release date for Advent Children Complete in Japan was given as March 2009 . The new edition of the film was released in Japan on April 16 , 2009 . A separate version was sold that included a demo of Final Fantasy XIII . Both editions included the first HD trailers of Final Fantasy Versus XIII and Final Fantasy Agito XIII , though a third edition without the extra videos or demos was also released . On April 11 and 12 , 2009 , days before Advent Children Complete 's release , Square Enix held four special screenings of Advent Children Complete at the Ginza Sony Building in Tokyo . There were 800 seats , available to those who reserved the Blu @-@ ray or the PlayStation 3 bundle at the Square Enix e @-@ store , and were members of Square Enix 's online website . 
 Advent Children Complete has a higher visual quality than the original release , is 25 minutes longer than the original cut of the film , and also contains roughly one thousand revised scenes . Themes expanded in Advent Children Complete include Cloud 's development , Denzel 's background , and a more in @-@ depth view of the Turks and Rufus Shinra . The film 's staff wanted to add links to the other titles in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII that had been released since the original film . There is more violence in this version , specifically more blood during the fights , as the staff wanted to bring a " dirtier " look to the film , with characters ' faces and clothes getting darker and dirtier throughout the battles . Additionally , the fight between Cloud and Sephiroth was expanded by several minutes , and includes a scene in which Sephiroth impales Cloud on his sword and holds him in the air , mirroring the scene in the game where he performs the same action . 
 Advent Children Complete was released in North America on June 2 , 2009 , and in Europe on July 27 , 2009 . The North American and European versions come with a new trailer for Final Fantasy XIII rather than a demo . The releases in all regions also feature an animated piece entitled " On the Way to a Smile - Episode : Denzel " , as well as the story digests " Reminiscence of Final Fantasy VII " and " Reminiscence of Final Fantasy VII Compilation " . The Japanese and English voice actors had to return to record additional dialogue for the new and expanded scenes . Nomura stated there were no major problems with this process , noting that Sakurai and Morikawa were already used to their characters from voicing them in other media . However , some of the child characters , most notably Denzel and Marlene , had to be recast and have all their lines re @-@ recorded , as the original performers ' voices now sounded too old in both languages . Nomura has stated that while Advent Children Complete did not represent the end of Compilation of Final Fantasy VII , as the staff still had more ideas , it marked " the end of the Advent Children saga " as there would be no more re @-@ releases or extended versions . 
 = = Tie @-@ ins = = 
 = = = Last Order : Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Last Order : Final Fantasy VII is an original video animation directed by Morio Asaka , written by Kazuhiko <unk> , and animated by Madhouse . It depicts an alternate rendition of two flashbacks found within Final Fantasy VII . It was originally released in Japan on the Advent Pieces DVD , on September 14 , 2005 . It was released in North America in the Limited Edition Collector 's Set on February 20 , 2007 . Thus far , it has not been released on any DVD editions of the film outside Japan or North America . There is currently no English dub for the film , and the North America version is subtitled . 
 = = = On the Way to a Smile = = = 
 On the Way to a Smile is a series of short stories that take place between the time of Final Fantasy VII and Final Fantasy VII Advent Children . Written by Kazushige Nojima , the first story , " Case of Denzel " , was released in episodic form on the official Japanese Advent Children website . " Case of Denzel " is told indirectly from the perspective of Denzel , who has requested an interview with Reeve Tuesti in the hopes that he may become part of Reeve 's newly formed World Regenesis Organization , an army devoted to rebuilding the planet . Denzel tells his life story , including how he became an orphan , the events leading up to his becoming afflicted with Geostigma , and how he came under the care of Tifa and Cloud . " Case of Denzel " was adapted into On the Way to a Smile - Episode : Denzel , a short OVA that was released with Advent Children Complete . 
 The second short story , " Case of Tifa " , is Tifa 's account of the events following Meteor 's destruction and her life with Cloud , overlapping in part with Denzel 's story . A third On the Way to a Smile story , " Case of Barrett " , involves Barret and his struggles to try to find a new energy source for the people of the world . To coincide with the release of Advent Children Complete in 2009 , four more stories were written : " Case of Yuffie " , " Case of Red XIII " , " Case of Shinra " , and " Case of Lifestream - Black & White " . All the stories were released together as a book titled On the Way to a Smile at the same time that Advent Children Complete was released . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The DVD releases of Advent Children sold over 410 @,@ 000 copies in Japan during their first week on sale , with roughly half of the sales coming from the limited edition . The DVD and UMD releases combined sold over 700 @,@ 000 units in Japan in the first three weeks , and over one million copies by January 2006 . In a 2005 Oricon Japanese sales report , the regular edition of the DVD ranked twelfth on the best seller list in Japan for the entire year after one week of sales , and the limited edition ranked fifteenth . The two editions ranked third and fourth on the animated feature <unk> . The English language DVD sold over 960 @,@ 000 units , which translated to almost $ 15 million in revenue , by the fifth week of release . The DVD ranked a " surprise " # 2 during its first week on the American Nielsen VideoScan sales charts after being released in North America . Nielsen 's " Top Selling Anime Releases of 2006 " report had Advent Children ranked first , and the 2006 report by the Japan External Trade Organization also ranked the film as the best @-@ selling Japanese anime DVD in the United States . In the 2007 list , the DVD was at the tenth spot . In June 2006 , Square Enix and Sony announced that the DVD and UMD releases combined had sold over 2 @.@ 4 million units worldwide , with 1 million units sold in Japan , 1 @.@ 3 million in North America , and 100 @,@ 000 in Europe . By May 2009 , just prior to the release of Advent Children Complete , the film had sold over 4 @.@ 1 million copies across all versions . 
 On its first day of release , over 100 @,@ 000 Blu @-@ ray copies of Advent Children Complete were sold in Japan across all three versions . During its initial week , the Blu @-@ ray was # 2 on the American Nielsen VideoScan Blu @-@ ray bestseller list , with 274 @,@ 774 units sold . During 2009 , the regular version of Advent Children Complete sold 49 @,@ 000 units in Japan according to Oricon , ranking second in their category " Animation / Special Effects Blu @-@ ray Discs " . It ranked eighth in the category " Overall Blu @-@ ray Discs , by Yen " with 310 million yen ( US $ 3 @.@ 4 million ) sold in 2009 . Gaming sites Gamasutra and Kotaku cited Advent Children Complete as one of the main reasons why sales of the PlayStation 3 video game console radically increased during the film 's first week of release . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Advent Children has received mixed reviews . The computer @-@ animated graphics were generally praised ; 1UP.com 's James Mielke , who awarded the film an " A- " , said the quality and clarity of the CG visuals was " genuinely amazing " . Anime News Network writer Carlo Santos praised the animation while awarding the film a " B " , calling it " outstanding " , and About.com 's Roger Altizer , while giving the film overall 2 and a half stars out of 5 , cited the visuals as one of its few positive points . The film 's plot was generally criticized as confusing ; Leslie Felperin of Variety , in a sharply negative review , described the plot as " soulless " and " utterly impenetrable " to anyone who had not played the game , and Anime News Network 's Santos agreed that people who had not played Final Fantasy VII would not understand the story . Mania Entertainment 's John <unk> also found the plot confusing to non @-@ players , though they liked how the characters were further explored in the film . Todd Douglass Jr. from DVD Talk , while " highly recommending " the film , praised Cloud 's character development in particular . About.com 's Altizer summarized the plot and dialogue as " weak " , and IGN 's Chris Carle , in their 9 out of 10 review , felt that the plot was just as excuse to get to the next action sequence . The story digest " Reminiscence of Final Fantasy VII " , included with the DVD to explain the plot of Final Fantasy VII , was described by Anime News Network 's Santos as " just as confusing as the movie " , and of no help in explaining the plot to anyone who had not already played the game , though Carle of IGN felt it was helpful to those who had not played the game in a while . 
 The action scenes were generally praised . RPGamer 's Michael Beckett , while giving the film a 4 out of 5 , lauded the film 's fighting scenes , calling them " mesmerizing " and the primary focus of the movie . Anime News Network 's Santos also heavily praised the action sequences , and Felperin of Variety felt they were the only point to the movie , which they felt focused entirely on the technical aspects of the action . The music received mixed reviews ; <unk> of Mania Entertainment heavily praised it , as did Santos of Anime News Network , but 1UP.com 's Mielke called it " a bit sappy " . Douglass Jr. from DVD Talk concluded that Advent Children " is pretty much the film that fans all over the world have been waiting for " , RPGamer 's Beckett said that " the film feels very much like a love letter to the fans of Final Fantasy VII " , and IGN 's Carle summed up the film as " glorious , beautiful , well @-@ executed fan service . " 
 The director 's cut , Advent Children Complete , was generally praised over the original version . Joystiq 's Andrew Yoon found Advent Children Complete a better film , feeling it was more accessible to people who had not played Final Fantasy VII . Blu @-@ ray.com 's Dustin Somner called it " a nice improvement on an entertaining film " , and DVD Talk 's Todd Douglass Jr. said it was " the best version of the film " due to its audio quality , the new scenes , and the expansion of Cloud 's battle against Sephiroth . Douglass also found the addition of On the Way to a Smile - Episode : Denzel to be a welcome edition , though he felt that the bonus features as a whole were underwhelming , belying the " Complete " title . Yoon of Joystiq felt that the new scenes helped give more depth to Cloud 's development , to the point of " humanizing " him , though he felt the change in pacing for some scenes made the plot hard to follow . Kotaku writer AJ Glasser , however , summed up the director 's cut as " 26 extra minutes and it still doesn 't make any sense " , saying that the new scenes did little to improve the plot of the film itself . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Advent Children received the Honorary Maria Award at the Sitges Film Festival on October 15 , 2005 . The film was also awarded " best anime feature " at the 2007 American Anime Awards . IGN placed it second in their " Top 10 Straight @-@ to @-@ DVD Animated Movies " list . In 2007 , the music video for the song " <unk> <unk> " ( " Sonata of Temptation " ) by Korean singer Ivy recreated the fight between Tifa and Loz . The director of the video stated that it was just a parody of the film but was unable to get in contact with Square Enix to get official permission . The video was subsequently banned from airing on Korean television after a copyright lawsuit by Square Enix . OverClocked ReMix 's four disc Final Fantasy VII unofficial tribute album , Voices of the Lifestream , contains one disc remixing music from the film . Final Fantasy XIII director Motomu Toriyama has stated that he felt the film showed " battles that have not been achievable in FF so far " , and so tried to design the battle system for Final Fantasy XIII to create cinematic battles like the film 's . In addition , Cloud 's outfit from the movie was added to Super Smash Bros for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U in December 2015 . 
 = Ontario Highway 73 = 
 King 's Highway 73 , commonly referred to as Highway 73 , was a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The route began in Port Bruce and progressed north through Aylmer , encountering Highway 401 immediately before terminating east of Dorchester . The route was established in mid @-@ 1937 , remaining unchanged for nearly six decades before being transferred to Elgin County and Middlesex County in 1997 and 1998 . Today the route is known as Elgin County Road 73 and Middlesex County Road 73 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 73 began near the Lake Erie shoreline in Port Bruce , at Colin Street . From there it crossed Catfish Creek and veered east to Copenhagen , where it turned northward . The route progressed north through Elgin County , serving the communities of <unk> and <unk> en route to the town of Aylmer , where it intersected Highway 3 . From there it continued north through Little Aylmer and Lyons before crossing into Middlesex County . 
 Within Middlesex County , the highway served the communities of <unk> and Mossley , crossing a Canadian Pacific rail line immediately south of the latter . It encountered an interchange with Highway 401 ( Exit 203 ) southwest of Dorchester , ending soon thereafter at an intersection with Middlesex County Road 29 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Port Bruce to Dorchester Road was assumed by the Department of Highways on August 25 , 1937 . Initially only the portion of the route within Aylmer was paved . However , by 1942 the highway had been paved north to the Springfield cutoff ( now Ron McNeil Line ) . Between 1949 and 1952 , the section south of Aylmer to Port Bruce was paved . The remainder was paved by 1953 . 
 The routing of the highway remained unchanged for nearly sixty years . However , it was decommissioned entirely during the 1997 and 1998 highway transfers . On April 1 , 1997 , the highway south of Aylmer was transferred to the jurisdiction of Elgin County , and the highway north of the Highway 401 interchange was transferred to Middlesex County . Eight months later , on January 1 , 1998 , the remainder of the highway was transferred to the two counties . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 73 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Expedition to the Barrier Peaks = 
 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks is a 1980 adventure module for the Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying game written by Gary Gygax . While Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) is typically a fantasy game , the adventure includes elements of science fiction , and thus belongs to the science fantasy genre . It takes place on a downed spaceship ; the ship 's crew has died of an unspecified disease , but functioning robots and strange creatures still inhabit the ship . The player characters fight monsters and robots , and gather the futuristic weapons and colored access cards that are necessary for advancing the story . 
 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was first played at the Origins II convention in 1976 , where it was used to introduce Dungeons & Dragons players to the science fiction game Metamorphosis Alpha . In 1980 , TSR published the adventure , updated for first edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons rules . The adventure was not updated for later rules systems , but a Wizards.com article did provide a conversion to Future Tech . It included a separate booklet of illustrations , in both color and black and white . The adventure is an old @-@ time favorite of many Dungeons & Dragons fans , including Stephen Colbert . It was ranked the fifth @-@ best Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 , and received positive reviews from White Dwarf and The Space Gamer magazines . The other adventures in the S series include S1 Tomb of Horrors , S2 White Plume Mountain , and S4 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks takes place on a spaceship in the Barrier Peaks mountain range of the World of Greyhawk campaign setting . In the adventure 's introduction , it is explained that the Grand Duchy of Geoff is under constant attack by a succession of monsters that have been emerging from a cave in the mountains . The Grand Duke of Geoff has hired the characters to discover the origin of the creatures , and stop their incursions . 
 The cave is actually an entrance to a downed spacecraft whose inhabitants have succumbed to a virus , leaving them dead . Many of the ship 's robots are still functioning , however , and the players must either avoid or defeat them ; some may also be ignored . As later seen in video games , " plot coupons " need to be collected . The adventure requires the players to gather colored access cards ( the " coupons " ) to advance to the next story arc : entering restricted areas , commanding robots , and other actions are all dependent on the cards . Expedition to the Barrier Peaks comes with a booklet of 63 numbered illustrations , depicting the various monsters , high tech devices , and situations encountered in the adventure . Much of the artwork for the adventure , including the cover , was produced by Erol Otus . Several of his contributions were printed in full color . Jeff Dee , Greg K. Fleming , David S. <unk> , Jim <unk> and David C. Sutherland III provided additional illustrations for the adventure . 
 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks 's 32 @-@ page adventure guide is divided into six sections . These describe the crew 's quarters , the lounge area , the gardens and menagerie , and the activity deck . Along the way , the characters find colored access cards and futuristic devices such as blaster rifles and suits of powered armor that they can use to aid their journey . The first two sections involve various monsters , <unk> — short humanoid plant creatures — who have commandeered the crew 's quarters , and a repair robot that follows instructions before its batteries run out . There is also a medical robot trying in vain to find a cure for the virus that killed the ship 's crew . In the lounge area , a " Dining Servo Robot " still works , although the " food " it serves is now moldy poison . 
 The gardens and menagerie area includes an encounter with a " cute little <unk> on the stump " . It looks like a horned rabbit on a tree stump , but when approached , the stump develops fangs and its roots become tentacles , which it then uses to attack the characters . The next encounter involves a <unk> , a large alien frog @-@ like creature with tentacles and three eyes on an eyestalk . In the sixth and final section , the activity deck , the players ' characters must contend with various sports robots , including a " boxing and wrestling trainer " and a " karate master " . If the characters can communicate with the karate master and tell it that boxing is superior to karate , it will attack the boxing robot until both are destroyed , else they will both attack the characters . The last area of the activity deck is the loading area , where the characters can leave the spaceship . The adventure then ends , with no postscript . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 While D & D is a fantasy roleplaying game , Expedition to the Barrier Peaks introduces science fiction elements into the game . Work on the adventure began in 1976 , when TSR was considering publishing a science fantasy role playing game . James M. Ward had shown them his rough notes on Metamorphosis Alpha . Gary Gygax thought it would be a good idea to introduce science fiction / science fantasy concepts to D & D players through the use of a tournament scenario at the 1976 Origins II gaming convention in Baltimore , Maryland . Gygax started with his old Greyhawk Castle campaign material and added a spaceship , which Rob Kuntz helped him populate with monsters . Kuntz is further credited for " inspiration " for the module ; his " Machine Level " having been incorporated into Greyhawk Castle and Tim Kask having played in a D & D game with science fantasy content run by Kuntz at <unk> VII in 1974 . 
 According to Gygax , both the scenario that became Expedition to the Barrier Peaks and Metamorphosis Alpha were successful at the convention . Although Metamorphosis Alpha became available to the general public in mid @-@ 1976 , only a few copies of the Expedition to the Barrier Peaks tournament adventure survived after the convention . 
 When Metamorphosis Alpha was updated and expanded into Gamma World , it seemed the right time for Gygax to reintroduce Expedition to the Barrier Peaks to the public . Said Gygax , " What could be more logical than to make available a scenario which blends the two role playing approaches into a single form ? " Gygax updated the scenario to Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) rules , hoping it could serve as a primer on how to integrate science into one 's fantasy role playing game . In 1980 , the updated version was published as Expedition to the Barrier Peaks . At the time of Expedition to the Barrier Peaks 's release , each Dungeons & Dragons module was marked with an alphanumeric code indicating the series to which it belonged . The 32 @-@ page adventure bears the code S3 ( " S " for " special " ) . The module included a 36 @-@ page book and a 32 @-@ page book , with two outer folders ; it was one of the first deluxe scenario modules , and included a book of illustrations intended to be shown to the players during the game , including four color paintings . This module was included as part of the Realms of Horror abridged compilation produced in 1987 . Although an article on the Wizards.com web site did provide a conversion to Future Tech , the adventure never received an official sequel and was not updated for the D & D version 3 @.@ 5 rules ( Wizards of the Coast periodically alters the rules of Dungeons & Dragons and releases a new version ) . It was made into a novel of the same name by Roland J. Green for the Greyhawk Classics series . The adventure has also been referenced in the <unk> comic series . Unlike the other S series adventures , Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was not included in the Dungeon Survival Guide by author Bill Slavicsek because to him it was a " wonderful adventure " , but not " a D & D adventure . Once you add ray guns and power armor to the game , you have a fundamentally different experience . " Other products that have introduced futuristic elements into D & D include the adventure City of the Gods ( 1987 ) and the novel Tale of the Comet ( 1997 ) . 
 All four modules of the S @-@ series were included as part of the Dungeons of Dread hardcover collection , released on March 19 , 2013 . Lawrence Schick wrote in the foreword : " <unk> and robots . What more could you need to hear ? Let ’ s go ! S3 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks was Gary in full @-@ on funhouse mode , having a high old time mixing elements of Jim Ward 's Gamma World with fantasy to create a rollicking and memorable AD & D adventure . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Expedition to the Barrier Peaks received favorable reviews and was ranked the 5th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 , on the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game . Judge Bill Slavicsek felt the adventure was a " classic clash of genres " . It was not something he felt should be done often , but it made a " memorable diversion " . Judge Mike Mearls described how he felt the first time he read Expedition to the Barrier Peaks . " I had this terrible , terrible conflict within myself to immediately tell my friends about it at war with a maniacal , desperate drive to keep it hidden at all costs . " Judge Keith Baker was most impressed with the adventure 's art . He liked that it came with a separate book of art ; in particular the before and after illustrations of the carnivorous plant with a " built @-@ in bunny lure " . This was later featured in a Wizards.com " Ask Wizards " segment . According to the Dungeon editors , the adventure 's defining moment was its <unk> creature , and its full page color illustration . 
 Two gaming magazines reviewed Expedition to the Barrier Peaks in 1981 . Reviewer Marcus L. Rowland said in White Dwarf # 26 that he found the adventure " very enjoyable , with ideas and creatures eminently suitable for wider use " . He gave it 9 / 10 overall , but complained that some of the maps were printed on both sides of the same sheet , making them useless as a Dungeon Master 's shield ( a visual barrier that allows dice rolls and other activities to be conducted without the players knowing the outcome ) . He recommended at least a week 's study by the Dungeon Master before attempting to play it . He also notes that the cover " reveals the secret of the creatures " . Kirby Griffis reviewed the adventure in The Space Gamer # 36 . Griffis noted that it is full of " surprises and new monsters " , and felt that its one drawback was that Gygax presented standard D & D monsters as natives of other planets . In summary , he found it interesting and " full of spice and flavor " ; recommending it to anyone interested in " something new " or wanting to include science fiction in their D & D game . 
 According to Creighton Broadhurst , author of <unk> of Evil : Deadly Foes to Vex Your Heroes , the adventure is one of the most popular " old time " Greyhawk adventures . Game designer Daniel Kaufman remembers " the famous backward @-@ firing guns " as one of the adventure 's highlights , and Stephen Colbert , who played Dungeons & Dragons as a child , chose this adventure as his personal favorite . 
 = Backlash ( 2004 ) = 
 Backlash ( 2004 ) was the sixth annual Backlash professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was presented by Square Enix 's Drakengard . It took place on April 18 , 2004 at the Rexall Place in Edmonton , Alberta and was a Raw brand @-@ exclusive event . This was the first Backlash event held outside the United States . 
 The main event was a Triple Threat match for the World Heavyweight Championship involving reigning champion Chris Benoit , Triple H , and Shawn Michaels , which Benoit won after forcing Michaels to submit to the sharpshooter . One of the predominant matches on the card was Randy Orton versus Cactus Jack in a Hardcore match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship . Orton won the match and retained the title after pinning Cactus following an RKO . Another primary match on the undercard was Edge versus Kane , which Edge won by pinfall after executing a spear . 
 = = Background = = 
 The main feud heading into Backlash was between Chris Benoit , Triple H , and Shawn Michaels over the World Heavyweight Championship . Chris Benoit won the title one month prior at WrestleMania XX when he defeated Michaels and then @-@ champion Triple H in a Triple Threat match . Benoit won the match by forcing Triple H to submit to the Crippler Crossface . The following night on Raw , Benoit and Michaels defeated Evolution ( Randy Orton , Ric Flair , and Batista ) in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 Handicap tag team match . Benoit and Michaels won the match after Benoit forced Batista to submit to the Sharpshooter . On March 22 , Triple H was drafted over to the SmackDown ! brand , and Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff announced that Michaels would receive a World title match against Benoit at Backlash . Four days later on the March 25 episode of SmackDown ! , SmackDown ! General Manager Kurt Angle announced that Triple H had been traded back to Raw in exchange for The Dudley Boyz and Booker T. The next week on Raw , Bischoff made the one @-@ on @-@ one World Heavyweight Championship match between champion Chris Benoit and Shawn Michaels , a Triple Threat match also involving Triple H. 
 The other main match on the card was a Hardcore match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship between Randy Orton and Cactus Jack . Three months prior at the Royal Rumble , after Mick Foley eliminated Orton from the Royal Rumble match , Orton hit Foley with a steel chair , and the two brawled up the ramp and into the back . In March at WrestleMania XX , Evolution ( Orton , Batista , and Ric Flair ) faced off against The Rock ' n ' Sock Connection ( Foley and The Rock ) in a Handicap match . Evolution won the match when Orton pinned Foley after an RKO . Two weeks later , Foley challenged Orton to a Hardcore match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship at Backlash , which Orton accepted that same night . 
 Another feud heading into the event was between Chris Jericho and Christian and Trish Stratus . At WrestleMania XX , Christian defeated Jericho . After the match , Stratus , Jericho 's on @-@ screen girlfriend at the time , turned on Jericho and joined Christian . On April 5 , Christian announced that he would be teaming up with Stratus to take on Jericho in a Handicap match at Backlash . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , Val Venis defeated Matt Hardy in a match taped for Sunday Night Heat . The first match that aired was between Shelton Benjamin and Ric Flair . After back and forth action between the two , Flair attempted to use brass knuckles on Benjamin , though Benjamin splashed Flair from behind . Benjamin then performed a clothesline on Flair off the top rope to get the pin on Flair . Next was a match between Jonathan Coachman and Tajiri . During the match , Garrison Cade interfered on Coachman 's behalf , allowing Coachman to roll @-@ up on Tajiri for the win . 
 The third match of the event was Chris Jericho versus Christian and Trish Stratus in a Handicap match . Jericho won the match by pinning Christian after throwing him onto Stratus followed by executing an <unk> kick . The match that followed was for the WWE Women 's Championship between Victoria and Lita . The match was evenly controlled by both Victoria and Lita . The match ended when Victoria pinned Lita with an Inside Cradle . After the match , Molly Holly and Gail Kim attacked both Lita and Victoria . 
 Next was a Hardcore match between Randy Orton and Cactus Jack for the WWE Intercontinental Championship . One spot in the match saw Cactus lie a barbed wire baseball bat between Orton 's legs and perform a leg drop . Cactus continued to use the bat , as he poured gasoline on it and tried to light it on fire . Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff , however , interrupted and informed Cactus that he would be disqualified and the event would end if he lit the bat on fire . Towards the end of the match , Orton managed to execute an RKO on Cactus onto the barbed wire baseball bat . Orton pinned Cactus afterwards to win the match and retain the WWE Intercontinental Championship . 
 The sixth match was a tag team match in which The Hurricane and Rosey defeated La Résistance ( Robért Conway and Sylvain Grenier ) . After a back and forth match , Hurricane pinned Conway after an Eye of the Hurricane . The match that followed was between Edge and Kane . The match was controlled by Kane , as he focused on Edge 's injured left hand . Edge , however , reversed attacks from Kane , whom he then attempted to spear . Kane was able to dodge the spear , which in turn caused Edge to spear the referee . Edge used his cast to knock Kane out and followed by performing a spear . Edge pinned Kane afterwards for the win . 
 The main event was a Triple Threat match for the World Heavyweight Championship between Chris Benoit , Shawn Michaels and Triple H. One spot in the match saw Michaels miss a flying <unk> and saw him crash into the Spanish Announcing team 's table . Another included , Triple H assaulting Michaels with a sledgehammer . The last moments in the match saw Michaels submit to the sharpshooter which was applied by Benoit . As a result of the win , Benoit retained the World title . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On April 19 on Raw , General Manager Eric Bischoff scheduled a World Heavyweight Championship match between Chris Benoit and Shawn Michaels for the May 3 episode of Raw . On the same night , an impromptu team of Benoit and Edge defeated Evolution ( Ric Flair and Batista ) for the World Tag Team Championship , making Benoit a double champion . Two weeks later on Raw , Benoit retained the World Heavyweight title in a scheduled match against Shawn Michaels , after interference by Triple H. On May 10 , a match between Shelton Benjamin and Triple H , resulted in Michaels attacking Triple H. Michaels actions resulted in a suspension from Eric Bischoff . Prior to Raw that night , Bischoff informed Triple H that he would face Benoit for the World title the following week on Raw . The following week , Benoit defeated Triple H to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . Also that night , a Battle Royal took place , in which the winner would go on to face Benoit at Bad Blood for the World title . During the match , Triple H , one of the participants in the match , was eliminated by Michaels , who was not a participant in the match . 
 On the May 24 episode of Raw , Bischoff lifted Michaels suspension , after Triple H pleaded that Michaels be reinstated . On the same night , Michaels confronted Bischoff wanting to know if he was scheduled in a match with Triple H at Bad Blood . Bischoff assured Michaels , but Triple H attacked Michaels from behind , after Michaels attacked Triple H outside the arena 's parking lot . Bischoff gave orders to Raw superstars to attack Triple H and Michaels , if seen fighting . The roster tried breaking the fight up , but were unsuccessful in doing so . The result of the fight gave Bischoff the authority to schedule a Hell in a Cell match between Triple H and Michaels at Bad Blood . At Bad Blood , Triple H defeated Michaels by pinfall after executing two Pedigrees . 
 Following Backlash , Lita and Kane were put in angle , which involved Matt Hardy . It saw Hardy attack Kane to an attempt to prevent Kane from harming Lita . In the following weeks on Raw , Kane began repeatedly assaulting Hardy and attempting to seduce Lita . One incident saw Kane kayfabe kidnap Lita and hold her tied up backstage , where he supposedly asked her a " question . " Later that night , Kane won a number one contenders Battle Royal match , in which he received a title shot at Bad Blood . At Bad Blood , Benoit was successful in defending the World Heavyweight title , after he pinned Kane with a roll @-@ up . 
 During a match between Christian and Chris Jericho , Christian defeated Jericho after interference by Tyson Tomko ; Tomko was revealed to be the " problem solver " for Christian and Trish Stratus . The following weeks on Raw , Tomko assaulted Jericho , until May 10 , when Jericho defeated Christian in a Steel Cage match when he made Christian submit to the Walls of Jericho . As a result of the Steel Cage match , Christian suffered a legitimate back injury . After defeating Randy Orton and Batista in a tag team match , Tomko attacked Jericho , in which he powerbombed Jericho through the announcers table . On the June 7 episode of Raw , Bischoff booked a match at Bad Blood between Tomko and Jericho . At Bad Blood , Jericho pinned Tomko , after an Enzuigiri . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Spinosaurus = 
 Spinosaurus ( meaning " spine lizard " ) is a genus of theropod dinosaur that lived in what now is North Africa , during the lower Albian to lower Cenomanian stages of the Cretaceous period , about 112 to 97 million years ago . This genus was known first from Egyptian remains discovered in 1912 and described by German paleontologist Ernst Stromer in 1915 . The original remains were destroyed in World War II , but additional material has come to light in recent years . It is unclear whether one or two species are represented in the fossils reported in the scientific literature . The best known species is S. aegyptiacus from Egypt , although a potential second species , S. maroccanus , has been recovered from Morocco . 
 Spinosaurus was among the largest of all known carnivorous dinosaurs , possibly larger than Tyrannosaurus and Giganotosaurus . Estimates published in 2005 , 2007 , and 2008 suggested that it was between 12 @.@ 6 – 18 metres ( 41 – 59 ft ) in length and 7 to 20 @.@ 9 tonnes ( 7 @.@ 7 to 23 @.@ 0 short tons ) in weight . A new estimate published in 2014 and based on a more complete specimen , supported the earlier research , finding that Spinosaurus could reach lengths greater than 15 m ( 49 ft ) . The skull of Spinosaurus was long and narrow , similar to that of a modern crocodilian . Spinosaurus is known to have eaten fish , and most scientists believe that it hunted both terrestrial and aquatic prey ; evidence suggests that it lived both on land and in water as a modern crocodilian does . The distinctive spines of Spinosaurus , which were long extensions of the vertebrae , grew to at least 1 @.@ 65 meters ( 5 @.@ 4 ft ) long and were likely to have had skin connecting them , forming a sail @-@ like structure , although some authors have suggested that the spines were covered in fat and formed a hump . Multiple functions have been put forward for this structure , including thermoregulation and display . 
 = = Description = = 
 Since its discovery , Spinosaurus has been a contender for the longest and largest theropod dinosaur . Both Friedrich von Huene in 1926 and Donald F. Glut in 1982 listed it as among the most massive theropods in their surveys , at 15 meters ( 49 ft ) in length and upwards of 6 t ( 5 @.@ 9 long tons ; 6 @.@ 6 short tons ) in weight . In 1988 , Gregory Paul also listed it as the longest theropod at 15 meters ( 49 ft ) , but gave a lower mass estimate of 4 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 9 long tons ; 4 @.@ 4 short tons ) . 
 Dal Sasso et al . ( 2005 ) assumed that Spinosaurus and Suchomimus had the same body proportions in relation to their skull lengths , and thereby calculated that Spinosaurus was 16 to 18 meters ( 52 to 59 ft ) in length and 7 to 9 tonnes ( 6 @.@ 9 to 8 @.@ 9 long tons ; 7 @.@ 7 to 9 @.@ 9 short tons ) in weight . The Dal Sasso et al. estimates were criticized because the skull length estimate was uncertain , and ( assuming that body mass increases as the cube of body length ) scaling Suchomimus which was 11 meters ( 36 ft ) long and 3 @.@ 8 tonnes ( 4 @.@ 2 short tons ) in mass to the range of estimated lengths of Spinosaurus would produce an estimated body mass of 11 @.@ 7 to 16 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 12 @.@ 9 to 18 @.@ 4 short tons ) . 
 François Therrien and Donald Henderson , in a 2007 paper using scaling based on skull length , challenged previous estimates of the size of Spinosaurus , finding the length too great and the weight too small . Based on estimated skull lengths of 1 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 75 meters ( 4 @.@ 9 to 5 @.@ 7 ft ) , their estimates include a body length of 12 @.@ 6 to 14 @.@ 3 meters ( 41 to 47 ft ) and a body mass of 12 to 20 @.@ 9 tonnes ( 11 @.@ 8 to 20 @.@ 6 long tons ; 13 @.@ 2 to 23 @.@ 0 short tons ) . The lower estimates for Spinosaurus would imply that the animal was shorter and lighter than Carcharodontosaurus and Giganotosaurus . The Therrien and Henderson study has been criticized for the choice of theropods used for comparison ( e.g. , most of the theropods used to set the initial equations were tyrannosaurids and carnosaurs , which have a different build than spinosaurids ) , and for the assumption that the Spinosaurus skull could be as little as 1 @.@ 5 meters ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) in length . Improvement of the precision of size estimates for Spinosaurus requires the discovery of more complete remains as available for some other dinosaurs , especially the limb bones of Spinosaurus which are " hitherto unknown " . 
 = = = Neural spines = = = 
 Very tall neural spines growing on the back vertebrae of Spinosaurus formed the basis of what is usually called the animal 's " sail " . The lengths of the neural spines reached over 10 times the diameters of the vertebral bodies from which they extended . The neural spines were slightly longer front to back at the base than higher up , and were unlike the thin rods seen in the <unk> <unk> Edaphosaurus and Dimetrodon , contrasting also with the thicker spines in the iguanodontian Ouranosaurus . 
 Spinosaurus sails were unusual , although other dinosaurs , namely the ornithopod Ouranosaurus , which lived a few million years earlier in the same general region as Spinosaurus , and the South American sauropod Amargasaurus , might have developed similar structural adaptations of their vertebrae . The sail may be an analog of the sail of the Permian synapsid Dimetrodon , which lived before the dinosaurs even appeared , produced by convergent evolution . 
 The structure may also have been more hump @-@ like than sail @-@ like , as noted by Stromer in 1915 ( " one might rather think of the existence of a large hump of fat [ German : <unk> ] , to which the [ neural spines ] gave internal support " ) and by Jack Bowman Bailey in 1997 . In support of his " buffalo @-@ back " hypothesis , Bailey argued that in Spinosaurus , Ouranosaurus , and other dinosaurs with long neural spines , the spines were relatively shorter and thicker than the spines of pelycosaurs ( which were known to have sails ) ; instead , the dinosaurs ' neural spines were similar to the neural spines of extinct hump @-@ backed mammals such as <unk> and Bison latifrons . 
 = = = Skull = = = 
 The skull had a narrow snout filled with straight conical teeth that lacked serrations . There were six or seven teeth on each side of the very front of the upper jaw , in the premaxillae , and another twelve in both maxillae behind them . The second and third teeth on each side were noticeably larger than the rest of the teeth in the premaxilla , creating a space between them and the large teeth in the anterior maxilla ; large teeth in the lower jaw faced this space . The very tip of the snout holding those few large anterior teeth was expanded , and a small crest was present in front of the eyes . Using the dimensions of three specimens known as MSNM V4047 , UCPC @-@ 2 , and BSP 1912 VIII 19 , and assuming that the postorbital part of the skull of MSNM V4047 had a shape similar to the postorbital part of the skull of Irritator , Dal Sasso et al . ( 2005 ) estimated that the skull of Spinosaurus was 1 @.@ 75 meters ( 5 @.@ 7 ft ) long . The Dal Sasso et al. skull length estimate was questioned because skull shapes can vary across spinosaurid species . 
 A 2013 made study performed by scientists Andrew R. Cuff and Emily Rayfield showed that Spinosaurids like Spinosaurus had relatively poor resistance in their skulls for torsion compared to other members of this group ( Baryonyx ) and modern alligators , thus showing Spinosaurus preyed more regularly on fish than it did on land animals , although considered predators of the former too . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Spinosaurus gives its name to the Spinosauridae family of dinosaurs , which includes two subfamilies : Baryonychinae and Spinosaurinae . The Baryonychinae include Baryonyx from southern England and Suchomimus from Niger in central Africa . The Spinosaurinae include Spinosaurus , Irritator from Brazil , and <unk> ( which is probably synonymous with Irritator ) from Brazil . The Spinosaurinae share unserrated straight teeth that are widely spaced ( e.g. , 12 on one side of the maxilla ) , as opposed to the Baryonychinae which have serrated curved teeth that are numerous ( e.g. , 30 on one side of the maxilla ) . 
 The following cladogram shows an analysis of Tetanurae simplified to show only Spinosauridae from Allain et al . ( 2012 ) : 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 = = = Naming of species = = = 
 Two species of Spinosaurus have been named : Spinosaurus aegyptiacus ( meaning " Egyptian spine lizard " ) and Spinosaurus maroccanus ( meaning " Moroccan spine lizard " ) . 
 The first described remains of Spinosaurus were found and described in the early 20th century . In 1912 , Richard Markgraf discovered a partial skeleton of a dinosaur in the Bahariya Formation of western Egypt . In 1915 , German paleontologist Ernst Stromer published an article assigning the specimen to a new genus and species Spinosaurus aegyptiacus . 
 Fragmentary additional remains from Bahariya , including vertebrae and hindlimb bones , were designated by Stromer as " Spinosaurus B " in 1934 . Stromer considered them different enough to belong to another species , and this has been borne out . With the advantage of more expeditions and material , it appears that they pertain either to Carcharodontosaurus or to Sigilmassasaurus . 
 S. maroccanus was originally described by Dale Russell in 1996 as a new species based on the length of its neck vertebrae . Specifically , Russell claimed that the ratio of the length of the centrum ( body of vertebra ) to the height of the posterior articular facet was 1 @.@ 1 in S. aegyptiacus and 1 @.@ 5 in S. maroccanus . Later authors have been split on this topic . Some authors note that the length of the vertebrae can vary from individual to individual , that the holotype specimen was destroyed and thus cannot be compared directly with the S. maroccanus specimen , and that it is unknown which cervical vertebrae the S. maroccanus specimens represent . Therefore , though some have retained the species as valid without much comment , most researchers regard S. maroccanus as a nomen dubium or as a junior synonym of S. aegyptiacus . 
 = = = Specimens = = = 
 Six main partial specimens of Spinosaurus have been described . 
 BSP 1912 VIII 19 , described by Stromer in 1915 from the Bahariya Formation , was the holotype . The material consisted of the following items , most of which were incomplete : right and left dentaries and <unk> from the lower jaw measuring 75 centimeters ( 30 in ) long ; a straight piece of the left maxilla that was described but not drawn ; 20 teeth ; 2 cervical vertebrae ; 7 dorsal ( trunk ) vertebrae ; 3 sacral vertebrae ; 1 caudal vertebra ; 4 thoracic ribs ; and gastralia . Of the nine neural spines whose heights are given , the longest ( " i , " associated with a dorsal vertebra ) was 1 @.@ 65 meters ( 5 @.@ 4 ft ) in length . Stromer claimed that the specimen was from the early Cenomanian , approximately 97 million years ago . 
 This specimen was destroyed in World War II , specifically " during the night of 24 / 25 April 1944 in a British bombing raid of Munich " that severely damaged the building housing the <unk> Museum München ( Bavarian State Collection of Paleontology ) . However , detailed drawings and descriptions of the specimen remain . Stromer 's son donated Stromer 's archives to the <unk> <unk> München in 1995 , and Smith et al. analyzed two photographs of the Spinosaurus holotype specimen BSP 1912 VIII 19 discovered in the archives in 2000 . On the basis of a photograph of the lower jaw and a photograph of the entire specimen as mounted , Smith concluded that Stromer 's original 1915 drawings were slightly inaccurate . In 2003 , Oliver Rauhut suggested that Stromer 's Spinosaurus holotype was a chimera , composed of vertebrae and neural spines from a carcharodontosaurid similar to Acrocanthosaurus and a dentary from Baryonyx or Suchomimus . This analysis was rejected in at least one subsequent paper . 
 NMC <unk> , held by the Canadian Museum of Nature , is a mid @-@ cervical vertebra which is 19 @.@ 5 centimeters ( 7 @.@ 7 in ) long from the Kem Kem Beds of Morocco . It is the holotype of Spinosaurus maroccanus as described by Russell in 1996 . Other specimens referred to S. maroccanus in the same paper were two other mid @-@ cervical vertebrae ( NMC <unk> and NMC <unk> ) , an anterior dentary fragment ( NMC <unk> ) , a mid @-@ dentary fragment ( NMC <unk> ) , and an anterior dorsal neural arch ( NMC <unk> ) . Russell stated that " only general locality information could be provided " for the specimen , and therefore it could be dated only " possibly " to the Albian . 
 MNHN SAM 124 , housed at the Muséum National d 'Histoire Naturelle , is a snout ( consisting of partial premaxillae , partial maxillae , <unk> , and a dentary fragment ) . Described by Taquet and Russell in 1998 , the specimen is 13 @.@ 4 to 13 @.@ 6 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 3 – 5 @.@ 4 in ) in width ; no length was stated . The specimen was located in Algeria , and " is of Albian age . " Taquet and Russell believed that this specimen along with a premaxilla fragment ( SAM 125 ) , two cervical vertebrae ( SAM 126 @-@ 127 ) , and a dorsal neural arch ( SAM 128 ) , belonged to S. maroccanus . 
 <unk> ( in the collection of the Office National des Mines , Tunis ) was described by Buffetaut and <unk> in 2002 . It consists of a partial anterior dentary 11 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 53 in ) in length from an early Albian stratum of the <unk> Formation of Tunisia . The dentary fragment , which included four alveoli and two partial teeth , was " extremely similar " to existing material of S. aegyptiacus . 
 UCPC @-@ 2 in the University of Chicago Paleontological Collection consists mainly of two narrow connected nasals with a " fluted crest " from the region between the eyes . The specimen , which is 18 @.@ 0 centimetres ( 7 @.@ 09 in ) long , was located in an early Cenomanian part of the Moroccan Kem Kem Beds in 1996 and described in the scientific literature in 2005 by Cristiano Dal Sasso of the Civic Natural History Museum in Milan and colleagues . 
 MSNM V4047 ( in the Museo di Storia Naturale di Milano ) , described by Dal Sasso et al. in 2005 , consists of a snout ( premaxillae , partial maxillae , and partial nasals ) 98 @.@ 8 centimetres ( 38 @.@ 9 in ) long from the Kem Kem Beds . Like UCPC @-@ 2 , it is thought to have come from the early Cenomanian . 
 <unk> @-@ KK <unk> is a partial subadult skeleton recovered from the Kem Kem beds of North Africa . Described by Ibrahim et al . ( 2014 ) and designated as the neotype specimen ( although Evers et al . 2015 reject the neotype designation for <unk> @-@ KK @-@ <unk> ) . It includes cervical vertebrae , dorsal vertebrae , neural spines , a complete sacrum , femora , tibiae , pedal phalanges , caudal vertebra , several dorsal ribs , and fragments of the skull . The body proportions of this specimen have been debated as the hind limbs are disproportionately shorter in the specimen than in previous reconstructions . However , it has been demonstrated by multiple paleontologists that the specimen is not a chimaera , and is indeed a specimen of Spinosaurus that suggests that the animal had much smaller hind limbs than previously thought Other known specimens consist mainly of very fragmentary remains and scattered teeth . These include : 
 A 1986 paper described prismatic structures in tooth enamel from two Spinosaurus teeth from Tunisia . 
 Buffetaut ( 1989 , 1992 ) referred three specimens from the Institut und Museum für <unk> und Paläontologie of the University of Göttingen in Germany to Spinosaurus : a right maxilla fragment IMGP 969 @-@ 1 , a jaw fragment IMGP 969 @-@ 2 , and a tooth IMGP 969 @-@ 3 . These had been found in a Lower Cenomanian or Upper Albian deposit in southeastern Morocco in 1971 . 
 Kellner and Mader ( 1997 ) described two unserrated spinosaurid teeth from Morocco ( <unk> 001 and 002 ) that were " highly similar " to the teeth of the S. aegyptiacus holotype . 
 Teeth from the <unk> Formation in Tunisia which are " narrow , somewhat rounded in cross @-@ section , and lack the anterior and posterior serrated edges characteristic of theropods and basal archosaurs " were assigned to Spinosaurus in 2000 . 
 Teeth from the <unk> Formation of Niger were " tentatively " referred to Spinosaurus in 2007 . 
 A partial tooth 8 cm long purchased at a fossil trade show , reportedly from the Kem Kem Bed of Morocco and attributed to Spinosaurus maroccanus , showed 1 – 5 mm wide longitudinal striations and micro @-@ structures ( irregular ridges ) among the striations in a 2010 paper . 
 = = = = Possible specimens = = = = 
 Possible material belonging to Spinosaurus has been reported from the Turkana Grits of Kenya . 
 Some scientists have considered the genus Sigilmassasaurus a junior synonym of Spinosaurus . In Ibrahim et al . ( 2014 ) , the specimens of Sigilmassasaurus was referred to Spinosaurus aegyptiacus together with " Spinosaurus B " as the neotype and Spinosaurus maroccanus was considered as a nomen dubium following the conclusions of the other papers . A 2015 re @-@ description of Sigilmassasaurus disputed these conclusions , and considered the genus valid . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Function of neural spines = = = 
 The function of the dinosaur 's sail or hump is uncertain ; scientists have proposed several hypotheses including heat regulation and display . In addition , such a prominent feature on its back could make it appear even larger than it was , intimidating other animals . 
 The structure may have been used for thermoregulation . If the structure contained abundant blood vessels , the animal could have used the sail 's large surface area to absorb heat . This would imply that the animal was only partly warm @-@ blooded at best and lived in climates where nighttime temperatures were cool or low and the sky usually not cloudy . It is also possible that the structure was used to radiate excess heat from the body , rather than to collect it . Large animals , due to the relatively small ratio of surface area of their body compared to the overall volume ( Haldane 's principle ) , face far greater problems of dissipating excess heat at higher temperatures than gaining it at lower . Sails of large dinosaurs added considerably to the skin area of their bodies , with minimum increase of volume . Furthermore , if the sail was turned away from the sun , or positioned at a 90 degree angle towards a cooling wind , the animal would quite effectively cool itself in the warm climate of Cretaceous Africa . However , Bailey ( 1997 ) was of the opinion that a sail could have absorbed more heat than it radiated . Bailey proposed instead that Spinosaurus and other dinosaurs with long neural spines had fatty humps on their backs for energy storage , insulation , and shielding from heat . 
 Elaborate body structures of many modern @-@ day animals usually serve to attract members of the opposite sex during mating . It is quite possible that the sails or humps of these dinosaurs were used for courtship , in a way similar to a peacock 's tail . Stromer speculated that males and females may have differed in the size of the neural spine . 
 Gimsa et al . ( 2015 ) suggest that the dorsal sail of Spinosaurus was homologous to the dorsal fins of sailfish and served a hydrodynamic purpose . Gimsa and others point out that more basal , long @-@ legged spinosaurids have otherwise round or crescent @-@ shaped dorsal sails , whereas in Spinosaurus , the dorsal neural spines form a shape that is roughly rectangular and similar in shape to the dorsal fins of sailfish . They therefore argue that Spinosaurus used its dorsal neural sail in the same manner as Sailfish , and that it also employed its long narrow tail to stun prey like a modern Thresher shark Sailfish employ their dorsal fins for herding schools of fish into a " bait hall " where they cooperate to trap the fish into a certain area where the sailfish can snatch the fish with their bills . The sail could have possibly reduced yaw rotation by counteracting the lateral force in the direction opposite to the slash as suggested by Gimsa et al . ( 2015 ) . Gimsa and colleagues specifically wrote : 
 Spinosaurus anatomy exhibits another feature that may have a modern homology : its long tail resembled that of the thresher shark , employed to slap the water to herd and stun shoals of fish before devouring them ( Oliver et al.2013 ) . The strategies that sailfish and thresher sharks employ against shoaling fish are more effective when the shoal is first concentrated into a ‘ bait ball ’ ( Helfman , Collette & <unk> , 1997 ; Oliver et al.2013 ; Domenici et <unk> ) . Since this is difficult for individual predators to achieve , they cooperate in this effort . When herding a shoal of fish or squid , sailfish also raise their sails to make themselves appear larger . When they slash or wipe their bills through shoaling fish by turning their heads , their dorsal sail and fins are outstretched to stabilize their bodies hydrodynamically ( Lauder & Drucker , 2004 ) . Domenici et al . ( 2014 ) postulate that these fin extensions enhance the accuracy of tapping and slashing . The sail can reduce yaw rotation by counteracting the lateral force in the direction opposite to the slash . This means that prey is less likely to recognize the massive trunk as being part of an approaching predator ( <unk> et <unk> ; Webb & Weihs 2015 ) . Film footage available online impressively demonstrates the hunting strategies of sailfish and thresher sharks . Interestingly , Spinosaurus exhibited the anatomical features required to combine all three hunting strategies : a sail for herding prey more efficiently , as well as flexible tail and neck to slap the water for stunning , injuring or killing prey . The submerged dorsal sail would have provided a strong <unk> @-@ like counterforce for powerful sidewards movements of the strong neck and long tail , as performed by sailfish ( Domenici et <unk> ) or thresher sharks ( Oliver et al.2013 ) . While smaller dorsal sails or fins make the dorsal water volume better accessible for slashing , it can be speculated that their smaller stabilization effect makes lateral slashing less efficient ( e.g. for thresher sharks ) . Forming a hydrodynamic fulcrum and hydrodynamically stabilizing the trunk along the dorsoventral axis , Spinosaurus ’ sail would also have compensated for the inertia of the lateral neck by tail movements and vice versa not only for predation but also for accelerated swimming . This behaviour might also have been one reason for Spinosaurus ’ muscular chest and neck reported by Ibrahim et al . ( 2014 ) . " Finally , it is quite possible that the sail or hump combined these functions , acting normally as a heat regulator , becoming a courting aid during the mating season , being used to cool itself and , on occasions , turning into an intimidating device when an animal was feeling threatened . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 It is unclear whether Spinosaurus was primarily a terrestrial predator or a piscivore , as indicated by its elongated jaws , conical teeth and raised nostrils . The hypothesis of <unk> as specialized fish eaters has been suggested before by A. J. Charig and A. C. Milner for Baryonyx . They base this on the anatomical similarity with crocodilians and the presence of digestive acid @-@ etched fish scales in the rib cage of the type specimen . Large fish are known from the faunas containing other spinosaurids , including the <unk> , in the mid @-@ Cretaceous of northern Africa and Brazil . Direct evidence for <unk> diet comes from related European and South American taxa . Baryonyx was found with fish scales and bones from juvenile Iguanodon in its stomach , while a tooth embedded in a South American pterosaur bone suggests that <unk> occasionally preyed on pterosaurs , but Spinosaurus was likely to have been a generalized and opportunistic predator , possibly a Cretaceous equivalent of large grizzly bears , being biased toward fishing , though it undoubtedly scavenged and took many kinds of small or medium @-@ sized prey . A study by Cuff and Rayfield ( 2013 ) concluded that bio @-@ mechanical data suggests that Spinosaurus was not an obligate piscivore and that its diet was more closely associated with each individual 's size . The characteristic rostral morphology of Spinosaurus allowed its jaws to resist bending in the vertical direction , however its jaws were poorly adapted with respect to resisting lateral bending . 
 In 2009 , Dal Sasso et al .. reported the results of X @-@ ray computed tomography of the MSNM V4047 snout . As the foramina on the outside all communicated with a space on the inside of the snout , the authors speculated that Spinosaurus had pressure receptors inside the space that allowed it to hold its snout at the surface of the water to detect swimming prey species without seeing them . 
 A 2010 isotope analysis by Romain Amiot and colleagues found that oxygen isotope ratios of spinosaurid teeth , including teeth of Spinosaurus , indicate semiaquatic lifestyles . Isotope ratios from tooth enamel and from other parts of Spinosaurus ( found in Morocco and Tunisia ) and of other predators from the same area such as Carcharodontosaurus were compared with isotopic compositions from contemporaneous theropods , turtles , and crocodilians . The study found that Spinosaurus teeth from five of six sampled localities had oxygen isotope ratios closer to those of turtles and crocodilians when compared with other theropod teeth from the same localities . The authors postulated that Spinosaurus switched between terrestrial and aquatic habitats to compete for food with large crocodilians and other large theropods respectively . 
 = = = Posture = = = 
 Although traditionally depicted as a biped , it has been suggested since the mid @-@ 1970s that Spinosaurus was at least an occasional quadruped . This has been bolstered by the discovery of Baryonyx , a relative with robust arms . Because of the mass of the hypothesized fatty dorsal humps of Spinosaurus , Bailey ( 1997 ) was open to the possibility of a quadrupedal posture , leading to new restorations of it as such . The hypothesis that Spinosaurus had a typical quadrupedal gait has fallen out of favor , though spinosaurids may have crouched in a quadrupedal posture . 
 Theropods , including spinosaurids , could not pronate their hands ( rotate the forearm so the palm faced the ground ) , but a resting position on the side of the hand was possible , as shown by fossil prints from an Early Jurassic theropod . A 2014 paper describing new material of Spinosaurus , proposed that its legs were too short for it to move effectively on land . The reconstruction used in the study was an extrapolation based on different sized individuals , scaled to what was assumed to be the correct proportions . Palaeontologist John Hutchinson of the Royal Veterinary College of the University of London has expressed scepticism to the new reconstruction , and cautioned that using different specimens can result in inaccurate chimaeras . Scott Hartman also expressed criticism because he believes the legs and the pelvis were inaccurately scaled ( 27 % too short ) and don 't match the published lengths . However , responses from Ibrahim et al. to Mark Witton have been positively received as reliable . The 2015 re @-@ description of Sigilmassasaurus Evers et al . 2015 doubted whether the material assigned to Spinosaurus by Ibrahim et. al. belonged to it . 
 = = Locomotion = = 
 Previous theories on how Spinosaurus moved through the water showed it paddling like a duck or crocodile through the water . However , a new hypothesis suggests Spinosaurus could not swim at all , but instead hopped on the bottom of rivers . It states that , since Spinosaurus has dense bones , it would most likely hang low in the water column , and that it moved around by running on the bottom of rivers such as hippos , tapir , and indian rhinos . Spinosaurus shows many other traits in common with hippos such as partial webbed toes , flat unguals , and a barrel shaped body which are traits that are usually attributed animals that use this kind of locomotion . The animal may have had thick skin to achieve this as well . The environment that Spinosaurus lived in is similar to the environment of thick skinned aquatic mammals and it is possible that Spinosaurus may have had this thick skin to achieve the kind of locomotion . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The environment inhabited by Spinosaurus is only partially understood , and covers a great deal of what is now northern Africa . The region of Africa Spinosaurus is preserved in dates from 112 to 97 million years ago . A 1996 study concluded from Moroccan fossils that Spinosaurus , Carcharodontosaurus , and <unk> " ranged across north Africa during the late Cretaceous ( Cenomanian ) . " Those Spinosaurus that lived in the Bahariya Formation of what is now Egypt may have contended with shoreline conditions on tidal flats and channels , living in mangrove forests alongside similarly large dinosaurian predators <unk> and Carcharodontosaurus , the titanosaur sauropods <unk> and <unk> , crocodylomorphs , bony and cartilaginous fish , turtles , lizards , and plesiosaurs . In the dry season it might have resorted to preying on pterosaurs . This situation resembles that in the Late Jurassic Morrison Formation of North America , which boasts up to five theropod genera over one tonne in weight , as well as several smaller genera ( Henderson , 1998 ; Holtz et al . , 2004 ) . Differences in head shape and body size among the large North African theropods may have been enough to allow niche partitioning as seen among the many different predator species found today in the African savanna ( Farlow & Pianka , 2002 ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Spinosaurus appeared in the 2001 film Jurassic Park III , replacing Tyrannosaurus as the main antagonist . The film 's consulting paleontologist John R. Horner was quoted as saying : " If we base the ferocious factor on the length of the animal , there was nothing that ever lived on this planet that could match this creature [ Spinosaurus ] . Also my hypothesis is that T @-@ rex was actually a scavenger rather than a killer . Spinosaurus was really the predatory animal . " ( He has since retracted the statement about T. Rex being a scavenger . ) In the film , Spinosaurus was portrayed as larger and more powerful than Tyrannosaurus : in a scene depicting a battle between the two resurrected predators , Spinosaurus emerges victorious by snapping the tyrannosaur 's neck . In the fourth film Jurassic World , there is a nod to this fight where the T @-@ Rex smashes through the skeleton of a Spinosaurus in the climatic fight near the end of the film . 
 Spinosaurus has long been depicted in popular books about dinosaurs , although only recently has there been enough information about spinosaurids for an accurate depiction . After an influential 1955 skeletal reconstruction by Lapparent and Lavocat based on a 1936 diagram by Stromer , it has been treated as a generalized upright theropod , with a skull similar to that of other large theropods and a sail on its back , even having four @-@ fingered hands . 
 In addition to films , action figures , video games , and books , Spinosaurus has been depicted on postage stamps such as ones from Angola , The Gambia , and Tanzania . 
 = Cherry Pop = 
 " Cherry Pop " is a song recorded by Romanian recording artist Alexandra Stan for her sophomore studio album , Unlocked ( 2014 ) . It was made available for digital download on 28 May 2015 through Roton as the second single from Unlocked . " Cherry Pop " was written by Stan herself , Lukas Hällgren and Erik Lidbom , while production was handled by both Hällgren and Lidbom . The track was recorded in Bucharest , Romania at the Fonogram Studios and was additionally engineered at Lidbom 's <unk> Production . 
 " Cherry Pop " was described as a J @-@ Pop song during one of Stan 's interviews prior to the track 's release . An accompanying music video for " Cherry Pop " premiered on 28 May 2015 on Stan 's YouTube channel ; Khaled Mokhtar was both the clip 's director and director of photography . It was shot in Buftea , Romania and portrays Stan and her background dancers performing choreography created by performer Emil Rengle . The song reached number 64 on the Japan Hot 100 and became the most sought ringtone on the largest Japanese profile site , Recochoku . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Cherry Pop " was written by Stan herself , Lukas Hällgren and Erik Lidbom , while production was handled by both Hällgren and Lidbom . It was recorded at the Fonogram Studios in Bucharest , Romania and was additionally mixed and engineered at Lidbom 's Hitfire Production in Uppsala , Sweden . Further 's work on the track was done during <unk> , the first Romanian international songwriting camp held in Azuga . Fellow Romanian and international singers were also present at the two @-@ weeks event , such as Delia Matache , Mohombi , Smiley and <unk> . The track was described as a J @-@ pop song during one of Stan 's interviews prior to the release of " Cherry Pop " ; she also noticed influences to Eurodance . An administrator of <unk> commended the recording as being influenced by house , while also describing the song 's instrumentation as " electric " and " vibrant " . Anthony Easton , a writer for The Singles Jukebox , described the song as a " <unk> " , while Ian Mew compared it to " Bubble Pop ! " by South Korean singer Hyuna . According to Popdust , " Cherry Pop " uses dubstep for its breakdown . The main idea for the song was based on Stan 's first kiss which , according to her , " tasted like candy " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Cherry Pop " received generally mixed reviews from music critics upon release . The Singles Jukebox gave the song an overall rating of 5 / 10 . A writer of The Singles Jukebox , Andy Hutchins , confessed that " a better title for the song might have been ' Dr. Pepper ' " . Website Popdust described the song as " outdated " , but at the same time catchy and funny . Hitfire praised the song 's refrain as being " <unk> " and " trashy " . They went on saying that " Cherry Pop " " doesn 't reach the standards like of her previously launched songs , ' Mr. Saxobeat ' , ' Get Back ( ASAP ) ' and ' Lemonade ' " . Music website Pop Shock described the single as a " grower track " , while Robin Catling of Everything Express criticized " Cherry Pop " for being " irritating " . He went on saying that " the verse let down by an horrific chorus and a truly nasty backing track " . Website <unk> praised overall her album Unlocked , mentioning also that the song is " ironic " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 According to the biggest Japanese profile site , Recochoku , " Cherry Pop " became the most sought ringtone on their website within two hours . The news that " Cherry Pop " achieved so much success in Japan came to Stan when she was on tour in Turkey . There , the organizers of her show displayed the sentence " Congratulations , Alexandra Stan , you 're number 1 ! " on the main screen of the club . The song entered the Japan Hot 100 at number 64 on 5 July 2014 . It subsequently leaved the chart after just one week . " Cherry Pop " debuted at number 82 on the Romanian Radio Airplay Chart ; it lasted for six weeks on that chart , with it reaching its peak position at number 44 . The track peaked at number two on the Turkish Number One Top 20 compiled on 6 September 2014 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Cherry Pop " was uploaded onto Stan 's YouTube channel on 28 May 2014 , where it has since amassed a total of 5 million views . The clip was shot by Khaled Mokhtar in Buftea , Romania in a set built specially for this project . The accompanying choreography was choreographed by Romanian performer Emil Rengle and the eight " shiny and glam " different outfits used for the video were designed by Andra Moga . Particularly , Stan described the video as incorporating " both a futuristic and a retro point of view " . 
 The video opens with Stan and some of her male back @-@ up dancers being presented in a dark white room . Subsequently , the room becomes enlightened and Stan is seen wearing transparent sunglasses , a white <unk> and a silver jacket . Following this , she retrieves a tennis racket from one of her background dancers and holds it in front of her face before returning the racket to a nearby dancer . Next , Stan performs the pre @-@ refrain of the song , while two female performers clutch a hair dryer in their hands . For the refrain , she and ten other female background dancers are performing synchronized dances , with them having wigs on , and dressing white clothing and red accessories . Following this , Stan is presented standing on a yellow plate which is kept in the air by two threads . She wears a silver leotard and a multicolored wig . Next , Stan is shown walking into a tennis field , whereon she plays a tennis match against herself . For the breakdown of " Cherry Pop " , the video gets introduced into a dark @-@ lighted room . There , her previously shown male background dancers are presented ; the video continues with Stan dancing accompanied by her dancers . The clip finally ends with a pink tennis ball dropping out of the ceiling , while the screen becomes black . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On 12 December 2014 , Stan performed both " Cherry Pop " and " Vanilla Chocolat " on an episode of Vocea României . Shortly after her performance , juror Tudor <unk> expressed how he was very disappointed by Stan 's act , as she didn 't provide live vocals . In an interview with Cancan , Stan confessed that " [ her ] conditions of appearance at Vocea României were previously discussed with the producers of the show , so no one should have been surprised about [ her ] performing playback " . " Cherry Pop " was included on the tracklist of her Unlocked Tour ( 2014 ) and her Cherry Pop Summer Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = 1878 FA Cup Final = 
 The 1878 FA Cup Final was a football match between Wanderers and Royal Engineers on 23 March 1878 at Kennington Oval in London . It was the seventh final of the world 's oldest football competition , the Football Association Challenge Cup ( known in the modern era as the FA Cup ) . Wanderers had won the Cup in the previous two seasons and on four previous occasions in total , including the first FA Cup Final , in 1872 , in which they defeated the Engineers . The Engineers had also won the Cup , having defeated Old Etonians in the 1875 final . 
 Wanderers , who were considered firm favourites to win the Cup for the third consecutive season , took the lead after only five minutes through Jarvis Kenrick , but the Engineers quickly equalised . The cup @-@ holders regained their lead before half @-@ time and added a third goal after the interval to secure a 3 – 1 victory . Under the original rules of the competition , the Cup was retired and presented to the club on a permanent basis to mark their third straight win , but the Wanderers returned the Cup to The Football Association on the condition that it never again be won outright by any club . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 Wanderers were the reigning cup holders and had also won the tournament in 1872 , 1873 and 1876 . In the first of these victories they had defeated the Royal Engineers . The Engineers had won the competition in 1875 . Both teams entered the competition at the first round stage . Wanderers were allocated a home tie against Panthers and easily defeated their opponents 9 – 1 , proceeding to the second round where they were paired with High Wycombe and again recorded a high @-@ scoring victory , winning 9 – 0 . Their opponents in the third round , Barnes , proved stronger opposition , particularly as key players such as Hon. Arthur Kinnaird were unavailable for the cup @-@ holders . The match ended in a 1 – 1 draw [ 1 ] necessitating a replay , which Wanderers ( back to full strength ) won 4 – 1 . In the quarter @-@ finals Wanderers defeated Sheffield 3 – 0 and then , with an uneven number of teams remaining in the competition , the team received a bye into the final . 
 The Engineers ' scheduled first round opponents were Highbury Union , but they withdrew from the competition , giving the Engineers a walkover victory . The " Sappers " , as the Royal Engineers regiment is traditionally nicknamed , went on to defeat Pilgrims 6 – 0 and Druids 8 – 0 , with hat @-@ tricks in both matches from Lieut . Robert Hedley , to reach the quarter @-@ finals where their opponents were 1874 cup @-@ winners Oxford University . The initial match finished in a 3 – 3 draw , and the replay also finished without a victor , ending 2 – 2 . Finally , the Engineers emerged victorious in a second replay , winning 4 – 2 . This set up a semi @-@ final match against Old <unk> , the team for former pupils of Harrow School . The match was played at Kennington Oval and the Engineers reached the final by defeating the <unk> 2 – 1 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Wanderers , who were considered the firm favourites by the book @-@ makers , won the coin toss and chose to defend the Harleyford Road end of The Oval . The match drew a crowd estimated at 4 @,@ 500 spectators , the highest yet recorded for an FA Cup Final . Both teams played with two full @-@ backs , two half @-@ backs and six forwards ; the team captains were the Hon. Arthur Kinnaird and Lieut . Robert Hedley . The cup @-@ holders immediately dominated the game and Kinnaird quickly had an unsuccessful shot on goal . After only five minutes Henry Wace crossed the ball from a wide position and Jarvis Kenrick kicked the ball past the Engineers ' goalkeeper Lieut . <unk> Friend to give the Wanderers the lead . Approximately ten minutes later , Wanderers goalkeeper James Kirkpatrick suffered a broken arm during a tussle on the goal @-@ line , but managed to keep the ball out of the goal , and went on to play the remainder of the match despite his injury . In the 20th minute of the game , the Engineers scored an equalising goal . Some modern sources state that Lieut . William Morris scored the goal , however contemporary newspaper reports in The Field , The Sporting Life and Bell 's Life in London all state that Morris took a throw @-@ in which led to a " scrimmage " or " bully " in front of the Wanderers ' goal , out of which the ball was forced over the goal @-@ line . 
 Towards the end of the first half , the Wanderers were awarded a free kick . Kinnaird took the kick , which led to a second goal for the cup @-@ holders . Modern sources list Kinnaird as the goalscorer , but some contemporary reports suggest that , following his free kick , another " scrimmage " ensued in front of the Engineers ' goal before the ball was forced over the line . Shortly after the half @-@ time break , the Engineers ' captain Robert Hedley appeared to have scored a goal , but it was disallowed due to an infringement of the offside rule . After around twenty minutes of the second half , Kenrick scored his second goal following some skilful play by Hubert Heron , giving Wanderers a 3 – 1 lead which they retained until the end of the game . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 Match rules : 
 90 minutes normal time . 
 30 minutes extra @-@ time if scores are level , at captains ' discretion . 
 Replay if scores still level . 
 No substitutes . 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 As was the norm until 1882 , the winning team did not receive the trophy at the stadium on the day of the match , but later in the year at their annual dinner . Under the original rules of the competition , if a team won the Cup three times in succession , it would be retired and become their " absolute property " . Wanderers secretary C. W. Alcock , however , returned the Cup to The Football Association on the condition that the rule be removed and no other team permitted to win the Cup outright . The only other team to win the Cup in three successive seasons to date is Blackburn Rovers , who won it three times in a row in the 1880s . On this occasion the club was presented with a commemorative shield . 
 Three weeks after the Cup final , Wanderers played Scottish Cup winners Vale of Leven at Kennington Oval in a match for the unofficial " championship of Britain " . In front of a crowd of around 2 @,@ 000 spectators , Wanderers turned in what was regarded by the press as a sub @-@ standard performance and were defeated 3 – 1 . 
 = Italian cruiser Ettore Fieramosca = 
 Ettore Fieramosca was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) built in the 1880s . She was the fourth and final member of the Etna class , which included three sister ships of slightly smaller dimensions . Named for the condottiero of the same name , she was the only member of her class not named for a volcano . The ship was laid down in December 1885 , launched in August 1888 , and was commissioned in November 1889 . She was armed with a main battery of two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) and six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , and could steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Ettore Fieramosca had a relatively uneventful career ; her first decade in service was confined to the normal peacetime routine of training with the Italian fleet . She thereafter spent most of her career abroad , including a deployment to China to help suppress the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 and tours in African and North American waters in the mid @-@ 1900s . She was stricken from the naval register in July 1909 and sold for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Compared to her half @-@ sisters , Ettore Fieramosca was almost 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) longer at 290 feet ( 88 @.@ 4 m ) between perpendiculars , and 10 inches ( 0 @.@ 3 m ) wider with a beam of 43 feet 4 inches ( 13 @.@ 2 m ) . She had a mean draft of 18 feet 9 inches ( 5 @.@ 7 m ) and displaced 3 @,@ 538 long tons ( 3 @,@ 595 t ) . Her crew numbered 17 officers and 298 men . Designed to be a half @-@ knot faster than her sisters , the ship had two horizontal compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller , with steam provided by four double @-@ ended cylindrical boilers . Ettore Fieramosca was the fastest ship in her class and reached a maximum speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) from 7 @,@ 000 ihp ( 5 @,@ 200 kW ) during her sea trials . She had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the ships consisted of two Armstrong 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) , 30 @-@ caliber breech @-@ loading guns mounted in barbettes fore and aft . She was also equipped with six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , 32 @-@ caliber , breech @-@ loading guns that were carried in sponsons along the sides of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , Ettore Fieramosca was fitted with six 57 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and eight 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . Ettore Fieramosca was also armed with three 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . She was protected with an armored deck below the waterline with a maximum thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . The conning tower had .5 in ( 13 mm ) worth of armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ettore Fieramosca was built by the Regia Marina shipyard in Livorno . Her keel was laid down on 31 December 1885 and her completed hull was launched on 30 August 1888 . After fitting @-@ out work was finished , she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 16 November 1889 . Ettore Fieramosca and her sisters Vesuvio and Stromboli participated in the 1893 naval maneuvers as part of the Squadron of Maneuvers . <unk> and Ettore Fieramosca next participated in the 1896 naval maneuvers as part of the Maneuver Fleet . In 1897 , Enrico <unk> served aboard the ship . Ettore Fieramosca and Vesuvio were sent to China in 1900 to assist the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance in putting down the Boxer Rebellion there . 
 Ettore Fieramosca returned to Italy and made a cruise off East Africa in 1905 . She then sailed across the Atlantic and made a number of port visits in South America . The ship was then assigned to the American Squadron and refitted in Boston in November 1906 . In 1908 she visited Bridgeport in the United States for celebrations on Columbus Day . There , bluejackets from Ettore Fieramosca and the US battleship USS New Hampshire marched in a parade . Upon her return to Italy in 1909 Ettore Fieramosca was struck off the naval register on 15 July 1909 and sold for scrap . 
 = Mike Jackson ( right @-@ handed pitcher ) = 
 Michael Ray " Mike " Jackson ( born December 22 , 1964 ) is a former professional baseball player whose career spanned 19 seasons , 16 of which were spent in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . Jackson , a relief pitcher for the majority of his career , compiled a career earned run average ( ERA ) of 3 @.@ 42 , allowing 451 earned runs off of 983 hits , 127 home runs , and 464 walks while recording 1 @,@ 006 strikeouts over 1 @,@ 005 games pitched . 
 Standing 6 feet 1 inch ( 185 cm ) and weighing 185 pounds ( 84 kg ) , he made his professional debut in 1984 for the minor @-@ league Spartanburg Suns , an affiliate of the Philadelphia Phillies . After battling arm injuries in the early 1990s , Jackson reestablished himself as a top relief pitcher for the Reds in 1995 and went on to pitch in the 1997 World Series for the Indians . After one @-@ year stints with the Astros , Twins , and White Sox , Jackson retired from baseball in 2005 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jackson was born on December 22 , 1964 , in Houston , Texas . He attended high school at Forest Brook , and later attended college at Hill College in Texas . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies ( 1984 – 1987 ) = = = 
 Jackson entered the Major League Baseball Draft in 1983 , where he was selected by the Philadelphia Phillies in the 29th round . He did not sign with the Phillies , and reentered the draft in 1984 where was again drafted by the Phillies in the second round of the January Secondary amateur draft . Jackson signed a $ 60 @,@ 000 contract with the club on April 27 , 1984 . 
 Jackson began playing minor league baseball for the single @-@ A Spartanburg Suns , a minor league affiliate of the Phillies , in 1984 . Over 80 @.@ 2 innings pitched , Jackson recorded an earned run average ( ERA ) of 2 @.@ 68 , third best on his team . While batting , he recorded the best batting average and slugging percentage on the team , hitting .368 and slugging .526 . 
 Jackson continued his minor league career in 1985 , playing for the Peninsula Pilots of the Carolina League . Unlike the previous year where he started all 14 games he pitched , Jackson roughly split the 1985 season between starting games and serving as a reliever , starting 18 games but pitching in 31 . For the season , Jackson led the Pilots in losses , with nine , while allowing the most hits , runs , and earned runs among team members . 
 In 1986 , he played in three different leagues : Double @-@ A , Triple @-@ A , and in the Major Leagues . In Double @-@ A , Jackson played for the Reading Phillies , recording a 1 @.@ 66 ERA over 43 @.@ 1 innings pitched . He played Triple @-@ A ball for the Portland Beavers before making his major league debut for the Philadelphia Phillies on August 11 , 1986 . For his debut , Jackson pitched a perfect inning in relief of Dan <unk> in a game against the New York Mets . Jackson finished the 1986 Major League season with a 3 @.@ 38 ERA , allowing five runs off of 12 hits and becoming the seventh youngest player in the National League that year . 
 Jackson played almost the entire 1987 season for the Philadelphia Phillies , also making two starts for the Maine Guides . During the season , he compiled a 4 @.@ 20 ERA with three wins and 10 losses . After the season , on December 9 , 1987 , Jackson was traded , along with Glenn Wilson and Dave Brundage , to the Seattle Mariners . In exchange , the Phillies received pitcher Tim <unk> , who never made a professional appearance for the Phillies , and an outfielder , Phil Bradley . Author Rich Westcott would later call Jackson " a good one who got away " in reference to the Phillies trade . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners ( 1988 – 1991 ) = = = 
 From 1988 to 1991 , Jackson played for the Seattle Mariners . In 1988 and 1989 , Jackson finished in the top ten in the American League for most games pitched , with 62 and 65 , respectively , while recording a 2 @.@ 90 ERA over 198 @.@ 2 innings pitched for the two seasons . In 1991 , while facing the Kansas City Royals , he allowed Stu Cole 's only Major League hit while pitching in the bottom of the 13th inning . 
 After spending four seasons with the Mariners , Jackson was traded , along with Bill Swift and Dave Burba , to the San Francisco Giants . The Mariners , in return for Swift , Burba , and Jackson , acquired outfielder Kevin Mitchell and pitcher Mike Remlinger . This trade received criticism , being called " possibly the worst trade in [ Mariners ] history . " 
 = = = San Francisco Giants ( 1992 – 1994 ) = = = 
 Jackson , now with a salary of $ 1 @,@ 666 @,@ 667 , made his debut for the Giants on April 7 , 1992 , in a game against the Los Angeles Dodgers . Jackson allowed one walk in one inning pitched , while finishing the 1992 season with a 3 @.@ 73 ERA , 80 strikeouts , and one save . He led his team in games pitched , with 67 , the second highest total in his Giants career . 
 In 1993 he led the Major Leagues in games pitched , with 81 , while also leading the Majors in holds , with 33 . The 1994 MLB season was Shortened to 115 games for the Giants ; however , over 36 games pitched , Jackson led National League relievers in ERA ( 1 @.@ 49 ) , opponents average ( <unk> ) , and hits per 9 @.@ 0 innings pitched ( 4 @.@ 9 ) while finishing second in strikeouts per 9 @.@ 0 innings pitched ( 10 @.@ 84 ) . The already shortened season was again shortened for Jackson due to tendinitis in his right elbow . This led to two stints on the disabled list : one from June 17 until July 2 , and another from July 6 until the end of the season . On October 17 , 1994 , Jackson was granted free agency . 
 = = = Cincinnati Reds ( 1995 ) = = = 
 Jackson signed with the Cincinnati Reds on April 8 , 1995 . Again he struggled with injury , and was placed on the disabled list once for tendinitis in his right shoulder and once for a strained rib cage muscle . In his only year with the club , Jackson posted a team @-@ best 2 @.@ 39 ERA , while recording 41 strikeouts over 40 games . Jackson and the Reds made the playoffs , winning the National League Divisional Series but losing the National League Championship Series to the Atlanta Braves in four games . Jackson was granted free agency on November 3 , 1995 . 
 = = = Seattle Mariners ( 1996 ) = = = 
 In 1996 , Jackson signed a $ 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 contract , which included a $ 400 @,@ 000 earned bonus , with the Seattle Mariners . Jackson averaged nearly nine strikeouts per 9 @.@ 0 innings pitched ( 70 strikeouts / 72 @.@ 0 innings pitched ) . After the season , Baseball Digest called Jackson " a competent and underappreciated setup man " . The Mariners did not resign Jackson , on the grounds that Jackson 's new contract would be too expensive . 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 1997 – 1999 ) = = = 
 In 1997 , Jackson signed a three year , six million dollar contract with the Cleveland Indians . Jackson served as the primary setup man to closer José Mesa for the first half of the season , but took over the closer position while Mesa answered to charges of rape . Finishing the year with an 86 – 75 record , the Indians finished first in the American League Central and made the playoffs . After winning against the New York Yankees in the American League Divisional Series ( ALDS ) and the Baltimore Orioles in the American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) , the Indians played in the World Series against the Florida Marlins . In the World Series , Jackson recorded an ERA of 1 @.@ 93 over four games pitched , although the Indians lost the World Series , four games to three . 
 After the Indians traded Mesa to the Giants in July 1998 , Jackson became the Indians primary closer , recording 40 saves over 64 @.@ 0 innings pitched and leading the team in games finished , saves , and games pitched . The Indians again made the postseason , but were eliminated by the New York Yankees in the ALCS . 
 Jackson finished the 1999 season with Cleveland , ranking fourth in the American League in saves , with 39 . Jackson recorded his 100th career save against the Minnesota Twins on April 11 , and made his 800th career appearance on July 3 against the Kansas City Royals before he was granted free agency on October 28 of that year . 
 = = = 2000 onward = = = 
 Jackson signed with the Phillies in 2000 but did not pitch due to discomfort in his right shoulder the first time Jackson warmed up to pitch in a game for Philadelphia . On May 26 , Jackson had season @-@ ending arthroscopic surgery to repair a <unk> tear in his right shoulder . 
 Jackson signed with the Houston Astros the next year . The Astros , National League Central champions , earned a spot in the playoffs , but were eliminated by the Atlanta Braves in the Divisional series . After his season with the Astros , in 2002 , Jackson signed as a non @-@ roster invitee with the Minnesota Twins , helping them to finish 94 – 67 and leading them to a playoff appearance , where he recorded a 27 @.@ 00 ERA over three games pitched in the American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) . The Twins lost the ALCS in five games . Jackson was granted free agency later that year . 
 On January 29 , 2003 , Jackson signed for the Arizona Diamondbacks , but did not play a major league or minor league game for the franchise . The Diamondbacks released Jackson on March 29 , 2003 , before the season began . Jackson later stated : 
 I know it 's a numbers game and nothing I could control , but I was disappointed that I had to sit at home [ for the 2003 season ] . If teams want to base their decision about me on spring training as opposed to what I ’ ve accomplished over the years , then I don ’ t know what to say . 
 In his last professional season , Jackson signed as a non @-@ roster invitee with the Chicago White Sox . For the season , Jackson recorded an ERA of 5 @.@ 01 , allowing 31 runs over 46 @.@ 2 innings pitched . The White Sox released Jackson on September 2 , 2004 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Jackson is married to Tammy Jackson and has four children : Lindsey , Ryan , Amber and Michael . 
 = M @-@ 212 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 212 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The highway was designated in order to provide access from M @-@ 33 to both the small community of Aloha on the eastern shore of Mullett Lake , as well as to Aloha State Park , where the highway ends . M @-@ 212 is the shortest signed state highway in Michigan , beating out the second shortest , M @-@ 239 , which registers at 1 @.@ 136 miles ( 1 @.@ 828 km ) . M @-@ 212 even beats out Michigan 's shortest signed business route , BUS M @-@ 32 in Hillman , which comes in at 0 @.@ 738 miles ( 1 @.@ 188 km ) , only about six @-@ thousandths of a mile longer , or about 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) . 
 M @-@ 212 was assigned on December 29 , 1937 , from the intersection with Second Street to an intersection with US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) . In 1940 , the state of Michigan rerouted US 23 and replaced it with M @-@ 33 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 212 begins at an intersection with Second Street and the <unk> Trail north of the entrance to Aloha State Park in the community of Aloha . The community was originally a stop on the Detroit and Mackinac Railway that was named after a trip to Hawaii by the local sawmill owner . Progressing eastward , M @-@ 212 intersects with Third Street and Fourth Street , both of which are just separated by woodlands and residences . To the north of the highway , there is all woodlands and residences . To the south , there are just a few residences . After a while , there is a large clearing , which gives way to a farm to the north and more residences to the south . After the farm there is a large field and M @-@ 212 terminates at an intersection with M @-@ 33 in Aloha Township . 
 = = History = = 
 The Michigan State Highway Department assigned M @-@ 212 to its current alignment in Aloha Township from what was then US 23 on December 29 , 1937 . The route has remained mainly intact since its assignment . Originally , US 23 ran along the highway at the eastern terminus of M @-@ 212 , but the highway department realigned the highway onto an alignment along the shore of Lake Huron in 1940 ; that year , the highway department replaced the former US 23 alignment with the designation of M @-@ 33 , which has remained there since . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Aloha Township , Cheboygan County . 
 = Brunette Coleman = 
 Brunette Coleman was a pseudonym used by the poet and writer Philip Larkin . In 1943 , towards the end of his time as an undergraduate at St John 's College , Oxford , he wrote several works of fiction , verse and critical commentary under that name . The style he adopted parodies that of popular writers of contemporary girls ' school fiction , but the extent of the stories ' homoerotic content suggests they were written primarily for adult male titillation . 
 The Coleman oeuvre consists of a completed novella , Trouble at Willow Gables , set in a girls ' boarding school ; an incomplete sequel , Michaelmas Term at St Brides , set in a women 's college at Oxford ; seven short poems with a girls ' school ambience ; a fragment of pseudo @-@ autobiography ; and a critical essay purporting to be Coleman 's literary apologia . The manuscripts were stored in the Brynmor Jones Library at the University of Hull , where Larkin was chief librarian between 1955 and 1985 . Their existence was revealed to the public when Larkin 's Selected Letters and Andrew Motion 's biography were published in 1992 and 1993 respectively . The Coleman works themselves were finally published , with other Larkin drafts and <unk> , in 2002 . 
 At Oxford Larkin underwent a period of confused sexuality and limited literary output . The adoption of a female persona appeared to release him from his creative inhibitions , as in the three years following the Coleman phase he published under his own name two novels and his first poetry collection . Thereafter , although he gradually established his reputation as a poet , his career as a prose writer declined , and despite several attempts he completed no further fiction . Critical reaction to the publication of the Coleman material was divided between those who saw no value in these juvenilia , and those who considered that they cast useful light on the study of the mature Larkin . 
 = = Origins = = 
 In October 1940 Philip Larkin began studying English at St John 's College , Oxford . A prolific writer since childhood , his primary ambition as an undergraduate was to be a novelist rather than a poet . As well publishing articles and poems in Cherwell and Oxford Poetry , he wrote additional unpublished material that included fragments of semi @-@ autobiographical stories exploring homosexual relationships among groups of undergraduates . According to Larkin 's biographer Andrew Motion these writings , while of no literary value , give an indication of Larkin 's confused sexuality at that time , and his growing distaste for what he terms " this buggery business " . 
 From 1942 the character of much of Larkin 's private writing changed , as a result of his friendship with a fellow undergraduate from St John 's , Kingsley Amis , who arrived at the university that summer . Amis , a much more confident and assertive character than Larkin , disguised his serious concerns behind a facade of jokes and comic ironies . Larkin soon adopted that style as his own , joining with Amis in composing obscene rhymes and parodies of the Romantic poets they were required to study . In time they extended their efforts to soft @-@ porn fantasies in which , typically , " girls roll [ ed ] around together twanging elastic and straps " . After Amis 's departure for the army in early 1943 , Larkin made his first attempt at writing from a specifically feminine perspective in a story called " An Incident in the English Camp " , which he subtitled " A Thoroughly Unhealthy Story " . Lacking any salacious content despite its subtitle , the work is written in a pastiche of sentimental women 's magazine prose . It depicts an undergraduate girl 's parting from her soldier lover , and ends : " She walked in exaltation through the black streets , her heart glowing like a coal with deep love " . 
 = = Writing = = 
 From his general reading , Larkin had acquired a considerable knowledge of girls ' school fiction , and had formed definite views on the authors of such works : " stupid women without a grain of humour in their minds " , who lacked " erotic sensibility " and treated the lesbian perspective " too casually " . His intention to write in this genre is expressed in a letter to his friend Norman Iles , dated 5 June 1943 , just before Larkin sat his degree Finals : " I am spending my time doing an obscene Lesbian novel in the form of a school story " . The novel was Trouble at Willow Gables , a school adventure story in the manner of Dorita Fairlie Bruce or Dorothy Vicary , which Larkin completed at home while awaiting his Finals results . That was the prelude to a busy summer 's writing : " Leaving Oxford was like taking a cork out of a bottle . Writing flooded out of me " , Larkin later told his biographer . 
 Larkin 's letter to Iles does not mention a female pseudonym , although the idea of using one had been in his mind for months . The previous March he had begun writing the imagined autobiography of a supposed lady novelist , " Brunette Coleman " , adapting the name of a well @-@ known contemporary female jazz musician , Blanche Coleman . Larkin tentatively titled the autobiography " Ante Meridian " ; he soon abandoned it , but held on to the Coleman name . According to James Booth , who prepared the Coleman texts for publication in 2002 , the adoption of a female persona was in line with the pose of " girlish narcissism " that Larkin was affecting in the summer of 1943 : " I am dressed in red trousers , shirt and white pullover , and look very beautiful " . In his letters to Amis , Larkin maintained a straight @-@ faced pretence that Coleman was a real person . Thus in one letter he wrote " Brunette is very thrilled " with a poem written in her name , and in another , " Brunette can stand healthy criticism " . 
 As he waited for offers of employment through the summer and autumn of 1943 , Larkin added more works to the Coleman oeuvre . He began a sequel to Trouble at Willow Gables , set in a women 's college at Oxford and entitled Michaelmas Term at St Bride 's , but did not finish it : " All literary inspiration has deserted me " , he informed Amis on 13 August . Nevertheless , a week later he told Amis that Brunette was helping him to write a novel , provisionally entitled Jill , about " a young man who invents an imaginary sister , and falls in love with her " . With this letter Larkin sent a Coleman poem , " Bliss " , the first of seven written in the girls ' school idiom . As late as 19 October he reported to Amis that " Brunette is working on a little monograph about girls ' school stories " . This is a reference to the putative literary manifesto " What Are We Writing For " , which became the final Coleman work . Thereafter , Motion records , she disappeared , " to be mentioned only fleetingly in later accounts of his university life ... She ended up as an occasional comic reminder of lost youth " . 
 = = Works = = 
 The works which Larkin attributed to Brunette Coleman comprise a short piece of supposed autobiography , a complete short novel , an incomplete second novel , a collection of poems and a literary essay . 
 = = = " Ante Meridian " = = = 
 This fragment of spoof autobiography is distinct from the rest of the Coleman oeuvre in having no relation to girls ' school fiction . It records Brunette 's early life as the daughter of an eccentric priest , brought up in a tumbledown Cornish cliff @-@ top house . Apart from descriptions of the house and its contents ( some of which may be drawn from Larkin 's own childhood home in Coventry ) , much of the narrative is taken up with a comical description of an attempt to launch the local lifeboat . Larkin 's biographer Richard Bradford is struck by the distinctive tone in the fragment , different from anything else written under Coleman 's name . The text breaks off suddenly ; Motion surmises that Larkin abandoned it because he was eager to begin work on the first Coleman novel . Booth describes the prose as " a mix of Daphne du Maurier nostalgia and surreal farce " . 
 = = = Novel : Trouble at Willow Gables = = = 
 = = = = Synopsis = = = = 
 Marie Moore , a junior pupil at Willow Gables , receives a birthday present of £ 5 from an aunt . After the banknote is retained for safe keeping by the headmistress , Miss Holden , Marie slyly recovers it but is quickly found out , and is coerced by Miss Holden into giving the money to the school 's gymnasium fund . When later the banknote goes missing from the fund 's collection box , Marie is suspected , but protests her innocence despite a savage beating from Miss Holden with assistance from two burly school prefects . Only her friend Myfanwy believes her . Confined in the school 's punishment room , Marie manages to escape with the help of a domestic servant , and runs away . 
 Hilary Russell , a prefect and predatory lesbian , lusts after Mary Beech , the school 's cricket captain . On a night expedition in pursuit of Mary , Hilary catches Margaret <unk> , a junior , in the act of replacing the £ 5 note in Miss Holden 's room . Margaret says she originally took the money as a prank ; Hilary agrees not to report her to Miss Holden in return for sexual favours , to which Margaret reluctantly consents . The following morning , Hilary denounces her anyway ; Margaret responds by revealing Hilary 's sexual harassment but is not believed , and is taken to the punishment room where Marie 's absence is revealed . 
 Hilary is sent with a search party to find the missing girl . Meanwhile , Margaret makes a daring escape via the window , and rides off on the school horse . She finds Marie , who is miserable and frightened and wants to return to the school whatever the consequences . Margaret confesses that she borrowed the £ 5 to bet on a horse , and has won £ 100 . She means to leave Willow Gables for good , and apologises to Marie for the trouble she has caused her . This conversation is overheard by Hilary 's search party , and after a scuffle the truants are captured . On the way back to school they hear cries from the river ; it is Myfanwy , who has got into difficulties while swimming . Margaret frees herself from her captors ' clutches , dives in and saves her drowning friend . 
 Back at the school , Miss Holden overlooks the theft in view of Margaret 's heroism , although she confiscates the £ 100 winnings and donates the money to a new swimming pool fund . Marie is exonerated , and her £ 5 is returned . Mary Beech comes forward to corroborate Margaret 's accusations against Hilary , who is summarily expelled . Marie and Myfanwy enjoy an emotional reunion in the school sickroom , as life at the school returns to normal , with friendship and forgiveness all round . 
 = = = = Commentary = = = = 
 The typescript begins with a dedication page " To <unk> " ( Brunette Coleman 's imagined secretary ) . There follows an untitled poem which later appears , slightly altered , as " The School in August " in Sugar and Spice , the Coleman poetry collection . In the story the surnames of the headmistress and principal girls have been altered in ink throughout the typescript ; some of the original names belonged to Larkin 's real @-@ life acquaintances at Oxford . The presence of a publisher 's <unk> on the wallet containing the typescript indicates that the story may have been submitted by Larkin for publication . 
 Booth argues that , whatever Larkin 's motive in writing it , the story follows the parameters of schoolgirl fiction with some fidelity . Its main characters all have models within the genre ; Marie has much in common with Dorita Fairlie Bruce 's recurrent character " <unk> " , while Hilary is likewise based on Dorothy Vicary 's villainous " Una Vickers " in Niece of the Headmistress . The usual themes of friendships , rivalries and injustices are explored , and the ending in reconciliation and future hope is entirely true to type . Some scenes — the savage beating endured by Marie , the lingering descriptions of girls dressing and undressing , Hilary 's smouldering sexuality — may , Booth asserts , be written with " the lusts of the male heterosexual gaze " in mind but , he continues , the reader looking for explicit pornography will be disappointed . Bradford notes three prose styles combining in the narrative : " cautious indifference , archly overwritten symbolism ... and ... its writer 's involuntary feelings of sexual excitement " . Motion finds the tone of the prose frivolous on the surface , yet fundamentally cold and cruel : " Once its women have been arraigned for pleasure they are dismissed ; once they have been enjoyed they are treated with indifference " . 
 = = = Novel : Michaelmas Term at St Brides = = = 
 = = = = Synopsis = = = = 
 In this incomplete story Mary , Marie , Margaret and Myfanwy , friends from Willow Gables , are new undergraduates at St Bride 's College , Oxford . Mary is disconcerted to find that she is sharing her rooms with Hilary , her old adversary from the school . However , although Hilary still has a roving lesbian eye , she has lost most of her predatory instincts and the two become friends . Mary falls foul of Mary de Putron , the aggressive and authoritarian college games captain ; in the hockey trials de Putron makes Mary play out of her normal position , so that performs badly . Hilary subsequently avenges Mary 's humiliation by seducing de Putron 's boyfriend , a gauche Royal Air Force officer called Clive , whom she then dumps unceremoniously . 
 Of Myfanwy 's doings we learn relatively little . Margaret , still fascinated with horse @-@ racing , sets up her own bookmaking business . Marie discovers psychoanalysis and tries to cure her sister Philippa 's leather belt fetish . After various efforts prove unsuccessful , the sisters seek solace in alcohol . The later stages of the story introduce Larkin 's real @-@ life friend , Diana Gollancz , and recount her preparations for a fashionable party . In the final scenes the narrative becomes surreal , as on their alcoholic quest Marie and Philippa are confronted by the knowledge that they are characters in a story , while " real life " is going on in the next room . Marie takes a peep at real life , and decides she would rather stay in the story , which breaks off at this point with a few pencil notes indicating possible ways in which it might have continued . 
 = = = = Commentary = = = = 
 Only the first dozen pages of the manuscript are typed ; the remainder is handwritten . The surnames of the characters , which were changed in Trouble at Willow Gables , are unaltered . The script carries a dedication to " Miriam and Diana " : Miriam was an acquaintance with whom Larkin had discussed lesbian relationships , while Diana Gollancz ( " Diana G. " in the story ) , the daughter of the publisher Victor Gollancz , supplied him with many anecdotes from her schooldays . According to Motion , " St Bride 's " is recognisably based on Somerville College , Oxford . 
 In his analysis of the Coleman fiction , Stephen Cooper notes that , as with Willow Gables , the narrative voice switches from character to character so that different thoughts , attitudes and perspectives can be expressed . Cooper argues that as the narrative progresses , Larkin 's concerns ( in his Coleman voice ) move beyond sexual titillation ; he is no longer interested in describing lesbian encounters in voyeuristic detail . Hilary emerges as saviour rather than seducer , as a campaigner against male oppression , and as a figure who " deviates from the cultural norms [ yet ] can triumph over those who adopt conventional attitudes " . The scenes with sexual content or innuendo are largely confined to the earlier parts of the story . The later parts , which introduce the male characters " Clive " and Hilary 's other admirer , the contemptible " Creature " are , according to Motion , overlaid with male self @-@ disgust , a theme apparent in Larkin 's two published novels and in his later poetry . Motion suggests that the loss of erotic impetus , and Larkin 's apparent fading of interest , are the main reasons why the story peters out . 
 = = = Sugar and Spice : A Sheaf of Poems = = = 
 The typescript of Sugar and Spice consists of six poems , which in sequence are : " The False Friend " , " Bliss " , " Femmes <unk> " , " Ballade des Dames du Temps Jadis " , " Holidays " and " The School in August " . A seventh poem in pencil , " Fourth Form <unk> " has been loosely inserted into the typescript . " Femmes <unk> " , which was printed by John Fuller at the Sycamore Press , Oxford , in 1978 , is the only Coleman work published in Larkin 's lifetime . This poem , and " The School in August " , were included in Larkin 's Collected Poems published in 1988 ; " The School in August " was omitted from the 2003 revised edition of the collection although , according to Amis , it is the poem that best gives the flavour of the Coleman pastiche . " Bliss " was included in Larkin 's Selected Letters ( 1992 ) , as part of a letter to Amis . 
 Motion describes the Coleman poems as " a world of comfortless jealousies , breathless bike @-@ rides and deathless crushes " , mixing elements from writers and poets such as Angela Brazil , <unk> Crompton , John Betjeman and W.H. Auden . Larkin 's own attitude to these poems appears equivocal . He expresses pleasure that his friend Bruce Montgomery liked them , especially " The School in August " . However , to Amis he writes : " I think all wrong @-@ thinking people ought to like them . I used to write them whenever I 'd seen any particularly ripe schoolgirl ... Writing about grown women is less perverse and therefore less satisfying " . Booth finds the poems the most impressive of all the Coleman works , in their evidence of Larkin 's early ability to create striking and moving images from conventional school story clichés . They are an early demonstration of Larkin 's talent for finding depths in ordinariness , an ability that characterised many of his later poems . Booth draws specific attention to the elegiac quality of the final lines of " The School in August " : " And even swimming groups can fade / Games mistresses turn grey " . In Booth 's view the Coleman poems are among the best Larkin wrote in the 1940s , well beyond anything in his first published selection The North Ship ( 1945 ) . 
 = = = " What Are We Writing For " = = = 
 The typescript of the essay is headed by an epigraph , attributed to The Upbringing of Daughters by Catherine Durning <unk> . It reads : " The chief justification of reading books of any sort is the enlargement of experience that should accrue therefrom " . The text which follows is , in Motion 's words , " a homily on how and how not to write for children " . It argues for the need for well @-@ drawn heroines , and for unrepentant villainesses : " To be tenacious in evil is the duty of every villain ... Let her hate the heroine wholeheartedly , and refuse , yes , even on the last page , to take her hand in forgiveness " . The story should not be about schoolgirls , but about a school with girls in it . The school must be English ; foreign settings or trips abroad are disparaged . Larkin , in Coleman 's voice , pleads for " the Classic <unk> " : Unity of Place , which is the school and its inhabitants ; Unity of Time , normally the term in which the action occurs ; and Unity of Action , whereby every recorded incident contributes in some way to the telling of the story . The essay is laden with quotations from many writers of the genre , among them Joy Francis , Dorita Fairlie Bruce , Elsie J. Oxenham , Elinor Brent @-@ Dyer and Nancy Breary . 
 Motion argues that aside from the sometimes facetious tone , the opinions expressed by Larkin in his Coleman persona , particularly the mild xenophobia that enters the essay , foreshadow his own mature prejudices . Bradford believes that the essay reads as a serious , well @-@ researched paper on the genre of early twentieth century boarding school literature , worthy of inclusion in F. W. Bateson 's Essays and Criticism had that journal existed in 1943 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Shortly before his death in 1985 Larkin instructed his companion Monica Jones to burn his diaries . His instructions did not cover other writings , therefore the Coleman material remained in the archives of the Brynmor Jones Library at the University of Hull , where Larkin had worked as chief librarian since 1955 . The existence of these papers was first made public in 1992 , when Larkin 's Selected Letters was published . In the following year extensive extracts from the Coleman works appeared in Motion 's biography of Larkin , and became the subject of literary analysis by M. W. Rowe , in his 1999 essay " Unreal Girls : Lesbian Fantasy in Early Larkin " . Rowe saw Larkin 's adoption of a female persona as an outlet , compensating for his sexual awkwardness and lack of success with Oxford women . The punishment scenes , in which women punish women , were a means of subduing Larkin 's feelings of anger and frustration with his personal sexual failures . More significantly , according to Rowe , Larkin 's invention of Coleman was the catalyst which broke the writing block that had afflicted him for most of his Oxford years . The few months of her creative life in 1943 were , Larkin later acknowledged , the prelude to " the <unk> time of my life " ; in the three subsequent years his poetry collection The North Ship and his novels Jill and A Girl in Winter were published . 
 The complete Coleman material , in a collection edited by James Booth , was finally published in 2002 . Booth thought that the material would probably cause " a huge amount of confusion and smoke because the politically correct brigade will jump on it " . Anticipating the publication , Emma Hartley and Vanessa Thorpe in The Observer doubted the literary value of the works , citing Motion 's view that the stories were " little more than mild pornography " which the mature poet would never have wished to see published . On publication , Booth 's collection provoked a particularly hostile reaction from The Guardian 's critic Jenny <unk> , whose review dismissed the Coleman writings as " drivel " and " sad ramblings " , unworthy of publication or critical attention , and not even valid pornography : " Not a breast , not a clitoris is seen or mentioned . " Unlike serious pornographers , " Larkin sketches a mere outline and then walks away with a <unk> " . <unk> mocks Booth 's reverential descriptions of the typescripts " as though they were slivers of the True Cross " , and concludes : " Let this be a lesson , at least , to anyone who hasn 't got around to chucking out the crap they wrote in their teens and early twenties . " 
 Other critics were more positive . The New Statesman 's Robert Potts found the stories " entertaining and intriguing for readers familiar with their background and with the genre " , and for the most part charmingly innocent , " especially when compared with the reality of boarding @-@ school life " . The evocation of adolescent homoeroticism was deliberate and playful rather than pornographic . In a similar vein , Richard Canning in The Independent found the Willow Gables fiction vibrant , well @-@ constructed and entertaining , and praised Larkin 's " sly Sapphic spin " . In a more recent analysis Terry Castle , writing in the journal Daedalus , disagrees profoundly with the notion expressed by Adam Kirsch in The Times Literary Supplement , that the publication of the Coleman works was damaging to Larkin 's reputation . On the contrary , argues Castle , " the Brunette phase speaks volumes about the paradoxical process by which Philip Larkin became ' <unk> ' — modern English poetry 's reigning bard of erotic frustration and depressive ( if verse @-@ enabling ) self @-@ deprecation " . 
 = = Influences = = 
 The effects of Larkin 's Coleman phase are clearly evident in his first novel , Jill , in which he makes copious use of Willow Gables material . The novelist 's protagonist , a shy Oxford undergraduate called John Kemp , invents a schoolgirl sister called Jill , initially to impress his arrogant and dismissive room @-@ mate , Christopher Warner . Although Warner displays little interest , the non @-@ existent " Jill " comes to obsess Kemp . He imagines her at Willow Gables School , and writes long letters to her there . In the form of a short story he details her life at the school — now located in Derbyshire rather than Wiltshire as it had been in the Coleman works . The girls ' names are different , but their speech and attitudes closely reflect those of the earlier stories . A lesbian element is introduced through Jill 's fascination with the cool , detached senior girl Minerva Strachey . Kemp 's fantasy is disturbed when he meets a real @-@ life Jill , or Gillian ; his attempts to match his flight of fancy to reality end in embarrassment and humiliation . 
 Reviewing the published Coleman material , The Independent 's Richard Canning suggests that the influence of these early works is often discernible in Larkin 's poetry . Likewise Stephen Cooper , in his 2004 book Philip Larkin : Subversive Writer , argues that the stylistic and thematic influences of Trouble at Willow Gables and Michaelmas Term at St Brides anticipate the poetry 's recurrent concern with rebellion and conformity . Among examples , Cooper cites Marie 's refusal in Willow Gables to compromise with an unjust authority as reflecting the sentiments expressed in Larkin 's poem " Places , Loved Ones " ( 1954 ) . The reader , says Cooper , " is invited to identify with Marie 's plight in a manner that foreshadows the empathy felt for the rape victim in ' Deception ' " ( 1950 ) . When Marie , having escaped from the school , discovers that her freedom is an illusion , she longs to return to the familiar paths . These sentiments are present in poems such as " Poetry of Departures " ( 1954 ) , " Here " ( 1961 ) , and " High Windows " ( 1967 ) . 
 The spirit though not the name of Brunette was briefly revived during 1945 – 46 , when Larkin renewed his friendship with Amis . Among the stillborn projects planned by the pair was a story about two beautiful jazz @-@ loving lesbian undergraduates . According to Booth , the " feeble plot [ was ] merely the excuse for lesbian scenes ... far indeed from the originality of Larkin 's Brunette works of 1943 " . Jill , completed in 1944 , was finally published in October 1946 by The Fortune Press , whose eccentric proprietor Reginald Caton reportedly accepted the book without reading it . Larkin was disappointed by the book 's critical reception , but by this time his second novel , A Girl in Winter , had been accepted by Faber and Faber , and was duly published in February 1947 . It received better reviews than Jill , and achieved moderately good sales ; Booth calls it Larkin 's " most original and adventurous experiment in fiction " . It is written from the viewpoint of its main female character , Katherine , but otherwise is unrelated to the Coleman phase . Over the following years Larkin began but failed to finish several more novels , in the last of which , A New World Symphony , he returned once again to the device of a female protagonist @-@ narrator . The novel was finally abandoned around 1954 . 
 = Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Miami = 
 The Archdiocese of Miami is a particular church of the Roman Catholic Church in the United States of America . Its ecclesiastic territory includes Broward , Miami @-@ Dade , and Monroe counties in the U.S. state of Florida . The archdiocese is the metropolitan see for the Ecclesiastical Province of Miami , which covers Florida . The archbishop is Thomas Wenski . As archbishop , he also serves as pastor of the Cathedral of Saint Mary , the mother church of the archdiocese . Also serving are 428 priests , 160 permanent deacons , 50 religious brothers and 300 religious sisters who are members of various religious institutes . These priests , deacons and persons religious serve a Catholic population in South Florida of 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in 118 parishes and missions . 
 Because of the vast number of immigrants , Mass is offered in at least a dozen languages in parishes throughout the archdiocese . Educational institutions consist of two schools for the disabled , 60 elementary / middle schools , 13 high schools , two universities , and two seminaries . Radio , print , and television media outlets owned and operated by the archdiocese supplement teaching , communication , and ministries . 
 Several social service organizations are operated by the archdiocese which include two hospitals , nine health care centers , three homes for the aged , and two cemeteries . Charities include homeless shelters , legal services for the poor , an HIV / AIDS ministry , and the Missionaries of Charity and Society of Saint Vincent de Paul ministries to the poor . Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of Miami is a separate non @-@ profit organization operated by the archdiocese . It claims to be the largest non @-@ governmental provider of social services to the needy in South Florida . 
 = = History = = 
 Before 1952 , the entire State of Florida was under the jurisdiction of one diocese , the Roman Catholic Diocese of Saint Augustine . In the 1950s and early 1960s , Saint Augustine bishop Joseph Patrick Hurley purchased land throughout South Florida in anticipation of a future population boom . Today , these once remote areas are thriving cities . Dozens of Catholic churches , schools and cemeteries built on the land purchased by Hurley dot these areas . 
 The Diocese of Miami was created on October 7 , 1958 , with Coleman Carroll installed as bishop . The diocese included the 16 southern counties in Florida , with a Catholic population of 200 @,@ 000 . It encompassed one half of the area of the state . Less than a year after the creation of the diocese , Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba . This set off a mass exodus of Cuban exiles to South Florida , increasing church membership in the region . The Catholic Welfare Bureau , created by Carroll , played a significant part in helping these waves of Cuban immigrants . Between 1960 and 1962 , 14 @,@ 000 Cuban children were sent to the United States . Operation Pedro Pan , created by Monsignor Bryan O. Walsh , placed them with friends , relatives or the Catholic Welfare Bureau . In 1996 , the Catholic Welfare Bureau changed its name to Catholic Charities . Today it claims to be the largest non @-@ governmental provider of social services in South Florida . It served over 17 @,@ 000 families in the tri @-@ county area of Broward , Dade and Monroe counties in 2006 . 
 Due to an increased population , the diocese was divided in 1968 . Eight counties became part of the Diocese of St. Petersburg and the new Diocese of Orlando . Miami was made an archdiocese by Pope Paul VI , and was named Metropolitan See for all of Florida . Carroll became an archbishop on March 2 , 1968 . He participated in the church reforms of Vatican II as one of the Council Fathers . During the civil rights struggles of the 60 's , Carroll was influential in stemming threatened racial riots in Miami and in desegregating Catholic schools roughly 10 years before the rest of the State . He became a founder of the Community Relations Board which worked to " quell waves of misunderstanding , discrimination and discontent which often threatened to flood South Florida 's multi @-@ ethnic community . " 
 Upon the death of Carroll on July 26 , 1977 , Bishop Edward Anthony McCarthy was appointed as Miami 's archbishop . McCarthy oversaw the construction of the Pastoral Center for the archdiocese and restructured most senior operational divisions . He established the Office of Lay <unk> Ministry , the Office of Evangelization and the Permanent <unk> program . In 1980 , he offered support and assistance during the Mariel Boat Lift . The following year , he supported the rights of Haitian immigrants who were detained under the Wet Foot , Dry Foot policy . Responding to the needs of this new immigration , he opened the Pierre Toussaint Haitian Catholic Center . McCarthy retired in 1994 at the required age of 75 . 
 On November 3 , 1994 , Pope John Paul II appointed John C. Favalora as the third archbishop of Miami . During his tenure , he built two new high schools and nine grade schools . Favalora also initiated the Vision 2000 campaign , a five @-@ year fundraising campaign that created an endowment fund to support Catholic education and outreach institutions in the archdiocese . The effort raised $ 90 million ( USD ) . On July 11 , 2003 , Pope John Paul II appointed Miami auxiliary bishop Thomas Gerard Wenski to lead the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orlando . With substantial immigration of predominantly Catholic South and Central Americans to the South Florida area , the Catholic population there is 25 % of the total population . Waves of immigrants from other parts of the world , including Asian and African countries , have led to Mass being celebrated in over a dozen different languages in parishes throughout the archdiocese . 
 In 2009 , Father Fernando <unk> , of Our Lady of Lourdes , Kendall , was named the next bishop of Pueblo . He is the 11th priest from the archdiocese to be so designated since its creation in 1958 . 
 On April 20 , 2010 , Pope Benedict XVI accepted the resignation of Archbishop John Favalora eight months early and appointed Bishop Thomas Wenski of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orlando as his successor . On June 1 , 2010 , Archbishop Wenski was installed as the fourth archbishop of the Archdiocese of Miami at the Cathedral of Saint Mary . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Schools = = = 
 As of 2008 , the Archdiocese of Miami provides a parochial school education to almost 40 @,@ 000 students in 60 elementary / middle schools , 13 high schools and two non @-@ residential schools for the disabled located throughout Broward , Miami @-@ Dade and Monroe counties . 
 The high schools supported by the archdiocese are : 
 The archdiocese offers religious education classes in all of its 111 parishes for children who attend public and other non @-@ religious schools . According to the 2007 Official Catholic Directory , there were 95 @,@ 837 students enrolled in these classes . This same source lists as teachers <unk> laity , 58 religious sisters , and 43 priests and religious brothers . Religious education classes are also offered to adults throughout the archdiocese . In 1997 , Archbishop Favalora adopted a policy requiring all volunteers , employees , teachers and priests to be fingerprinted and have a background check before they could work with children . Several years later , this policy was enshrined and adopted by all U.S. Bishops in the Charter for Protection of Young People . 
 = = = Universities = = = 
 The Archdiocese of Miami oversees and administers the Catholic university of St. Thomas University in Miami . St. Thomas University offers Bachelor of Arts , Master of Arts , Master 's degree , Master of Business Administration , <unk> , Doctor of Education , and Doctor of Philosophy. programs through its college and various schools . It offers several joint degree programs and an accelerated B.A. / J.D. as well . The School of Law at St. Thomas was fully accredited by the American Bar Association in February 1995 , and offers the Juris Doctor degree ( J.D. ) as well as the Masters of Law ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Seminaries = = = 
 St. John Vianney College Seminary and St. Vincent de Paul Regional Seminary serve priestly formation needs . Candidates to the Catholic priesthood must have a college degree plus another four to five years of seminary formation . This formation includes not only academic classes but also human , spiritual and pastoral education . St. John Vianney Seminary , which is located in Miami , states as its fundamental purpose " to provide an undergraduate education for students whose stated objective is to serve the Catholic Church as priests " , but it also offers education to lay ministers and to " others who may be enriched by its services " . St. Vincent de Paul Regional Seminary , located in Boynton Beach , offers a master 's degree in Theology and Theological Studies and a First Professional Degree in Divinity and Ministry . Priests serving in the Archdiocese of Miami are required to speak both Spanish and English , and these two seminaries are the only bilingual seminaries in the United States . As of August 2007 , there are 126 seminarians in priestly formation at both seminaries . 
 = = Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of Miami = = 
 Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of Miami is a separate non @-@ profit organization operated by the Archdiocese of Miami . It is part of a national network of organizations that are operated in each U.S. diocese . This organization claims to be the largest nongovernmental provider of services to the needy in South Florida . It began in 1931 during the Great Depression with four Miami @-@ area pastors and lay members of the Society of Saint Vincent de Paul . It employs over 600 staff and operates on an annual budget of over $ 38 million . In 2006 , it served over 17 @,@ 000 families in the tri @-@ county area of Broward , Miami @-@ Dade and Monroe Counties . Some of these services include transitional housing , homeless shelters , elderly day care , child day care , addiction recovery , HIV / AIDS programs , family and school counseling , meals for the elderly and various immigrant and refugee help programs among others . 
 = = Catholic Health Services = = 
 Archdiocese of Miami Catholic Health Services operates 26 facilities in Broward and Miami @-@ Dade Counties . According to the 2007 Archdiocese of Miami Official Catholic Directory , the two Catholic hospitals , Mercy Hospital in Miami and Holy Cross Hospital in Ft . Lauderdale , served 1 @,@ 278 @,@ 516 people ; three CHS health care centers served 7 @,@ 896 ; three homes for the aged assisted 2 @,@ 578 senior citizens ; two residential care centers for children served 376 ; seven day @-@ care centers served 1 @,@ 885 ; two specialized homes assisted 383 ; twelve special centers for social services served 81 @,@ 320 ; and eleven other institutions served 1 @,@ 432 people in 2007 . Catholic Hospice Care is a partnership between the Archdiocese of Miami and Mercy Hospital . It provides end of life care to terminally ill patients and their families throughout Miami @-@ Dade and Monroe counties . Catholic Health Services also operates two Catholic cemeteries , Our Lady Queen of Heaven in Broward County and Our Lady of Mercy in Miami @-@ Dade . 
 = = Outreach = = 
 = = = Lay movements and ministries = = = 
 Over 60 movements and ministries are run by laity ( those who are not ordained priests or religious brothers and sisters ) , " There may be hundreds more ... " according to Miami auxiliary bishop Felipe Estevez . There are 17 categories of ministries listed under the archdiocese Office of Lay <unk> are : Airport Ministry , Apostleship of the Sea , Ascending Life , Campus ministry , Charismatic Renewal , Courage Ministry ( " Ministry to Persons With Same @-@ Sex Attraction " ) , Council of Catholic Women , <unk> , Family Life , Knights of Columbus , Lay ministry , Lay movements , Marian movements , Missions , Prison ministry , Respect Life , and Youth Ministries . Some other lay movements and ministries include various prayer and support groups , an Emmaus , and groups which provide worship , social and religious formation for men , women and teenagers . Some parishes provide groups for single Catholics , divorced or separated people , drug and alcohol addiction help , learning Spanish or English as a second language and parish outreach services to the poor and needy through parish pantries and need @-@ specific donor drives . 
 The archdiocese also supports , in conjunction with other Christian communities , two pro @-@ life crisis pregnancy centers which provide aid to pregnant women and encourage them not to have abortions . A post @-@ abortion counseling program called Project Rachel is also provided . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Morning Star Renewal Center is a retreat house operated by lay people with the support of the archdiocese . The center provides facilities for group retreats and offers spiritual formation activities year round . Facilities include a 60 guest capacity , a conference room , a chapel , and overnight and cafeteria accommodations . 
 = = = Charities = = = 
 Several Charities are run by the archdiocese and staffed by both employees and volunteers . These include Camillus House , Catholic Legal Services , an HIV / AIDS shelter , the Missionaries of Charity , Society of Saint Vincent de Paul , and social advocacy groups . 
 = = Media = = 
 The archdiocese uses several types of media to fulfill its evangelization efforts : 
 = = = Radio ministry = = = 
 Radio Paz is a Spanish @-@ language radio ministry of the Archdiocese of Miami founded in December 1990 . In South Florida , it is broadcast on <unk> 830 AM . Radio Peace — the sister station of Radio Paz — is an English @-@ language radio ministry founded in January 1993 and broadcast on <unk> 1040 AM . These stations also broadcast over the Internet at <unk> The stations were founded by Archdiocese of Miami priest Fr . Federico <unk> , who envisioned a radio station " to respond to the call of Pope John Paul II to evangelize through the media . " 
 = = = Newspaper = = = 
 A localized version of the Florida Catholic newspaper is published 26 times a year . Each issue contains a message from the Archbishop , spiritual reflections on the scripture readings for the week , news reporting on various events happening around the archdiocese and the world , and a digest of upcoming events featured around the archdiocese among other features . The newspaper is also published online . A series produced for the Miami edition entitled " Building the City of God " which profiles the personal side of priests won a Communicator Award of Distinction for print media " Marketing / Promotion / Campaign " . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 One part of Communications office of the archdiocese is television and video production . English and Spanish masses air Sundays on local television stations . Additionally , the television center produces content for the internet and video . One video , entitled " Walking in the Light of Christ , " received a <unk> Award of Excellence from the Association of Marketing and Communication Professionals . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 = = = Archbishops = = = 
 Bishop ( later Archbishop ) Coleman Carroll ( 1958 – 1977 ) 
 Archbishop Edward Anthony McCarthy ( 1977 – 1994 ) 
 Archbishop John Favalora ( 1994 – 2010 ) 
 Archbishop Thomas Wenski ( since 2010 ) 
 = = = Auxiliary bishops = = = 
 Bishop Norbert Dorsey ( 1986 – 1990 ) ; appointed Bishop of Orlando 
 Bishop Felipe <unk> ( 2004 @-@ 2011 ) ; appointed Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of St. Augustine , Florida , on Wednesday , April 27 , 2011 
 Bishop Gilberto Fernandez ( 1997 @-@ 2002 ) ; resigned 
 Bishop John Fitzpatrick ( 1968 – 1971 ) ; appointed Bishop of Brownsville 
 Bishop René <unk> ( 1968 – 1975 ) ; appointed Bishop of Pensacola @-@ Tallahassee 
 Bishop John Nevins ( 1979 – 1984 ) ; appointed Bishop of Venice , Florida 
 Bishop John Noonan ( 2005 @-@ 2010 ) ; appointed Bishop of Orlando 
 Bishop Agustin Roman ( 1979 @-@ 2013 ) ; retired 
 Bishop Thomas Wenski ( 1997 – 2003 ) ; appointed Coadjutor Bishop of Orlando ; served as Bishop of Orlando before returning in 2010 as Archbishop of Miami 
 Bishop Peter <unk> ( 2014 – present ) 
 = = = Priests of the diocese who became bishops = = = 
 Ambrose De Paoli appointed nuncio , and titular Archbishop , in 1983 
 Fernando <unk> appointed Bishop of Pueblo in 2009 
 Robert Nugent Lynch appointed Bishop of Saint Petersburg , Florida in 1996 
 = Thomas F. Bayard = 
 Thomas Francis Bayard ( October 29 , 1828 – September 28 , 1898 ) was an American lawyer , politician , and diplomat from Wilmington , Delaware . A Democrat , he served three terms as United States Senator from Delaware and made three unsuccessful bids for the Democratic nomination for President of the United States . In 1885 , President Grover Cleveland appointed him Secretary of State . After four years in private life , he returned to the diplomatic arena as Ambassador to the United Kingdom . 
 Born in Delaware to a prominent family , Bayard learned politics from his father , James A. Bayard , Jr . , who also served in the Senate . In 1869 , the Delaware legislature elected Bayard to the Senate upon his father 's retirement . A Peace Democrat during the Civil War , Bayard spent his early years in the Senate in opposition to Republican policies , especially the Reconstruction of the defeated Confederacy . His conservatism extended to financial matters , as he became known as a staunch supporter of the gold standard and an opponent of greenbacks and silver coinage , which he believed would cause inflation . Bayard 's conservative politics made him popular in the South and with Eastern financial interests , but never popular enough to obtain the Democratic nomination for President , which he attempted to win in 1876 , 1880 , and 1884 . 
 In 1885 , President Cleveland appointed Bayard Secretary of State . Bayard worked with Cleveland to promote American trade in the Pacific while avoiding the acquisition of colonies at a time when many Americans clamored for them . He sought increased cooperation with Great Britain , working to resolve disputes over fishing and seal @-@ hunting rights in the American @-@ Canadian border waters . As ambassador , Bayard continued to strive for Anglo @-@ American friendship . This brought him into conflict with his successor at the State Department , Richard Olney , when Olney and Cleveland demanded more aggressive diplomatic overtures than Bayard wished in the Venezuela Crisis of 1895 . His term at the American embassy ended in 1897 , and he died the following year . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Thomas F. Bayard was born in Wilmington , Delaware in 1828 , the second son of James A. Bayard , Jr. and Anne née Francis . The Bayard family was prominent in Delaware : Bayard 's father would be elected to the United States Senate in 1851 . Among Thomas Bayard 's ancestors were his grandfather , James A. Bayard , also a Senator ; and great @-@ grandfather , Richard Bassett , who served as Senator from , and Governor of , Delaware . Several other relatives served in high office , including Bayard 's uncle , Richard H. Bayard , another Delaware Senator , and his great @-@ great @-@ uncle , Nicholas Bayard , who was Mayor of New York City . On his mother 's side , Bayard descended from Philadelphia lawyer and financier Tench Francis , Jr . 
 Thomas Bayard was educated in private academies in Wilmington and , after his father moved to New York City for business reasons , in Flushing , New York . James Bayard returned to Delaware in 1843 , but Thomas remained in New York , working as a clerk in the mercantile firm of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , August Schermerhorn . In 1846 , his father secured him a job in a banking firm in Philadelphia , and Bayard worked there for the next two years . Bayard was unsatisfied with his progress at the firm , and returned to Wilmington to read law at his father 's office . 
 Bayard was admitted to the bar in 1851 , the year his father was elected to the United States Senate . Thomas took on greater responsibilities in the family law office , and rose quickly in the legal profession . In 1853 , after the election of a Democratic president , Franklin Pierce , Thomas Bayard was appointed United States Attorney for Delaware . He spent only a year in the position before moving to Philadelphia to open a practice with his friend William Shippen , a partnership that lasted until Shippen 's death in 1858 . While in Philadelphia , Bayard met Louise Lee , whom he married in October 1856 . The marriage produced twelve children . 
 = = Civil War and Reconstruction = = 
 Thomas Bayard 's return to Wilmington in 1858 brought greater involvement in the political scene . James Bayard was a delegate to the 1860 Democratic National Convention , and Thomas attended with him . The elder Bayard supported Robert M. T. Hunter of Virginia for the nomination . When the convention deadlocked and the Southern Democrats split from the main party , James Bayard adhered to the regular Democrats , but told Thomas that he thought the nominee , Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois , was untrustworthy . The subsequent election of Republican Abraham Lincoln and secession of the seven states of the Deep South led both Bayards to fear for the future of the Union , and the elder Bayard to propose a convention of all the states to resolve their differences . In the meantime , as four more Southern states seceded , James Bayard encouraged his son to help organize an independent militia unit , the Delaware Guard ; Thomas Bayard was commissioned as its First Lieutenant . 
 In 1860 , Delaware occupied an unusual position in the free state @-@ slave state divide ; nominally a slave state , Delaware 's slave population had been in steep decline for decades and represented just 1 @.@ 6 % of the state 's people . Opinion on secession was mixed in Delaware , but the Bayards were Peace Democrats and leaned to the Southern perspective . They blamed the war on abolitionist Republicans and believed that secession , while unwise , should not be suppressed with military force . Thomas Bayard spoke at a public meeting in Dover in June 1861 , saying that " with this secession , or revolution , or rebellion , or by whatever name it may be called , the State of Delaware has naught to do . " Even after the Civil War 's first battles erupted in Virginia , Bayard continued to hope for peace . By early 1862 , the Delaware Guard came under suspicion of Southern sympathies , and Major General Henry du Pont , commander of the state militia , ordered it disarmed . When Bayard refused to comply , he was briefly arrested before being released on parole . 
 Bayard 's father was reelected to the Senate in 1862 , but resigned shortly thereafter in protest of the new oath of office , which demanded that Senators swear they had never borne arms against the United States nor given aid and encouragement to its enemies . Bayard and his father continued in private law practice through the war . Both were pleased with the Democrats ' peace platform in 1864 , but disappointed in the choice of nominee , Major General George B. McClellan , a War Democrat . In 1866 , Thomas Bayard successfully represented four South Carolinians in habeas corpus cases against the military . The following year , Senator George R. Riddle died and the legislature elected James Bayard to fill the remainder of the term , which ended in 1869 . 
 Thomas Bayard became more politically active , speaking at a public meeting in September 1867 against constitutional proposals for ending racial discrimination in voting rights . The following year , he condemned the impeachment proceedings against President Andrew Johnson , who had succeeded to the presidency in 1865 after Lincoln 's assassination and had threatened the Republican Congress 's plans for Reconstruction of the Southern states . Both Bayards attended the 1868 Democratic National Convention and , although they were unenthusiastic about the nominee , Horatio Seymour , supported the unsuccessful ticket that fall . 
 = = United States Senator = = 
 = = = Reaction to Reconstruction = = = 
 James Bayard retired from the Senate when his term ended in 1869 , and the legislature elected his son to the seat with little opposition . Thomas Bayard entered a Senate in which his fellow Democrats were greatly outnumbered by Republicans ; the new president , Ulysses S. Grant , was also a Republican . In the Reconstruction Era , Bayard took up the cause of the defeated South , speaking against the continued military rule of the conquered states and advocating a return to civilian ( and conservative ) government . He protested the requirement that readmitted Southern states ratify the Fourteenth Amendment , which guaranteed equal protection of the laws to all Americans . Bayard also inveighed against the continued presence of federal troops in the South . He spoke against each of the three Enforcement Acts , which increased the federal government 's power to protect black Southerners ' civil and political rights in the face of rising violence by the Ku Klux Klan and other groups . 
 Although his protests were to little effect , Bayard continued to voice opposition to the majority party 's plans for reconstructing the South . In 1871 , he was named to a joint committee sent by Congress to investigate conditions in the South . The committee , like the Congress , had a Republican majority , and their report detailed many of the Klan 's outrages against the newly freed slaves . Bayard dissented , questioning the veracity of the witnesses ' testimony and stating that there were few incidents of lawlessness and that the South was generally at peace . The majority disagreed , and their findings were the basis for the Third Enforcement Act later that year . 
 As more Democrats returned to the Senate , and as Republican goals shifted elsewhere , Bayard 's ideas gained some traction , but were still largely in vain . In 1873 , the Senate passed a resolution he introduced that demanded that Grant disclose how much government money was being expended in enforcing Reconstruction laws in the South , and to whom it was paid ; the President ignored the resolution . The next year , Bayard opposed a Republican bill authorizing federal supervision of the upcoming election in Louisiana , attacking the Republican administration there as corrupt ; he was unsuccessful , and the election was supervised by federal troops . He spoke forcefully against the proposed Civil Rights Act of 1875 , which was to be the last such act for nearly a century . Again , he was unsuccessful and the bill , which guaranteed equal treatment in public accommodations regardless of race , passed Congress and became law . Although ultimately unsuccessful , Bayard 's actions endeared him to his conservative constituents , and he was elected to another six @-@ year term in 1874 . 
 = = = Specie resumption = = = 
 From the start of his congressional career , Bayard was an advocate of hard money , i.e. , a dollar backed by gold . During the Civil War , Congress had authorized a new form of currency , redeemable not in specie ( gold or silver coin ) but in 6 % government bonds . These United States Notes , popularly known as " greenbacks , " had helped to finance the war when the government 's gold supply did not keep pace with the expanding costs of maintaining the armies . When the crisis had passed , many in Congress ( including Bayard ) wanted to return the nation 's currency to a gold standard as soon as possible . The process of retiring the greenbacks had already begun when Bayard was elected , but stopped when many congressmen thought the fiscal contraction too severe , and likely to be harmful to the economy . In 1869 , Congress passed the Public Credit Act of 1869 , which required that the government pay its bond holders in gold , not greenbacks . Bayard thought the bill not strong enough , since it did not require removing greenbacks from circulation , and he voted against it . 
 In 1873 , a business depression ( known as the Panic of 1873 ) , increased the pressure for retaining greenbacks , as some in Congress believed that inflating the currency would ease the economic problems . Grant 's Treasury Secretary , William Adams Richardson , reissued $ 26 million of the redeemed greenbacks , reversing the administration 's previous policy of removing them from circulation . This ignited a four @-@ month debate in the Senate over whether and when the government should return to backing all of its currency with gold — including the remaining greenbacks . The majority , including Bayard , favored resumption , but in wording the resolution that passed the Senate , Republican John Sherman of Ohio left vague the exact timing ; Bayard feared it would be put off indefinitely . The Sherman bill also proposed to remove greenbacks from circulation by exchanging them for bonds payable in gold ; in response , Bayard proposed an amendment limiting the amount of debt the government could incur . When the amendment was rejected , Bayard voted against the bill ( known as the Specie Payment Resumption Act , ) believing that it was likely to cause inflation . 
 = = = Election of 1876 = = = 
 Bayard 's popularity with his party had grown during his time in the Senate , and by 1875 he was seen as a contender for the presidency . His advocacy of hard money had won him friends in some of the Northern cities , and his stance against Reconstruction made him popular throughout the South . Competing for those same factions of the Democratic party was New York governor Samuel J. Tilden , who had gained national fame for fighting the political corruption of William M. Tweed 's Tammany Hall machine in New York City . Other contenders included Governor Thomas A. Hendricks of Indiana and Major General Winfield Scott Hancock . Tilden 's wealth and national renown helped gather delegates to his cause , and in June 1876 , he entered the convention with 404 ½ votes ; Bayard placed fifth with 33 . Tilden was nominated on the second ballot . 
 Displeased with the result , Bayard nonetheless supported the Democratic nominee against Governor Rutherford B. Hayes of Ohio , the Republican candidate , speaking to large crowds in cities across the North and Midwest . On election day , the vote was close , but appeared to favor a Tilden victory . Three days later , Tilden looked to have won 184 electoral votes , one short of a majority , while Hayes appeared to have 166 votes , with the votes of Florida , Louisiana , and South Carolina still in doubt . Each party sent their people to observe the vote in the disputed states . Abram Hewitt , chairman of the Democratic National Committee , asked Bayard to travel to Louisiana along with several others , but Bayard refused to go . 
 The counts of the disputed ballots were inconclusive , with each state producing two sets of returns , one signed by Democratic officials , the other by Republicans , each claiming victory for their man . There was debate about which person or house of Congress was authorized to decide between the competing slates of electors , with the Republican Senate and the Democratic House each claiming priority . By January 1877 , with the question still unresolved , Congress and President Grant agreed to submit the matter to a bipartisan Electoral Commission , which would be authorized to determine the fate of the disputed electoral votes . Bayard supported the idea , and visited Tilden in New York to convince him that it was the only alternative to stalemate and possible renewed civil war . The bill passed , with Bayard 's vote , and provided for a commission of five representatives , five senators , and five Supreme Court justices . To ensure partisan balance , there would be seven Democrats and seven Republicans ; the fifteenth member was to be a Supreme Court justice chosen by the other four on the commission ( themselves two Republicans and two Democrats ) . Justice David Davis , an independent respected by both parties , was expected to be their choice . Bayard was among the seven Democrats chosen . 
 Davis upset the careful planning by accepting election to the Senate by the state of Illinois and refusing to serve on the commission . The remaining Supreme Court justices were all Republicans and , with the addition of Justice Joseph P. Bradley to the place intended for Davis , the commission had an 8 @-@ 7 Republican majority . The commission met and considered all of the disputed ballots , awarding each to Hayes by an 8 @-@ 7 party @-@ line vote . Bayard and his fellow Democrats were outraged , and the Democratic majority in the House threatened to filibuster to prevent the results from being accepted . As the March 4 inauguration day approached , leaders of both parties met at Wormley 's Hotel in Washington to negotiate a compromise . Republicans promised that , in exchange for Democratic acquiescence in the Committee 's decision , Hayes would order federal troops to withdraw from the South and accept the election of Democratic governments in the remaining " unredeemed " states there . The Democrats agreed and the filibuster ended . Tilden later blamed Bayard , among others , for his role in creating the Electoral Commission , but Bayard defended his position , believing that the only alternative to the result was civil war . 
 = = = Gold standard = = = 
 In 1873 , Congress had passed a Coinage Act that regulated which coins were legal tender . The list of legal coins duplicated that of the previous coinage act , leaving off only the silver dollar and three smaller coins . The rationale in the Treasury report accompanying the draft bill was that to mint a gold dollar and a silver dollar with different intrinsic values was problematic ; as the silver dollar did not circulate and the gold did , it made sense to drop the unused coin . The bill passed easily , with Bayard 's support , but quickly thereafter became unpopular . Opponents of the bill would later call this omission the " Crime of ' 73 , " and would mean it literally , circulating tales of bribery of Congressmen by foreign agents . 
 Over the next few years , pressure to reintroduce silver coinage grew , and cut across party lines . In 1877 , Republican Senator Stanley Matthews of Ohio introduced a resolution to pay the national debt in silver instead of gold . Bayard joined several Republicans in speaking and voting against the measure , calling it " folly , " but it passed the Senate 42 to 20 . Meanwhile , Democrat Richard P. Bland of Missouri furthered the silver cause from the House , proposing a free silver bill that would require the United States buy as much silver as miners could sell the government and strike it into coins , a system that would increase the money supply and aid debtors . In short , silver miners would sell the government metal worth fifty to seventy cents , and receive back a silver dollar . William B. Allison , a pro @-@ silver Republican from Iowa , offered an amendment in the Senate requiring the purchase of two to four million dollars per month of silver , but not allowing private deposit of silver at the mints . Thus , the seignorage , or difference between the face value of the coin and the worth of the metal contained within it accrued to the government 's credit , not private citizens . Bayard saw the whole effort as the path to inflation and economic ruin . Again , he spoke against the bill , but like the Matthews resolution , the Bland – Allison Act passed both houses of Congress in 1878 . President Hayes shared Bayard 's fear of inflation , and vetoed the bill , but Congress mustered the two @-@ thirds vote necessary to overturn the veto , and it became law . 
 = = = Clashes with Hayes = = = 
 The elections of 1878 returned control of both houses of Congress to the Democrats for the first time since before the Civil War . The new Democratic majority passed an army appropriation bill in 1879 with a rider that repealed the Enforcement Acts . Those Acts , passed during Reconstruction , made it a crime to prevent someone from voting because of his race and allowed the use of federal troops to supervise elections . Bayard supported the effort , which passed both houses and sent to the President . Hayes was determined to preserve the law to protect black voters , and he vetoed the appropriation . Bayard spoke in favor of the bill , believing the time had come to end the military 's involvement in Southern politics . The Democrats did not have enough votes to override the veto , but they passed a new bill with the same rider . Hayes vetoed this as well , and the process was repeated three times more . Finally , Hayes signed an appropriation without the rider , but Congress refused to pass another bill to fund federal marshals , who were vital to the enforcement of the Force Acts . The election laws remained in effect , but the funds to enforce them were cut off . 
 Bayard also clashed with Hayes on the issue of Chinese immigration . In 1868 , the Senate had ratified the Burlingame Treaty with China , allowing an unrestricted flow of Chinese immigrants into the country . As the economy soured after the Panic of 1873 , Chinese immigrants were blamed for depressing workmen 's wages . During the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 , anti @-@ Chinese riots broke out in San Francisco , and a third party , the Workingman 's Party , was formed with an emphasis on stopping Chinese immigration . Bayard favored some restriction on Chinese immigration and voted in favor of a Chinese Exclusion Act in 1879 , which passed both houses that year . Hayes vetoed the bill , believing that the United States should not abrogate treaties without negotiation . The veto drew praise among eastern liberals , but Hayes was bitterly denounced in the West . After the veto , Assistant Secretary of State Frederick W. Seward suggested that both countries work together to reduce immigration . Congress passed a new law to that effect , the Chinese Exclusion Act , in 1882 . Bayard supported this new act , which became law with President Chester A. Arthur 's signature that year . 
 = = = Election of 1880 = = = 
 As the election of 1880 drew near , Bayard was again regarded as a likely candidate . Hayes had pledged himself to a one @-@ term presidency , which meant the Republicans would not have the advantage of incumbency . On the Democratic side , Tilden was regarded as the natural choice , as many Democrats were still convinced he had been robbed of the office in 1876 . Tilden 's supporters saw Bayard as a rival , and sought to smear him by suggesting he had colluded with Republicans to defeat Tilden in 1876 . Meanwhile , in the House , Tilden supporter Clarkson Nott Potter of New York began an investigation into the 1876 election , hoping that evidence of Republican malfeasance would harm that party 's candidate in 1880 . In fact , the Potter committee 's investigation had the opposite effect , uncovering telegrams from Tilden 's nephew , William Tilden Pelton , that offered bribes to Southern Republicans in the disputed states to help Tilden claim their votes . The telegrams doomed Tilden 's hopes for the nomination , and boosted Bayard 's chance among the erstwhile Tilden supporters . 
 As Tilden 's star began to fade , many Democrats looked to Bayard . He remained popular in the Eastern cities for his conservatism and hard money beliefs , but many in the South , including Senator Augustus Hill Garland of Arkansas , advised Bayard to embrace silver to help halt the defections of Southern and Western Democrats to the new Greenback Party . Bayard declined to do so . He was also reluctant to strike a deal with John Kelly of New York , whose Tammany faction of the Democratic party was currently at odds with the Tilden machine there . After the party rift caused the defeat of the Democratic governor in New York 's 1879 election , many Tilden adherents began to think their candidate could not win his home state , and drifted to Bayard , among others . Tilden 's supporters attempted to weaken Bayard in February 1880 by publishing the speech he gave in Dover in 1861 , in which he said that the United States should acquiesce in Southern secession . At the same time , Bayard 's uncompromising stance on the money question pushed some Democrats to support Major General Winfield Scott Hancock , who had not been identified with either extreme in the gold @-@ silver debate and had a military record that appealed to Northerners . 
 Leading up to the convention in Cincinnati , Tilden remained ambiguous about his intentions . George Gray , Delaware 's attorney general , placed Bayard 's name in nomination , calling the senator " a veteran , covered in scars of many a hard @-@ fought battle , where the principles of constitutional liberty have been at stake ... Bayard is a statesman who will need no introduction to the American people . " When the convention took its first ballot on June 23 , Bayard placed second with 153 ½ votes , trailing only Hancock , who had 171 . On the second ballot , the delegates broke for Hancock , and he was nominated . The Southern delegates , whom Bayard thought would be most loyal to him , were among the first to desert him . The convention nominated William Hayden English of Indiana , a Bayard supporter and hard @-@ money man , for vice president , and then closed . Bayard 's supporters were disappointed , but he supported the ticket as usual , in the interest of party unity . Hancock and English fought to a near @-@ draw in the popular vote , but lost the electoral vote to James A. Garfield and Chester A. Arthur by 214 to 155 . 
 = = = Budget surplus and civil service reform = = = 
 The Delaware legislature re @-@ elected Bayard to the Senate for a third term in 1881 without serious opposition . The Senate in the 47th Congress was evenly divided between Republicans and Democrats , with the new vice president , Arthur , holding the tie @-@ breaking vote . After spending the special session of March 1881 in an intra @-@ Republican Party fight over the confirmation of Garfield 's cabinet nominees , the Senate went into recess until October . By that time , Garfield had been assassinated and Arthur was president . When the Senate reconvened , the Democrats held the majority briefly , and Bayard was elected president pro tempore on October 10 ; Republicans regained the majority three days later as Republican latecomers arrived and were sworn in , and David Davis took over the office . 
 Among the issues confronting the Senate was the surplus of government funds . With high revenue held over from wartime taxes , the federal government had collected more than it spent since 1866 ; by 1882 the surplus reached $ 145 million . Opinions varied on how to balance the budget ; the Democrats wished to lower tariffs , in order to reduce revenues and the cost of imported goods , while Republicans believed that high tariffs ensured high wages in manufacturing and mining . They preferred the government spend more on internal improvements and pensions for Civil War soldiers while reducing excise taxes . Bayard did not oppose some veterans ' pensions , but worried that pensions would require continued high tariffs , which he opposed . He supported the movement for a commission to examine the tariff and suggest improvements , but opposed the resulting Tariff of 1883 , which reduced tariffs by an average of 1 @.@ 47 % . Congressional Republicans also sought to deplete the surplus through a Rivers and Harbors Act that increased spending on internal improvements ; Bayard opposed the bill and was gratified when Arthur vetoed it against his own party 's wishes . 
 Bayard and Arthur also agreed on the need for civil service reform . Garfield 's assassination by a deranged office seeker amplified the public demand for civil service reform . Leaders of both parties , including Bayard , realized that they could attract the votes of reformers by turning against the spoils system and , by 1882 , a bipartisan effort began in favor of reform . In 1880 , Democratic Senator George H. Pendleton of Ohio introduced legislation that required selection of civil servants based on merit as determined by an examination , but the bill did not pass . After the 1882 congressional elections , in which Democrats campaigned successfully on the reform issue , the Pendleton bill was proposed again , and again Bayard supported it , saying that " the offices of this Government are created ... for the public service and not for the private use of incumbents . " The Senate approved the bill 38 – 5 and the House soon concurred by a vote of 155 – 47 . Arthur signed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act into law on January 16 , 1883 . 
 = = = Election of 1884 = = = 
 Despite his rebukes at the Democratic national conventions in 1876 and 1880 , Bayard was again considered among the leading candidates for the nomination in 1884 . Tilden again was ambiguous about his willingness to run , but by 1883 New York 's new governor , Grover Cleveland , began to surpass Tilden as a likely candidate . After Tilden definitively bowed out in June 1884 , many of his former supporters began to flock to Bayard . Many Democrats were concerned with Cleveland 's ability to carry his home state after he , like Tilden before him , became embroiled in a feud with the Tammany Hall wing of the party . At the same time , the Tammany Democrats became more friendly to Bayard . 
 By the time the Democrats had assembled in Chicago on July 8 , 1884 to begin their convention , the Republicans had already picked their nominee : James G. Blaine of Maine . Blaine 's nomination turned many reform @-@ minded Republicans ( known as Mugwumps ) away from their party . Bayard and Cleveland , seen as honest politicians , were the Democrats most favored by the renegade Republican faction . Bayard was optimistic at the start of the convention , but the results of the first ballot ran heavily against him : 170 votes to Cleveland 's 392 . The reason was the same as in 1880 : as Congressman Robert S. Stevens of New York said , " I believe if he were President his Administration would be one in which every American citizen would take pride . I believe he is a patriot , but it would be a suicidal attempt to nominate him . His [ 1861 ] Dover speech would be sent into every household in the North . " The voting the next day demonstrated the point , as Cleveland was nominated on the second ballot . 
 The resulting campaign between Cleveland and Blaine focused more on scandal and mudslinging than the issues of the day . In the end , Cleveland eked out a narrow victory . Carrying New York was crucial for the Democrat ; a shift of just 550 votes in that state would have given the election to Blaine . Instead , Cleveland carried his home state and a Democrat was elected president for the first time since 1856 . Cleveland recognized Bayard 's status in the party hierarchy by offering him the top spot in his cabinet : Secretary of State . Bayard did not think himself an expert in foreign affairs and enjoyed the sixteen years he had spent in the Senate ; even so , he accepted the post and joined the administration . 
 = = Secretary of State = = 
 = = = Samoa and Hawaii = = = 
 Among the first foreign policy challenges Bayard and Cleveland faced was that concerning American influence in the Samoan Islands . The United States , Great Britain , and Germany all had treaties with the Samoan government that guaranteed their right to trade and establish naval bases there . In the 1880s , German chancellor Otto von Bismarck began to increase German influence in Samoa , and attempted to replace the Samoan king , Malietoa <unk> , with Tamasese <unk> , a claimant to the throne who favored German suzerainty . Bayard and Cleveland opposed any change that would undermine Samoan independence , as did the British government . Bayard filed a note of protest with the German government , and the three powers agreed to meet for a conference in Washington in June 1887 , but they failed to achieve any agreement . 
 Shortly thereafter , Tamasese 's unpopularity led another claimant , Mata 'afa Iosefo , to start a rebellion that led to the Samoan Civil War . When Tamasese 's German guards were killed , Bismarck considered it an attack on Germany , and sent warships to Samoa . Cleveland dispatched three American warships , <unk> , Trenton , and Vandalia , in response , and a British warship joined them . As the threat of war grew , Bismarck backed down and agreed to another conference in 1889 ; two weeks later , a hurricane struck the harbor and all of the German and American warships were damaged or sunk . As tempers cooled , the parties met in conference in Berlin . By that time , Cleveland had been defeated for re @-@ election and James G. Blaine took Bayard 's place as Secretary of State . The three powers agreed to a tripartite protectorate of Samoa with Malietoa <unk> restored as king ; that situation prevailed until 1899 , when renewed civil war led to a second convention partitioning the islands between Germany and the United States . 
 In the Kingdom of Hawaii , Bayard and Cleveland pursued a similar goal of maintaining the Hawaiian kingdom 's independence while expanding access for American trade . As a Senator , Bayard had voted for free trade with Hawaii , but the treaty was allowed to lapse in 1884 . As Secretary of State the following year , Bayard hoped to again have free trade with Hawaii , and also endorsed the idea of establishing an American naval base there , although he preferred Midway Atoll to the eventual location , Pearl Harbor . A treaty to that effect passed the Senate in 1887 by a 43 – 11 vote . As in Samoa , the administration sought to curb foreign influence , encouraging the Hawaiian government to reject a loan from Britain that would have required pledging future government revenues toward its repayment . 
 = = = Relations with Britain = = = 
 Despite their agreement on Samoa , much of Bayard 's term of office was taken up in settling disputes with Great Britain . The largest of these concerned the Canadian fisheries off the Atlantic coasts of Canada and Newfoundland . The rights of American fisherman in Canadian waters had been disputed since American independence , but the most recent disagreement stemmed from Congress 's decision in 1885 to abrogate part of the 1871 treaty that governed the situation . Under that treaty , American fishermen had the right to fish in Canadian waters ; in return , fishermen from Canada and Newfoundland had the right to export fish to the United States duty @-@ free . Protectionists in Congress thought the arrangement hurt American fisherman , and convinced their colleagues to repeal it . In response , Canadian authorities fell back on an interpretation of the earlier Treaty of 1818 , and began to seize American vessels . In 1887 , the lame duck 49th Congress then passed the Fisheries Retaliation Act , which empowered the president to bar Canadian ships from American ports if he thought Canadians were treating American fishermen " unjustly ; " Cleveland signed the bill , but did not enforce it and hoped he and Bayard would be able to find a diplomatic solution to the escalating trade war . 
 = = = Bayard @-@ Chamberlain Treaty = = = 
 Britain agreed to negotiate , and a six @-@ member commission convened in Washington in June 1887 . Bayard led the American delegation , joined by James Burrill Angell , president of the University of Michigan , and William LeBaron Putnam , a Maine lawyer and international law scholar . Joseph Chamberlain , a leading statesman in the British Parliament , led their delegation , which also included Lionel Sackville @-@ West , the British ambassador to the United States , and Charles Tupper , a prominent politician from Nova Scotia . By February 1888 , the commission agreed on a new treaty , which would create a mixed commission to determine which bays were open to American fishermen . Americans could purchase provisions and bait in Canada if they purchased a license , but if Canadian fisherman were allowed to sell their catch in the United States duty @-@ free , then the Americans ' licenses to fish in Canada would be free . Bayard believed that the treaty , " if observed honorably and honestly , will prevent future friction ... between the two nations . " The Senate , controlled by Republicans , disagreed , and rejected the treaty by a 27 – 30 vote . Aware of the risk that the treaty might be rejected , Bayard and Chamberlain agreed on a two @-@ year working agreement , allowing Americans to continue their fishing in Canadian waters by paying a fee . This arrangement was renewed every two years until 1912 , when a permanent solution was found . 
 = = = Seal hunting = = = 
 A similar dispute with Britain arose in the Pacific , over the rights of Canadians to hunt seals in waters off the Pribilof Islands , a part of Alaska . While only Americans had the right to take seals on the islands , the right to hunt in the waters around them was less well @-@ defined , and Americans believed foreign sealers were depleting the herd too quickly by hunting off @-@ shore . Bayard and Cleveland believed the waters around the islands to be exclusively American , but when Cleveland ordered the seizure of Canadian ships there , Bayard tried to convince him to search for a diplomatic solution instead . The situation remained unresolved when the administration left office in 1889 , and remained so until the North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 . 
 = = = 1888 presidential election = = = 
 Relations with Britain were also impaired when Sackville @-@ West intervened in the 1888 election . A Republican , posing as a British immigrant to the United States , asked Sackville @-@ West whether voting for Cleveland or his Republican opponent , Benjamin Harrison , would best serve British interests . Sackville @-@ West wrote that Cleveland was better for Britain ; Republicans published the letter in October 1888 , hoping to diminish Cleveland 's popularity among Irish @-@ Americans . Cleveland 's cabinet discussed the matter and instructed Bayard to inform the ambassador his services would no longer be required in Washington . Bayard attempted to limit the electoral damage , and gave a speech in Baltimore condemning Republicans for scheming to portray Cleveland as a British tool . Cleveland was defeated for re @-@ election the following month in a close election . 
 = = Return to private life = = 
 Bayard 's term as Secretary of State ended in March 1889 after Cleveland 's defeat , and he returned to Wilmington to resume his law practice . He lived in " very comfortable circumstances " there , with a fortune estimated at $ 300 @,@ 000 , although his income from the law practice was modest . His wife having died in 1886 , Bayard remarried in 1889 to Mary Willing Clymer , the granddaughter and namesake of the Philadelphia socialite Mary Willing Clymer . Bayard remained involved with Democratic politics and stayed informed on foreign affairs . When Cleveland was re @-@ elected in 1892 , many assumed Bayard would resume his position in the cabinet . Instead , Cleveland selected Judge Walter Q. Gresham of Indiana for the State Department and appointed Bayard Ambassador to Great Britain , the first American envoy to Britain to hold that rank ( his predecessors had been envoys ) . Bayard accepted the appointment , which the Senate quickly confirmed . 
 = = Ambassador to Great Britain = = 
 On June 12 , 1893 , Lord <unk> , the British Foreign Minister , received Bayard in London . Bayard began his tenure as ambassador with an " instinctive feeling of friendship for England , " and a desire for peace and cooperation between the two nations . That desire was quickly impaired when Cleveland took the side of Venezuela when that nation insisted on taking a boundary dispute between it and British Guiana to international arbitration . The exact boundary had been in dispute for decades , but Britain had consistently denied any arbitration except over a small portion of the line ; Venezuela wished the entire boundary included in any arbitration . 
 Bayard spent the summer of 1894 in the United States conferring with Gresham . The tension in the Venezuelan boundary dispute continued to escalate , while British disagreements with Nicaragua also threatened to involve the United States . Britain had once ruled the Caribbean coast of Nicaragua ( the Mosquito Coast ) but had abandoned it in 1860 . Nicaragua had annexed the area while guaranteeing the inhabitants ( the Miskito people ) a degree of autonomy . When Nicaragua expanded their control of the area in 1894 , the Miskito chief , Robert Henry Clarence , protested with the support of the British ambassador . Bayard agreed with Cleveland and Gresham that the British were not attempting to reestablish their colony , but Nicaraguans ( and many Anglophobic Americans ) saw a more sinister motive , including a possible British @-@ controlled canal through Nicaragua . Returning to England , Bayard met with the new Foreign Minister , Lord Kimberley , to <unk> Nicaragua 's right to govern the area . 
 The tension over Nicaragua soon abated , but the May 1895 death of Secretary Gresham , who like Bayard had favored cooperation with the British , led to increased disagreement over the Venezuela issue . Cleveland appointed Richard Olney to take over the State Department , and Olney soon proved more confrontational than his predecessor . Olney 's opinion , soon adopted by Cleveland , was that the Monroe Doctrine not only prohibited new European colonies , but also declared an American national interest in any matter of substance within the hemisphere . Olney drafted a long dispatch on the history of the problem , declaring that " to @-@ day the United States is practically sovereign on this continent , and its fiat is law upon the subjects to which it confines its interposition ... " Bayard delivered the note to the British Prime Minister ( Lord Salisbury , who was also serving as Foreign Minister ) on August 7 , 1895 . 
 Olney 's note was met with vehement disagreement and delay , but when tempers cooled , the British agreed to arbitration later that year . Bayard disagreed with the bellicose tone of the message , which he attributed to an effort to satisfy Anglophobia among " Radical Republicans and the foolish Irishmen . " Olney , for his part , thought Bayard soft @-@ <unk> the note and asked Cleveland to remove Bayard from office , which Cleveland declined . The House of Representatives agreed with Olney , and passed a resolution of censure against Bayard in December 1895 . Britain and Venezuela formally agreed to arbitration in February 1897 , one month before the Cleveland administration came to an end . The panel 's final judgement , delivered in 1899 , awarded Britain almost all of the disputed territory . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Bayard remained in London until the arrival of his successor , John Hay , in April 1897 . He returned to Wilmington that May and visited ex @-@ President Cleveland at his home in Princeton the following month , remaining friendly with him despite their differences on the Venezuela question . Bayard 's health had begun to decline in England , and he was often ill after his return to the United States . He died on September 28 , 1898 , while visiting his daughter Mabel Bayard Warren in Dedham , Massachusetts . Bayard was buried in the Old Swedes Episcopal Church Cemetery at Wilmington . He was survived by his second wife and seven of his twelve children , including Thomas F. Bayard , Jr . , who would serve in the United States Senate from 1922 to 1929 . 
 Thirteen years after his death , the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica said of Bayard that " his tall dignified person , unfailing courtesy , and polished , if somewhat deliberate , eloquence made him a man of mark in all the best circles . He was considered indeed by many Americans to have become too partial to English ways ; and , for the expression of some criticisms regarded as unfavorable to his own countrymen , the House of Representatives went so far as to pass ... a vote of censure on him . The value of Bayard 's diplomacy was , however , fully recognized in the United Kingdom where he worthily upheld the traditions of a famous line of American ministers . " In 1929 , the Dictionary of American Biography described Bayard , as a Senator , as being " remembered rather for his opposition to Republican policies ... than for constructive legislation of the successful solution of great problems " , and said that he had " the convictions of an earlier day ... and was never inclined , either politically or socially , to seek popularity with the country at large . " Charles C. <unk> , a conservative historian , found much to praise in Bayard ; he published a volume on Bayard 's diplomatic career in 1940 and another about his congressional career in 1946 , the only full @-@ length biographies to appear since Bayard 's death . Later historians took a dimmer view of Bayard 's diplomatic career ; in a 1989 book , Henry E. Mattox numbered Bayard among the Gilded Age foreign service officers who were " demonstrably incompetent . " 
 = How the Ghosts Stole Christmas = 
 " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " is the sixth episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on December 13 , 1998 . It was written and directed by series creator Chris Carter , and featured guest appearances by Edward Asner and Lily Tomlin . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 6 , being watched by 17 @.@ 3 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics , although some reviews criticized the episode for over @-@ <unk> the characters . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this Christmas @-@ themed episode , Mulder and Scully stake out a reputed haunted house . The duo soon discover a pair of lovelorn spectres living inside the house who are determined to prove how lonely the holidays can be . 
 Carter based the episode around an idea he and fellow writer Frank Spotnitz had been working on , featuring a haunted house . Featuring the smallest cast of an X @-@ Files episode — with only four actors — and a single set , " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " was the cheapest sixth season episode . The drastic reduction in the budget , however , put more strain on the main actors . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) calls Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) on Christmas Eve to investigate a haunted house in Maryland . He explains that during Christmas of 1917 , a young couple living in the house agreed to a lover 's pact , one killing the other and the remaining one committing suicide . He explains that they could not stand the thought of being alone after the other died and during the afterlife ; they wanted to experience it all together . Now , Mulder claims , they want to make couples who venture into their mansion have the same fate . 
 Scully , who is busy wrapping presents , ultimately relents to Mulder 's request . Inside the house , the agents experience strange phenomena : the door to the mansion slams shut , creaks are heard in the ceiling from the upper floor , and the shadow in the form of an old woman in a nightgown is seen , among other occurrences . Mulder and Scully reluctantly decide to investigate the floor above them . There , they find a massive library storing two corpses that have the same clothes and hairstyles as the agents , along with two gunshot wounds . They decide to go search other rooms , only to find that every door they walk through is the same library room they first entered . They then decide to split up , hoping to find a way out of the room . 
 While separated , they meet the inhabitants of the mansion — Maurice ( Ed Asner ) and Lyda ( Lily Tomlin ) . The ghosts soon turn the agents against each other . Scully is told that Mulder will kill her . Scully meets back up with Mulder , only for him to pull out a gun and shoot her . Scully , completely confused , loses consciousness , and the perspective shifts . It is revealed that Lyda is actually the one carrying out these actions and , through her ghostly ability to create apparitions , causes Scully to see Mulder instead . Meanwhile , Mulder comes upon a bleeding Scully lying on the floor . When he leans over her to try to help her , she shoots Mulder in the stomach . Again , the audience sees that it is Lyda pretending to be Scully , manipulating Mulder . 
 Both Mulder and Scully stumble down the stairs in hope of just getting outside to die . They meet up by the door , both crawling on the floor , covered in massive amounts of blood . Scully claims he shot her , while Mulder claims she shot him . Mulder realizes that that could not have happened and stands up . The illusion is broken , and the two leave the house . Maurice and Lyda sit by the fire , holding hands , saying that they almost had the two agents . Meanwhile , at Mulder 's apartment , Mulder and Scully exchange gifts , even though they told each other they would not . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Writer , director , and series creator Chris Carter based the episode around an idea he and fellow writer Frank Spotnitz had been working on , featuring a haunted house . The only scene that the two had completely planned out was the climax , which features Mulder and Scully pulling themselves across the floor , bleeding profusely . Carter wanted to keep all the action on one set , with the episode featuring only one location . To do this , production designer Corey Kaplan proposed that the episode be filmed in Scully 's apartment , a set that the crew had not used for season six . Carter , however , wanting to keep the haunted house motif , asked Kaplan if she could design a mansion set . Kaplan was tasked with designing a set that was " bleak , but not too bleak [ ... ] decrepit , but not too decrepit , " and " deserted , but not too deserted . " 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " features the smallest cast in X @-@ Files history , with only David Duchovny , Gillian Anderson , and the two guest stars present in the episode . Lily Tomlin , who played the part of Lyda , had originally approached the casting agents for The X @-@ Files several seasons prior to season six . Her agent expressed her interest in a part . Carter agreed to meet her and the two discussed possible ideas for futures episodes . After several years of thinking , Carter decided to write " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " as a vehicle for her . Originally , Carter wanted Bob Newhart to play the part of Maurice . However , Newhart was not interested . The crew , instead , approached veteran actor Ed Asner , who readily agreed to take part in the episode . 
 The episode was filmed without multiple sets , out @-@ of @-@ studio locations , or a large amount of extras . In addition , the budget for the episode was kept to a minimum . Because of this , " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " was the cheapest episode filmed for the sixth season . Carter readily admits that making the episode was a challenge . The drastic reduction in the budget put more strain on the main actors and several key individuals involved in the production . The outside scenes were filmed in front of the Piru Mansion in Piru , California , where the sixth season episode " The Rain King " was filmed . The day before filming was slated to begin , a brush fire ignited on the hill behind the mansion . Location manager Ilt Jones rushed to the scene in the middle of the inferno , but after an hour , the local firemen were able to bring the blaze under control by digging a fire break . The fire stopped a mere 300 feet from the house . 
 = = = Effects and music = = = 
 The gunshot wounds that Scully , and later Mulder , discover on Maurice and Lyda were created on a computer . Special effects editor Bill Millar was tasked with designing the " bloodless bullet holes " that were on Asner 's head and Tomlin 's stomach . To create this effect , Millar attached orange fluorescent cloth to the places that would become the bullet wounds . An ultraviolet light was then added to the set lighting so that the invisible reflected light would function as tracking data . The orange cloth was then excised during post @-@ production and the computerized bullet wounds were inserted in their place . Millar admits that the technique was borrowed from the 1992 movie Death Becomes Her , although he sarcastically admitted that , " we did it better and with less money . " Gillian Anderson was later critical of the fake blood used for the episode because the sheer quantity soon coagulated and formed a " gummy mess . " 
 Mark Snow , the composer for the episode , admitted to " ripping off " Joseph Haydn 's " Toy " Symphony to create the eerie Baroque @-@ inspired harpsichord score . Snow also admits that another major influence for the episode was Johnny Mandel 's " brilliant " score for the 1982 movie Deathtrap . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " first aired in the United States on December 13 , 1998 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 6 , with a 16 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 16 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 30 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on April 11 , 1999 and received 0 @.@ 70 million viewers and was the fourth most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " This holiday season ... share the gift of terror . " Corey Kaplan later won an award of excellence from the Society of Motion Picture and Television Art Directors for his work on " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas . " 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics , with some detractors . Sight on Sound called the episode " one of the best Christmas episodes of any series . " The review called “ How the Ghosts Stole Christmas , ” " an extremely creative , arguably bitter Holiday treat , perfect for [ Christmas ] with its blend of horror , comedy and hints of romance . " Static Mass writer Patrick Samuel awarded the episode five stars and said , " As [ Mulder and Scully ] gleefully unwrap their presents at the end , this episode is something that really makes my own Christmases feel that little bit more complete . " Den of Geek writer Juliette Harrisson , in a review of " Monday , " said , " Season six included some more excellent episodes [ and ] classic comedy episodes including , " How The Ghosts Stole Christmas . " DVD.net called " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " a " classic " standalone episode . SFX named the episode the sixth best " SF [ Sci @-@ Fi ] & Fantasy Christmas Episodes " and noted that it was full of " classic lines , some neat tricks " . 
 Zack Handlen from The A.V. Club gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it a grade of an A. He noted that the episode was written in a similar manner to the earlier , Carter @-@ penned " The Post @-@ Modern Prometheus " . Handlen wrote that both entries " have a gleeful , everybody @-@ gets @-@ out @-@ okay @-@ in @-@ the @-@ end vibe " . He , however , concluded that the " episode lives and dies on the strength of its two guest stars " before writing that " Asner and Tomlin are more than up to the task . " Earl Cressey from DVD Talk called " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " one of the " highlights of season six . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode more of a mixed to positive review , noting the lack of darkness in the episode . He wrote , " OK , I liked a lot of this episode . [ … ] But while I 've enjoyed the sheer entertainment value of the past three shows , I really am longing for something a bit sinister and darker . " 
 Not all reviews were so positive . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a largely negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris was unhappy with the way Maurice and Lyda were characterized , noting that their method of trying to get Mulder and Scully to kill each other resulted in " endless psychobabble dialogue " . Michigan Daily writer Melissa Runstrom , in a review of the sixth season , described " How the Ghosts Stole Christmas " as " hokey " and " over @-@ the @-@ top . " She identified it as the weakest episode of the sixth season . 
 = Wavering Radiant = 
 Wavering Radiant is the fifth and final full @-@ length album by American post @-@ metal group ISIS , released by Ipecac Recordings in 2009 and produced by Joe Barresi . It stands as Isis ' last full @-@ length album , as the band split just over a year after its release . The album continues Isis ' history of lengthy songwriting , yet presents a slight departure from the soft @-@ loud dynamics and post @-@ metal aesthetic which characterized previous releases . 
 Reviewers noted a continued increase in melody from previous releases , and many were quick to note an increased prominence of keyboardist Bryant Clifford Meyer 's work , using a Hammond B3 organ . In keeping with Isis ' retinue of concept albums , a thematic strand runs throughout , dealing with dreams and Jungian psychology . Critical appraisal was largely positive , with some critics deeming it Isis ' finest album ; it also appeared on a handful of best @-@ of lists at the close of the year . Commercially , it was Isis ' most successful release ever , breaching the Billboard 200 for the first time and gaining international chart presence . It was ranked in the year @-@ end lists by a number of reputed publications . To promote the album , Isis embarked on a world tour and shot a music video for the sixth track " 20 Minutes / 40 Years . " 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 From conception to final release in 2009 , drummer Aaron Harris estimates that the creation and execution of Wavering Radiant took about two and a half years . During the writing of the record , all of Isis ' members were residing permanently within Los Angeles ; a situation in contrast to their previous full @-@ length , 2006 's In the Absence of Truth ; band members were divided between New York and Los Angeles throughout that album 's inception and creation . The entire band felt a degree of dissatisfaction with In the Absence of Truth , and Harris felt that the logistical change was beneficial to the writing process , allowing for more time : " rather than feeling like we had limited time to capture something , I felt like we could take our time with the songs , and come back the next day to work on things rather than in a few weeks " . The resulting sound was described by guitarist Michael Gallagher as " more live [ ... ] a little bit dirtier – almost , for lack of a better word , sloppy . But in a good way . We spent a lot of time getting all of our takes as close to perfect as we could on previous records . On this one , we went more with the vibe of the particular take in question . " 
 During the composition phase , Harris multitrack recorded the rehearsals , allowing the band to listen to the material and re @-@ examine it , allowing them greater room to jam while writing " without the worry of forgetting something or not fully understanding what [ they were ] doing " . This , coupled with the lack of a deadline , meant that the process was more open @-@ ended for the band , allowing more freedom to abandon failed avenues and giving ideas time to evolve . This attitude was extended to the manner in which the vocals were tracked – until Wavering Radiant , the vocals had normally been recorded last . Instead , more time was spent recording them ; this allowed Turner , who had steadily grown in confidence as a vocalist , to relax and enjoy the process . 
 The recording process for the album began in November 2008 and lasted around three months , helmed by Joe Barresi . Isis ' previous full @-@ lengths since Celestial had been produced by Matt Bayles , but for this record , it was decided that a change was needed . Although the professional parting of ways was peaceable , working with Bayles had become , in the words of Harris , " routine " and " old hat " . Barresi was selected thanks to his work with bands such as Tool , Queens of the Stone Age and Melvins , and upon the album 's completion , Harris felt that Barresi " brought out some aspects of the band that even we didn 't fully understand . " Harris ' drums and keyboardist Bryant Clifford Meyer 's Hammond B3 lines were tracked over three and a half days at Sound City in Van Nuys ; the same studio in which the seminal Nirvana record Nevermind was tracked . This marked the first time a specialist drum tech was utilised by the band ; Jerry Johnson , a veteran of projects with Def Leppard and Linkin Park , was recruited . 
 The involvement of Tool 's Adam Jones as a guest musician was revealed at the same time as the album 's official announcement . Jones contributes additional guitar on " Hall of the Dead " and keyboards on " Wavering Radiant " , whereas Tool member Justin Chancellor had contributed to Isis ' 2004 album , Panopticon , and Isis supported Tool during a 2006 tour . 
 Two additional tracks were recorded during the Wavering Radiant sessions , but failed to make it onto the final cut of the album . " The <unk> Foe " was selected for the Metal Swim compilation released by Adult Swim , as well as Isis ' split with the Melvins , both released in 2010 . " Way Through Woven Branches " saw release as an addition to the Japanese edition as a bonus track , as well as making its way onto the split with the Melvins . 
 = = Theme = = 
 Reviewers have discussed the presence of a theme , with Milton Savage deducing that " track titles would imply an underlying conceptual framework to Wavering Radiant , with ' Hall of the Dead ' preceding ' Ghost Key ' , and ' Threshold of Transformation ' closing the album in epic circumstances – Turner , it seems , has left our world behind for exploration of another beyond the lives led by mortal men . " Isis releases have always had a thematic basis ; as Andrew Rennie dissects , " Isis 's four previous full @-@ lengths have clear story arcs , but Wavering Radiant 's themes are open to interpretation , giving it added appeal . " Over time , Turner has become reluctant to divulge the thematic particulars of any given album and on Wavering Radiant he has been equivocal . The act of explaining the thematic basis of an album erodes Turner 's " connection " with the music , and he has spoken of how that relationship is something he " wishes to preserve " . He also asserts that retaining this synergy with the music allows him to commit more to the album 's live performances . Similarly , he has also spoken of how " [ p ] eople have a tendency to focus on one narrow aspect of the overall concept or misinterpret it . " 
 Although reluctant to give any specifics , he has expressed snippets of conceptual background at times ; this , however , doesn 't extend to the reasoning behind the album 's title , which he declined to elaborate upon . When asked to describe the album in three words , he stated that it was a " path of exploration " . Bassist Jeff <unk> has revealed that Turner noted Carl Jung as a major influence on the concept and lyrics . Jung 's 1961 work , Memories , Dreams , Reflections , served as a specific source of inspiration for Turner , as he noted on his blog in a post preceding the album 's release . Beyond Jung , he has spoken of how the album is closely related to dreams , and that he had been keeping a dream journal during the album 's compositional phase . He gave up smoking marijuana in 2008 , which he says enabled him to remember his dreams more clearly and , according to J. Bennett , " tap into an internal consciousness " . All of the album 's official lyrics , deemed almost entirely indecipherable , were revealed in celebration of the album 's first anniversary . 
 = = Music = = 
 Wavering Radiant , at 54 minutes , is Isis ' shortest release since their 2000 studio début Celestial . The standard release contains seven tracks , ranging from less than two minutes to more than ten . It continues Isis ' use of non @-@ standard time signatures , opening in 5 / 4 time with " Hall of the Dead " . 
 Milton Savage tussled with the challenge of defining Isis ' sound : " If it 's not heavy – ' dense ' is better description – and the band 's purer metal roots have grown into a towering trunk from which sprout the most tangled of branches , both sturdy and incredibly delicate , then how does one take in the full picture and condense twelve years of unfaltering advancement to a single adjective ? " Roque Strew , of Pitchfork Media , struggles in the same vein : " pin a single label , style , adjective on Isis and it slips right off . " 
 While reviewers were troubled with categorizing the band , much time was spent deliberating upon the album 's sound when held in comparison with other Isis material . Robin Jahdi , writing for FACT Magazine , holds that the album presents a shift in dynamic . " It takes a while to realise , but [ Wavering Radiant ] is pretty different to what 's come before from Aaron Turner and co . The last time this happened was 2002 , when they transformed from brutal sludge metal to something altogether more delicate . " Here , he references the transition brokered when Isis released Oceanic , a critically acclaimed departure from the sound of 2000 's Celestial . Other differences from some of Isis ' previous material have been noted ; on a broad scale , the album was deemed " less punishing than Panopticon , from 2004 , and less ponderous than In the Absence of Truth , from 2006 " , but closer examination also led Slant 's Matthew Cole to suggest differences . " On past releases , Isis employed loud / soft dynamics to stunning effect , and while that element remains central to their sound , the best parts of Wavering Radiant suggest a more sophisticated integration . Rather than playing on the line between pretty and heavy , tracks like ' Stone to Wake a Serpent ' and ' 20 Minutes / 40 Years ' dissolve it . " Not all reviews held the album to be such a departure – for instance , Andrew Hartwig feels that " Wavering Radiant continues in the direction that Isis have been travelling since their inception , with an increasing prominence of melody and a greater focus on placid sections to balance out their signature crushing heaviness " . 
 Although Turner 's lyrics are found to be " far from wholly discernable " , his vocals have " mellowed " . Robin Jahdi writes that " Turner 's vocals are growing as well , sounding eerily like Steve Brodsky , from Isis ' peers Cave In . These journeys into melody are so successful ( vocal harmonies , no less ) that you wonder why Turner still bothers with the pseudo @-@ death metal vocals at all . They add little to the music and must serve to turn off more potential fans than they attract . " Nate Chinen , however , sees this variety as a vital component of the album 's success , attesting that " Aaron Turner expertly alternates between a death @-@ metal roar and a more human wail , using whichever better suits the needs of a song " . 
 According to William Ruhlmann , " a big difference is provided by keyboardist Clifford Meyer , who provides texture , filling up the overall sound and also adding ethereal touches that sometimes make Isis reminiscent of Pink Floyd . " This view is shared by Roque Strew , who argues that " equally vital to the record 's dense , hypnotic shape is Clifford Meyer 's command of the keyboard [ ... ] His blissful , knotty phrases , played on a dusty Hammond B3 or Rhodes , often recreate moments from the psychedelic and prog @-@ rock past . " However , Chris Norton of Tiny Mix Tapes contends that " the prominent keyboard tones sound pretty hokey on this album . " Praise was spared for drummer Aaron Harris also ; on this release , " everyone is playing off Harris and following his lead dynamically . His sense of moment is perfect ; knowing exactly when and where to jump in or cut back , and just how much . " 
 The influence of several contemporary bands was deemed apparent upon the sound of the album . Robin Jahdi writes that " the Isis sound , debuted proper on the 2002 album , is still present and correct , but there 's more subtle shifts in mood here , most interestingly when they take influence from outside ( Tool 's Adam Jones plays on two songs ) . The basslines bounce and jolt with that familiar elasticity , but the seismic six @-@ string shifts on songs like ' Hand of the Host ' and ' 20 Minutes / 40 Years ' are the sort not heard from this band in years . It is no coincidence that these are highlights . " The rhythms of " 20 Minutes / 40 Years " are described as " Pelican @-@ like " by NME reviewer Ben Patashnik , and No Ripcord 's Sean Caldwell compares the album to Mastodon 's Blood Mountain , citing its potential for " crossover " appeal . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 In late December 2008 , Isis began to introduce a previously unheard track into their live setlists , prompting speculation from fans and critics as video versions circulated on the Internet . Turner went on to announce the track 's title as " 20 Minutes / 40 Years " on 30 December . The album was officially announced on 22 January 2009 , and its title a week later . The album artwork and tracklist were published shortly afterwards , in early February . On 24 March , Isis added the song " 20 Minutes / 40 Years " to their MySpace page , and a week before the album 's release , made the entire record available for streaming . To promote the album in the build @-@ up to its release , Isis released a series of teaser videos , consisting of footage of the band recording , but no musical content . A limited edition run of signed CD booklets were made available to those pre @-@ ordering the album , as well as album @-@ related merchandise . 
 The album was released by Ipecac Recordings on limited vinyl on 21 April 2009 , and in CD format on 5 May . European distribution was undertaken by Conspiracy Records , while a special Japanese edition was handled by <unk> Recordings . 
 Following the album 's release , Isis embarked on a tour of North America , supported by Pelican and Tombs . They then went on to tour the UK and Europe through late 2009 , supported variously by bands including <unk> , Dälek and Circle . They toured Australia , New Zealand and Japan with Baroness before returning to the United States to tour with Melvins , Jakob and Cave In from May to June . This American leg of the tour included an appearance at 2010 's Bonnaroo festival in Manchester , Tennessee , while the Pacific portion took in the Soundwave Festival in Australia . 
 Having shot videos for tracks from their previous two albums , Isis went on to record another for " 20 Minutes / 40 Years " . Described as a " seven and a half minute epic " , the video , directed by Matt Santoro and released in November 2009 , opens with ferromagnetic fluid moving through an ambiguous , dark setting . A masked figure , trapped inside a translucent box , watches its interplay . The fluid enters the box , where it is subsumed by the figure . As the song reaches its crescendo , the box rises through the earth and breaks out of the surface into the sunlight , and its captive is freed . It received airplay on MTV2 's Headbanger 's Ball . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical response to the album was , overall , fairly laudatory . Its score of 79 out of 100 – or ' generally favorable ' – on Metacritic attests to decent reception . Regarding its place in Isis ' catalog , it has been described as their " most accomplished and complete album to date " by Ali Maloney of The Skinny , as their " smartest and richest record " and as " the toughest and catchiest Isis record " since their debut full @-@ length , Celestial . " Beyond the band 's own repertoire , it was described as " metal played at its arresting best " , and Andrew Rennie of NOW went as far as declaring it " close to perfect " . Not all reviews were so glowing , as the NME characterized it as " 45 minutes of awesomeness stretched out to a slightly bloated hour [ ... ] the unsettling <unk> of ' Ghost Key ' meander just too long and ' Hand of the Host ' spends half of its 11 minutes repeating itself without really juddering into the granite riff golem it threatens to be . " Similarly , Chris Norton of Tiny Mix Tapes feels that the album " isn 't the band 's best by a really long shot , even if it ain 't bad . " Accessibility was a similarly divisive issue , with the album being characterized as " perhaps their most rewarding yet , but simultaneously their hardest to immediately access given its prioritising of subtle nuances over senses @-@ numbing assaults " and " a slow @-@ burning success " . Conversely , it has also been declared to be " easily the band 's most accessible effort " . Allmusic 's William Ruhlmann felt that with regards to structure , " Wavering Radiant works as a single piece of music rather than a series of songs " , as Milton Savage of Drowned in Sound concurred that Isis have " construct [ ed ] their latest so that it 's best experienced as a whole " . 
 The success of the album was deemed contingent upon balance . The Guardian 's Jamie Thomson posits that " the Isis of old gave the impression they were enjoying their meandering jams just a little too much , leaving the listener a tad lost . Here , they rein them in perfectly , and reward you with a colossal chorus for staying the distance " , while Nate Chinen , of The New York Times , feels that the release " upholds a deliberative truce between brute physicality and moody rumination " . 
 Critical selection of album highlights has provided multiple standout tracks : Milton Savage unequivocally declares that " ' Stone to Wake a Serpent ' is an obvious selection : its ominous , horror @-@ movie keyboard tones duel with Turner 's most ferocious performance in some years " , a pick Andrew Rennie of NOW shared . Other selections include " 20 Minutes / 40 Years " and " Hall of the Dead " , which Roque Strew argues " may be the lushest , most astutely crafted opener in the Isis discography " . 
 Turner himself had this to say of the album , fully cognizant that it would be the band 's last : " I don 't know if looking back many years from now if Wavering Radiant will be my favorite Isis record or not , but I certainly feel like it 's the best record we were capable of making at the time , and I also feel like we didn 't compromise in any really significant way the spirit or ideology behind the band in making it . And sonically speaking , I think it sounds really good , so that makes me happy , too . " 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 On 13 May the album entered the Billboard 200 at number 98 and the Top Independent Albums chart in tenth spot , representing the band 's highest placing to date . In the United States , the album sold 5 @,@ 800 copies in the first week of its release . It entered the BBC Radio 1 Top 40 Rock Albums chart at number 17 , the Norwegian National Chart at number 37 , and the German charts at number 96 , providing Isis with their first chart exposure outside the United States and United Kingdom . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Isis . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Loyal Order of Moose = 
 The Loyal Order of Moose is a fraternal and service organization founded in 1888 , with nearly 1 million men in roughly 2 @,@ 400 Lodges , in all 50 U.S. states and four Canadian provinces as well as Bermuda ; along with its female auxiliary , Women of the Moose with more than 400 @,@ 000 members in roughly 1 @,@ 600 Chapters in the same areas and the Loyal Order of Moose in Britain these organizations make up the Moose International . It is headquartered in Mooseheart , Illinois . 
 Moose International supports the operation of Mooseheart Child City & School , a 1 @,@ 023 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 14 km2 ) community for children and teens in need , located 40 miles ( 64 km ) west of Chicago ; and Moosehaven , a 63 @-@ acre ( 250 @,@ 000 m2 ) retirement community for its members near Jacksonville , Florida . Also , Moose Lodges and Chapters conduct approximately $ 75 million worth of community service ( counting monetary donations and volunteer hours worked ) annually . 
 Additionally , the Moose organization conducts numerous sports and recreational programs , in local Lodge / Chapter facilities called either Moose Family Centers or Activity Centers , in the majority of 44 State and Provincial Associations , and on a fraternity @-@ wide basis . 
 = = History = = 
 The Loyal Order of Moose was founded in Louisville , Kentucky , in the spring of 1888 by Dr. John Henry Wilson . Originally intended purely as a men 's social club , lodges were soon founded in Cincinnati , Ohio , St. Louis , Missouri and Crawfordsville and Frankfort , Indiana . The early order was not prosperous . Dr. Wilson himself was dissatisfied and left the order of the Moose before the turn of the century . When Albert C. Stevens was compiling his Cyclopedia of Fraternities in the late 1890s he was unable to ascertain whether it was still in existence . 
 In the fall of 1906 the Order only had the two Indiana lodges remaining . On October 27 of that year James J. Davis became the 247th member of the Order . Davis was a Welsh immigrant who had come to the US as a youth and worked as an iron puddler in the steel mills of Pennsylvania , and an active labor organizer ( he later became Secretary of Labor in the Harding administration ) . He saw the Order as a way to provide a social safety net for a working class membership , using a low annual membership fee of $ 10 – $ 15 . After giving a rousing address to the seven delegates of the 1906 Moose national convention , he was appointed " Supreme Organizer " of the Order . Davis and a group of organizers set out to recruit members and establish lodges throughout the US and Canada . He was quite successful and the Order grew to nearly half a million members in 1 @,@ 000 lodges by 1912 . 
 = = = Mooseheart & Moosehaven = = = 
 At the 1911 convention in Detroit , Davis , who now “ Director General ” of the Order , recommended that the LOOM acquire property for an " Institute " , " School " or " College " that would be a home , schooling , and vocational training for the orphans of LOOM members . For months offers came in and a number of meetings were held regarding the project . It was eventually agreed that the center should be located somewhere near the center of population , adjacent to both rail and river transportation and within a day 's travel to a major city . On December 14 , 1912 the leaders of the organization decided to purchase the 750 @-@ acre Brookline Farm . Brookline was a dairy farm near Batavia , Illinois . It was close to the Fox River , two railway lines and the ( then dirt ) Lincoln Highway . The leadership also wished to buy additional real estate to the west and north owned by two other families , for a total of 1 @,@ 023 acres . Negotiations for the purchases were held in January and February 1913 , and legal possession of the property was taken on March 1 . The name " Mooseheart " had been adopted for the school at the suggestion of Ohio Congressmen and Supreme Council member John Lentz by a unanimous joint meeting of the Supreme Council and Institute Trustees on Feb. 1 . Mooseheart was dedicated on July 27 , 1913 . Vice President Thomas R. Marshall gave a speech for the occasion . 
 While Mooseheart began as a school , it soon grew to become a small incorporated village and hub of the organization , housing the headquarters of the LOOM , as well as the Women of the Moose . The population of Mooseheart would grow to 1 @,@ 000 by 1920 , reach a peak of 1 @,@ 300 during the Great Depression and go down to approximately 500 , the campus ' current maximum capacity , in 1979 . 
 In addition to Mooseheart , the LOOM also runs a retirement center , Moosehaven , located in Orange Park Florida . This project was inaugurated in the Autumn of 1922 with 26 acres of property and 22 retired Moose residents . It has grown to a 63 @-@ acre community with over 400 residents . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Local units are called " Lodges " , state groups are " State Associations " and the national authority is the " Supreme Lodge of the World " , which meets annually . In 1923 there were 1 @,@ 669 lodges " promulgated in every civilized country controlled by the Caucasian race " . In 1966 3 @,@ 500 lodges were reported in every US state , Guam , Canada , Bermuda and England . In 1979 the Order had 36 State Associations and over 4 @,@ 000 Lodges . Today it has 1 @,@ 800 Lodges , in all 50 states and four Canadian provinces , as well as Bermuda and the United Kingdom . 
 The entire membership is sometimes referred to as the " Moose Domain " . 
 = = Membership = = 
 In the early 1920s membership was restricted to white men of " sound mind and body , in good standing in the community , engaged in lawful business who are able to speak and write the English language " . In June 1972 the Supreme Court handed down a decision in the Order 's favor , saying that a Moose Lodge in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , could not be denied a state liquor license because they refused to serve a black guest . 
 In the early 1920s the LOM reportedly had over half a million members with 32 @,@ 570 in the Mooseheart Legion and 5 @,@ 178 in the Junior Order of Moose . In 1928 this had grown to 650 @,@ 000 members with 59 @,@ 000 in the ladies ' auxiliary . There were slightly more than a million in 1966 . In 1979 the LOM had 1 @,@ 323 @,@ 240 members . In 2013 there were 800 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Rituals = = 
 An important ritual for the Moose is the " 9 o 'clock Ceremony " . At nine o 'clock , all Moose are directed to face toward Mooseheart with bowed heads and folded arms and repeat a silent prayer " Suffer little children to come unto me and forbid them not for such is the Kingdom of Heaven . God bless Mooseheart . " At that same time the children of Mooseheart kneel at their bedside in prayers as well . There are also the ten " thou shalts . " These begin with " Thou shalt believe in God and worship Him as thy conscience dictates . Thou shalt be tolerant to let others worship each in his own way " . Other " thou shalts " pertain to patriotism , service to <unk> , protection of the weak , avoidance of slander to a brother Moose , love of the LOM , faithfulness and humility 
 James Davis drew up the initiation ritual for the order . It is relatively short , usually taking 45 minutes . The governor of the lodge asks the Sergeant @-@ at @-@ Arms to administer the Moose obligation . After candidates are asked if they believe in a Supreme Being , and if they are willing to assume the obligation they take the oath with their left hand on their heart and their right hand raised . Among other things , this obligation pledges the candidate not to " communicate or disclose or give any information - concerning anything - I may hereafter hear , see or experience in this lodge or in any other Lodge " . At this point the lodge performs the <unk> 'Clock Ceremony , and then the lodge chaplain or prelate explains the ten " thou shalts " . Next the governor grasps the hands of the candidates while the members sing Blest Be the Tie that <unk> . Finally , the governor administers the second part of the obligation , the candidates promise to support Mooseheart , Moosehaven , help fellow Moose , settle disputes within the order and not to join any unauthorized Moose organizations . The prelate offers another prayer at the altar , and all then join in singing Friendship We Now Extend . 
 There are also death and graveside services , granted on request of the family of deceased Moose , as well as a Memorial Day ceremony every first Sunday in May . The lodge altar is draped in black and white cloth , a Bible , a flower and drapes are placed on the lodge charter and the lodge prelate leads the members in prayers and the singing of Nearer , My God , to Thee . 
 = = = Gustin @-@ Kenny incident = = = 
 The Moose rituals took a tragic turn on July 24 , 1913 , when two candidates for membership , Donald A. Kenny and Christopher Gustin , died during an incident at their initiation ceremony in Birmingham , Alabama . Kenny was the president of the local <unk> Union and Gustin was an iron moulder . Both men were made to look upon a red hot emblem of the Order , then blindfolded , disrobed and had a chilled rubber version of the emblem applied to their chests , while a magneto was attached to their legs and an electric current was applied to them by a wire to their shoulders . The aim was evidently to make them believe that they were being branded . Both men fainted , but , as it was thought that they were feigning , the lodge officers did not stop the initiation until it was evident that the two were dying and the lodge physician was unable to revive them . 
 = = Benefits and philanthropy = = 
 The LOOM has historically supported numerous charitable and civic activities . It has sponsored medical research for muscular dystrophy , cerebral palsy , cancer and cardiology , as well as the March of Dimes . It has also supported Boy Scout and Girl Scout programs . 
 = = Independent , Benevolent and Protective Order of Moose = = 
 In 1925 the LOOM brought a suit against the Independent , Benevolent and Protective Order of Moose , an African American order . They attempted to obtain a legal injunction to keep them from using the Moose name , ritual , emblem and titles of its officers . The New York Court of Appeals restrained the African American order from using the name " Moose " , but allowed them to continue using the same fraternal titles and colors . The I , <unk> was apparently an all woman order . 
 = = Religious objections = = 
 By 1966 the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Synod forbade membership in the Loyal Order of Moose . The Catholic Church , however , has never explicitly objected to the Moose , despite having condemned similar organizations , such as the Freemasons for their oaths and other rituals . 
 = = Notable Moose members = = 
 = = = Presidents = = = 
 Warren G. Harding - U.S. President — Marion , Ohio : Lodge 889 
 Franklin D. Roosevelt - U.S. President — New York City : Lodge 15 
 Theodore Roosevelt - U.S. President 
 Harry S. Truman - U.S. President 
 = = = Other politicians = = = 
 Evan Bayh - Former U.S. Senator / Governor of Indiana — Elkhart , Indiana Lodge : 599 
 Robert C. Byrd - U.S. Senator — Beckley , West Virginia : Lodge 1606 
 Tom Corbett - Governor of Pennsylvania — Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania : Lodge <unk> 
 Richard J. Daley - Mayor of Chicago 1955 @-@ 1976 — Greater Chicago , Illinois : Lodge 3 
 Joe Manchin III - US Senator , State of West Virginia — Charleston , West Virginia : Lodge 1444 
 C.L. " Butch " Otter - Governor , State of Idaho 2007 — Boise , Idaho : Lodge 337 
 Tommy Thompson - Former U.S. Secretary of Health & Human Services — Juneau County , Wisconsin : Lodge 1913 
 Earl Warren - Chief Justice U.S. Supreme Court ( Holder of the Pilgrim Degree of Merit ) -- Oakland , California : Lodge 324 
 = = = Entertainers = = = 
 Bud Abbott & Lou Costello Radio , TV Movie Entertainers — Atlantic City , New Jersey : Lodge 216 
 Ernest Borgnine - Oscar @-@ Winning Actor — Junction City , Oregon : Lodge 2238 
 Charles Chaplin - Motion Picture Actor / Director / Producer — Los Angeles , California : Lodge 134 
 Harry <unk> - Motion Picture Actor @-@ Van Nuys , California : Lodge 306 
 Erik Estrada - Television Actor ; National Spokesman , Safe Surfin ' USA — Bedford , Virginia : Lodge 1897 
 Dr. Ralph Stanley - Bluegrass Recording Artist — Dinwiddle , Virginia : Lodge 1993 
 Ralph Stanley II - Bluegrass Recording Artist — Dinwiddle , Virginia : Lodge 1993 
 James Stewart - Oscar @-@ Winning Actor — Indiana , Pennsylvania : Lodge 174 
 Danny Thomas - Entertainer — Indianapolis , Indiana : Lodge 17 
 Darryl Worley - Country Music Artist — Savannah , Tennessee : Lodge 1918 
 = = = Athletes = = = 
 Ed Beard - Middle Linebacker , San Francisco 49ers — South Norfolk , Virginia : Lodge 464 
 Raymond Berry - NFL Hall @-@ of @-@ famer , Baltimore Colts / Super Bowl XX Coach , New England Patriots — Montgomery County , Virginia : Lodge 1470 
 Larry Bird - NBA Hall @-@ of @-@ famer — Orange County , Indiana : Lodge <unk> 
 Walter Blum - Hall of Fame Jockey with 4 @,@ 382 wins — Lauderdale Lakes , Florida : Lodge 2267 
 <unk> Bol - NBA 's tallest @-@ ever player — Chicopee Falls , Massachusetts : Lodge 1849 
 Jason Couch - Hall of Fame Professional Bowler — South Lake County , Florida : Lodge 1615 
 Jack Ham - NFL Hall of Fame linebacker , Pittsburgh Steelers — Indiana , Pennsylvania : Lodge 174 
 Woody Hayes - Ohio State University Football Coach — Columbus , Ohio : Lodge 11 
 Ted Hendricks - NFL Hall of fame Linebacker — Hialeah , Florida : Lodge 1074 
 Bob Huggins - Men 's Basketball Coach , West Virginia — Charleston , West Virginia : Lodge 1444 
 Pete Johnson - Fullback , Ohio State & Cincinnati Bengals — <unk> , Ohio : Lodge <unk> 
 Jerry Lucas - Basketball Hall of Fame ; NBA Rookie of the Year 1964 ; Sports Illustrated " Sportsman of the Year " 1961 ; Only Three @-@ Time Big Ten Conference Player of the Year — Bucyrus , Ohio : Lodge 669 
 Rocky Marciano - Boxer 
 Billy Martin - All @-@ Star Infielder , Manager — Oakland , California : Lodge 324 
 Zach Miller - Tight End , Jacksonville Jaguars — Mooseheart , Illinois : Lodge <unk> 
 Arnold Palmer - <unk> — Greensburg , Pennsylvania : Lodge 1151 
 Cal Ripken Sr. - Baseball Manager — Aberdeen , Maryland : Lodge 1450 
