 Gale Sayers - NFL Hall of Famer — Elkhart , Indiana : Lodge 599 
 Billy Sims - 1978 Heisman Trophy Winner ; Running back , University of Oklahoma ( 1975 – 79 ) and Detroit Lions ( 1980 @-@ 84 ) ; Member , College Football Hall of fame — Grand Rapids @-@ Sparta , Michigan : Lodge 50 
 Bill " Moose " Skowron - Major League Baseball Player ( 1954 – 1967 ) -- River Park , Illinois : Lodge 2578 
 Bill Stewart - Head Football Coach of West Virginia University — New Martinsville , West Virginia : Lodge 931 
 Tony Stewart - NASCAR Driver — Columbus , Indiana : Lodge 398 
 Gene Tunney - Boxer — Cincinnati , Ohio : Lodge 2 
 Bill Veeck - Major League Baseball Executive — Greater Chicago , Illinois : Lodge 3 
 Honus Wagner - Baseball Hall @-@ of @-@ Famer — Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania : Lodge 46 
 Donnell Woolford - Pro Bowl Cornerback , Chicago Bears — Batavia , Illinois : Lodge 682 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Eugene Cernan - Astronaut ; " the last man on the moon " in December 1972 — Bellwood , Illinois : Lodge 777 
 Jean Davidson - Author and granddaughter of Harley @-@ Davidson co @-@ founder Walter Davidson — Mooseheart , Illinois : Chapter 3001 
 Henry Ford - Inventor of the mass @-@ produced automobile — Detroit , Michigan : Lodge 160 
 Virgil I. " Gus ” Grissom – Astronaut : Warwick , Virginia : Lodge 1711 
 Darell Hammond - Founder / CEO , KaBOOM ! Inc . - Builder of playgrounds worldwide ( and , member of Mooseheart High School Class of 1989 ) -- Batavia , Illinois : Lodge 682 
 Lt. Col. Edward A. Silk - Mooseheart Class of 1935 ; Recipient of the Medal of Honor in World War II — Johnstown , Pennsylvania : Lodge 48 
 = Quebec referendum , 1995 = 
 The 1995 Quebec referendum was the second referendum to ask voters in the Canadian province of Quebec whether Quebec should proclaim national sovereignty and become an independent country , with the condition precedent of offering a political and economic agreement to Canada . 
 The culmination of multiple years of debate and planning after the failure of the Meech Lake and Charlottetown constitutional accords , the referendum was launched solely by the provincial Parti Québécois government of Jacques Parizeau . Despite initial predictions of a heavy sovereignist defeat , an eventful and complex campaign followed , with the " Yes " side flourishing after being taken over by charismatic Bloc Québécois leader Lucien Bouchard . 
 The fast rise of the " Yes " campaign and apparent inability of the personalities of the " No " campaign to counter their message created an atmosphere of great uncertainty , both in the federal government and across Canada . 
 Voting took place on October 30 , 1995 , and featured the largest voter turnout in Quebec 's history ( 93 @.@ 52 % ) . The " No " option carried by 54 @,@ 288 votes ( 50 @.@ 58 % ) . Parizeau , who retired the following day , would later state that he would have quickly proceeded with a unilateral declaration of independence had the result been affirmative and negotiations failed or been refused , the latter of which was later revealed as the federal position in the event of a " Yes " victory . 
 Controversies over both the provincial vote counting and direct federal financial involvement in the final days of the campaign reverberated in Canadian politics for over a decade after the referendum took place . In the aftermath of the close result , the federal government , after unilaterally recognizing Quebec as a distinct society and amending the federal constitutional veto procedure , referred the issue to the Supreme Court of Canada , which stated that the unilateral secession contemplated in the referendum was illegal . 
 = = Background = = 
 Quebec , a province in Canada since its foundation in 1867 , has always been the sole majority French @-@ speaking province . Long ruled by forces ( such as the Union Nationale ) that focused on affirmation of the province 's French and Catholic identity within Canada , the Quiet Revolution of the early 1960s prompted a surge in civic and economic nationalism , as well as voices calling for the independence of the province and the establishment of a nation state . Among these was René Lévesque , who would eventually found the Parti Québécois with like @-@ minded groups seeking independence from Canada . After arriving in power in 1976 , the PQ government held a referendum in 1980 seeking a mandate to negotiate " sovereignty @-@ association " with Canada that was decisively defeated . 
 In response to the referendum result , Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau declared that he would seek to " <unk> " the Canadian Constitution and bring about what would eventually become the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . During tense negotiations in November 1981 , an agreement was reached between Trudeau and nine of the ten premiers by Trudeau , but not Lévesque . The Constitution Act of 1982 was enacted without the Quebec National Assembly 's symbolic approval . 
 Trudeau 's successor as Prime Minister , Brian Mulroney , and Quebec Liberal premier Robert Bourassa sought a series of Constitutional amendments designed to address Quebec 's concerns . In what became known as the Meech Lake Accord , the Federal government and all provincial premiers agreed to a series of amendments that decentralized some powers and recognized Quebec as forming a distinct society . The Accord , after fierce debate in English Canada , fell apart in dramatic fashion in the summer of 1990 , prompting outrage in Quebec and a surge in support for sovereignty . While the Accord was collapsing , Lucien Bouchard , a cabinet minister in Mulroney 's government , led a coalition of Progressive Conservative and Liberal members of parliament from Quebec to form a new federal party devoted to Quebec sovereignty , the Bloc Québécois . 
 Following these events , Bourassa proclaimed that a referendum would occur in 1992 , with either sovereignty or a new Constitutional agreement as the subject . This prompted a national referendum on the Charlottetown Accord of 1992 , a series of amendments that included the proposals of Meech Lake as well as concerns of the broader Canadian federation . The Accord failed in Quebec and English Canada . 
 In the 1993 federal election , as the Liberals returned to power with a majority government under Jean Chrétien , who had been Minister of Justice during the 1980 @-@ 81 constitutional discussions . The Bloc Québécois won 54 seats with 49 @.@ 3 % of Quebec 's vote . The result made the Bloc the second largest party in the House of Commons , giving it the role of Official Opposition and allowing Bouchard to be able to confront Chrétien in Question Period on a daily basis . 
 In Quebec , the 1994 provincial election brought the sovereigntist Parti Québécois back to power , led by Jacques Parizeau . The party 's platform promised to hold a referendum on sovereignty during his term in office as premier . The PQ won a majority government with 44 @.@ 75 % of the popular vote . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In preparation for the referendum , every household in Quebec was sent a draft of the Act Respecting the Future of Quebec ( also referred to as the Sovereignty Bill ) , with the announcement of the National Commission on the Future of Quebec to commence in February 1995 . The Commission was boycotted by the Liberal Party of Quebec , the Liberal Party of Canada , and the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada . 
 The primary issue of debate within the sovereignty movement became on what terms sovereignty would be put before the electorate . Parizeau , long identified with the <unk> wing of the party , was opposed to the PQ 's general historical preference for an economic relationship with the rest of Canada to be offered alongside sovereignty , as he thought this would encourage the Federal government to simply refuse to negotiate and cast the project as doomed , as had happened in 1980 . As a practical matter , Parizeau believed that given the emotional circumstances of separation a special partnership was unlikely , and that given free trade agreements and other multilateral institutions it was unnecessary . 
 Parizeau 's stance created opposition in the sovereignty movement , which coalesced around Bloc Québécois leader Lucien Bouchard . A popular and charismatic figure , Bouchard had come close to death from necrotizing fasciitis and lost his left leg . His recovery , and subsequent public appearances on crutches , provided a rallying point for <unk> and the public at large . Bouchard thought a proposal lacking a partnership would doom the project among soft nationalists ( such as himself ) who worried about the economic consequences of separation . 
 As polls showed Parizeau 's approach as highly unlikely to even exceed 40 % support in a referendum , leaders of the movement engaged in a heated public debate . After Parizeau moved the planned referendum date to the fall , Deputy Premier Bernard Landry aroused ire by stating he would not want to be involved in a " charge of the light brigade . " During the Bloc 's April conference , after a speech demanding a change in direction , Bouchard expressed ambivalence to a radio show about participating if a partnership proposal was not included . Mario Dumont , leader of the new Action démocratique du Québec , also stated that he would only consider participation in the referendum if a partnership was made part of the question . 
 The final findings of the National Commission , issued April 19 , included a statement that the public generally desired an economic partnership with Canada . Fearing Bouchard and Dumont would further dilute their position as the referendum wore on , Parizeau agreed to negotiate a broader approach , and would agree to a statement that included partnership with Dumont and Bouchard on June 12 , 1995 . The Agreement contained details of the partnership negotiation process , and a general plan of seeking " sovereignty " while requiring an economic and social partnership offer be negotiated and presented to the rest of Canada . Most importantly for Parizeau , the agreement also allowed the government to declare immediate independence if negotiations were not successful or heard after a successful referendum . 
 = = = Bertrand v. Quebec = = = 
 The looming referendum prompted a number of actions in the Quebec Superior Court , which were consolidated under the application of prominent lawyer Guy Bertrand . Bertrand asked for interim and permanent injunctions against the holding of the referendum . The Federal Attorney General declined to intervene , and after failing in a motion to strike the application , the Quebec Attorney General unilaterally withdrew from the hearing . The government moved the September sitting of the National Assembly two days forward to be sure that parliamentary immunity would prevent <unk> from being summoned to testify . 
 Justice Lesage of the Court found that secession could only legally be performed by constitutional amendment pursuant to Section V of the Constitution Act , 1982 , and that a unilateral declaration of independence would be " manifestly illegal . " Lesage refused to issue an injunction to stop the referendum , as he believed that to do so could paralyze the workings of government and cause more disorder than the referendum being held . The Court opted for declaratory relief , declaring that the Sovereignty Bill and the referendum constituted a serious threat to Bertrand 's Charter rights 
 Parizeau denounced the decision as undemocratic , stated that the Constitution Act , 1982 did not apply to Quebec , and refused to move the referendum timetable . Quebec Attorney General Paul Bégin stated that he believed an extra @-@ constitutional referendum was legal pursuant to international law . Daniel Johnson announced the following day that the ruling would not change the strategy of the " No " campaign . Some Federal officials questioned if their level of government could be involved after the declaration , but ultimately the Federal government decided to participate . 
 = = = Referendum question = = = 
 In a dramatic reading at the Grand Théâtre de Québec on September 6 , the final version of the Sovereignty Bill was unveiled . The bill would be tabled in the National Assembly awaiting the result of the referendum . 
 The question in the 1980 referendum , in an attempt to build a broad coalition , had sought only the authority to negotiate sovereignty with the Canadian government , and promised a second referendum to ratify the results of any negotiation . Parizeau believed a second referendum was unnecessary and would only encourage the remainder of Canada to use delaying tactics . The draft initial Act featured a question only asking for the authority to declare Quebec sovereign . 
 Pursuant to the partnership agreement with Bouchard and Dumont , the referendum question was changed to incorporate the partnership agreement . It was presented on September 7 , 1995 to be voted on October 30 , 1995 . In English , the question on the ballot asked : 
 Do you agree that Quebec should become sovereign after having made a formal offer to Canada for a new economic and political partnership within the scope of the bill respecting the future of Quebec and of the agreement signed on June 12 , 1995 ? 
 The question came under immediate fire from federalists , who had no input in the drafting . Quebec Liberal leader Daniel Johnson stated it was confusing and at the very least should have contained the word " country . " Prominent federalists argued that the referendum question should not have mentioned " partnership " proposals , because no Canadian political leaders outside Quebec had shown any interest in negotiating a possible partnership agreement with an independent Quebec , and arguably no entity capable of undertaking such negotiations actually existed . 
 Other federalists argued that the question erroneously implied an agreement had been reached between Canada and Quebec regarding a partnership on June 12 , 1995 . Parizeau would later express regret that the agreement had to be cited in the question , but noted that the June 12 , 1995 agreement had been sent to every registered voter in the province . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 = = = Participants = = = 
 Pursuant to Quebec 's Referendum Act ( enacted by the National Assembly prior to the referendum of 1980 ) , the campaign would be conducted as a provincially governed election campaign , and all campaign spending had to be authorized and accounted for under " Yes " ( Le Comité national du <unk> ) or " No " ( Comité des <unk> et des Québécois pour le NON ) umbrella committees . Each committee had an authorized budget of $ 5 million . Campaign spending by any person or group other than the official committees would be illegal after the official beginning of the referendum campaign . 
 After the agreement of June 12 , the " Yes " campaign would be headed by Jacques Parizeau . The official " No " campaign would be chaired by Liberal leader Daniel Johnson Jr . 
 Making matters more complex , especially for the " No " camp , was the federal nature of Canada . The governing Liberal Party of Canada and its leader , Prime Minister Jean Chrétien were not strongly represented in the province outside of Montreal . Chrétien 's involvement in the 1982 negotiations and his stance against the Meech Lake Accord made him unpopular with moderate francophone federalists and <unk> , who would be the swing voters in the referendum . Lucienne Robillard , a nationalist former Bourassa @-@ era cabinet minister , would serve as the federal Liberal representative on the " No " committee . Jean Charest , leader of the Federal Progressive Conservative Party , would be prominently featured , as he and the PCs had closely and productively cooperated with the Quebec Liberals in the Meech Lake negotiations . 
 Fearing missteps by politicians not used to Quebec that had occurred during the Meech Lake and Charlottetown debates , Johnson and the campaign heavily controlled appearances by Federal politicians , including Chrétien . Johnson bluntly banned any appearance by the Reform Party or its leader , Preston Manning . This would go unchallenged by Ottawa for the majority of the campaign , but created much frustration within the governing Liberals in Ottawa . Prominent Chrétien adviser Eddie Goldenberg believed that the " No " campaign at some points was more focused on the future election position of the Quebec Liberals rather than the referendum itself . 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 The campaign officially began on October 2 , 1995 , with a televised address by both leaders . Parizeau emphasized that he believed this might be the last opportunity for sovereignty for the foreseeable future , while Johnson chose to forecast the uncertainty that a " Yes " vote could provoke . 
 Johnson 's campaign focused on the practical problems created by the sovereignty process , emphasizing that an independent Quebec would be in an uncertain position regarding the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and not be able to control the Canadian dollar . Prominent business figures such as Power Corporation president Paul <unk> and Bombardier Inc. head Laurent Beaudoin spoke that they believed a " Yes " victory could spell doom for their Quebec business interests . 
 The initial campaign for the " Yes " was led by Parizeau , with Dumont campaigning separately . In addition to the traditional themes of the movement 's appeal to Quebec nationalism , his campaign attempted to highlight the slim possibility of any future reform to Canada 's federal system . Parizeau bitterly attacked business leaders for intervening in the referendum , calling it a betrayal of their Quebec customers and workers . While Parizeau 's responses were highly popular with " Yes " stalwarts , it was generally seen that speeches against business leaders were only highlighting the economic uncertainty that worried swing voters . 
 Polls in the first week were highly disappointing for the " Yes " camp , as they showed them behind by 5 @-@ 7 percentage points among decided voters , with an even larger gap if " undecided " voters were weighed toward the " No " side as would generally be expected . Parizeau , a general fixture in Quebec politics for decades whose strong views of sovereignty were well known among the populace , was under pressure to create a spark . 
 = = = Appointment of Bouchard = = = 
 In an unannounced ceremony on October 7 at the Université de Montréal , Parizeau made a surprise announcement : He appointed Bouchard as " Chief Negotiator " for the partnership talks following a " Yes " vote . The move came as a dramatic surprise to the campaign , promoting the popular Bouchard to the fore and simultaneously emphasizing the " partnership " aspect of the question . 
 Bouchard , already popular , became a sensation : in addition to his medical struggles and charisma , his more moderate approach and prominent involvement in the Meech Lake Accord while in Ottawa reminded undecided nationalist voters of Federal missteps from years past . Politicians on both sides described his appeal as messianic and almost impossible to personally attack , in contrast to the well worn figures on both sides of the referendum . " No " advisor John <unk> noted that at focus groups , when presented with statements Bouchard had made that they did not like , participants would refuse to believe he meant them . New polls eventually showed a majority of Quebecers intending to vote " Yes " 
 " No " forces , including Johnson , were shocked by the development , which required wholesale changes in strategy three weeks before the vote . Unwilling to believe Parizeau had given up his leadership role voluntarily , most in the " No " camp and Ottawa had assumed a coup had taken place , though the maneuver had been pre @-@ planned and voluntary . The dramatic events prompted many Federal politicians to lobby for similarly dramatic intervention from Ottawa and the Federal government , which were refused by the " No " committee , who believed that with Bouchard 's introduction the margin for error was dramatically reduced . The " No " campaign continued to focus on the economic benefits of Federation . 
 Bouchard 's speeches asked Quebecers to vote " Yes " to give a clear mandate for change , and that only the clarity a " Yes " vote would provide a final solution to Canada 's long standing constitutional issues and a new partnership with English Canada for the betterment of both . Bouchard 's popularity was such that his remarks that the Québécois were the " white race " with the lowest rate of reproduction , which threatened to cast the project as focused on ethnic nationalism , were traversed with ease . Bloc Québécois MP Suzanne Tremblay was less successful in this regard , and apologized after answering journalist Joyce Napier 's question of how minority francophones outside of Quebec would be helped by independence by stating that Napier 's last name and lack of a Québécois accent made her ignorant of the subject . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Pursuant to the Referendum Act , both committees were required to contribute to a brochure sent to every voter describing their positions . The official " No " brochure , written by the Quebec Liberals , stated that Quebec was a distinct society , and that Quebec should enjoy full autonomy in areas of provincial jurisdiction . Parizeau , while speaking in Hull , challenged Chrétien to tell voters that , if " No " won , Ottawa would withdraw from all provincial jurisdictions , prompting a vague response from the " No " campaign . 
 On October 21 in Longueuil , Johnson , hoping to defuse the issue , ad libbed a challenge to Chrétien to declare his position on distinct society recognition . When presented with the request Chrétien , in New York for a United Nations meeting , responded , " No . We 're not talking about the Constitution , we 're talking about the separation of Quebec from the rest of Canada . " The remarks in direct contradiction to Johnson were portrayed in the press as a blunt refusal . 
 Chrétien 's position was far more difficult than Johnson 's : Part of the 1993 Liberal election platform had been moving the country away from large scale constitutional debates . Provincial governments were also far more hostile to the constitutional process than they had been in the decade prior , with even the federal government 's typical ally , Ontario , being firmly against any pursuit of constitutional accommodation . 
 French President Jacques Chirac , while answering a call from a viewer in Montreal on CNN 's Larry King Live , declared that , if the " Yes " side were successful , the fact that the referendum had succeeded would be recognized by France . 
 At a federalist rally of about 12 @,@ 500 people was held at the Verdun Auditorium on October 24 , Chrétien introduced a focus on Quebec 's emotional attachment to Canada , promised reforms to give Quebec more power , and in a more startling announcement , declared that he would support enshrinement of Quebec as a distinct society and that he would support reforms to the Canadian constitution . The sudden reversal of Chrétien 's long @-@ standing position on the issue , along with Chrétien 's wan complexion and atypically nervous appearance , sparked considerable comment . Charest further emphasized his commitment to constitutional reform if a " No " victory was achieved . 
 = = = Aboriginal activism = = = 
 In response to the referendum , aboriginal peoples in Quebec strongly affirmed their own right to self @-@ determination . First Nations chiefs said that forcing their peoples to join an independent Quebec without their consent would violate international law , violating their rights to self @-@ determination . Aboriginal groups also demanded to be full participants in any new constitutional negotiations resulting from the referendum . 
 The Grand Council of the Crees in Northern Quebec was particularly vocal and prominent in its resistance to the idea of being included in an independent Quebec . Grand Chief Matthew Coon Come issued a legal paper , titled Sovereign Injustice , which sought to affirm the Cree right to self @-@ determination in keeping their territories in Canada . On October 24 , 1995 , the Cree organized their own referendum , asking the question : " Do you consent , as a people , that the Government of Quebec separate the James Bay Crees and Cree traditional territory from Canada in the event of a Yes vote in the Quebec referendum ? " 96 @.@ 3 % of the 77 % of Crees who cast ballots voted to stay in Canada . The Inuit of <unk> held a similar local vote , asking , " Do you agree that Quebec should become sovereign ? " , with 96 % voting No . First Nations communities contributed significantly to the tense debate on a hypothetical partition of Quebec . 
 = = = October 25 , 1995 : Three addresses = = = 
 Five days before the vote , United States President Bill Clinton , while recognizing the referendum as an internal issue of Canada , gave a minute @-@ long statement extolling the virtues of a united Canada , ending with " Canada has been a great model for the rest of the world , and has been a great partner of the United States , and I hope that can continue . " While the statement provided relief in sovereignist circles for not being a stronger endorsement of the " No " position , the implication of Clinton , who was popular in Quebec and the leader of the province 's most important trading partner , endorsing Canadian unity had strong reverberations in the electorate . 
 The same night , Prime Minister Jean Chrétien gave a televised address to the nation in English and French . Broadly similar in both languages , Chrétien promoted the virtues of Canadian federalism to Quebec , touched on the shared values of the country , warned that Parizeau would use the referendum result as a mandate to declare independence from Canada ( while explicitly not stating the result would be accepted ) , and announced that Quebec would be recognized as a distinct society and that any future constitutional reform that impacted Quebec would be made with the province 's consent . 
 The " Yes " side was provided airtime for a rebuttal in English and French . Lucien Bouchard was given the task in both languages , with the " Yes " campaign stating that a federal politician should give the response . Bouchard 's French address recounted the previous animosities of the constitutional debate , specifically targeting Chrétien 's career and actions , including showing a newspaper headline from the aftermath of the 1982 Constitution that featured Trudeau and Chrétien laughing . Bouchard then focused on the details of the partnership aspect of the proposal . He used his English address to ask Canadians to understand the " Yes " side and to announce an intention to negotiate in good faith . 
 = = = Unity Rally = = = 
 Fisheries Minister Brian Tobin , expressing anxiety to his staff about the referendum the week before , was told about a small rally planned in Place du Canada in Montreal for <unk> on October 27 . Asked by Federal advisor John Rae , Pierre Claude Nolin agreed to allow Tobin to invite Canadians outside Quebec to the rally , provided Quebec 's referendum laws were adhered to . Tobin then encouraged fellow caucus members to send as many people as possible . 
 After gaining permission from the Prime Minister ( over the objections of Quebec members of Cabinet ) , Tobin then appeared on the national English @-@ language Canada AM , and while disavowing any connection with the " No " organization , announced that the " No " side would be holding a rally in Montréal on October 27 , and implored Canadians from around the country to attend the rally to support the " crusade for Canada . " Tobin noted that committees were being formed in Ottawa and Toronto , charter aircraft were being ordered , and that Canadian Airlines had a 90 % off " unity " sale . Tobin proceeded to call the chairman of Air Canada in his capacity as a private citizen and suggest planes be made available at the same rate , a request that was granted . 
 Tobin 's Canada AM appearance resulted in calls flooding MP 's offices in English Canada , and bus companies volunteered hundreds of vehicles to take Canadians from outside of Quebec to Montreal . The rally at Place du Canada was estimated to have between 50 @,@ 000 and 125 @,@ 000 attendees , with estimates varying wildly as the crowd grew and shrank throughout the day . Jean Chrétien , Jean Charest and Daniel Johnson spoke to the crowd for the occasion , which would become known as the " Unity Rally " . Images of the large crowd with an oversized Canadian flag became iconic . Charest felt the rally helped to keep momentum for the " No " campaign moving . 
 The federal government 's intervention in the rally attracted strident protests from the " Yes " side , who felt the discounts and coordination were an illegal intervention in the referendum . Bouchard publicly contrasted the rally with what he believed was the inattention of English Canada to the collapse of the Meech Lake Accord . Nolin regretted granting permission for the " No " committee once the scale became known , and Johnson felt the rally only exacerbated tensions with regard to English Canada . Opinions on whether the rally had an impact were divided and unable to be gauged , as the rally happened while the final polls for the Monday referendum were being produced . 
 = = = Opinion polling = = = 
 During the campaign , polls were reported by all pollsters and press outlets with a general guideline of having undecided voters split unevenly in favour of the " No " side : This ranged from 2 / 3 to 3 / 4 of the undecided vote . 
 = = Result = = 
 93 @.@ 52 % of the 5 @,@ 087 @,@ 009 registered Quebecers voted in the referendum , a higher turnout than any provincial or federal election in Canada 's history . The proposal of June 12 , 1995 was rejected by voters , with 50 @.@ 58 % voting " No " and 49 @.@ 42 % voting " Yes " . The margin was significantly smaller than the 1980 referendum . The " Yes " side was the choice of French speakers by an estimated majority of about 60 % . Anglophones and allophones ( those who do not have English or French as a first language ) voted " No " by a margin of 95 % . 
 There was a majority " Yes " vote in 80 out of 125 National Assembly ridings . The " Yes " side was strongest in Saguenay – Lac @-@ Saint @-@ Jean , the Gaspé , the Centre @-@ du @-@ Québec , and generally the suburbs of Quebec City and Montreal . While there was disappointment in the results of Montreal and the Beauce , Quebec City 's soft support for " Yes " was the greatest surprise for the " Yes " side . This prompted speculation that provincial government officials did not want the uncertainty a " Yes " would bring , especially after Parizeau had promised to integrate displaced Federal civil servants in a sovereign Quebec . 
 The heavily populated West Island ridings of Montreal , home to a large anglophone population , voted " No " by margins eclipsing 80 % ; some polling stations even showed literally no " Yes " votes at all . The far North , the <unk> , the Beauce , and the Eastern Townships also generally voted " No " . 
 The riding with the highest " Yes " result was Saguenay along the northern shore with 73 @.@ 3 % voting yes ; The riding with the highest " No " result was D 'Arcy @-@ McGee in the West Island with 96 @.@ 38 % voting " No " ; The riding with the closest result was Vimont in Laval , which the " Yes " won by 6 votes . 
 = = Immediate responses = = 
 " No " supporters gathered at <unk> in Montreal , Johnson expressed hope for reconciliation in Quebec and stated he expected the Federal government to pursue Constitutional changes . Prime Minister Chrétien echoed similar sentiments to Johnson , and stated that he " extended his hand " to Quebec 's premier and government . 
 " Yes " supporters met at the Palais des <unk> de Montréal on referendum night . After the result became known , Dumont and Bouchard made speeches accepting the result as part of the movement 's democratic convictions and expressing hope that a subsequent referendum would bring a " Yes " victory . 
 Jacques Parizeau , who had not prepared a concession speech , rejected one prepared by Jean @-@ François <unk> and spoke without notes . Noting that 60 % of French @-@ speakers had voted yes , he stated that he would address French @-@ speaking Québécois as nous ( " we " ) , and that they had spoken clearly in favour of the " Yes . " He then stated that the only thing that had stopped the " Yes " side was " money and ethnic votes " and that the next referendum would be successful with only a few percentage more of French speakers onside . The remarks , widely lambasted in the Canadian and international press as ethnocentric , sparked surprise and anger in the " Yes " camp , as the movement had gone to great lengths to disown ethnic nationalism . 
 Bernard Landry confronted Parizeau at a Cabinet meeting the next morning about the remarks , stating that the movement " had to hide its head in shame . " Parizeau , after canvassing opinions , then told his Cabinet that he would resign as premier and leader of the Parti Québécois . It was later revealed that he had declared he would retire anyway if the " Yes " side lost , in an embargoed interview with TVA taped days before the referendum . 
 Five days after the referendum , André Dallaire , a schizophrenic " Yes " supporter upset at the result , broke into Chrétien 's Ottawa residence armed with a knife . Dallaire attempted to find Chrétien and kill the prime minister in his bed before being discovered by Aline Chrétien , who barricaded the bedroom door . Chrétien was unharmed , and Dallaire would eventually be found not criminally responsible by reason of mental defect . 
 = = Contingency preparation for a " Yes " victory = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> believed that a " Yes " vote of 50 % plus one vote was a binding result pursuant to the Referendum Act and the Sovereignty Bill , as well as the general international law principle of self @-@ determination . In the event of a " Yes " victory , Parizeau had said he intended to return to the National Assembly of Quebec within two days of the result and seek support for a motion recognizing the result of the referendum . In a speech he had prepared in the event of a " Yes " victory , he said a sovereign Quebec 's first move would be to " extend a hand to its Canadian neighbour " in partnership pursuant to the wording of the referendum . 
 Parizeau 's immediate plans after the referendum relied upon what he felt would be general pressure from economic markets and the business community in English Canada to stabilize the situation as quickly as possible , which he believed would mitigate any catastrophic initial events ( such as blockades ) and prepare for negotiations . 
 Despite the prominent placement of Bouchard in the referendum campaign , Parizeau planned to retain all authority with regard to negotiations , and to appoint most members of the negotiation team if they were to occur . Parizeau also believed federalist Quebecers such as Chrétien and Charest would be quickly disregarded and replaced at negotiations by representatives from the other nine provinces . If the Federal government refused to negotiate , or if negotiations were to exceed October 30 , 1996 , Parizeau stated that he would proceed with a unilateral declaration of independence ( UDI ) for an independent Quebec pursuant to Section 26 of the Sovereignty Bill . 
 Parizeau 's hopes for international recognition , a practical requirement of statehood , rested with France and the Francophonie . He believed that if Quebec declared independence in these circumstances , President of the French National Assembly Philippe Séguin , a powerful Gaullist power broker who was sympathetic to the sovereignty movement , would pressure President Chirac to recognize the declaration . He counted on a French recognition to spread quickly to the Francophonie and bring the issue to a head . Benoit Bouchard , Canada 's ambassador at the time , believed that the plan was irrational as he doubted Séguin , who was supposed to be a neutral figure in his role , could bring sufficient pressure in the country 's semi @-@ presidential system . 
 In interviews conducted in 2014 , Bouchard and Dumont both believed that negotiations would have resulted had the " Yes " side won and that Quebec would have remained in Canada with a more autonomous status . Bouchard , while approving of Parizeau 's intention to unilaterally declare independence should negotiations be refused , implied that he and Dumont would have been able to control negotiations and offer a subsequent referendum on a new agreement . Dumont noted that international recognition would have been difficult had two of the three leaders of the " Yes " campaign been against a UDI , and that he and Bouchard were willing to slow the process down if necessary . For his part , Bernard Landry believed that nothing short of a seat at the United Nations would have been accomplished had the " Yes " won . 
 = = = Federalists = = = 
 = = = = Recognition = = = = 
 As the referendum was only of force and effect pursuant to a provincial law , neither the provincially sanctioned " No " committee or the Federal government had any input on the question of the referendum . Federalists strongly differed on how or if a " Yes " referendum result would be recognized . " No " campaign head Daniel Johnson disputed the " Yes " side 's position that a simple majority was sufficient to declare independence , as he believed the question was too vague and gave negotiators too broad a mandate given the enormity of the issue and the uncertainty of negotiations . 
 Jean Chrétien refused to publicly comment or consider contingencies regarding a possible " Yes " victory , and at no point stated the referendum bound the Federal government to negotiations or permitted a unilateral declaration of independence . His wording of speeches during the referendum noted that Parizeau would interpret a " Yes " vote as a mandate to separate Quebec from Canada , but never offered recognition that this was legal or recognizable . A speech drafted for Chrétien in the event of a " Yes " vote stated that the question was too ambiguous to be binding and that only dissatisfaction with the status quo had been stated . 
 Reform party leader Preston Manning , a prominent proponent of direct democracy , would have recognized any result , with critics suspecting he preferred a " Yes " vote for electoral gain . Jean Charest recognized the referendum 's legitimacy , although a draft post @-@ referendum speech had him interpreting a " Yes " vote as a call for drastic reform of Canadian federation instead of separation . The New Democratic Party 's official position was that the result had to be recognized . 
 = = = = Negotiations = = = = 
 Little planning was made for the possibility of a " Yes " vote by the Canadian federal government , with the general consensus being that the referendum would be easily won and that planning would spark panic or give the referendum undeserved legitimacy . Some members of the federal cabinet met to discuss several possible scenarios , including referring the issue of Quebec 's independence to the Supreme Court . Senior civil servants met to consider the impact of a vote for secession on issues such as territorial boundaries and the federal debt . A dispute arose as to whether Jean Chrétien and many prominent members of Cabinet who had been elected in a Quebec ridings could represent Canada at a hypothetical partnership negotiation . 
 Manning intended to immediately call for Chrétien 's resignation and for a general election if the referendum was successful , even though the Liberals , independent of their Quebec seats , had a sizable majority in the House of Commons . There was also some doubt that Chrétien would be able to assure the Governor General that he retained enough support within his party to remain the Prime Minister of Canada . Chrétien 's intention was , whatever the result , to stay in office . New Brunswick Premier Frank McKenna later confirmed that he had been invited into a hypothetical " National Unity " cabinet if the " Yes " side was victorious , with a general understanding that former Ontario Premier Bob Rae was to be included as well . 
 = = Controversies post @-@ referendum = = 
 = = = Rejected ballots = = = 
 When the counting was completed , approximately 86 @,@ 000 ballots were rejected by Deputy Returning Officers , alleging that they had not been marked properly by the voter . Each polling station featured a Deputy Returning Officer ( appointed by the " Yes " ) who counted the ballots while a Poll Clerk ( appointed by the " No " ) recorded the result of the count . 
 Controversy arose over whether the Deputy Returning Officers of the Chomedey , Marguerite @-@ Bourgeois and Laurier @-@ Dorion ridings had improperly rejected ballots . In these ridings the " No " vote was dominant , and the proportion of rejected ballots was 12 % , 5 @.@ 5 % and 3 @.@ 6 % . Thomas Mulcair , member of the Quebec National Assembly for Chomedey , told reporters that there was " an orchestrated attempt to steal the vote " in his riding . A study released months after the referendum by McGill University concluded that ridings with a greater amount of " No " votes had a higher percentage of rejected ballots . Directeur général des <unk> du Québec ( DGEQ ) , Pierre F. Cote , launched an inquiry into the alleged irregularities , supervised by the Chief Justice of the Quebec Superior Court , Alan B. Gold . All ballots of the three ridings plus a sample of ballots from other ridings were examined . The inquiry concluded that some ballots had been rejected without valid reasons , but the incidents were isolated . The majority of the rejected ballots were " No " votes , in proportion to the majority of the valid votes in those districts . 
 Two Deputy Returning Officers were charged by the DGEQ with violating elections laws , but in 1996 were found not guilty ( a decision upheld by the Quebec Court of Appeal ) , after it was found that the ballots were not rejected in a fraudulent or irregular manner , and that there was no proof of conspiracy . A Quebec Court judge acquitted a Deputy Returning Officer charged with illegally rejecting 53 % of the ballots cast at his Chomedey polling district . 
 In 2000 , the Quebec Superior Court denied an application by Alliance Quebec that attempted to force the DGEQ to give access to all 5 million ballots , ruling that the only authority that could do so expired in 1996 . The referendum ballots were incinerated in 2008 after appeals were exhausted . In May 2005 , former PQ cabinet minister Richard Le <unk> said that the PQ coordinated the ballot rejections , which PQ officials denied . 
 = = = Citizenship and Immigration Canada = = = 
 Citizenship Court judges from across Canada were sent into the province to ensure as many qualified immigrants living in Quebec as possible had Canadian citizenship before the referendum , and thus were able to vote . The goal was to have 10 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 outstanding citizenship applications processed for residents of Quebec by mid @-@ October . 43 @,@ 855 new Quebecers obtained their Canadian citizenship during 1995 , with about one quarter of these ( 11 @,@ 429 ) were granted their citizenship during the month of October . When confronted about the issue by a Bloc Québécois MP who suggested shortcuts were being taken to hurry citizenship applications for immigrants who would most likely vote " No " , Minister of Citizenship and Immigration Sergio Marchi responded that this was common before provincial election campaigns in other provinces . 
 = = = Spending limits and Option Canada = = = 
 The Canadian Unity Council incorporated a Montreal @-@ based lobbying group called Option Canada with the mandate to promote federalism in Quebec . Option Canada received $ 1 @.@ 6 million in funding from the Canadian Heritage Department in 1994 , $ 3 @.@ 35 million in 1995 and $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 1996 . The Montreal Gazette reported in March 1997 that the group also had other funds from undeclared sources . A Committee to Register Voters Outside Quebec was created to help citizens who had left Quebec before the 1995 vote register on the electoral list . The Committee handed out pamphlets during the referendum , including a form to be added to the list of voters . The pamphlet gave out a toll @-@ free number as contact information , which was the same number as the one used by the Canadian Unity Council . 
 After the referendum , the <unk> filed 20 criminal charges of illegal expenditures by Option Canada and others on behalf of the " No " side , which were dropped after the Supreme Court of Canada in Libman vs. Quebec @-@ Attorney General ruled sections of the Referendum Act restricting third @-@ party expenditures were unconstitutionally restrictive under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms . 
 Aurèle Gervais , communications director for the Liberal Party of Canada , as well as the students ' association at Ottawa 's Algonquin College , were charged with infractions of Quebec 's Election Act after the referendum for illegally hiring buses to bring supporters to Montreal for the rally . Environment Minister Sergio Marchi told reporters that Gervais should wear [ the charges against him ] like a badge of honour . " Two years later , the Quebec Superior Court dismissed the charges , stating that the actions took place outside of Quebec and so the Quebec Election Act did not apply . 
 The <unk> asked retired Quebec court judge Bernard Grenier in 2006 to investigate Option Canada after the publishing of Normand Lester and Robin Philpot 's " The Secrets of Option Canada " , which alleged over $ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 had been spent helping the " No " campaign . Grenier determined that C $ 539 @,@ 000 was illegally spent by the " No " side during the referendum , although he drew no conclusions over the " Unity Rally . " Grenier said there was no evidence of wrongdoing by Jean Charest or that the rally was part of a plan to sabotage the sovereigntist movement . Grenier urged Quebecers in his report to move on . The Bloc Québécois called for a federal inquiry , which did not occur . 
 = = = Responses = = = 
 After the referendum , the ballot for Quebec elections was redesigned to reduce the size of the space where voters could indicate their choice and the rules on allowable markings were relaxed , so that Deputy Returning Officers would have fewer grounds for rejecting ballots . The Quebec government also changed the Electoral Act so that voters would need to show a Canadian passport , Quebec drivers ' license or Quebec provincial health care card at the polling station for identification purposes in future elections . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Quebec = = = 
 Parizeau 's resignation led to Bouchard becoming the leader of the PQ and Premier unopposed . While Bouchard maintained a third referendum was forthcoming provided " winning conditions " occurred , his government 's chief priority became reform of the Quebec economy . Daniel Johnson would resign as leader of the Liberal Party of Quebec , and after significant pressure in English Canada , Charest resigned as national PC leader and was acclaimed as leader of the Liberals . Bouchard would defeat Charest in the 1998 election , and subsequently continue his government 's focus on austerity . 
 Bouchard retired in 2001 , and was replaced by Bernard Landry , who promises a more robust stance on the sovereignty issue . Charest would become Premier in the 2003 Quebec election . 
 = = = Distinct society and veto = = = 
 After the referendum , Chrétien attempted to pursue constitutional recognition of distinct society , but was stopped by the blunt refusal of Ontario Premier Mike Harris to discuss any constitutional matters . Not wanting to engage the same negotiations with provincial governments that had dominated the Trudeau and Mulroney governments , Chrétien opted to pursue unilateral Federal changes to fulfill his government 's commitments . This included the Act respecting constitutional amendments , which required permission from the provinces of Quebec , Ontario , British Columbia for Federal approval to be granted to any Constitutional amendment , granting Quebec a de facto veto . The federal parliament also officially recognized Quebec as a distinct society . Both changes , not being constitutional amendments , are theoretically reversible by future parliaments . 
 = = = " Plan B " = = = 
 Chrétien also pursued what he called " Plan B , " hoping to convince Quebec voters that economic and legal obstacles would follow if Quebec were to declare itself sovereign , whose public face would become professor Stéphane Dion . This included a reference to the Supreme Court of Canada , which followed Federal intervention post @-@ referendum into the Bertrand case : The 1998 Reference Re Secession of Quebec stated that unilateral secession was illegal , would require a constitutional amendment , and that only a clear majority on a clear question could bring about any sort of obligation on the federal and provincial governments to negotiate secession . 
 After the decision , the Liberal government passed the Clarity Act , which stated that any future referendum would have to be on a " clear question " and that it would have to represent a " clear majority " for the federal Parliament to recognize its validity . Section 1 ( 4 ) of the Act stated that questions that provided for only a mandate for negotiation or envisioned other partnerships with Canada would be considered unclear , and thus not recognized . The National of Assembly of Quebec passed Bill 99 , proclaiming the right of self @-@ determination pursuant to the Referendum Act . Bill 99 's constitutionality is currently being litigated . 
 = = = Sponsorship scandal = = = 
 Following the narrow victory , the Chrétien government established a pro @-@ Canada advertising campaign . The aim was to sponsor hunting , fishing and other recreational events , and in doing so promote Canada within Quebec . While many of the events sponsored were legitimate , a large sum of money was mismanaged . Auditor General Sheila Fraser released a report in November 2003 , outlining the problems . This eventually led to the Gomery Commission 's investigation of the Sponsorship Scandal . Bloc Québécois leader Gilles Duceppe argued that Canada was trying to " buy " federalism and using it as an excuse to channel dirty money into Liberal @-@ friendly pockets . This scandal 's extensive coverage in Quebec contributed support to the sovereignty movement . 
 = = <unk> Works / Further Reading = = 
 Argyle , Ray . Turning Points : The Campaigns That Changed Canada - 2011 and Before ( 2011 ) excerpt and text search ch 15 
 Cardinal , Mario ( 2005 ) . Breaking Point : Quebec , Canada , The 1995 Referendum . Montreal : Bayard Canada Books . ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 068 @-@ X. 
 Chrétien , Jean ( 2007 ) . My Years as Prime Minister . Toronto : Vintage Canada . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 676 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 CBC documentary Breaking Point ( 2005 ) 
 Robin Philpot ( 2005 ) . Le <unk> <unk> . Montreal : Les éditions des <unk> . ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 189 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , David ( 2014 ) . <unk> Secession . Portland : Bloomsbury Publishing . ISBN <unk> . 
 Hébert , Chantal ( With Jean Lapierre ) ( 2014 ) . The Morning After : The 1995 Referendum and the Day that Almost Was . Toronto : Alfred A Knopf Canada . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 345 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Paul Jay documentary <unk> Referendum 
 Fox , John ; Andersen , Robert ; Dubonnet , Joseph ( 1999 ) . " The Polls and the 1995 Quebec Referendum " . Canadian Journal of Sociology 24 ( 3 ) : 411 – 424 . JSTOR <unk> . 
 = Zack Greinke = 
 Donald <unk> " Zack " Greinke ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ kee ; born October 21 , 1983 ) is an American professional baseball pitcher for the Arizona Diamondbacks of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . He previously played for the Kansas City Royals , Milwaukee Brewers , Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim , and Los Angeles Dodgers . 
 The Royals selected Greinke in 2002 MLB draft after he won the Gatorade National Player of the Year Award as a high school senior . After playing in the minor leagues , he made his MLB debut in 2004 . His career was almost derailed by his battles with depression and anxiety in 2005 – 2006 , and he missed most of the 2006 season . He returned in 2007 as a relief pitcher before rejoining the starting rotation in 2008 and developing into one of the top pitchers in the game . In 2009 , he appeared in the MLB All @-@ Star Game , led the major leagues in earned run average , and won the American League Cy Young Award . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Donald <unk> Greinke was born in Orlando , Florida , the son of teachers Donald and Marsha Greinke . He was active in Little League and also excelled in tennis and golf tournaments as a youth . As a teenager , Greinke helped lead his team to the Senior League World Series title in 1999 . He played shortstop for the team and his coach estimated that he hit close to <unk> in the tournament . 
 Greinke was primarily a shortstop when he started playing baseball at Apopka High School . He hit over .400 with 31 home runs in his high school career . He worked as a relief pitcher as a sophomore and junior , before becoming a starting pitcher as a senior . During his senior season , in 2002 , Greinke compiled a 9 – 2 win @-@ loss record , a 0 @.@ 55 earned run average ( ERA ) , and 118 strikeouts in 63 innings . He also held opposing batters to a <unk> average . He led his team to a 32 – 2 record and their third straight district title , and he was selected as Gatorade National Player of the Year . After the high school season ended , he played in the Florida Athletic Coaches Association All @-@ Star Classic and impressed pro scouts with his performance against some of the best hitters in the country . 
 Greinke was selected in the first round of the 2002 Major League Baseball draft by the Kansas City Royals , who felt he was a polished player who could move quickly through their system . Greinke turned down a scholarship offer from Clemson University to sign with the Royals for a $ 2 @.@ 5 million signing bonus . 
 = = Minor leagues = = 
 Greinke pitched in six minor league games for the Royals farm teams in 2002 : three games for the Gulf Coast Royals , two for the Low @-@ A Spokane Indians , and two innings for the High @-@ A Wilmington Blue Rocks of the Carolina League . He had a 3 @.@ 97 ERA in 111 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 In 2003 , Greinke opened the season with Wilmington , where he was 11 – 1 with a 1 @.@ 14 ERA in 14 starts . Those numbers earned spots on the Carolina League mid @-@ season and post @-@ season all @-@ star teams as well as Carolina League Pitcher of the Year award . The Blue Rocks ' manager , Billy Gardner , Jr . , remarked that Greinke was " the best pitcher I 've ever seen at this level of the minor leagues . " He was promoted in July to the AA Wichita Wranglers of the Texas League , where in nine starts he was 4 – 3 with a 3 @.@ 23 ERA . He had a couple of games where he struggled at Wichita and gave up a lot of runs . However , he bounced back and helped them make the playoffs with a victory in the final game of the season . 
 Greinke was named the organization 's Minor League Pitcher of the Year for 2003 . He was promoted by the Royals in 2004 to the Omaha Royals of the Pacific Coast League , where he was 1 – 1 with a 2 @.@ 51 ERA in six starts . 
 = = Major league career = = 
 = = = Kansas City Royals = = = 
 Greinke was called up to the major leagues on May 22 , 2004 , and made his major league debut against the Oakland Athletics , allowing two runs in five innings . At 20 years old he was the youngest player in the majors and came close to picking up the win , but the team 's closer , Jeremy Affeldt , gave up the lead with two outs in the bottom of the ninth inning . 
 Greinke recorded his first career win on June 8 , when he pitched seven scoreless innings against the Montreal Expos . His first major league hit was a home run off Arizona Diamondbacks pitcher Russ Ortiz in a 12 – 11 loss on June 10 , 2005 ; however he also allowed 15 hits in that game , which tied a club record . 
 Greinke was quiet and sometimes awkward in the clubhouse . To alleviate some of his anxiety and solitude , the Royals arranged for him to live with Royals Hall of Fame third baseman George Brett . Still , Greinke 's uneasiness grew . By the 2005 – 2006 offseason , he almost quit baseball . Greinke later remarked that , at the time , he did not expect to return to baseball . He left spring training for personal reasons in late February 2006 . It was later revealed that he was suffering from social anxiety disorder and depression . He reported back to the Royals ' spring training facility in Surprise , Arizona , on April 17 , where he underwent ongoing pitching sessions . He was placed on the 60 @-@ day disabled list due to psychological issues and took time away from baseball entirely . He began seeing a sports psychologist and taking anti @-@ depressant medication . 
 In 2007 , Greinke returned to the Royals rotation at the start of the season , but was sent to the bullpen in early May . Greinke returned to the rotation in 2008 and performed well that season . His 3 @.@ 47 ERA was the best by a full @-@ time Royals starter in 11 years . On January 26 , 2009 , he agreed to a four @-@ year contract with the Royals worth $ 38 million . 
 After ending the 2008 season with 15 scoreless innings , Greinke started off 2009 by not allowing a run in his first 24 innings , which meant that for 39 innings in a row , he had not given up a run . Greinke was named American League ( AL ) Pitcher of the Month for April , his five wins , 0 @.@ 50 ERA and 44 strikeouts all tops in the Majors . On August 25 , Greinke struck out 15 batters , breaking Mark <unk> 's team record for strikeouts in a single game . On August 30 , Greinke had a one @-@ hit complete game against the Seattle Mariners . 
 Greinke 's record for the 2009 season was 16 – 8 , and he posted an ERA of 2 @.@ 16 , the lowest in MLB . On October 21 , he was named American League Pitcher of the Year by Sporting News . On October 28 , Greinke was awarded the MLBPA Players Choice AL Pitcher of the Year . On November 17 , 2009 , he won the AL Cy Young Award . Greinke credited some of his performance to his use of " modern pitching metrics " — statistics on team defense and defense independent pitching statistics — to calibrate his own approach to pitching . Greinke specifically mentioned FIP ( fielding independent pitching ) , an indicator developed by sabermetrician Tom Tango , as his favorite statistic . " That 's pretty much how I pitch , to try to keep my FIP as low as possible . 
 = = = Milwaukee Brewers = = = 
 On December 17 , 2010 , Greinke reportedly asked the Royals to trade him , claiming that he was not motivated to play for a rebuilding team . The Royals were unlikely to afford signing Greinke to a long @-@ term deal once he became a free agent , so they agreed to trade him for some quality prospects . On December 19 , he was traded to the Milwaukee Brewers with <unk> Betancourt and $ 2 million for Alcides Escobar , Lorenzo Cain , Jeremy Jeffress , and Jake <unk> . He was given the number 13 , instead of his preferred number 23 , due to number 23 already being issued to Rickie Weeks . Greinke would later admit that he handled the trade request poorly , that he was " pretty rude " on the way out , but the deal worked out well for both teams . 
 In February 2011 , before reporting to his first spring training with the Brewers , Greinke suffered a fractured rib while playing basketball . He started the 2011 season on the disabled list . 
 Greinke made his Brewers debut in the second game of a doubleheader on May 4 , 2011 . Despite missing the first month of the season because of his injury , Greinke finished second on the team in wins with a 16 – 6 record . He also had a 3 @.@ 83 ERA , and 201 strikeouts ( 7th in the National League ( NL ) ) in 171 innings pitched while surrendering 45 walks . Greinke became only the fifth Brewer pitcher to strike out 200 + batters in a season . He was fourth in the NL in won @-@ lost percentage ( <unk> ) and sixth in wins . He went a perfect 11 – 0 in his starts at Miller Park , the Brewers ' home stadium . 
 On April 7 , 2012 , the Brewers defeated the Cardinals 6 – 0 in Greinke 's first start of the season after he pitched seven scoreless innings while giving up four hits and striking out 7 . 
 In an oddity , Greinke became the first pitcher to start three straight games in the Majors in 95 years . On July 7 , he was ejected from the game after just 4 pitches for angrily throwing the ball into the ground following a close play at first base . The following day , Greinke started again , but lasted only until the third inning . The All @-@ Star break followed , and Greinke was the Brewers ' starter on July 13 , the team 's next game . Greinke 's third start ended after 5 innings . Before this , the most recent pitcher to start three consecutive games was Red Faber in the 1917 , who started both games of a September 3 doubleheader , throwing just six innings in total , followed by a complete game win the following day . 
 Greinke never recorded a loss in any of his starts at Miller Park . 
 = = = Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim = = = 
 Despite his success with the Brewers , the team was struggling and not likely to make a playoff run . When talks on a contract extension broke down , the team traded Greinke to the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim on July 27 in exchange for top infield prospect Jean Segura and pitchers Ariel Peña and Johnny Hellweg . Brewers General Manager Doug Melvin remarked that it was one of the tougher decisions he had to make because he was very fond of Greinke . 
 Greinke made his first start for the Angels on July 29 . After a stretch of four unproductive starts from August 3 – 19 ( 1 – 1 , 7 @.@ 20 ERA in 25 innings ) , Greinke followed up with four consecutive starts of at least seven innings and two or fewer runs — all of them wins . In those starts , he produced a 1 @.@ 88 ERA in 281 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 Greinke became the first pitcher since 1920 to record 13 strikeouts in five innings or less in a game against the Seattle Mariners on September 25 . He then combined with four other Angels pitchers to tie an American League record by striking out 20 batters in a nine @-@ inning game . He finished his time with the Angels with a 6 – 2 record and a 3 @.@ 53 ERA in 13 starts . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers = = = 
 Greinke agreed to a six @-@ year free agent contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers worth $ 147 million , on December 8 , 2012 . The deal , which was finalized on December 10 , was the largest ever for a right @-@ handed pitcher at the time it was signed . It was surpassed a year later by Félix Hernández 's seven @-@ year $ 175 million contract extension with the Seattle Mariners . Greinke later claimed that he chose the Dodgers over the Texas Rangers , who also were pursuing him , primarily because they offered more money . 
 On April 11 , 2013 , Greinke fractured his left collarbone in a brawl with Carlos Quentin of the San Diego Padres after Quentin was hit by an inside pitch and charged the mound . He was placed on the disabled list and it was revealed that he would require surgery , which was performed on April 13 . It was estimated that he would miss eight weeks of the season . However , he returned to action on May 10 when he pitched in a rehab game for the Class @-@ A Rancho Cucamonga Quakes . He returned to the Dodgers on May 15 . 
 On June 11 , 2013 , Greinke was hit in the head and neck area by Arizona Diamondbacks pitcher Ian Kennedy , leading to a bench @-@ clearing brawl . Because Greinke did not participate in the fight , he was not ejected . 
 Greinke picked up his 100th career win on August 5 , 2013 , against the St. Louis Cardinals . He was 5 – 0 with a 1 @.@ 23 ERA during the month of August and was selected as National League Pitcher of the Month . Greinke finished his first season with the Dodgers with a 15 – 4 record and 2 @.@ 63 ERA in 28 starts . He also batted .328 , the highest batting average for a Dodgers pitcher since Orel Hershiser in the 1993 season . He was awarded with the Silver Slugger Award as the best hitting pitcher in the National League . 
 Greinke began the 2014 season by setting an MLB record with 22 straight starts ( dating back to July 2013 ) where he allowed two or fewer earned runs . He was selected to the National League squad at the 2014 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game and finished the season with a 17 – 8 record and a 2 @.@ 71 ERA in 32 starts , the highest win total in his career . He won the Gold Glove Award as the best fielding pitcher in the National League . 
 When Justin Upton of the San Diego Padres homered against Greinke in the eighth inning on June 13 , 2015 , it was the last run he surrendered until the All @-@ Star break . Greinke was then selected to the All @-@ Star Game , his second straight appearance , and subsequently chosen to be the starting pitcher for the National League squad . At that point in the season , Greinke carried a major league @-@ leading 1 @.@ 48 ERA with a 7 – 2 record and 35 2 ⁄ 3 consecutive scoreless innings . After Greinke retired 28 consecutive batters over a span of two starts , Nationals outfielder Michael Taylor ended the streak in the third inning on July 19 . His scoreless inning streak lasted until a July 26 start against the New York Mets at Citi Field . He shared the NL player of the week honors with his teammate Clayton Kershaw for July 13 – 19 . Greinke finished the 2015 season with a 19 – 3 record , 200 strikeouts and a major league best 1 @.@ 66 ERA . His ERA was the second lowest in Dodgers history behind Rube Marquard in 1916 , and his ERA + ( 225 ) and WHIP ( 0 @.@ 844 ) were the best in franchise history . 
 Greinke pitched in two games in the 2015 National League Division Series against the New York Mets . He allowed five runs in 13 2 ⁄ 3 innings and took the loss in the deciding fifth game in the series . At the conclusion of the series , it was announced that he would opt out of the last three years of his contract with the Dodgers and become a free agent . He officially opted out on November 3 . 
 After the season , Greinke was selected as the Outstanding National League Pitcher at the Players Choice Awards , and won his second Gold Glove Award . Greinke finished second in the NL Cy Young Award voting to Jake Arrieta . 
 = = = Arizona Diamondbacks = = = 
 On December 8 , 2015 , Greinke signed a six @-@ year , $ 206 @.@ 5 million contract with the Arizona Diamondbacks . Greinke started on Opening Day 2016 at Chase Field against the Colorado Rockies ; he gave up seven runs in four innings , including two home runs to rookie shortstop Trevor Story , who was making his MLB debut . The Diamondbacks lost the game 10 – 5 . In his second start , on April 9 , Greinke matched up against Kyle Hendricks and the Chicago Cubs . He allowed three runs in the first inning , and struggled through the rest of his outing . The Diamondbacks lost the game 4 – 2 . Greinke got his first win as a Diamondback on April 19 , 2016 against the San Francisco Giants , allowing just one run in over six innings of work . On July 3 , 2016 , Greinke was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list due to a left oblique strain . 
 = = Pitching style = = 
 Greinke throws six different pitches : 
 Four @-@ seam fastball — 91 to 96 miles per hour ( 146 – 154 km / h ) 
 Two @-@ seam fastball — 91 to 95 miles per hour ( 146 – 153 km / h ) 
 Cutter — 88 to 91 miles per hour ( 142 – 146 km / h ) 
 Slider — 83 to 87 miles per hour ( 134 – 140 km / h ) 
 <unk> — 68 to 77 miles per hour ( 109 – 124 km / h ) 
 <unk> — 87 to 90 miles per hour ( 140 – 145 km / h ) 
 His curveball , like his divisional rival Madison Bumgarner , has two speeds with different types of movement , though he throws his slow curveball much more frequently than does Bumgarner , and will sometimes throw a curve that is more in the middle range combining the types of movement . His two @-@ seamer is his most @-@ used pitch against right @-@ handed hitters and is used more frequently than against lefties , as is his slider . His changeup is only thrown to left @-@ handed hitters . Greinke 's curveball is typically used early in the count , while his slider is his most common 2 @-@ strike pitch . 
 Greinke 's slider has been one of his more effective pitches . <unk> have only a .154 batting average and .230 slugging percentage against the pitch . It has produced 51 % of his strikeouts . Its whiff rate is 42 % , and more than half the pitches put in play are ground balls . However , he limits the use of the slider in order to not put excessive strain on his arm . 
 Greinke has produced good strikeout @-@ to @-@ walk ratios throughout his career , finishing in his league 's top 10 five times and ranking fifth among active pitchers in the category , at 3 @.@ 5 : 1 as of the start of the 2014 season . 
 Greinke has been described as a " scientist as a pitcher " and is known for preparing for each start more extensively than most . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Greinke is married to Emily Kuchar , whom he met while attending Apopka High School . Kuchar is a former Dallas Cowboys Cheerleader and was Miss Daytona Beach USA 2008 . On April 17 , 2015 , Kuchar announced via Twitter that they were expecting their first child . Their son , Bode , was born on July 23 , 2015 . 
 His younger brother , Luke , was also a pitcher . Luke played college baseball at Auburn University and was drafted by the New York Yankees in the 12th round of the 2008 MLB draft , but was out of baseball a year later because of injuries . 
 = Heavy Crown ( song ) = 
 " Heavy Crown " is a song recorded by Australian rapper Iggy Azalea featuring English singer Ellie Goulding , recorded for Reclassified ( 2014 ) , the reissue of Azalea 's debut studio album The New Classic ( 2014 ) . Azalea and Goulding co @-@ wrote the song with its producers , Salt Wives and The Invisible Men , with additional writing from Jon Turner . " Heavy Crown " received generally positive reviews from critics , who commended Azalea 's delivery on the track , finding it to be superior to that of her earlier songs . 
 " Heavy Crown " was used as the backing track for the trailer to the 2014 film Kingsman : The Secret Service . In the week of the album 's release , " Heavy Crown " charted at number 9 on the Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and entered two digital urban subsidiary charts , the Hot Digital R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , where it peaked at 37 , and the Hot Digital Rap Songs , where it peaked at 23 . The track also peaked on the lower ends of the Czech Republic and Slovakian digital singles charts . 
 = = Background = = 
 Azalea first announced the song in September 2014 , in one of many tweets she made where she discussed Reclassified , one in @-@ particular reading " Me and Ellie Goulding have a nice little <unk> together on there . <unk> " . During the promotional campaign leading up to the release of Reclassified , Azalea revealed that she would be collaborating with Ellie Goulding on a track titled " Heavy Crown " featured in the film Kingsman : The Secret Service . In October 2014 , while giving an interview with <unk> , Azalea mentioned her longtime desire to work with Goulding , and after meeting her several times , was approached about a song that would eventually become " Heavy Crown " . She recalled one meeting , " she played it for me and I was in love with it and just felt it was so kind of appropriate for this to be our collaboration " , because it " brings out something different in both artists that you don 't usually see . " On 14 November , a preview of " Heavy Crown " was uploaded to Azalea 's VEVO channel . In December 2014 , " Trouble " was announced to be the next single from Reclassified , as opposed to " Heavy Crown " . Fans reacted badly , leading to Azalea releasing a statement explaining that test audiences had preferred " Trouble " over " Heavy Crown " , and that the duet with Goulding was not " formatted for pop or rhythmic radio " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Heavy Crown " is a hip @-@ hop , pop , electronica track that runs for a total duration of three minutes and fifty @-@ two seconds . Bianca Gracie from Idolator observed that " the hard @-@ hitting , thumping tune finds Azalea switching up her usually laid @-@ back flow with a snarled , teeth @-@ baring rap — which is juxtaposed by Goulding 's chilling vocals . " , while Jonathan <unk> from <unk> described the song as an " aggressive , warmongering track dedicated to her haters . " Jim Farber from the New York Daily News commented that " ' Heavy Crown ' has a tribal rock beat and a cocky cameo vocal from Ellie Goulding " , and went on to analyse the lyrics , referring to Azalea 's dispute with Snoop Dogg , " one new verse from Iggy addresses a recent , and light @-@ hearted , beef . ' Get rid of the makeup / let ’ s be just who you is , ' Azalea raps at one point , alluding to a series of tit @-@ for @-@ tat spats in October with Snoop Dogg . " . Latin Post writer Esther Jang described Goulding 's delivery of the chorus as her using her " signature echo @-@ y voice " , going on to describe the tracks production as " ' 70s bass guitar @-@ heavy rock " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Heavy Crown " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Kevipod from Direct Lyrics described the song as " the most @-@ anticipated track " from Reclassified , writing " love the contrast between the menacing , raucous Iggy Azalea verses to the vulnerable Ellie choruses " . When the track premiered ahead of the release of Reclassified , one writer from Capital wrote that " it doesn 't disappoint ! " . Carl Smith from <unk> described the track as " SASS <unk> " , ending his review with " it 's generally just our new office jam " . The track was also well received by Jim Farber of the New York Daily News , who commended the tracks instrumental and Goulding 's " cocky " cameo . In a positive review , Nolan Feeney from TIME commented that " ' Heavy Crown ' won ’ t change the minds of anyone who ’ s already written off the rapper , but Iggy 's double @-@ time rap over the militaristic march seems more at ease than the occasionally clunky verses on early singles . " He went on to describe Azalea 's first verse in the song as " unforgettable " , and described Goulding 's vocals as " smooth " . A writer for Fuse commented that " Iggy and Ellie know they 're on top and aren 't planning on moving from their spot anytime soon . " 
 Upon Reclassified 's release , many critics deemed " Heavy Crown " to be a standout cut from the album . Idolator 's Mike Wass said that of the new material on the re @-@ release , it " stands out as another future hit " . Allan Raible of ABC News picked the track as one of three ' focus tracks ' from Reclassified , writing " ' Heavy Crown ' is interesting because during the verses , the beat is really hard @-@ hitting and during the chorus , the music recedes to give Goulding a lush minimalist backdrop . It creates an interesting bit of contrast . " A writer for The Cavalier Daily also thought of " Heavy Crown " as a standout track from Reclassified , and described it as a harsher alternative to Azalea 's 2014 single " Black Widow " , specifically the song 's " much harder beat drop " . 
 In a mixed review of the song , Daryl Nelson from The Boombox thought that Azalea seemed " pissed " on the track , and questioned the over @-@ usage of the term " hater " . Jake <unk> , a writer for the Badger Herald , panned Reclassified . In his review , he described " Heavy Crown " as an ironic statement , " but it ’ s on ' Heavy Crown , ' in a candid moment of irony , where Azalea is most telling . ' Get rid of the makeup let us just see who you is , ' she raps . For an Australian @-@ born rapper who denies her roots and sits comfortably in American culture , Azalea seems to forget how much proverbial makeup she cakes on herself " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Digital Spy named " Heavy Crown " as one of their weekly ' 10 Tracks You Need To Hear ' , placing the song at number three on their list , writing " together they deliver a hardline and bolshy hip @-@ hop number that is sure to help secure that chart throne for a little longer yet " . Fuse placed the track at number eleven on their list of the ' 12 Best Female Collaborations Of 2014 ' , describing the track as a " ( tragically ) under @-@ appreciated jam " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Reclassified liner notes . 
 Locations 
 Recorded at Sarm West Coast and Grove Studios . ( London , UK ) 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Eilat Airport = 
 Eilat Airport ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> Eilat ; Arabic : مطار <unk> ) , also known as J. <unk> Airport ( IATA : ETH , ICAO : <unk> ) , is an Israeli airport located in the city of Eilat , and named for Arkia Airlines founder Yakov <unk> ( Jacob Housman ) . Eilat Airport is located in the central area of the city , next to Route 90 ( The Arava Road ) . It mostly handles domestic flights to Tel Aviv and Haifa with international flights operating instead to Ovda International Airport , but a few international flights on aircraft that can handle the relatively short runway use Eilat as well . 
 The airport is expected to cease civilian operations by 2017 when Eilat 's new international airport , Ramon Airport , should become operational . 
 = = History = = 
 Eilat Airport was established in 1949 by the Israel Air Force , following the 1948 Israeli War of Independence . During its early years , the airport aimed to establish a comprehensive set of connections to towns across the country , most notably with Tel Aviv and Haifa . Consequently , a regular route from Eilat to Lod Airport ( now Ben Gurion International Airport ) was started . Soon after , a route to Haifa Airport became operational . In December 1950 , following their establishment , Arkia Israel Airlines became the largest domestic operator at Eilat Airport , taking the position of the former companies <unk> and <unk> . To this day , they retain this position . Later , in 1964 the runway was expanded to 1500 m , and a passenger terminal was built . Five years later , the runway was further expanded increasing the length to 1900 m . In 1975 , Eilat Airport started to attract Scandinavian airlines . The first international flight arrival to Eilat , of the Danish airline , Sterling Airlines landed in this year . Since then , many international routes have been established directly linking Eilat with Europe , however , the airport is still unable to handle landings of large aircraft which have to fly to Ovda International Airport . 
 In the 1994 Peace Agreement between Israel and Jordan it was decided that operations were supposed to be transferred from Eilat Airport to Aqaba Airport . The original plan was to rename Aqaba Airport as Aqaba @-@ Eilat Peace International Airport . The agreement was never followed , however , and an agreement between the two countries in March 1997 , stipulated that domestic flights would continue to use Eilat Airport , whilst no further action to move international flights took place . 
 In August 2005 , a Katyusha rocket fired from Jordan landed near a taxi traveling just 15 yards ( 14 m ) from the airport perimeter fence . On August 8 , 2013 , the Israeli Military instructed the airport to cancel all landings and departures after a security assessment . Militants in Egypt 's Sinai Peninsula had fired rockets towards the city in recent years , but it was not immediately clear if that was the reason for the closure . 
 = = The airport today = = 
 Today , Eilat Airport sustains peak loads concentrated into Thursdays , Saturdays , and Sundays . On Thursdays and Sundays , flights are handled in a period of a few hours in the mornings and on Saturdays only the evening hours are used . Often there are days when 10 @,@ 000 passengers on 120 flights are channelled through the 2 @,@ 800 m2 terminal , counting as one of the highest peak loads worldwide in this category . 
 International passenger traffic decreased from magnitude of 20 @,@ 000 in a year in late 2000s to 5 @,@ 000 in a year in 2010s . 
 Although the airport is capable of handling Boeing 767 aircraft , for large numbers of these aircraft , significant investment would be needed . Consequently , the largest aircraft regularly flying to the airport are Boeing 757 . The main problem at the airport is the lack of ramp space , with just two parking positions for large aircraft . As a result , El Al operates regular shuttle flights to Ben Gurion International Airport carrying passengers from around the world on 757s and 737s . 
 The small size of the airport is perhaps best illustrated with the fact that a Boeing 757 cannot taxi past another aircraft to parking positions . As a result , controllers are responsible not only for ensuring that valuable space is utilised , but also ensuring that other aircraft are kept circling until larger aircraft are parked . Despite these limitations , the airport successfully handles ten to twenty times more traffic than airports of a comparable size . It is for this reason that plans to relocate the airport are so important in the short @-@ term scale . In 2006 , a NIS 5 @.@ 5 million renovation programme of Eilat Airport 's terminal and runway was undertaken , designed to sustain the airport until it is replaced in the near future . 
 = = The future = = 
 Since the beginning of the 1990s the authorities in Eilat have considered relocating the airport , approximately 20 km north of Eilat , to the Ora Well area near Be 'er Ora . There were numerous reasons behind this idea . Primarily , the fact that safety would be improved as in its current location , there is the chance of aircraft crashing into buildings in the city . Other reasons were the pure value of the land which the airport occupies , and the fact that the airport is dividing the city of Eilat into two parts with the hotels and tourist areas on one side , and the residential buildings on the other . 
 On 24 July 2011 the Israeli cabinet approved the construction of a new airport to be built in <unk> , 18 km ( 11 mi ) north of Eilat , next to Be 'er Ora . It will have a 3 @,@ 600 m ( 11 @,@ 800 ft ) runway , longer than the runway in Eilat , which will allow large aircraft to land . The airport is due to open in 2017 and will be named after the first Israeli astronaut Ilan Ramon and his son Assaf Ramon , who died six years later when his F @-@ 16 fighter jet crashed over the West Bank . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = Sarah Trimmer = 
 Sarah Trimmer ( née Kirby ; 6 January 1741 – 15 December 1810 ) was a writer and critic of 18th @-@ century British children 's literature , as well as an educational reformer . Her periodical , The Guardian of Education , helped to define the emerging genre by seriously reviewing children 's literature for the first time ; it also provided the first history of children 's literature , establishing a canon of the early landmarks of the genre that scholars still use today . Trimmer 's most popular children 's book , Fabulous Histories , inspired numerous children 's animal stories and remained in print for over a century . 
 Trimmer was also an active philanthropist . She founded several Sunday schools and charity schools in her parish . To further these educational projects , she wrote textbooks and manuals for women interested in starting their own schools . Trimmer 's efforts inspired other women , such as Hannah More , to establish Sunday school programs and to write for children and the poor . 
 Trimmer 's works are dedicated to maintaining many aspects of the social and political status quo . As a high church Anglican , she was intent on promoting the established Church of England and on teaching young children and the poor the doctrines of Christianity . Her writings outlined the benefits of social hierarchy , arguing that each class should remain in its God @-@ given position . Yet , while supporting many of the traditional political and social ideologies of her time , Trimmer questioned others , such as those surrounding gender and the family . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sarah Trimmer was born on 6 January 1741 in Ipswich , England to Joshua Kirby and Sarah ( née Bell ) ; her father was a noted artist and served as President of the Society of Artists of Great Britain . Trimmer had one younger brother , William ; she was apparently the better writer , for she would sometimes compose his school essays for him . As a young girl , Trimmer attended Mrs. <unk> ’ s boarding school in Ipswich , an experience she always remembered fondly . In 1755 , the family moved to London when her father , who had written several important works on perspective , became the tutor of perspective to the Prince of Wales . Because of her father 's connections within the artistic community , Trimmer was able to meet the painters William Hogarth and Thomas Gainsborough as well as the by @-@ then legendary writer and critic Samuel Johnson . She made a favourable impression on Johnson when she immediately produced her pocket copy of John Milton 's Paradise Lost ( 1667 ) to help settle a dispute between her father and Johnson over a particular passage . Johnson , delighted that she admired Milton enough to carry his works with her at all times , " subsequently invited her to his house and presented her with a volume of his famous periodical The Rambler " . In 1759 , at the urging of his former pupil the Prince of Wales ( soon to be George III ) , her father was made Clerk of the Works to the Royal Household at Kew Palace and the family moved to Kew . There she met James Trimmer , whom she married on 21 September 1762 ; after their marriage , the couple moved to Old Brentford . 
 = = Motherhood and philanthropy = = 
 Trimmer was close to her parents ; after her marriage , she walked to visit her father every day , later accompanied by her eldest children . She and her husband had 12 children in all — six boys and six girls . Trimmer was responsible for her children 's education and it was the combination of her duties as a mother and a teacher that initially sparked her interest in education . 
 Inspired by Robert Raikes , Trimmer also became active in the Sunday school movement , founding the first Sunday school for poor children in Old Brentford in 1786 . She and two of the ministers in her parish , Charles Sturgess and Charles Coates , organized a fund drive and established several schools for the poor children of the neighborhood . Initially , five hundred boys and girls wanted to attend Trimmer 's Sunday school ; unable to accommodate such numbers , she decided to exclude those under five years of age and restricted each family to one pupil . The parish set up three schools , each with about thirty students — one for older boys , one for younger boys and one for girls . While some other educational reformers of the period such as Mary Wollstonecraft argued for co @-@ educational instruction , Trimmer was opposed to such pedagogical changes ; she believed in educating the sexes separately . The students were taught to read , with the aim of teaching them to read the Bible . The students were also encouraged to keep clean — " a present of a brush and comb was given to all who desired them " . Trimmer 's schools became so well known and admired that Raikes , Trimmer 's initial inspiration , recommended those who needed assistance organizing a Sunday school to turn to Trimmer ; even Queen Charlotte asked Trimmer 's advice on founding a Sunday school at Windsor . 
 After her visit to the queen , Trimmer was inspired to write The Œconomy of Charity , which describes how readers , specifically women , can establish Sunday schools in their own communities . However , her book accomplished much more than this . While proponents of Sunday schools such as Raikes and Trimmer claimed that the schools would help control the growing social unrest of the poor , critics claimed that these schools would only encourage the social upheaval they were trying to quell . The Hon. John Byng , for example , issued the dire warning that " not only would education ' teach them to read seditious pamphlets , books and publications against Christianity ' … but it would render them unfit for ' the laborious employment to which their rank in society had destined them ' " . Trimmer agreed that the poor were " destined " by God to be poor but would argue that her schools reinforced that divine social hierarchy . The Sunday school debate was waged in churches , in Parliament and in print ; in publishing The Œconomy of Charity , Trimmer was entering this vigorous debate . 
 As scholar Deborah Wills has argued : " [ The Œconomy of Charity ] is actually informed by a highly politicized subtext which anticipates , subverts , and counters anti @-@ Sunday School arguments . [ Trimmer ] outlines a programme through which the Sunday School , when properly administered , can serve as a means of instituting social control and intensifying hierarchy . … Trimmer ’ s carefully modest and unassuming text is thus revealed as a middle @-@ class manifesto for the appropriation of social , political , and religious power in the name of moral instruction . " 
 For example , Trimmer contends that Sunday schools teach their pupils not merely to read the Bible but how to draw the proper theological and political conclusions from it . Furthermore , Trimmer argues that the responsibility for educating the poor rests on the shoulders of the middle class alone . By eliminating the aristocracy from an active role in her philanthropic programs , " Trimmer ensures that those who actually regulate the Sunday School curriculum are those who will both embody and perpetuate bourgeois culture " . As Wills points out , this distinguishes her from other philanthropists of the time such as Hannah More . 
 Trimmer also founded and oversaw charity schools in her neighborhood . She directed promising students from her Sunday schools , which met only once a week , to these charity schools , which met several times a week . As she wrote in her journal , these schools seemed to her to " afford a happy prospect of rescuing many poor children from vice and profligacy " . While the Sunday schools were funded by subscription , that is , donations from people within the parish , the charity schools were largely funded by the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge ( SPCK ) , which had funded the first charity schools around a century earlier . Trimmer criticized the rote learning that went on in traditional charity schools and tried to institute a more dynamic catechetical method in her own schools that would stimulate students to ask questions . She wrote in her journal , " my earnest desire is to compose a course of teaching for Charity Schools , by which the children may learn in reality , and not by rote , the principles of the Christian Religion , as taught in the Scriptures " . Trimmer also established schools of industry to which she directed her less promising pupils . These schools would teach girls , for example , how to knit and spin . Initially , Trimmer believed that the schools would turn a profit since the girls would spin and knit all day long ; however , the girls were unskilled and turned out poor products that could not be sold . Trimmer viewed this project as a failure . 
 Wilfried <unk> , a modern scholar of the 18th century , has criticized Trimmer 's projects as naive and moralistic : 
 [ There is ] no indication that Sarah Trimmer based her many efforts to instruct and improve the children of the poor on detailed social analysis , but it is apparent that she was deeply disturbed not only by their needs but also about the increasing <unk> of the country . Whether she understood that society was changing from a more feudal to a more modern bourgeois structure , in which many of the stabilizing old personal ties were removed and replaced by the cash @-@ nexus , is not clear . … on the whole she displays no interest in the social and economic causes of poverty . Instead she offers a model of improvement which rests on a rigorous division of the working people and the poor into black and white : the deserving and the undeserving poor , the godly and the ungodly , the respectable and dutiful and the rebellious and <unk> , the idle and the industrious , that is , on an alternating identification of poverty with virtue and vice . 
 Although Sunday schools such as the ones established by Trimmer have often been characterized by modern scholars as a repressive device used by the middle class to impose their morality on the lower classes , Thomas Laqueur has argued that the poor embraced this opportunity to obtain literacy and disregarded many of the moral lessons forced upon them . 
 = = Literary career = = 
 In a literary career that spanned more than a quarter of a century , Trimmer authored somewhere between 33 and 44 texts . She wrote in a wide range of genres : textbooks , teaching manuals , children 's literature , political pamphlets and critical periodicals . While many of her texts were for children , some of her works , such as The Œconomy of Charity , were also for specific adult audiences . Still others were written for both children and adults , such as The Servant ’ s Friend ( 1786 – 7 ) , which was meant to instruct servants of all ages . 
 Throughout her career , Trimmer worked with four different publishers — John Marshall , T.N. Longman , G. Robinson , and Joseph Johnson — and , by 1800 , she had the most works of any author in the Newbery catalogue , the catalogue that sold the most children 's literature . Eventually , Trimmer stopped publishing with Joseph Johnson , because she disagreed with his politics — he was a supporter of the French Revolution and was publishing works that she considered subversive . 
 = = = An Easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature = = = 
 Trimmer 's first book was An easy introduction to the knowledge of nature , and reading the holy scriptures , adapted to the capacities of children ( 1780 ) , which built on the revolution in children 's literature begun by Anna Laetitia Barbauld . In the " Preface " , Trimmer writes that Isaac Watts 's Treatise on Education was the inspiration for the work and that " a book containing a kind of general survey of the works of Nature would be very useful , as a means to open the mind by gradual steps to the knowledge of the <unk> <unk> , preparatory to their reading the holy scriptures " . In the text , the reader follows a mother and her two children , Charlotte and Henry ( perhaps named after two of Trimmer 's own children ) , on a series of nature walks during which the mother describes the wonders of God 's creation . In 1793 , a version of this book was added to the catalogue of the Society for the Propagation of Christian Knowledge ; after 77 years , it had sold over 750 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Aileen Fyfe , a historian interested in the relationship between science and religion , has argued that Trimmer 's text , although inspired by Barbauld 's books , differs dramatically from Barbauld 's in its religious orientation . Barbauld was a Dissenter and more inclined , according to Fyfe , to " encourage curiosity , observation , and reasoning " . In contrast , Trimmer , as a high church Anglican , depicted nature as " awe @-@ inspiring " and as a reflection not only of God 's divinity but also of his goodness . These beliefs are reflected even in the structure of the text ; Trimmer 's aim was to convey a sense of the awe , therefore her text does not progress in an orderly fashion through a study of the natural world . Barbauld 's texts , however , emphasize the slow accumulation of knowledge as well as logical thinking . Thus Evenings at Home , which she co @-@ wrote with her brother , John Aikin , has a " systematic structure " . Another difference between the two writers lies in the role of authority : whereas Barbauld 's texts and those she wrote with her brother , emphasize dialogues between teacher and pupil , Trimmer 's textual conversations , Fyfe notes , were " controlled by the parent " . 
 However , <unk> Ruwe , a scholar of 18th @-@ century children 's literature , has pointed out that An Easy Introduction is not entirely a conservative text — it challenges 18th @-@ century notions of the proper roles for women laid out in conduct manuals such as those written by John Gregory and James Fordyce . The mother in Trimmer 's text acts as a " spiritual leader " and demonstrates that a woman is capable of " theological reasoning " . Such depictions challenge Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's claims that women are capable only of memorizing religious dogma and not of sophisticated reasoning . Furthermore , Trimmer 's mother tries to educate her children in a straightforward manner instead of employing the " manipulative " tricks of the tutor in Rousseau 's Emile . 
 A few years later , inspired by Madame de Genlis 's Adèle et Théodore ( 1782 ) , Trimmer commissioned sets of illustrations of the Bible for which she provided the commentary ; she also published print / commentary sets of ancient history and British history . These various sets were very popular and could be purchased together ( commentary and prints ) or individually . The prints were usually hung on walls or bound into books . 
 = = = Relations with John Marshall = = = 
 The children ’ s publisher John Marshall & Co. produced The footstep to Mrs. Trimmer 's Sacred history : for the instruction and amusement of little children in 1785 . Trimmer had always advocated the use of pictorial material in books for children , and the publisher , who was experienced in producing cheap popular prints , was in a good position to publish them for her . In May 1786 Marshall published A series of prints of scripture history , " designed as ornaments for those apartments in which children receive the first rudiments of their education . " The prints were sold " pasted on boards , for hanging up in nurseries " at 1s 6d , in sheets for 8d , sewed in marbled paper ‘ for the pocket , ’ for <unk> or else neatly bound in read leather at 1s 2d . They were also published with an accompanying small book entitled , A description of a set of prints of scripture history , which was also available in different bindings . The venture proved to be successful and these two works were quickly followed by the publication of five similar ‘ Series of Prints ’ together with accompanying ‘ Descriptions ’ , compiled by Mrs Trimmer , on the subjects of Ancient history ( 1786 ) , Roman history ( 1789 ) , English history ( 1789 ) , the New Testament ( 1790 ) and the Old Testament ( 1797 ) . These were hugely popular and were reprinted by the Marshalls and their successors at regular intervals over the next thirty years . 
 In January ( 1788 ) Mrs Trimmer and John Marshall announced a new joint venture , The family magazine ; or a repository of religious instruction and rational amusement . It was a monthly periodical " designed to counteract the pernicious tendency of immoral books & c. which have circulated of late years among the inferior classes of people , " and usually included one engraved plate . The content consisted of ‘ religious tales for Sunday evenings ’ and ‘ moral tales for weekdays ’ ; advice on the management of infants and on childrearing was given together with a comparative view of other nations to demonstrate that ‘ the poor in England possess privileges , and enjoy many comforts , which persons of their rank … in other countries cannot enjoy . ’ Descriptions of animals were also included , ' in order to check the practice of cruelty to brute creation . ' The final section of the magazine contained ' a selection of Ballads , Songs & c . , both ancient and modern , of a Moral Tendency . ' Thus , in both its objects and content , this publication introduced many of the ideas which would later bear fruit in Hannah More ’ s more ambitious and well @-@ known scheme for Cheap Repository Tracts of 1795 . The family magazine survived for eighteen months with Trimmer as both the editor and the principal contributor , but eventually she had to give it up seemingly through exhaustion 
 = = = Books for charity schools = = = 
 Because , in Trimmer 's opinion , there was a dearth of good educational material to use in charity schools , she decided to write her own . The series of books she produced between 1786 and 1798 were used in Britain and its colonies well into the 19th century . Trimmer was an able promoter of her materials ; she knew that her books would not reach large numbers of poor children in charity schools unless they were funded and publicized by the SPCK . She wrote in her journal " my scheme without its aid , will fall to the ground " . Thus , she joined the society in 1787 . In 1793 , she sent 12 copies of her treatise Reflections upon the Education in Charity Schools with the Outlines of a Plan Appropriate Instruction for the Children of the Poor to the subcommittee that chose the books funded by the organization . In the treatise , she argued that the current charity school curriculum was outdated ( it was over 100 years old ) and needed to be replaced . She suggested a list of seven books that she herself would write : 
 A Spelling Book in two Parts 
 Scripture Lessons from the Old Testament 
 Scripture Lessons from the New Testament 
 Moral Instructions from the Scriptures 
 Lessons on the Liturgy from the Book of Common Prayer 
 Exemplary Tales 
 The Teacher 's Assistant 
 The committee largely accepted her proposal . The Charity School Spelling Book was printed first and was the most widely used . It was one of the first children 's books for the poor that was small but still had large type and large margins ( features often considered appropriate only for books for more privileged readers ) . The stories themselves were also innovative : they emphasized the ordinary lives of ordinary children — " these children climbed trees , played with fire , threw cricket bats at sheep and begged in the streets " . The book was adopted by Andrew Bell around 1800 for his Madras system of education and by various educational societies throughout Britain and its colonies ; it was even used to educate adult slaves in Antigua and Jamaica . 
 The proposed " Scripture Lessons " became Trimmer 's An Abridgement of Scripture History , consisting of Lessons selected from the Old Testament , for the Use of Schools and Families which was an anthology of selections from the Bible . Like the Charity School Spelling Book , it was adopted throughout the British educational system and was part of school life well into the mid @-@ 19th century . In 1798 SPCK published Scripture Catechisms , Part I and II ; these works were intended to aid the teacher while the <unk> ( a shorthand name for the Scripture Histories of both the Old and New Testament that Trimmer eventually published ) were intended to aid the pupil . The " Exemplary Tales " seem not to have been written exactly as planned but Trimmer 's Servant 's Friend and Two Farmers fulfilled the purpose she outlined in her plan of publishing pleasurable moral tales . These two books served as Sunday school prizes as well . The Teacher 's Assistant was an instruction aid and was also widely adopted throughout British schools . The only texts not published by the SPCK were Trimmer 's adaptations and commentaries on the Book of Common Prayer , which she had printed elsewhere . 
 = = = Fabulous Histories = = = 
 Fabulous Histories ( later known as The Story of the Robins ) , Trimmer 's most popular work , was first published in 1786 , and remained in print until the beginning of the 20th century . It tells the story of two families , a robin family and a human family , who learn to live together <unk> . Most importantly , the human children and the baby robins must learn to adopt virtue and to shun vice . For Trimmer , practising kindness to animals as a child would hopefully lead one to " universal benevolence " as an adult . According to Samuel Pickering , Jr . , a scholar of 18th @-@ century children 's literature , " in its depiction of 18th @-@ century attitudes toward animals , Mrs. Trimmer ’ s Fabulous Histories was the most representative children ’ s book of the period " . The text expresses most of the themes that would come to dominate Trimmer 's later works , such as her emphasis on retaining social hierarchies ; as Tess Cosslett , a scholar of children 's literature explains , " the notion of hierarchy that underpins Fabulous Histories is relatively stable and fixed . Parents are above children in terms of authority , and humans above animals , in terms both of dominion and compassion : poor people should be fed before hungry animals … [ but ] the hierarchical relation of men and women is not so clearly enforced . " Moira Ferguson , a scholar of the 18th and 19th centuries , places these themes in a larger historical context , arguing that " the fears of the author and her class about an industrial revolution in ascendance and its repercussions are evident . Hence , [ the ] text attacks cruelty to birds and animals while affirming British aggression abroad . … The text subtly opts for conservative solutions : maintenance of order and established values , resignation and compliance from the poor at home , expatriation for foreigners who do not assimilate easily . " A second overarching theme in the text is rationality ; Trimmer expresses the common fear of the power of fiction in her preface , explaining to her childish readers that her fable is not real and that animals cannot really speak . Like many social critics during the 18th century , Trimmer was concerned about fiction 's potentially damaging impact on young readers . With the rise of the novel and its concomitant private reading , there was a great fear that young people and especially women would read racy and adventurous stories without the knowledge of their parents and , perhaps even more worrisome , interpret the books as they pleased . Trimmer therefore always referred to her text as Fabulous Histories and never as The Story of the Robins in order to emphasize its reality ; moreover , she did not allow the book to be illustrated within her lifetime — pictures of talking birds would only have reinforced the paradox of the book ( it was fiction parading as a history ) . Yarde has also speculated that most of the characters in the text are drawn from Trimmer 's own acquaintances and family . 
 = = = The Guardian of Education = = = 
 Later in her life , Trimmer published the influential Guardian of Education ( June 1802 – September 1806 ) , which included ideas for instructing children and reviews of contemporary children 's books . Although one previous attempt had been made to regularly review children 's books in Britain , according to Matthew Grenby , " it was a far less substantial and sustained enterprise than Trimmer ’ s " . The Guardian included not only reviews of children 's books but also extracts from texts Trimmer thought would edify her adult readers . She aimed " to assess the current state of educational policy and praxis in Britain and to shape its future direction " . To do so , she evaluated the educational theories of Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau , John Locke , Mary Wollstonecraft , Hannah More , Madame de Genlis , Joseph Lancaster , and Andrew Bell , among others . In her " Essay on Christian Education , " also published separately later , she proposed her own comprehensive educational program . 
 Trimmer took her reviewing very seriously and her over 400 reviews constitute a set of distinct values . As Grenby puts it , " her initial questions of any children ’ s books that came before her were always first , was it damaging to religion and second , was it damaging to political loyalty and the established social hierarchy " . Religion was always Trimmer 's first priority and her emphasis on Biblical inerrancy illustrates her fundamentalism . She criticized books that included scenes of death , characters who were insane , and representations of sexuality , as well as books that might frighten children . She typically praised books that encouraged intellectual instruction , such as Anna Barbauld 's Lessons for Children ( 1778 – 79 ) . 
 Trimmer 's fundamentalism , Grenby argues , does not necessarily mark her as the rigid thinker that many critics have presumed her to be . Grenby points out that Trimmer , like Rousseau , believed children were naturally good ; in this , she was arguing against centuries of tradition , particularly Puritanical attitudes towards raising children . She also agreed with " Rousseau ’ s key idea [ while ironically attacking Rousseau 's works themselves ] , later taken up by the Romantics , that children should not be forced to become adults too early " . 
 The Guardian of Education established children 's literature as a genre with her reviews . Moreover , in one of her early essays , " Observations on the Changes which have taken place in Books for Children and Young Persons " , Trimmer wrote the first history of children 's literature , setting out the first canon of children 's literature . Its landmark books are still cited today by scholars as important in the development of the genre . 
 = = = = Fairy tales = = = = 
 Trimmer is perhaps most famous now for her condemnation of fairy tales , such as the various translations of Charles Perrault 's Histoires ou contes du temps passé ( originally published in 1697 ) , because they endorsed an irrational view of the world and suggested that children could become successful too easily ( in other words , they did not have to work ) . <unk> were the literature of the poor and Trimmer was attempting to separate children 's literature from texts she associated with the lower classes ; she also feared that children might gain access to this cheap literature without their parents ' knowledge . Trimmer criticized the values associated with fairy tales , accusing them of perpetuating superstition and unfavourable images of <unk> . Rather than seeing Trimmer as a censor of fairy tales , therefore , Nicholas Tucker has argued , " by considering fairy tales as fair game for criticism rather than unthinking worship , Mrs Trimmer is at one with scholars today who have also written critically about the ideologies found in some individual stories " . 
 One of the reasons Trimmer believed fairy tales were dangerous was because they led child readers into a fantasy world where adults could not follow and control their exposure to harmful experiences . She was just as horrified by the graphic illustrations included with some fairy tale collections , complaining that " little children , whose minds are susceptible of every impression ; and who from the liveliness of their imaginations are apt to convert into realities whatever forcibly strikes their fancy " should not be allowed to see such scenes as Blue Beard hacking his wife 's head off . 
 = = = = French revolution and religion = = = = 
 In the pages of The Guardian of Education , Trimmer denounced the French revolution and the philosophers whose works she believed underpinned it , particularly Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau . She argued that there was a vast conspiracy , organized by the atheistic and democratic revolutionaries of France , to overthrow the legitimate governments of Europe . These conspirators were attempting to overturn traditional society by " endeavouring to infect the minds of the rising generation , through the medium of Books of Education and Children 's Books " ( emphasis Trimmer 's ) . Her views were shaped by Abbé Barruel 's Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism ( 1797 – 8 ) ( she extracted large sections from this text into the Guardian itself ) but also by her fears of the ongoing wars between France and Britain during the 1790s . Trimmer emphasized Christianity above all in her writings and maintained that one should turn to God in times of trial . As M. Nancy Cutt argues in her book on children 's literature , Trimmer and writers like her " claimed emphatically that the degree of human happiness was in direct proportion to the degree of submission to the divine Will . Thus they repudiated the moralists ’ view that learning should exalt reason and work to the temporal happiness of the individual , which was governed by the best interests of society " . Trimmer and her allies contended that French pedagogical theories led to an immoral nation , specifically , " deism , infidelity and revolution " . 
 = = = Bell vs. Lancasterian school system debate = = = 
 In 1789 , Andrew Bell invented the Madras system of education to order to instruct British colonial subjects in India ; it was a disciplinary system which employed a hierarchy of student monitors and very few teachers ( economical for the colonies , Bell argued ) . He published a book , Experiment in Education ( 1797 ) , in order to explain his system , one that he thought could be adapted for the poor in England ( in it he endorsed many of Trimmer 's own books ) . A year after reading the Experiment , an English Quaker , Joseph Lancaster , adopted many of its principles for his school in London and then published his own book , Improvements in Education ( 1803 ) , which repeated many of Bell 's ideas . Because of his Quaker sympathies , Lancaster did not encourage the teaching of the doctrines of the Established Church . Trimmer , appalled by the suggestion that British children did not need to be brought up within the Established Church , wrote and published her Comparative View of the two systems in 1805 , creating a schism between two very similar systems . According to F. J. Harvey Darton , an early scholar of children 's literature , " her effect upon English education … was very considerable , even extraordinary . The two rival systems , Bell ’ s and Lancaster ’ s , were hotly debated all over the country , and the war between Bell and the Dragon , as a cartoonist labelled it , raged in all the magazines , even in the Edinburgh Review . " Out of the debate " arose the two great societies – the National Society for Promoting the Education of the Children of the Poor in the Principles of the Established Church , and the British and Foreign School Society – upon whose work , fundamentally , the whole of [ Britain 's ] later elementary school system was based " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Trimmer 's husband died in 1792 ; this affected her quite deeply , as is evidenced in her journal . In 1800 , she and some of her daughters were forced to move to another house in Brentford . This was painful for Trimmer , who wrote in her diary : 
 Alas , a widow , unacquainted with the ways of the world , ignorant of legal matters , can do but little on occasions like these which now occur . After more than thirty years ’ residence in a house , in which I have known many comforts , and in a neighbourhood where I have endeavoured to make myself respected , I am likely to be obliged to seek for a new habitation ; and there is not one within so short a distance as to enable me to fulfil the wishes of my heart by attending to the schools . Should I find it necessary to change my abode , the schools will , I fear , unavoidably decline . I shall also be removed to a distance , from some of my children , whose society would comfort my declining years . 
 She died in Brentford on 15 December 1810 , and was buried at St Mary 's , Ealing . There is a plaque memorializing her at St. George 's , Brentford : 
 To the memory of <unk> relict of James Trimmer , resident in this parish nearly 50 years , during which she adorned the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things , by her practice a constant attendant in God ’ s House of Prayer . In her own house an example to Christian <unk> , in her neighbourhood ministering to the necessities of all ; the destitute , the afflicted and the ignorant , seeking their moral improvement by imparting Christian instruction both in private and also in the Church School raised by her exertions and fostered by her care . By her writings , edifying the members of that branch of Christ ’ s Holy Church in which she was born and which she loved with an ardent but well tempered zeal . She obtained rest from her labours on 15 December 1810 in the seventieth year of her age . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Trimmer 's most popular book , Fabulous Histories , was reprinted for at least 133 years and had a profound impact on generations of readers and writers . In 1877 , when the firm of Griffith and Farran published it as part of their " Original Juvenile Library , " they advertised it as " the delicious story of <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , who can have forgotten it ? It is as fresh today as it was half a century ago . " Tess Cosslett has also suggested that the names of Trimmer 's birds — <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Robin — bear a striking resemblance to the rabbits — Flopsy , <unk> , <unk> and Peter — in Beatrix Potter 's children 's books . 
 Trimmer also influenced the children 's writers of her own age ; William Godwin 's Fables , Ancient and Modern ( 1805 ) , for example , imitates Trimmer 's Ladder to Learning . Among her contemporary admirers was Frances Burney , who remarked in a letter to her sister Esther about the education of the latter 's 10 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , " Mrs. Trimmer I should suppose admirable for a girl " ( as an introduction to the Scriptures ) . 
 While Trimmer was highly respected for her charity work during her lifetime and for her books long after her death , her reputation began to wane at the end of the 19th century and plummeted during the 20th century . One reason for this is that her textbooks , so widely used during the first half of the century , were replaced by secular books in the second half of the century . The tone of her books was no longer seen as consonant with British society . An early scholar of children 's literature , Geoffrey Summerfield , describes her this way : " Of all the morally shrill women active in the late 18th and early 19th centuries , she was probably the <unk> . Unbalanced , frenetic , paranoid , she may have been , but no one could deny her energy and perseverance in defending the souls of the children of England from the assaults of the devil . " Recently , however , children 's literature scholars have attempted to view 18th @-@ century children 's literature within its historical context rather than judge it against modern tastes ; scholars such as Grenby , Ruwe , Ferguson , Fyfe and Cosslett have reassessed Trimmer 's work . Because Trimmer does not fit the mold of 20th @-@ century feminism — that is , since she did not rebel against the social mores of her society as did Mary Wollstonecraft — she did not attract the attention of early feminist scholars . However , as Ruwe points out , " by the confluence of political , historical , and pedagogical events at the turn of the century , a woman such as Trimmer was able to gain a greater visibility in the realm of public letters than was perhaps typical before or after " ; Trimmer was a " role model for other women authors " , and these later authors often acknowledged their debt explicitly , as did the author of The Footsteps to Mrs. Trimmer ’ s Sacred History . 
 = = Trimmer 's children = = 
 Trimmer and her husband had twelve children . 
 = = List of works = = 
 This list of works has been taken from Deborah Wills ' entry on Trimmer in the Dictionary of Literary Biography . Other entries have been added if they appear in other academic articles or database collections under Trimmer 's name . 
 An Easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature , and Reading the Holy Scriptures , adapted to the Capacities of Children ( 1780 ) 
 Sacred History ( 1782 – 5 ) ( 6 volumes ) 
 The Œconomy of Charity ( 1786 ) 
 Fabulous Histories ; Designed for the Instruction of Children , Respecting their Treatment of Animals ( 1786 ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints of Scripture History : Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons ( 1786 ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints of Ancient History : Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons . In Two Parts ( 1786 ) 
 The Servant ’ s Friend ( 1786 ) 
 The Two Farmers ( 1787 ) 
 The Œconomy of Charity ( 1787 ) 
 The Sunday @-@ School <unk> , Consisting of Familiar Lectures , with Questions ( 1788 ) 
 The Sunday @-@ scholar 's Manual ( 1788 ) 
 The Family Magazine ( 1788 – 9 ) ( periodical ) 
 A Comment on Dr. Watts ’ s Divine Songs for Children with Questions ( 1789 ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints of Roman History , Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons ( 1789 ) 
 The Ladder of Learning , Step the First ( 1789 ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints Taken from the New Testament , Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons ( 1790 ) 
 Easy Lessons for Young Children ( <unk> ) [ not on Wills ' list ] 
 Sunday School Dialogues ( 1790 ) ( edited by Trimmer ) 
 A Companion to the Book of Common Prayer ( 1791 ) 
 An Explanation of the Office for the Public Baptism of Infants ( 1791 ) 
 An Attempt to <unk> the Catechism of the Church of England ( 1791 ) 
 The Little Spelling Book for Young Children ( 4th ed . , 1791 ) [ not on Wills ' list ] 
 Reflections upon the Education of Children in Charity Schools ( 1792 ) 
 A Friendly Remonstrance , concerning the Christian Covenant and the Sabbath Day ; Intended for the Good of the Poor ( 1792 ) 
 The Ladder of Learning , Step the Second ( 1792 ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints of English History , Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons ( 1792 ) 
 An Abridgement of Scripture History ; Consisting of Lessons Selected from the Old Testament ( 1792 ) 
 A Scriptures Catechism ( 1797 ) ( 2 parts ) [ not on Wills ' list ] 
 A Description of a Set of Prints Taken from the Old Testament ( <unk> ) [ not on Willis ' list ] 
 The Silver Thimble ( 1799 ) 
 An Address to Heads of Schools and Families ( 1799 ? ) 
 The Charity School Spelling Book ( <unk> ) ( 2 parts ) 
 The Teacher 's Assistant : Consisting of Lectures in the <unk> Form ( 1800 ) 
 A Geographical Companion to Mrs. Trimmer 's Scripture , Antient , and English Abridged Histories , with Prints ( 1802 ) 
 A Help to the <unk> in the Study of the Holy Scriptures ( 1805 ) 
 An Abridgement of the New Testament ( 1805 ? ) 
 A Comparative View of the New Plan of Education <unk> by Mr. Joseph Lancaster ( 1805 ) 
 The Guardian of Education ( 1802 – 6 ) ( periodical ) 
 A New Series of Prints , Accompanied by Easy Lessons ; Being an Improved Edition of the First Set of Scripture Prints from the Old Testament ( 1808 ) 
 A Concise History of England ( 1808 ) 
 Instructive Tales : Collected from the Family Magazine ( 1810 ) 
 An Essay on Christian Education ( 1812 ) ( posthumous ) 
 Sermons , for Family Reading ( 1814 ) ( posthumous ) 
 Some Account of the Life and Writings of Mrs. Trimmer ( 1814 ) ( posthumous ) 
 A Description of a Set of Prints of the History of France , Contained in a Set of Easy Lessons ( 1815 ) ( posthumous ) 
 A Selection from Mrs. Trimmer 's Instructive Tales ; The Good Nurse ... ( 1815 ) ( posthumous ) 
 Miscellaneous Pieces , Selected from the Family Magazine ( 1818 ) ( posthumous ) 
 Prayers and Meditations Extracted from the Journal of the Late Mrs. Trimmer ( 1818 ) ( posthumous ) 
 A Selection from Mrs. Trimmer 's Instructive Tales ; The Rural Economists ... ( 1819 ) ( posthumous ) 
 = Regina Maria Pia @-@ class ironclad = 
 The Regina Maria Pia class was a group of four ironclad warships built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1860s . The class comprised four ships , Regina Maria Pia , San Martino , Castelfidardo , and Ancona . They were built by French shipyards , since Italian yards were unable to meet the demand of the rapidly expanding Italian fleet . The ships were broadside ironclads and mounted a battery of twenty @-@ six muzzle loading guns . 
 All four ships saw action at the Battle of Lissa during the Third Italian War of Independence in 1866 . Regina Maria Pia was badly burned in the battle , but the other three vessels were not seriously damaged . The ships served in a variety of roles for the remainder of their long careers ; they were modernized in the late 1880s and thereafter used as a training ships . Regina Maria Pia , San Martino , and Ancona were discarded in 1903 – 04 , and Castelfidardo joined them in the breaker 's yard in 1910 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Following the unification of Italy in 1861 , the new Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) began a construction program to prepare a fleet of ironclad warships capable of defeating the Austrian Navy . Italy considered the Austrian Empire to be its main rival , since it controlled predominantly Italian areas , including Venice . The nascent Italian shipyards were incapable of building the number of ships the new fleet would require , so most of this first generation of ironclads were built by foreign ship builders . In 1862 , the four ships of the Regina Maria Pia class were ordered from French shipyards , under the direction of Vice Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , then the Italian Navy Minister . These ships were designed by the French builders . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Regina Maria Pia class varied in their dimensions . Regina Maria Pia and San Martino , built by the same shipyard , were identical in size , while Castelfidardo and Ancona , though each built by different shipyards , also were identical . The first two ships were 75 @.@ 48 meters ( 247 @.@ 6 ft ) long between perpendiculars and 81 @.@ 2 m ( 266 ft ) long overall , and they had a beam of 15 @.@ 24 m ( 50 @.@ 0 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 35 m ( 20 @.@ 8 ft ) . Castelfidardo and Ancona were 76 m ( 249 ft ) between perpendiculars and 81 @.@ 8 m ( 268 ft ) overall , with a beam of 15 @.@ 16 m ( 49 @.@ 7 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 35 m . The first two ships displaced 4 @,@ 201 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 135 long tons ; 4 @,@ 631 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 527 t ( 4 @,@ 456 long tons ; 4 @,@ 990 short tons ) at full load , while Castelfidardo displaced 4 @,@ 191 t ( 4 @,@ 125 long tons ; 4 @,@ 620 short tons ) normally and 4 @,@ 527 t ( 4 @,@ 456 long tons ; 4 @,@ 990 short tons ) at full load . Curiously , Ancona was the lightest ship normally , at 4 @,@ 157 t ( 4 @,@ 091 long tons ; 4 @,@ 582 short tons ) , but the heaviest at full load , at 4 @,@ 619 t ( 4 @,@ 546 long tons ; 5 @,@ 092 short tons ) . 
 The ships were constructed with iron hulls . They were protected by iron belt armor that was 4 @.@ 75 inches ( 121 mm ) thick and extended for the entire length of the hull at the waterline . The battery deck was protected by 4 @.@ 3 in ( 109 mm ) of iron plate . Each vessel had a crew of 480 – 485 officers and men . The ships were initially schooner @-@ rigged to supplement the steam engine , though their masts were later reduced to a barque rig . Ultimately , they lost their sailing rig completely , having it replaced with a pair of military masts with fighting tops . 
 The ships ' propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion , two @-@ cylinder steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by six coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . The boilers were trunked into a single funnel placed amidships . Her engine produced a top speed of 12 @.@ 96 knots ( 24 @.@ 00 km / h ; 14 @.@ 91 mph ) from 2 @,@ 924 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 180 kW ) . Each ship had a capacity of 485 t ( 477 long tons ; 535 short tons ) of coal , which allowed them to steam for 2 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 3 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Regina Maria Pia class were broadside ironclads , and they were initially armed with a main battery of four 72 @-@ pounder smooth @-@ bore 8 in ( 203 mm ) muzzle @-@ loading guns and twenty @-@ two 32 @-@ pounder rifled 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) muzzle loaders , though their armament changed throughout her career . Most of these guns were placed on the broadside , but two of the 164 mm guns were mounted in an armored bunker forward and a third was placed in a similar mount at the stern , as chase guns . The ships were also fitted with a ram bow that was 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long . 
 In 1871 , all four ships were re @-@ armed with two 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) muzzle @-@ loading guns and eight 8 in muzzle @-@ loading guns , with a ninth 8 in gun added in 1880 . Regina Maria Pia and San Martino were later re @-@ equipped with eight 6 in ( 150 mm ) quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , five 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) QF guns , four 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) QF guns , and eight 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannon . In 1884 , Castelfidardo received the same battery of light guns , though she had a sixth 4 @.@ 7 in gun . When Ancona was similarly re @-@ armed , she only had two of the 37 mm revolver cannon . All four ships were also equipped with three torpedo tubes , with the exception of Castelfidardo , which received two tubes . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 All four ships of the class entered service in time to see action during the Third Italian War of Independence against the Austrian Navy in 1866 . Persano , now the commander of the Italian fleet , adopted a cautious strategy and conducted only one major offensive operation , which was directed at the island of Lissa . There , the Austrian fleet under Wilhelm von Tegetthoff attacked the Italians . The four Regina Maria <unk> all took part in the ensuing Battle of Lissa . Regina Maria Pia had been set on fire and badly burned in the battle , and minor fires were started by Austrian shells aboard San Martino and Castelfidardo , but neither were seriously damaged . Ancona emerged relatively unscathed , with only minor damage to her iron plates . 
 After the war , the Italian naval budget was slashed ; the cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . As the Italian fleet began to rebuild in the 1870s , the Regina Maria <unk> returned to active service in a variety of roles , both in the main fleet and in Italy 's overseas empire . All four ships were modernized in the late 1880s , and were thereafter used as training ships . Regina Maria Pia , Ancona , and San Martino were stricken from the naval register in 1903 – 04 , while Castelfidardo lingered on as a torpedo training ship until 1910 , when she too was sold for scrapping . 
 = Ulla Salzgeber = 
 Ulla Salzgeber ( born 5 August 1958 in Oberhausen ) is a German equestrian and Olympic champion who competes in the sport of dressage . Competing in the 2000 and 2004 Summer Olympics , she won two team gold medals , one individual silver and one individual bronze . She also won numerous medals at the World Equestrian Games , Dressage World Cup and European Dressage Championships . After the retirement of her Olympic horse , Rusty , after the 2004 Games , and unexpected death of her second international @-@ level mount in 2005 , Salzgeber struggled to find a new Grand Prix @-@ level horse . 
 In 2005 , she took time from competition to act as the dressage training adviser to the Australian national equestrian team , but resigned from that position in late 2006 . In 2008 , she began riding Herzruf 's Erbe at major events , but the horse has been plagued by injuries that have required him to miss many competitions . Salzgeber announced a change in her training base in early 2010 , moving to new stables in <unk> , Bavaria , which she said would allow her to accept more students . In 2013 , after returning Herzruf 's Erbe to competition , Salzgeber was again named to the German equestrian squad 's A @-@ team . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Born 5 August 1958 in Oberhausen as Ulla Helbing , Salzgeber began riding at age 10 , competing in the sport of vaulting . In 1977 , at age 19 , she was the Young Riders European Championships . She attended college , graduating from law school before building a training stable in Bad <unk> , Germany , that focuses on dressage . Salzgeber is married to Sebastian Salzgeber , and has one daughter , Kim . 
 = = Career = = 
 Salzgeber rode the same horse to all of her Olympic , World Equestrian Games and European Championship medals . Rusty 47 , nicknamed Rusty , was a Latvian warmblood gelding who was named <unk> when he was purchased by Salzgeber from a German show jumping barn . The pair came to international attention at the 1997 European Championships , with a sixth place individual finish and a team gold . They repeated team gold at the 1998 World Equestrian Games , while also taking a bronze medal in individual competition . The German team , with Salzgeber , rode to another team gold at the 1999 European Championships , and Salzgeber and Rusty also took individual silver . After Gigolo , a horse ridden by Isabell Werth , was retired in 2000 , Salzgeber and Rusty became the top dressage pair in Germany . At the 2000 Summer Olympics , she won the bronze medal in the individual dressage competition . She also rode as part of the gold @-@ medal winning German team , but as the lowest @-@ scoring member , her score was not used to determine the team 's standing . During the finals , in her musical <unk> performance , Salzgeber 's selected music stopped playing , but she continued riding and finished the event . The music to which the pair performed , Carmina Burana , was used by Salzgeber and Rusty in all their competitions and became " tightly linked to the horse with its signature pirouettes and to date still best one @-@ tempi changes ever . " 
 The 2001 and 2003 European Championships brought four gold medals in team and individual competition , while the 2001 and 2002 Dressage World Cup competitions brought two additional golds . The 2002 World Equestrian Games brought a repeat of 1998 , with team gold and individual bronze medals . In 2003 , however , Salzgeber became mired in doping charges after Rusty tested positive for testosterone <unk> at the 2003 World Cup finals , losing what would have been a third successive gold . Rusty 's veterinarian claimed the drug was given to him to treat a hormonal imbalance , but the pair was banned from competition for two months by the German Equestrian Federation . An exception was made for the 2004 German Dressage Championships , which allowed them to qualify for the 2004 Olympic Games . She was not allowed to compete in qualifying events for the 2004 World Cup , and she did not ride in the event . At the 2004 Summer Olympics , she improved her individual performance to win a silver medal , and rode with the German team to a second successive gold in the team competition . Rusty was retired soon after the 2004 Olympics , and was euthanized in 2013 at the age of 25 . Months before his death , it was announced that Rusty had been cloned , resulting in two young stallions , nicknamed " Rusty Clone 1 " and " Rusty Clone 2 " . 
 In mid @-@ 2005 , Salzgeber 's then @-@ current Grand Prix mount , Wall Street , was euthanized following an episode of colic . This , combined with the recent retirement of Rusty , left her with no Grand Prix @-@ level horses . Wall Street , while a relatively successful dressage horse , had suffered health problems and had never been able to compete with Rusty as Salzgeber 's top horse . In 2008 , Salzgeber again began competing at the Grand Prix level on Herzruf 's Erbe , who would develop into one of her top international horses . In that year , the pair won the Otto <unk> Prize , given each year to the best German Grand Prix horse under 10 years old . During 2008 , Salzgeber and Herzruf 's Erbe had won 10 Grand Prix competitions . In 2009 , the pair were expected to compete at the European Dressage Championships , but were not chosen for the German team after Herzruf 's Erbe sustained an injury at a competition in July . The immediate diagnosis was a severely pulled tendon , although a later diagnosis was that the horse had strained a suspensory muscle , expected to heal in about three months . By early 2010 , the horse was again able to be ridden , but was still not in top condition . 
 In June 2011 , Salzgeber announced that she would be selling one of her top @-@ level horses , Wakana , to a student , leaving Herzruf 's Erbe as her only horse prepared to compete at the international level . Later that month , Salzgeber removed herself from consideration for competition at the 2011 CHIO Aachen and European Dressage Championships . She announced that she had decided to take a break from competition and focus more on training and her personal life . In 2012 , she announced that she would not be seeking a spot on the German team for the 2012 Summer Olympics , saying that her training duties had not given her time to properly prepare Herzruf 's Erbe . She had ridden the horse at competitions during the 2011 @-@ 2012 winter , and stated that she planned to compete at additional competitions during the winter of 2012 @-@ 2013 . However , in late 2012 , the horse was put into a one @-@ year rest period to help him recover from the injuries that had troubled him throughout his career . In October 2013 , Salzgeber brought Herzruf 's Erbe back into competition , winning a national show in Germany . The pair was successful at subsequent competitions , and in December 2013 , it was announced that they had been returned to the German equestrian squad 's A @-@ team . 
 = = = Coaching and training = = = 
 In 2005 , Salzgeber was named as the new dressage training adviser to the Australian national equestrian team . In the role , Salzgeber held training camps , approved team members ' training programs and helped choose team members for international competitions . In late 2006 , she resigned , citing a mix of training duties at home in Europe and disagreements with the Equestrian Federation of Australia . Under her tenure , however , the Australian team made their best @-@ ever placing at the 2006 World Equestrian Games , finishing 9th . 
 In early 2010 , Salzgeber announced that she would be moving her base of training from the stables in Bad <unk> where she had been located since she graduated from college . The new facilities , nearby in <unk> , Bavaria , offered more room and extensive natural therapy facilities , including <unk> , acupuncture , osteopathy , and <unk> . Salzgeber said the new , larger , base would allow her to give more training clinics and accept more students . 
 = Shiver ( Coldplay song ) = 
 " Shiver " is a song written and recorded by British alternative rock band Coldplay . British record producer Ken Nelson and Coldplay produced the track for their debut album Parachutes . Vocalist Chris Martin admitted that " Shiver " was written for a specific woman , from whom the media has generated several speculations . The song contains influences attributed to American singer @-@ songwriter Jeff Buckley , whom Coldplay 's early influences were drawn from . 
 The song was released as the album 's lead single in the United Kingdom , and second in the United States following the hit single " Yellow " . The single reached number 35 on the UK Singles Chart , and its critical reception has been generally positive . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Shiver " was written two years before its release . Accordingly , Martin wrote the song while thinking of Australian singer @-@ songwriter Natalie Imbruglia , the woman he was linked to , but later denied it . Some accounts have claimed , however , that Imbruglia was indeed not Martin 's inspiration in writing the song . Instead , he appeared to have been inspired with girlfriends in his teenage days and early 20s . Martin actually wrote the song in a " glum " day , when he felt he would never find the right woman for him . He described it as something of a " stalking song " , admitting he wrote it for a specific woman . In addition , Martin wrote the song while listening to music of Buckley , and had claimed it is their " most blatant rip @-@ off song " . 
 " Shiver " was recorded in Rockfield Studios in Wales , United Kingdom , where the band was booked by A & R representative Dan Keeling to begin working on the band 's debut album , Parachutes . Keeling was disappointed with the early demos presented to him , saying it " didn 't have any of their passion , their energy " , a result of the band 's freshly resolved internal pressure in the time . Keeling deemed the demos as " limp " and asked the band to redo it . Smaller parts of the song were recorded at Parr Street Studios in Liverpool , England , where the band relocated after Christmas in 1999 . 
 The song was produced by Coldplay and British record producer Ken Nelson . As with most songs in the album , Nelson used an analogue desk in recording " Shiver " . The guitar was re @-@ dubbed in search of perfection , while Martin de @-@ tuned his guitar to easily generate complex chord sequences . Martin 's vocals were recorded in more than one take , but the band chose the one with a single take . 
 " Shiver " is in the alternative rock genre . A review claims that Coldplay 's indie rock inclinations are obvious in the song . " Shiver " has been perceived to have influences of Buckley , whom Coldplay 's early song influences were drawn from . Martin later said of the song that it was " a blatant Jeff Buckley attempt , not quite as good , that 's what I think " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Shiver " is one of the older songs in Coldplay 's catalogue , and had been performed at their early concerts in 1999 . Later , it was initially released as an EP in the spring of 2000 . It was released as the album 's lead single in the United Kingdom on 6 March 2000 , months before the release of the album . The single had been picked up for B @-@ play lists on some European prominent radio stations . In the United States , it was released as the second single , following the hit single " Yellow " . Website IGN posted a video at the 2008 Games Convention in Leipzig , Germany , revealing " Shiver " to be part of the song list in the video game Guitar Hero World Tour . 
 The single 's reception was generally positive . It reached number 35 on the UK Singles Chart . It also reached number 26 at the US Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks . The song remains , to this day , an audience favorite in live performances . It has earned the band praise from critics . Adrian Denning , in his review of the album , wrote , " ' Shiver ' has a vocal that could be Jeff Buckley influenced , the soaring vocals are a joy over a reasonably guitar rock based instrumental track . " A review by David DeVoe in <unk> reads , " ' Shiver ' is a delightfully laid back tune , full of that great guitar sound that I have come to appreciate this band for . " Spencer Owen of Pitchfork noted , " It 's the only truly decent song on Parachutes , but simultaneously , it 's the only one that blatantly shows its influences . In fact , the influence can even be pinned to a single song : Jeff Buckley 's ' Grace . ' " 
 The music video for " Shiver " was directed by English film director and cinematographer Grant Gee . It features Coldplay performing in a small studio . The yellow globe featured on the Parachutes cover can be seen on top of an amplifier in the video . The music video received " strong exposure " on MTV . 
 In 2003 , " Shiver " was featured on Coldplay 's live album Live 2003 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 CD 
 " Shiver " – 5 : 02 
 " For You " – 5 : 45 
 " Careful Where You Stand " – 4 : 47 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = Blacklock ( horse ) = 
 Blacklock ( 1814 – 24 February 1831 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse who won seventeen of his twenty @-@ three races . As a two @-@ year @-@ old in 1816 he was undefeated in three starts . In his first race as a three @-@ year @-@ old he finished second in the St. Leger , a neck behind Ebor . He then won four races in two weeks , including the Gascoigne Stakes and Dundas Stakes . In 1818 he recorded several wins including two of the Great Subscription <unk> at York . He won a third Great Subscription Purse in 1819 , along with the York Gold Cup . After retiring from racing , Blacklock became a successful stallion and was champion sire of Great Britain in 1829 , the year his son Voltaire won the Doncaster Cup . He was owned by Thomas Kirby as a two @-@ year @-@ old , before being purchased by Richard Watt , who owned him for the remainder of his racing career . Blacklock was trained by Tommy Sykes . 
 = = Background = = 
 Blacklock was a bay colt bred by Francis Moss and foaled in 1814 . He was sired by Whitelock , who won a number of races in the north of England . Whitelock was a son of St. Leger and dual Doncaster Cup winner Hambletonian , who was only defeated once in his career . Blacklock 's dam was a daughter of <unk> . He was the seventh of her nine foals , the youngest of which being 1822 St. Leger winner Theodore . Francis Moss had bought Blacklock 's dam for £ 3 in 1803 . 
 Blacklock was not thought to be a good @-@ looking horse . He was described as having " a head like a half @-@ moon " and being calf @-@ kneed . Thomas Kirby purchased him from Moss for £ 40 . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1816 : Two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Blacklock , who was then unnamed and raced under the name " Mr. Kirby 's b. c. by Whitelock , dam by <unk> " , made his racecourse debut on 23 August 1816 at York in a sweepstakes of 20 guineas each for two @-@ year @-@ olds . After starting at the price of about 3 / 1 he won the race , with the judge being unable to place any of his five rivals . On 11 September at Pontefract , he faced three opponents for a sweepstakes of 20 guineas each over one mile ( 1609 metres ) . He started as the 13 / 8 favourite and won the race . Shylock finished in second place , with Angelica in third . Blacklock was then purchased by Richard Watt . Racing in Watt 's colours ( Harlequin ) and ridden by jockey J. Jackson , Blacklock made his final start as a two @-@ year @-@ old at Doncaster on the 24 September when he competed in another sweepstakes of 20 guineas each . He started as the 4 / 7 favourite and won the race from the Young Woodpecker colt , who was followed by Eglinton . Blacklock apparently won the race easily . 
 = = = 1817 : Three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Blacklock , still unnamed , had his first race as a three @-@ year @-@ old in the St. Leger Stakes at Doncaster on Monday 22 September . He did not arrive at Doncaster until the Saturday before , and after reports that he was amiss his odds had lengthened to as much as 10 / 1 in the betting . After arriving , he had a gallop in the afternoon and soon shortened in the betting . After another of the pre @-@ race favourites , <unk> , was withdrawn due to illness Blacklock was sent off as the short @-@ priced favourite at about evens . Blacklock appeared like he was going to win easily and Jackson eased him up in the final furlong ( 200 metres ) of the race . However , Ebor and Restless began to quickly close down his lead . By the time Jackson realised , Blacklock could not accelerate quick enough and Ebor came out on top , beating Blacklock by a neck . Restless finished in third place and was the only other runner that could be placed by the judge . Blacklock had a crack in one of his hind heels , which was thought to have affected him in the race . 
 Two days after the St. Leger , Blacklock faced St. Helena over the same course and distance in the Gascoigne Stakes , which he won easily . Twenty @-@ four hours later , Blacklock lost to The Duchess in the Doncaster Club Stakes over two miles . On 8 October at Richmond he won a sweepstakes of 20 guineas each , beating four rivals , with <unk> finishing second . Later in the day Blacklock won the Dundas Stakes , beating Rasping , <unk> and Shepard into second , third and fourth respectively . 
 = = = 1818 : Four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Blacklock , racing under his name for the first time , started the 1818 season much earlier than he had done the previous two seasons , with his first race coming on 18 May at the York Spring Meeting in a sweepstakes of 20 guineas each over two miles . He started as the 1 / 2 favourite , but could only finish third behind St. Helena . Two days later he started as the 4 / 6 favourite for the Constitution Stakes over a mile @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter . He biggest rival was expected to be the Duke of Leeds 's Rasping , who was priced at 2 / 1 . Blacklock won the race from Rasping , with Hornby in third and <unk> last of the four runners . 
 Blacklock did not race again until August at York , where he ran in the four @-@ mile Great Subscription Purse for four @-@ year @-@ olds . He started as the evens favourite and faced three rivals ; Agatha , St. Helena and a filly by Orville . Blacklock won the race by over 100 yards ( 91 metres ) without being asked for an effort , causing some people to proclaim " nothing has been seen at all equal to Mr. Watt 's Blacklock since the days of Eclipse . " This referring to the ease with which Eclipse won his races . Agatha finished the race in second place and St. Helena in third . The race was won in a time of 7 minutes 23 seconds . The next day he beat Silenus to win the four @-@ mile Great Subscription Purse for four and five @-@ year @-@ olds . Later in the same day he started as the 1 / 2 favourite in a two @-@ mile sweepstakes of 25 guineas each , where he faced four opponents . Despite it being his third race in two days he won , beating Rasping into second place . 
 Blacklock then went to Doncaster , where on 23 September , he started 1 / 2 favourite and beat The Duchess to win the Doncaster Stakes over four miles . The same day he also walked over for a sweepstakes of 50 guineas each over the St. Leger course . Twenty @-@ four hours later he beat Rasping to win a sweepstakes of 25 guineas each over four miles . , and then went on to beat The Duchess to win the Doncaster Club Stakes . This was his fourth race in the space of two days . At Richmond in October he won his second Dundas Stakes , this time beating King Corney . Later in the day Blacklock finished last of four runners behind winner Doctor Syntax in the Richmond Cup over four miles . Doctor Syntax had started in the lead , but was overtaken by Blacklock after only 200 yards . Blacklock held the lead until about half a mile from the finish , when Doctor Syntax joined him again . Blacklock then swerved out of line , allowing Doctor Syntax to win easily . By the time The Richmond Cup was run Blacklock was apparently unwell and was coughing repeatedly during the race . 
 = = = 1819 : Five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 On 17 May 1819 at York , Blacklock finished second of seven in a two @-@ mile sweepstakes of 20 guineas each . The race was won by The Marshall . On 18 May he started as the evens favourite for the two @-@ mile Gold Cup . He won the race , with <unk> finishing second , Torch @-@ bearer third and Otho fourth . At the York August Meeting , Blacklock faced three rivals in the four @-@ mile Great Subscription Purse for five @-@ year @-@ olds and older . The Duchess started as the 5 / 2 favourite , with Blacklock and St. Helena both at 3 / 1 and Magistrate at 4 / 1 . Blacklock won the race from Magistrate , with The Duchess finishing in third place . Blacklock 's final race came two days later , when he finished second to St. Helena in a sweepstakes of 25 guineas each over two miles . During his racing career Blacklock had twenty @-@ three races , winning seventeen of those , placing second four times and third once . 
 = = Race record = = 
 a Only the winner could be placed by the judge . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 Blacklock was retired to stud , where he became a successful stallion . He first stood at Bishop Burton in Yorkshire , with his fee initially set at 15 guineas and half a guinea for the groom ( Thomas Barrow ) . He was then leased to Thomas Kirkby in York for four seasons where he stood for a much lower fee . In 1827 he was at Bildeston in Suffolk and was commanding a stud fee of twelve guineas . His fee reached up to 25 guineas . 
 Blacklock was champion sire of Great Britain in 1829 . His progeny included : 
 <unk> ( 1821 ) – won the Tradesmen 's Cup and Stand Cup at Chester in 1826 . As a sire he produced the Grand National winner <unk> and Hetman <unk> , who won several cups . He was also grandsire of Derby winner Cossack . 
 <unk> ( 1822 ) – won 25 races . 
 Belzoni ( 1823 ) – won the York St. Leger and later became a successful sire of hunters . He produced Vanguard , who won the Grand National in 1843 . 
 Laurel ( 1824 ) – won the Doncaster Cup in 1828 . Through one of his unnamed daughters he was the <unk> of Oaks winners <unk> and Governess . 
 Robin Hood ( 1825 ) – won ten races including two Newcastle Gold Cups . 
 Belinda ( 1825 ) – finished second in the St. Leger at Doncaster . As a broodmare she foaled <unk> Stakes winner Tuscan , as well as <unk> , who became the dam of Doncaster Cup winner <unk> . 
 Miss Pratt ( 1825 ) – foaled Echidna , who was the dam of The Baron . The Baron won the St. Leger and sired the influential stallion Stockwell . 
 <unk> ( 1825 ) – won the York St. Leger , York Gold Cup and Liverpool Cup . He sired Derby winner Amato , Oaks and St. Leger winner Queen of Trumps and 2000 Guineas winner Meteor . 
 Tranby ( 1826 ) – won the Oatlands Stakes in 1832 and ran four four @-@ mile legs in George <unk> 's successful attempt to ride 200 miles in 10 hours . 
 Voltaire ( 1826 ) – won the Doncaster Gold Cup and finished second in the St. Leger in 1829 . He sired Derby and St. Leger winner Voltigeur . Voltigeur 's son Vedette was the grandsire of the undefeated St. Simon , who became Champion sire nine times . It is mainly through St. Simon that Blacklock 's sire line survives today . 
 Moss Rose ( 1827 ) – won the Dee Stakes at Chester . 
 Belshazzar ( 1830 ) – finished third in an Ascot Gold Cup . He sired 1000 Guineas winner Cara and was later sent to America . 
 Blacklock mare – foaled Progress , who was the dam of Derby winner Attila . 
 Blacklock died on 24 February 1831 at Bishop Burton after rupturing a blood vessel when covering a mare . His death was described as " instantaneous " . In total Blacklock sired the winners of 442 races and over £ 50 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 Note : b . 
 = Bay , br . = 
 Brown , ch . 
 = Chestnut , gr . = 
 Grey 
 * Blacklock was inbred 3 × 4 to Pot @-@ 8 @-@ Os . This means that the stallion appears once in the third generation and once in the fourth generation of his pedigree . He was also inbred 3 × 4 to Highflyer , 4 × 4 × 4 to Herod and 4 × 4 to Eclipse . 
 = Chester Rows = 
 Chester Rows consist of covered walkways at the first floor behind which are entrances to shops and other premises . At street level is another set of shops and other premises , many of which are entered by going down a few steps . The Rows , found in each of the four main streets of the city of Chester , Cheshire , England , are unique ; nothing precisely similar exists anywhere else in the world . 
 Dating from the medieval era , the Rows may have been built on top of rubble remaining from the ruins of Roman buildings , but their origin is still subject to speculation . In some places the continuity of the Rows has been blocked by enclosure or by new buildings , but in others modern buildings have retained the Rows in their designs . <unk> or " crypts " were constructed beneath the buildings in the Rows . The undercrofts were in stone while most of the buildings in the Rows were in timber . 
 Today about 20 of the stone undercrofts still exist , but at the level of the Rows very little medieval fabric remains . Many of the buildings containing portions of the Rows are listed and some are recorded in the English Heritage Archive . The premises on the street and Row levels are used for a variety of purposes ; most are shops , but there are also offices , restaurants , cafés , and meeting rooms . Chester Rows are one of the city 's main tourist attractions . 
 = = Description = = 
 At street level the shops and other premises are similar to those found in other towns and cities , although many of the premises are entered by going down a few steps . On the first floor level are more shops and other premises , set back from the street , in front of which is a continuous walkway . The storey above this overlaps the walkway , which makes it a covered walkway , and this constitutes what is known as the " Row " . On the street side of the walkways are railings and an area which was used as shelves or stalls for the display of goods . The floors above the level of the Rows are used for commercial or domestic purposes , or for storage . The Rows are present , to a greater or lesser degree , in all the streets radiating from Chester Cross , namely Watergate Street , Northgate Street , Eastgate Street and Upper Bridge Street . They are continuous on both sides of Upper Bridge Street , along most of Watergate and Eastgate Street , but only for a short stretch along the east side of Northgate Street . Originally there were also Rows in Lower Bridge Street but these were blocked during the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 As the ground floor buildings are usually lower than the street level , they are sometime known as " crypts " . However , as the architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner points out , this is not a strictly accurate description because the level of the floors of the buildings is a half @-@ storey rather than a full @-@ storey level below the street . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Rows were built in the four main streets leading from Chester Cross , each of which originated during the settlement 's early development . In the Roman period the main street , now Watergate Street and Eastgate Street , lay on an east @-@ west axis . It was joined at what is now Chester Cross by the main road from the south , present @-@ day Bridge Street . During the Saxon period a road to the north was added , now called Northgate Street . Dendrochronological evidence shows that the Rows go back as far as the 13th century , but it is unlikely that they originated before 1200 . The first record of the Rows appears in 1293 , although it is uncertain whether it refers to a Row as it would be recognised today . The " earliest unambiguous instance " of the use of the term for an elevated walkway is in 1356 . 
 Because the Chester Rows are unique and their precise origins are unknown , they have been the subject of speculation . Chester has suffered from a series of fires . In 1278 the fire was so severe that almost the entire town within the walls was destroyed . It has been suggested that following this fire , the owners were ordered to make their ground floors fireproof , leading to the stone @-@ lined undercrofts . From this , the suggestion has been made that there was " a general undertaking by the citizens of Chester ... to improve the commercial potential of their property by providing two @-@ level access for customers " . 
 Another theory links the Rows with the debris left from the Roman occupation of Chester . The rubble from the Roman buildings which had fallen into ruin was piled up alongside the streets . It is suggested that in the medieval period buildings were constructed along the top of this debris . The buildings were set back from the street , a footpath passed in front of them , and wheeled vehicles passed along the street below . In time , the properties were improved and , possibly during the 13th century , cellars or undercrofts were excavated in the debris beneath them . When the buildings were further improved , upper stories were built which overlapped the lower storey , providing a covered walkway . Stalls or shelves were added on the street side of the walkway for the display of goods , and so the system of Rows was developed . In a few places , for example at the corner of Eastgate Street and Northgate Street , another building was constructed between the walkway and the street . It is thought that , apart from a relatively small number of later buildings , the system of the Rows had reached its full extent by about 1350 . 
 = = Medieval period = = 
 During the medieval period the Rows gave access to living accommodation . The doorway led into a hall , which was usually at right angles to the street . In some cases the front portion of the hall was used as a separate shop , and in other cases the whole hall was the shop . In the storey above the hall was the solar , a room providing private accommodation for the residents . In some cases , where the hall was larger , there were several shops on its frontage . Below the Rows , at street level , were crypts or undercrofts . Many of these were stone @-@ lined with ribbed vaults , and they were used for storage or for selling more valuable goods . Behind the hall , on the level of the Rows , was more domestic accommodation . Normally the kitchen was a separate building in the yard behind the house . The back yard was also used for cesspits and for the disposal of rubbish . 
 = = Subsequent development = = 
 Although many of the Rows are still continuous , in some areas they have been blocked . In Lower Bridge Street there was originally a continuous Row ; the first building to break the sequence was at the north end of the street , the public house now known as The Falcon . In the 17th century this was the town house of the Grosvenor family . It was rebuilt in 1626 , maintaining its section of the Row . However in 1643 , during the Civil War siege of Chester , Sir Richard Grosvenor moved his family there from his country estate at Eaton Hall . In order to increase the size of the house he gained permission to enclose the Row . This set the fashion for other houses in Lower Bridge Street to enclose their sections of the Row . Later , completely new houses were constructed which did not incorporate the Row . One of these was Bridge House , built by Lady Calveley in 1676 ; it was the first house in Chester to be designed in neoclassical style . In 1699 John Mather , a lawyer , gained permission to build a new house at 51 Lower Bridge Street , which also resulted in the loss of part of the Row . In 1728 Roger <unk> , rather than building a new house , enclosed the Row at his home , Tudor House , making it into an additional room . 
 During the Georgian era more sections of the Rows were blocked , especially by commercial development on the north side of Watergate Street . In 1808 Thomas Harrison designed the Commercial Coffee Room in Northgate Street in neoclassical style , with an arcade at the ground @-@ floor level , rather than continuing the Row on the first floor . In 1859 – 60 Chester Bank was built in Eastgate Street , again obliterating its part of the Row . However other architects continued the tradition of maintaining the Rows in their designs ; examples include the Georgian Booth Mansion of 1700 in Watergate Street , T. M. Penson 's Gothic Revival Crypt Chambers of 1858 in Eastgate Street , and buildings in modern style constructed in Watergate Street in the 1960s . 
 = = Today = = 
 About 20 stone undercrofts still exist , some of them vaulted , dating from the 13th or early 14th century . One of the finest is Cowper House at No. 12 Bridge Street , with an undercroft of six bays built in sandstone rubble . It has plain rib @-@ vaulting on plain corbels ; the ribs are single @-@ chamfered . On the other side of Bridge Street , at No. 15 , is another undercroft , this one having two double @-@ chamfered arches . The Falcon , in Lower Bridge Street , has an undercroft which formerly had three bays but which has now been divided into two chambers . At No. 11 Watergate Street is a two @-@ naved undercroft with four bays . Also in Watergate Street are undercrofts at Nos. 23 and 37 , the latter having 5 ½ bays . Crypt Chambers , at No. 28 Eastgate Street , has a four @-@ bay undercroft . 
 At the Row level , the medieval building was usually built in timber , and few examples remain . One which does remain is the building known as Three Old Arches . Consisting of three arches , the frontage of this shop is stone and is probably the earliest identified shopfront in England . The building also retains its undercroft and hall , the latter also built in stone . 
 According to the records in the English Heritage Archive , 14 buildings incorporate sections of Chester Rows . The records in the National Heritage List for England show that at least 95 of the buildings containing sections of the Rows are listed ; 9 of these are listed as Grade I , 20 as Grade II * , and 66 as Grade II . The National Heritage List for England records the uses made by the premises at street level and in the Rows . Most of these are shops , but other uses include offices , restaurants and cafés , and private dwellings . The building at No. 1 Bridge Street has shops at both street and Row levels . A department store occupies the street and Row levels ( and the storey above ) of Crypt Chambers . Bishop Lloyd 's House in Watergate Street has a shop at the street level and above this there are meeting rooms , and the office of Chester Civic Trust . As of 2010 , Booth Mansion , also in Watergate Street , contains a solicitors ' office . The former St Michael 's Church , which is now a heritage centre , includes part of Bridge Street Row in the lowest stage of its tower . A remaining example of a section of a Row with a building between the walkway and the street is No. 22 Eastgate Street . 
 Since 1995 access to the Rows has been improved by a pedestrianisation scheme , which affects all the streets containing Rows . Most vehicles are prohibited from using the area between 08 : 00 and 18 : 00 , although unloading is allowed until 10 : 30 and from 16 : 30 . Chester Rows are a major tourist attraction in the city because of their unique nature , their attractive appearance , and the covered shopping experience they provide . 
 On 7 July 2010 it was announced that Chester Rows were being considered as an applicant for the new United Kingdom Tentative List for World Heritage status by the Department of Culture Media and Sport . 
 = Sally ( Flight of the Conchords ) = 
 " Sally " is the pilot episode of the American television sitcom Flight of the Conchords . It first aired on HBO on June 17 , 2007 . In this episode , New Zealanders Jemaine Clement and Bret McKenzie of the band Flight of the Conchords have moved to New York City to try to make it in the United States . At a party , Jemaine falls for , and subsequently begins dating , Sally — Bret 's former girlfriend . As Jemaine 's attentions focus on Sally , a lonely Bret is forced to deal with the advances of Mel ( Kristen Schaal ) , the band 's obsessed — and only — fan . Meanwhile , Murray ( Rhys Darby ) , the band 's manager , helps the band film their first music video , although they cannot afford decent costumes or proper video equipment . 
 " Sally " received largely positive reviews from critics . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Sally " drew over 1 @.@ 2 million viewers . Several of the songs from the episode , most notably " Robots " , " Not Crying " , and " Most Beautiful Girl ( In the Room ) " received positive critical acclaim . All three songs were released on the band 's EP The Distant Future , although " Robots " appeared in a live form . " Robots " later was re @-@ recorded and released on the band 's debut album Flight of the Conchords , along with " Most Beautiful Girl ( In the Room ) . " The latter was later nominated for an Emmy award for Outstanding Original Music And Lyrics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jemaine ( Jemaine Clement ) and Bret ( Bret McKenzie ) attend a party thrown by their friend Dave ( <unk> Barker ) . In the crowd Jemaine spots a beautiful woman , Sally ( Rachel Blanchard ) , inspiring him to sing " Most Beautiful Girl ( In the Room ) " . Jemaine and Sally leave the party and eventually go back to the band 's apartment , but just as they begin kissing , Bret disturbs them by turning on the light , and an embarrassed Sally leaves . The next morning , Jemaine blames her departure on " the whole situation with the light " . However , Bret suggests it was because he used to date her himself . 
 Bret and Jemaine go to a band meeting with their manager Murray ( Rhys Darby ) in his office in the New Zealand Consulate . Murray criticizes Jemaine for dating his bandmate 's ex , and discusses the need to increase the group 's fan base , which currently consists of only one person : the obsessive Mel ( Kristen Schaal ) . Bret suggests they film a music video . However , unable to afford real video equipment and robot costumes like Daft Punk , they are forced to rely on a camera phone and disappointing cardboard costumes made by Murray . Regardless , they manage to film a video for " Robots " . 
 Over the following week , Jemaine spends more time with Sally , leaving Bret feeling lonely and neglected . When Bret suggests hanging out sometime , Jemaine invites him along on a dinner date with Sally , but they all feel a " bit weird " and Bret leaves early . On the way home , Mel tries to cheer him up but fails miserably . Immediately after dinner , Sally breaks up with Jemaine , leading him to sing " Not Crying " with Bret . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sally " was written by series co @-@ creators James Bobin , Jemaine Clement , and Bret McKenzie , the latter two starring as the titular Flight of the Conchords . Bobin directed the episode . The episode is the first of the series to feature Rachel Blanchard as Sally . The character returns to disrupt Bret and Jemaine 's lives in the fifth episode , " Sally Returns " . In " Sally " , the character Mel shows Bret that she carries around a picture of Jemaine 's lips in her wallet . This was inspired by an incident that happened to the band during the filming of their documentary A Texan Odyssey which covered their trip to the 2006 South by Southwest ( SXSW ) festival in Austin , Texas . The incident was caught on camera and is included in the documentary . Judah Friedlander has a cameo appearance in this episode , playing the role of the man who tries to sell Dave a cake . 
 The episode contains several cultural references . Murray is wearing a New Zealand All Blacks rugby shirt when the band is in Dave 's pawn shop obtaining a camera . In the same scene , Murray and Bret have a conversation about the band Fleetwood Mac and their album " Rumours " . Rhys Darby , who played Murray , later asked Mick Fleetwood , the drummer for the band , if he heard the joke and whether or not he enjoyed it . Fleetwood admitted that he " appreciate [ d ] " the joke . During the filming of the video for " Robots " , Jemaine tells Murray that he wanted robot costumes " like Daft Punk " rather than the amateur versions hand @-@ crafted by Murray . Murray replies with a characteristic lack of musical knowledge : " I don 't know who he is . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The first song featured in the episode is " The Most Beautiful Girl ( In the Room ) . " The song , also known as " Part @-@ Time Model " , was based on the conceit of a man " who 's not very good at compliments . " The song begins after Jemaine sees Sally from across the room at Dave 's party . Jemaine details his seduction of Sally , describing her as being so beautiful she could be a " part @-@ time model " . This song was voted number 60 in the 2008 Triple J Hottest 100 . Later , the song was nominated for an Emmy award for Outstanding Original Music And Lyrics . 
 The second song featured in the episode is " Robots " . The song , also known as " Humans Are Dead " , is sung by both Bret and Jemaine . It is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic " distant future " , humorously stated to be the year 2000 , where all humans are dead and robots have taken over the world . Within the context of the plot of the show , it is the band 's first music video . Since the band has very limited funds , Murray constructs the robot costumes himself and films the video using a cell phone . 
 The third and final song featured is " Not Crying " . The song begins as Sally breaks up with Jemaine . Jemaine denies that he is crying by offering excuses such as " it 's just been raining on my face " . All three of the songs were released on The Distant Future EP in 2007 , however , " The Most Beautiful Girl ( In the Room ) " and " Robots " appeared in live form . The two were subsequently re @-@ recorded in studio form for the band 's debut album , Flight of the Conchords in 2008 . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Sally " debuted on the internet , a month before the show premiered on HBO . The network , in conjunction with MySpace , iTunes , Yahoo ! TV , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , allowed a promotional version of the episode to be streamed as part of an online marketing campaign to build up word @-@ of @-@ mouth for the series . On television , " Sally " debuted on the HBO in the United States at 10 : 30 PM on Sunday , June 17 , 2007 in the time slot preceded by Entourage , and vacated by the last episode of the final season of The Sopranos . The episode received over 1 @.@ 2 million viewers . 
 The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . IGN , in an advanced review of the episode , awarded " Sally " an " amazing " 9 @.@ 2 out of 10 rating and called the series " The funniest show you haven 't seen yet . " The review noted that , " Flight of the Conchords deserves the buzz it is slowly building . This is a very funny show . " Blogcritics reviewer Daniel J. <unk> noted that the series was different for HBO , writing , " Flight of the Conchords isn ’ t Entourage or Sex in the City or even Extras . It ’ s different . And sometimes different is just good . " <unk> , however , did note that the availability of the band 's music on video sites like YouTube meant that watching the series was not worth the cost of a cable subscription . Further more , <unk> noted that while " the fun , quirky music videos that pop @-@ up can make this long half @-@ hour worth watching [ ... ] the 10 or so minutes in between numbers aren ’ t groundbreaking comedy . " Chris <unk> from Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a largely positive review . He called the new series " the funniest hour of comedy on television " and noted that the performance of Rhys Darby as Murray Hewitt was excellent , calling his character " scene @-@ stealing " . Finally , <unk> positively compared the episode to the 2004 comedy film Napoleon Dynamite , writing , " Indeed , the whole pilot vaguely reminded me of Napoleon in the way that the characters just sort of lurk around and pour their limited energy into absurd activities " . 
 = History of Liverpool F.C. ( 1892 – 1959 ) = 
 The history of Liverpool Football Club from 1892 to 1959 covers the period from the club 's foundation , through their first period of success from 1900 to the 1920s , to the appointment of Bill Shankly as manager . 
 Liverpool Football Club was formed on 15 March 1892 following a disagreement between the directors of Everton Football Club and its president , John Houlding , who owned the club 's ground , Anfield . A dispute over rent resulted in Everton moving to Goodison Park , which left Houlding with an empty stadium . Thus , he founded Liverpool F.C. , and they joined the Lancashire League . After winning the league title in their first season , Liverpool were accepted into the Football League for the 1893 – 94 season , following the resignations of Accrington and Bootle . 
 The appointment of Tom Watson as the club 's manager in 1896 led to the club 's first period of sustained success . Liverpool consolidated their position in the Football League following promotion to the First Division , and won their first League championship in 1901 . A further championship followed in 1906 , and in 1914 the club reached their first FA Cup final , losing to Burnley . Watson died suddenly in 1915 of pneumonia after the outbreak of the First World War . The club won two further championships in 1922 and 1923 when football resumed after the war . 
 An expansion to the Spion Kop terracing in the 1920s increased Anfield 's capacity . Liverpool 's fortunes declined during the inter @-@ war years , when the club often finished in midtable . Liverpool became League champions again in 1947 , in the first season after the Second World War , but following a slow downturn in performance the club was relegated to the Second Division in 1954 . By the time of Shankly 's appointment in 1959 , Liverpool had been in the Second Division for five seasons . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Liverpool 's origins lie with their neighbours Everton . Founded in 1878 , Everton moved to Anfield in 1884 , a facility owned by the club 's president , John Houlding , a former Lord Mayor of Liverpool . In 1892 a dispute arose between Houlding and the Everton board of directors , over the club 's tenancy of the ground . The annual rent had risen from £ 100 in 1884 to £ 250 in 1892 ; Houlding wanted to sell the ground to the club , which in turn wished to agree a long @-@ term rental . Houlding would only agree to this on the basis of a rent at a level unacceptable to the club . Negotiations having failed , the directors decided to leave Anfield and find another ground , leaving Houlding with an empty stadium . His response was to form a new football club to occupy the stadium . He attempted to retain the team name " Everton " by registering the name " Everton Football Club and Athletic Grounds Company , Limited " with Companies House , but the Football League decided that the name belonged to the departed Everton club , which acquired new premises at Goodison Park . Houlding therefore adopted the name " Liverpool Football Club " for his new venture . 
 Having established his new club , Houlding applied for membership of the First Division of the Football League , rather than the newly formed Second Division . The League , unimpressed with this premature application , refused to admit the club , which instead joined the Lancashire League . Liverpool played their first match on 1 September 1892 , a pre @-@ season friendly match against Rotherham Town , which they won 7 – 1 . The team Liverpool fielded against Rotherham was composed entirely of Scottish players – manager John McKenna had recruited the players after a scouting trip to Scotland – so they became known as the " team of Macs " . Liverpool 's first match in the Lancashire League , which they won 8 – 0 , was against Higher Walton . 200 spectators attended the match , but as the twenty @-@ two match season proceeded , and Liverpool continued to win , attendances increased . Approximately 2 @,@ 000 people watched Liverpool defeat South Shore in the penultimate match of the season at Anfield . 
 Liverpool 's first season was successful , as the club narrowly won the Lancashire League title on goal average , over Blackpool . They also won the Liverpool District Cup by defeating Everton . The subsequent theft of the league and cup trophies cost the club £ 130 to replace them . Following their success , Liverpool reapplied to the Football League . This application was successful , mainly because of the resignations of Accrington and Bootle from the Second Division . Liverpool 's original strip had been blue and white chequered shirts and white shorts , similar to those of their neighbours Everton . From 1894 they changed to red shirts and white shorts . 
 The club 's first match in the Football League was against Middlesbrough Ironopolis on 2 September 1893 , which they won 2 – 0 , with Malcolm <unk> scoring Liverpool 's first goal in League football . Liverpool 's first season in the Football League saw them unbeaten in 28 matches , 22 of which they won . They finished at the top of the Second Division , but as at that time there was no automatic promotion to the First Division , they were entered into the test match system . This involved a knockout match with the bottom team in the First Division , Newton Heath ( later renamed Manchester United ) . Liverpool won , and took their place in the First Division . Their stay in the division lasted only a season , as they finished in bottom position , with seven wins from thirty matches . They were relegated to the Second Division , after facing Bury in the test match and losing 1 – 0 , despite Bury playing most of the match with ten men after their goalkeeper was sent off . 
 = = Consolidation = = 
 As more people began to watch Liverpool , the ground capacity was expanded . The Main Stand was built , which helped to bring regular attendances of around 20 @,@ 000 . Liverpool 's stay in the Second Division was brief , as they secured promotion to the First Division during the 1895 – 96 season – twelve wins in their final fourteen matches gave them a first @-@ place finish , followed by success in the test matches over Small Heath ( later renamed Birmingham City ) and West Bromwich Albion . The club reached the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup for the first time in the 1896 – 97 season ; they were drawn against Aston Villa , and with Everton in the other semi @-@ final , there was the prospect of a first all @-@ Merseyside cup final . However , while Everton won their tie , Liverpool were defeated 3 – 0 . After winning promotion , the club appointed Tom Watson , who was managing Sunderland , as their new manager . Watson 's record of three League championships in four seasons with Sunderland convinced Houlding to make Watson the highest @-@ paid manager in England , with a yearly salary of £ 300 . Following Watson 's appointment , McKenna remained at the club as an administrator . 
 During the next two seasons Liverpool consolidated their place in the First Division , with fifth and ninth @-@ place finishes . Performances improved in the 1898 – 99 season , when the club went into their final game with a chance of winning their first League championship . They faced Aston Villa , with whom they were level on points , although Villa 's goal average advantage of 0 @.@ 02 meant that they only needed to draw the match to win the League title . In the event , Villa won 5 – 0 , to leave Liverpool as the runners @-@ up . Liverpool also reached the FA Cup semi @-@ final , where they faced Sheffield United . The match finished in a 2 – 2 draw ; the first replay at Burnden Park also finished with the sides equal at 4 – 4 , and a second replay at the small Fallowfield Stadium was abandoned when overcrowding caused fans to spill onto the pitch . The tie was finally decided at the Baseball Ground , which Sheffield United won 1 – 0 . 
 Liverpool won their first League championship in 1901 . Integral to their success were their captain Alex Raisbeck , and striker Sam Raybould . Raisbeck , a centre @-@ half , had been signed from Hibernian in 1898 . He became club captain a year later , and was often the focal point of the team , as an important defensive player and the instigator of many of Liverpool 's attacks . Raybould was signed from local club New Brighton Tower , and in the 1899 – 1900 season scored seven times as the club won nine of their last eleven matches , to finish in tenth place . He would go on to score 128 goals in 226 matches for Liverpool . Success in the 1900 – 01 season looked unlikely in February , at which point Liverpool had lost eight games and conceded 31 goals . However , they won nine and drew three of their next twelve matches , while only conceding four goals , to achieve their first League title . They were less successful in the following two seasons , finishing in eleventh and fifth places respectively . The 1903 – 04 season saw the club relegated to the Second Division ; like the previous relegation it was only for one year as they won the division the following season . On their return in the 1905 – 06 season they became the first team to win the Second and First Division in successive seasons . They also reached the semi @-@ final of the FA Cup , where they faced Everton and lost 2 – 0 . 
 Houlding died in 1902 , and in 1905 the ownership of the club was restructured . Of the existing 3 @,@ 000 shares , 2 @,@ 000 were held by the Houlding family . The club owed a debt of £ 10 @,@ 000 to Houlding , and a further £ 5 @,@ 000 bank overdraft was guaranteed by his family . The family offered to give up the 2 @,@ 000 shares and wipe out the debt , if the club relieved them of the bank loan guarantee . The board agreed , and a new share issue was released in 1906 with 15 @,@ 000 shares available for £ 1 each . Following the share issue , McKenna became chairman of the club . 
 Following the club 's successes , a new stand was erected along the Walton Breck Road end of the ground . The stand became known as the Spion Kop – it was originally given this name by local journalist Ernest Edwards , the sports editor of the Liverpool Daily Post and the Echo , after a famous hill in South Africa , where a local regiment had suffered heavy losses during the Boer War . More than 300 men had died , many of them from Liverpool , as the British army attempted to capture the strategic hilltop . 
 In the seasons following their second league title , Liverpool enjoyed limited success , generally finishing in midtable . They finished in second place behind Aston Villa in the 1909 – 10 season , the last for their captain , Raisbeck , who returned to his native Scotland to play for Partick Thistle . Liverpool 's form declined after his departure , with their best performance in the League a 12th @-@ place finish in the 1912 – 13 season . There was improvement in 1914 when the club reached their first FA Cup final , which they lost 1 – 0 to Burnley at Crystal <unk> following season four Liverpool players were implicated in the 1915 British football betting scandal , which involved a match with Manchester United . A 2 – 0 victory for United was required to win the bet , in which players from both sides were involved . With the score at 2 – 0 , Liverpool 's Fred Pagnam hit the crossbar with a shot , at which several of his teammates gestured angrily towards him . Subsequently , Tom <unk> , Tom Miller , Bob Pursell and Jackie Sheldon were found guilty by a Football Association ( FA ) enquiry of conspiring with three Manchester United players ( Sandy Turnbull , Arthur Whalley and Enoch West ) to fix a United win . All the players involved were banned for life . Following the end of the First World War , in which Turnbull was killed at the Battle of Arras in 1917 , the FA lifted the surviving players ' bans in recognition of their service in the conflict . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 Three weeks after visiting his hometown of Newcastle to celebrate his 56th birthday , Liverpool 's manager Tom Watson developed a severe chill , which developed into pneumonia . He died on 6 May 1915 ; Raisbeck and two other former Liverpool stars , Ned Doig and Arthur Goddard , were pallbearers at the funeral . 
 During the First World War , with normal Football League activity suspended , Liverpool competed in a regional league , the Lancashire Section . The competition was split into two parts : " Principal Tournament " and the " Supplementary Competition " . Liverpool won the former in the 1916 – 17 season , and the latter in the 1917 – 18 and 1918 – 19 seasons . A number of Liverpool players fought in the war , including Philip Bratley , Robert Crawford and Wilfred Bartrop . Bartrop was the only one to be killed , dying on 7 November 1918 while fighting in Belgium . 
 When football resumed after the war for the 1919 – 20 season , Watson 's post as manager was taken by David Ashworth . Liverpool finished in fourth place . During the season George V became the first reigning monarch to watch a League match , when Liverpool played Manchester City . Liverpool repeated their fourth @-@ place finish in 1920 – 21 , before regaining the League championship in the 1921 – 22 season . Liverpool had looked certain title winners , before the loss of three of their last six games put their chances in doubt . A 4 – 1 victory over West Bromwich Albion in the last match of the season was enough to secure Liverpool 's third League championship . 
 Ashworth left Liverpool midway through the following season , to manage Oldham Athletic – he wished to be closer to his wife and daughter , who lived in nearby Stockport . His replacement was the former Liverpool player Matt McQueen , a club director . McQueen was intended as a temporary appointment , but he kept the job as Liverpool retained the League championship . This success owed much to the form of their goalkeeper Elisha Scott , who conceded only 31 goals during the season , a league record at the time . Liverpool 's total of 60 points in the season equalled the record set by West Bromwich Albion three seasons earlier . Following their successive championships , Liverpool 's fortunes declined as their side aged . Some of the players had begun their careers before the war ; goalkeeper Scott had been in the side since 1912 . The club began the 1923 – 24 season aiming to win three league titles in a row , but finished in twelfth place . They achieved fourth place the following season , which was to be their best finish until after the Second World War . Changes to the offside rule in the 1925 – 26 season resulted in an increase in the number of goals scored during matches . Liverpool contributed to this , with big victories over Manchester United and Newcastle United , but could only manage a seventh @-@ place finish . 
 In 1920 , the Kop had been redesigned and extended to hold 30 @,@ 000 spectators , all standing . At the time , the Kop was the biggest football stand in the country , able to hold more spectators than the entire capacity of some grounds . The increase in spectators did not fully restore Liverpool 's fortunes ; they scored 90 goals during the 1928 – 29 season , striker Gordon Hodgson scoring thirty of them , yet finished in fifth place . McQueen was unable to replicate his early triumphs with the club , and retired in 1928 after his leg was amputated following a road accident . He was replaced as manager by club secretary George Patterson . The club 's fortunes did not improve under Patterson 's leadership ; they generally finished midtable . Their results were inconsistent ; in September 1930 , they lost 7 – 0 at West Ham United , yet nine days later they beat Bolton Wanderers 7 – 2 at Anfield . 
 During the 1930s Liverpool 's form continued to deteriorate , and they avoided relegation in the 1933 – 34 season by only four points . Scott left the club at the end of what had been a poor season for the veteran goalkeeper . In ten matches from the start of 1934 , Liverpool won only once with Scott in goal , and after a 9 – 2 defeat against Newcastle United , he was replaced by Arthur Riley . The change of goalkeepers brought an upturn in form , with a 6 – 2 victory over Birmingham City and a 4 – 1 win against Middlesbrough . Scott , who joined Belfast Celtic after 24 years at Liverpool , remains the club 's longest @-@ serving player . As they became used to finishing in the lower part of the league table , Liverpool began to lose their best players . Hodgson , who had scored 233 goals in 358 league games , was sold to Aston Villa in 1936 and the club struggled to replace him . They finished 19th in the season following his departure . Also in 1936 , Patterson resigned as manager for health reasons , and resumed his role as the club 's secretary . His replacement , Southampton manager George Kay , did not initially fare much better ; Liverpool narrowly avoided relegation in the 1936 – 37 season , and finished in 11th place in each of the following two seasons . By the outbreak of the Second World War , Liverpool had become accustomed to finishing midtable . 
 Soon after the outbreak of war in 1939 , the 1939 – 40 season was cancelled and all first @-@ class football in Britain temporarily suspended . When matches resumed , competitions were played on a regional basis as in the previous war , and teams often did not complete a full season . Liverpool participated in the Football League North , which they won in the 1942 – 43 season . Many footballers served in the armed forces , away from their clubs for long periods , and would often appear as " guests " for other clubs . Two Liverpool players were decorated for their wartime service ; Berry Nieuwenhuys received the Czech Medal of Merit , and Bill Jones was awarded the Military Medal after rescuing wounded comrades under fire . 
 = = Post @-@ war decline = = 
 League football in England resumed in the 1946 – 47 season , after seven seasons ' suspension due to the war . Before the resumption , Liverpool embarked on an eight @-@ week tour of the United States and Canada , scoring 70 goals in the ten matches played . In escaping from post @-@ war food rationing while on tour , the Liverpool players were able to eat more , and by the end of the trip had gained in weight an average of 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) a man . The New York Times reporter who followed the team on the tour noted the " perceptible gain in strength on the playing field . " 
 The first game played at Anfield after the war was against Middlesbrough , on 4 September 1946 , which Liverpool lost 1 – 0 before a crowd of 34 @,@ 140 . Despite this defeat , Liverpool finished the 1946 – 47 season as League champions . Vital to this success were their attacking players ; after a 5 – 0 defeat to Manchester United the club bought Albert Stubbins from Newcastle United , to augment the attack alongside Jack Balmer and Billy Liddell . Balmer typified this new attacking strength by scoring hat @-@ tricks in three successive matches . However , the club were unable to match this success in the two seasons that followed , and finished in 11th and 12th places respectively . The 1949 – 50 season brought another disappointing league campaign . The season started well , as the club was unbeaten in their first 19 matches and was top of the league at the turn of the year . Their form declined thereafter , and they finished eighth . This did not hinder their progress in the FA Cup , as they reached their second final ( their first at Wembley ) , against Arsenal . They were unable to win their first FA Cup ; two goals from Arsenal striker Reg Lewis meant Liverpool lost 2 – 0 . 
 After their FA Cup final appearance , Liverpool 's fortunes declined steadily . Kay resigned through ill @-@ health , and was replaced by Don Welsh . Welsh 's first season did not go smoothly , as Liverpool were knocked out of the FA Cup in the third round by Norwich City of the Third Division South . The following year , 61 @,@ 905 spectators watched Liverpool beat Wolverhampton Wanderers 2 – 1 in the fourth round of the FA Cup , the biggest attendance ever recorded at Anfield . Under Welsh 's stewardship the club gradually slipped further down the table , and were relegated to the Second Division in the 1953 – 54 season , after finishing in bottom place . Their relegation came after 50 uninterrupted years in the top division of English football . The side 's decline did not prevent John Moores , owner of retail company Littlewoods , from investing in the club with a 51 % stake . 
 Liverpool 's first season in the Second Division in 1954 – 55 brought them an 11th @-@ place finish . During this season the club suffered the biggest defeat in its history , a 9 – 1 loss to Birmingham City . Although in the following season they improved to third place , it was not enough for Welsh to keep his job and he was sacked at the end of the season . His replacement was Phil Taylor , a former captain of the club and a member of the coaching staff . Taylor signed players such as Ronnie Moran , Alan A 'Court and Jimmy Melia , who would become mainstays of the club for seasons to come , but was unable to guide Liverpool back to the First Division . The Liverpool board persisted with him , despite the club 's loss to non @-@ League side Worcester City in the third round of the FA Cup in January 1959 . His tenure ended during the 1959 – 60 season ; after a good start , their form began to tail off mid @-@ season , and after a defeat to Huddersfield Town , Taylor resigned . The man who replaced him was Huddersfield 's manager , Bill Shankly . 
 = Lambert – Eaton myasthenic syndrome = 
 Lambert – Eaton myasthenic syndrome ( LEMS , also Lambert – Eaton syndrome , or Eaton – Lambert syndrome ) is a rare autoimmune disorder that is characterized by muscle weakness of the limbs . It is the result of an autoimmune reaction in which antibodies are formed against presynaptic voltage @-@ gated calcium channels , and likely other nerve terminal proteins , in the neuromuscular junction ( the connection between nerves and the muscle that they supply ) . The prevalence is 3 @.@ 4 cases per million . Around 60 % of those with LEMS have an underlying malignancy , most commonly small cell lung cancer ; it is therefore regarded as a paraneoplastic syndrome ( a condition that arises as a result of cancer elsewhere in the body ) . 
 LEMS usually occurs in people over 40 years of age , but it may occur any age . The diagnosis is usually confirmed with electromyography and blood tests ; these also distinguish it from myasthenia gravis ( MG ) , a related autoimmune neuromuscular disease . 
 If the disease is associated with cancer , direct treatment of the cancer often relieves the symptoms of LEMS . Other treatments often used are steroids , azathioprine , which suppress the immune system , intravenous immunoglobulin , which <unk> <unk> antibody from Fc receptors and <unk> and 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine , which enhance the neuromuscular transmission . Occasionally , plasma exchange is required to remove the antibodies . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The weakness from LEMS typically involves the muscles of the proximal arms and legs ( the muscles closer to the trunk ) . In contrast to myasthenia gravis , the weakness affects the legs more than the arms . This leads to difficulties climbing stairs and rising from a sitting position . Weakness is often relieved temporarily after exertion or physical exercise . High temperatures can worsen the symptoms . Weakness of the bulbar muscles ( muscles of the mouth and throat ) is occasionally encountered . Weakness of the eye muscles is uncommon . Some may have double vision , drooping of the eyelids and difficulty swallowing , but generally only together with leg weakness ; this too distinguishes LEMS from myasthenia gravis , in which eye signs are much more common . In the advanced stages of the disease , weakness of the respiratory muscles may occur . Some may also experience problems with coordination ( ataxia ) . 
 Three quarters of people with LEMS also have disruption of the autonomic nervous system . This may be experienced as a dry mouth , constipation , blurred vision , impaired sweating , and orthostatic hypotension ( falls in blood pressure on standing , potentially leading to blackouts ) . Some report a metallic taste in the mouth . 
 On neurological examination , the weakness demonstrated with normal testing of power is often less severe than would be expected on the basis of the symptoms . Strength improves further with repeated testing , e.g. improvement of power on repeated hand grip ( a phenomenon known as " Lambert 's sign " ) . At rest , reflexes are typically reduced ; with muscle use , reflex strength increases . This is a characteristic feature of LEMS . The pupillary light reflex may be sluggish . 
 In LEMS associated with lung cancer , most have no suggestive symptoms of cancer at the time , such as cough , coughing blood and unintentional weight loss . It has been suggested that LEMS associated with lung cancer is more severe . 
 = = Causes = = 
 LEMS is often associated with lung cancer ( 50 – 70 % ) , specifically small @-@ cell carcinoma , making LEMS a paraneoplastic syndrome . Of the people with small cell lung cancer , 1 – 3 % have LEMS . In most of these cases , LEMS is the first symptom of the lung cancer , and it is otherwise asymptomatic . 
 LEMS may also be associated with autoimmune diseases , such as hypothyroidism ( an underactive thyroid gland ) or diabetes mellitus type 1 . <unk> gravis , too , may happen in the presence of tumors ( <unk> , a tumor of the thymus in the chest ) ; people with MG without a tumor and people with LEMS without a tumor have similar genetic variations that seem to predispose them to these diseases . HLA @-@ <unk> @-@ B8 ( an HLA subtype ) , in particular , seems to predispose to LEMS . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 In normal neuromuscular function , a nerve impulse is carried down the axon ( the long projection of a nerve cell ) from the spinal cord . At the nerve ending in the neuromuscular junction , where the impulse is transferred to the muscle cell , the nerve impulse leads to the opening of voltage @-@ gated calcium channels ( VGCC ) , the influx of calcium ions into the nerve terminal , and the calcium @-@ dependent triggering of synaptic vesicle fusion with plasma membrane . These synaptic vesicles contain acetylcholine , which is released into the synaptic cleft and stimulates the acetylcholine receptors on the muscle . The muscle then contracts . 
 In LEMS , antibodies against VGCC , particularly the P / Q @-@ type VGCC , decrease the amount of calcium that can enter the nerve ending , hence less acetylcholine can be released from the neuromuscular junction . Apart from skeletal muscle , the autonomic nervous system also requires acetylcholine neurotransmission ; this explains the occurrence of autonomic symptoms in LEMS . P / Q voltage @-@ gated calcium channels are also found in the cerebellum , explaining why some experience problems with coordination . The antibodies bind particularly to the part of the receptor known as the " domain III S5 – S6 linker peptide " . Antibodies may also bind other <unk> . Some have antibodies that bind <unk> , the protein sensor for calcium @-@ regulated vesicle fusion . Many people with LEMS , both with and without VGCC antibodies , have detectable antibodies against the M1 subtype of the acetylcholine receptor ; it is thought that their presence participates in a lack of compensation for the weak calcium influx . 
 Apart from the decreased calcium influx , there is also a disruption of active zone vesicle release sites , which is also thought to be antibody @-@ dependent since people with LEMS have antibodies to components of these active zones ( including voltage @-@ dependent calcium channels ) . Together , these abnormalities lead to the decrease in muscle contractility . Repeated stimuli over a period of about 10 seconds eventually lead to sufficient delivery of calcium , and an increase in muscle contraction to normal levels , which can be demonstrated using an <unk> medicine study called needle electromyography by increasing amplitude of repeated compound muscle action potentials . 
 It has been shown that the antibodies found in LEMS associated with lung cancer also bind to calcium channels in the cancer cells , and it is presumed that the antibodies originally develop as a reaction to these cells . It has been suggested that the immune reaction to the cancer cells suppresses their growth and improves the prognosis from the cancer . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis is usually made on electromyography ( EMG ) , which is one of the standard tests in the investigation of otherwise unexplained muscle weakness . This involves the insertion of small needles into the nerves supplying several muscles , administering small electrical impulses through these needles , and measuring the electrical response of the muscle in question . Two EMG investigations can be characteristic in LEMS : compound motor action potentials ( CMAP ) and single @-@ fiber examination . 
 CMAP shows small amplitudes but normal latency and conduction velocities . If repeated impulses are administered ( two per second or 2 Hz ) , it is normal for CMAP amplitudes to become smaller as the acetylcholine in the motor end plate is depleted . In LEMS , this decrease is larger than observed normally . Eventually , stored acetylcholine is made available , and the amplitudes increase again . In LEMS this remains insufficient to reach a level sufficient for transmission of an impulse from nerve to muscle ; all can be attributed to insufficient calcium in the nerve terminal . A similar pattern is witnessed in myasthenia gravis . In LEMS , in response to exercising the muscle , the CMAP amplitude increases greatly ( over 200 % , often much more ) . This also occurs on the administration of a rapid burst of electrical stimuli ( 20 impulses per second for ten seconds ) . This is attributed to the influx of calcium in response to these stimuli . On single @-@ fiber examination , features may include increased jitter ( seen in other diseases of neuromuscular transmission ) and blocking . 
 Blood tests may be performed to exclude other causes of muscle disease ( elevated creatine kinase may indicate a <unk> , and abnormal thyroid function tests may indicate <unk> myopathy ) . Antibodies against voltage @-@ gated calcium channels can be identified in 85 % of people with EMG confirmed LEMS . Once LEMS is diagnosed , investigations such as a CT scan of the chest are usually performed to identify any possible underlying lung tumors . 50 – 60 % of these are discovered immediately after the diagnosis of LEMS . The remainder is diagnosed later , but usually within two years and typically within four years . As a result , scans are typically repeated every six months for the first two years after diagnosis . While CT of the lungs is usually adequate , a positron emission tomography ( PET ) scan of the body may also be performed to search for an occult tumour , particularly of the lung . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 If LEMS is caused by an underlying cancer , treatment of the malignancy usually leads to resolution of the symptoms . Treatment usually consists of chemotherapy , with radiation therapy in those with limited disease . 
 Three treatment modalities aimed at improving LEMS symptoms directly , namely <unk> , 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine ( <unk> ) and guanidine , work to improve neuromuscular transmission . <unk> decreases the degradation of acetylcholine after release into the synaptic cleft , and thereby improves muscle contraction . In LEMS , the potassium channel blocker 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine base or the water @-@ soluble formulation , 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine phosphate , ( marketed under the name Firdapse ) are also used . Both 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine formulations delay the <unk> of nerve terminals after a discharge , thereby allowing more calcium to accumulate in the nerve terminal . In the United States , 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine phosphate ( Firdapse ) a more stable formulation of 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine that does not require refrigeration and 3 @.@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine free base are undergoing clinical trials to treat LEMS . Pending completion of these trials and submission to the FDA , both formulations are available to people with LEMS in the U.S. : the free base is available under a compassionate distribution program by Jacobus Pharmaceutical Company , and the phosphate salt is available to people with LEMS under an expanded access program by Catalyst Pharmaceuticals . Compounding pharmacies may also be a source of 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine salts in the U.S. In Europe , 3 @,@ 4 @-@ diaminopyridine phosphate is sold by <unk> under the name Firdapse , and the free base is compounded , usually by hospital pharmacies . An older agent , guanidine , causes many side @-@ effects and is not recommended . 4 @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) , an agent related to 3 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> , causes more side @-@ effects than 3 @,@ 4 @-@ DAP and is also not recommended . 
 Immune suppression tends to be less effective than in other autoimmune diseases . <unk> ( a glucocorticoid or steroid ) suppresses the immune response , and the steroid @-@ sparing agent azathioprine may replace it once therapeutic effect has been achieved . Intravenous immunoglobulin ( IVIG ) may be used with a degree of effectiveness . Plasma exchange ( or plasmapheresis ) , the removal of plasma proteins such as antibodies and replacement with normal plasma , may provide improvement in acute severe weakness . Again , plasma exchange is less effective than in other related conditions such as myasthenia gravis , and additional immunosuppressive medication is often needed . According to a systematic review by the Cochrane Collaboration , the best evidence in the treatment of LEMS exists for 3 @,@ 4 @-@ <unk> and IVIG . 
 = = History = = 
 Anderson and colleagues from St Thomas ' Hospital , London , were the first to mention a case with possible clinical findings of LEMS in 1953 , but Lambert , Eaton and Rooke at the Mayo Clinic were the first physicians to substantially describe the clinical and electrophysiological findings of the disease in 1956 . In 1972 , the clustering of LEMS with other autoimmune diseases led to the hypothesis that it was caused by autoimmunity . Studies in the 1980s confirmed the autoimmune nature , and research in the 1990s demonstrated the link with antibodies against P / Q @-@ type voltage @-@ gated calcium channels . 
 = Mitt Romney = 
 Willard Mitt Romney ( " Mitt " ) ( born March 12 , 1947 ) is an American businessman and politician , who was the 70th Governor of Massachusetts from 2003 to 2007 and the Republican Party 's nominee for President of the United States in the 2012 election . 
 Raised in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan , by his parents , George and Lenore Romney , he spent 2 @.@ 5 years in France as a Mormon missionary , starting in 1966 . He married Ann Davies in 1969 , and they have five sons . By 1971 , he had participated in the political campaigns of both parents . In 1971 , he earned a Bachelor of Arts at Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , Provo , Utah , and in 1975 , he earned a joint Juris Doctor and Master of Business Administration at Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts . 
 Romney entered the management consulting industry , and in 1977 secured a position at Bain & Company . Later serving as Bain 's Chief Executive Officer ( CEO ) , he helped lead the company out of a financial crisis . In 1984 , he cofounded and led the spin @-@ off company , Bain Capital , a highly profitable private equity investment firm that became one of the largest of its kind in the nation . Active in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , he served during his business career as the bishop of his ward ( head of his local congregation ) and then stake president in his home area near Boston . 
 After stepping down from Bain Capital and his local leadership role in the LDS Church , Romney ran as the Republican candidate in the 1994 Massachusetts election for U.S. Senate . Upon losing to longtime incumbent Ted Kennedy , he resumed his position at Bain Capital . Years later , a successful stint as President and CEO of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Olympics led to a relaunch of his political career . 
 Elected Governor of Massachusetts in 2002 , Romney helped develop and enact into law the Massachusetts health care reform legislation , the first of its kind in the nation , which provided near @-@ universal health insurance access through state @-@ level subsidies and individual mandates to purchase insurance . He also presided over the elimination of a projected $ 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 billion deficit through a combination of spending cuts , increased fees , and the closure of corporate tax loopholes . He did not seek re @-@ election in 2006 , instead focusing on his campaign for the Republican nomination in the 2008 U.S. presidential election . He won several primaries and caucuses ; however , he lost to the eventual nominee , Senator John McCain . His considerable net worth , estimated in 2012 at $ 190 – 250 million , helped finance his political campaigns prior to 2012 . 
 Following his term as Governor of Massachusetts in 2007 , Romney was the Republican Party 's nominee for President of the United States in the 2012 election . He won the 2012 Republican presidential nomination , becoming the first Mormon to be a major party presidential nominee . He was defeated by incumbent Democratic President Barack Obama in the November 2012 general election , losing by 332 – 206 electoral college votes . The popular vote margin was 51 – 47 percent in Obama 's favor . Following the election , he initially kept a low profile , and later became more visible politically . 
 In 2012 , Time magazine included Romney in their List of The 100 Most Influential People in the World . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 = = = Heritage and youth = = = 
 Willard Mitt Romney was born on March 12 , 1947 , at Harper University Hospital in Detroit , Michigan , one of four children born to automobile executive George W. Romney ( 1907 – 1995 ) and homemaker Lenore Romney ( née LaFount ; 1908 – 1998 ) . His mother was a native of Logan , Utah , and his father was born to American parents in a Mormon colony in Chihuahua , Mexico . Of primarily English descent , he also has Scottish and German ancestry . A fifth @-@ generation member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) , he is a great grandson of Miles Park Romney and a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Miles Romney , who converted to the faith in its first decade . Another great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , Parley P. Pratt , helped lead the early Church . 
 Romney has three elder siblings ; Margo , Jane , and Scott ( Mitt followed them after a gap of nearly six years ) . His parents named him after a family friend , businessman J. Willard Marriott , and his father 's cousin , Milton " Mitt " Romney , a former quarterback for the Chicago Bears . Romney was referred to as " Billy " until kindergarten , when he indicated a preference for " Mitt " . In 1953 , the family moved from Detroit to the affluent suburb of Bloomfield Hills . His father became the chairman and CEO of American Motors the following year , soon helping the company avoid bankruptcy and return to profitability . By 1959 , his father had become a nationally known figure in print and on television , and the youngster idolized him . 
 Romney attended public elementary schools until the seventh grade , when he enrolled as one of only a few Mormon students at Cranbrook School in Bloomfield Hills , Michigan , a traditional private boys ' preparatory school . Many students there came from backgrounds even more privileged than his . Not particularly athletic , he also did not distinguish himself academically . He participated in his father 's successful 1962 Michigan gubernatorial campaign , and later worked for him as an intern in the Governor 's office . Romney took up residence at Cranbrook when his newly elected father began spending most of his time at the state capitol . 
 At Cranbrook , Romney helped manage the ice hockey team , and he joined the pep squad . During his senior year , he joined the cross country running team . He belonged to eleven school organizations and school clubs overall , including the Blue Key Club , a booster group he had started . During his final year there , he improved academically but fell short of excellence . Romney became involved in several pranks while attending Cranbrook . He has since apologized , stating that some of the pranks may have gone too far . In March of his senior year , he began dating Ann Davies ; she attended the private Kingswood School , the sister school to Cranbrook . The two became informally engaged around the time of his June 1965 graduation . 
 = = = University , France mission , marriage , and children : 1965 – 75 = = = 
 Romney attended Stanford University during the academic year of 1965 – 66 . He was not part of the counterculture of the 1960s then taking form in the San Francisco Bay Area . As opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War grew , a group staged a May 1966 sit @-@ in at the university administration building to demonstrate against draft status tests ; Romney joined a counter @-@ protest against that group . He continued to enjoy occasional pranks . 
 In July 1966 , he left the U.S. for a thirty @-@ month stay in France as a Mormon missionary , a traditional rite of passage in his family . He arrived in Le Havre , where he shared cramped quarters under meager conditions . Rules against drinking , smoking , and dating were strictly enforced . Most individual Mormon missionaries do not gain many converts and Romney was no exception : he later estimated ten to twenty for his entire mission . He initially became demoralized and later recalled it as the only time when " most of what I was trying to do was rejected . " He soon gained recognition within the mission for the many homes he called on and the repeat visits he was granted . He was promoted to zone leader in Bordeaux in early 1968 , and soon thereafter became assistant to the mission president in Paris . Residing at the Mission Home for several months , he enjoyed a mansion far more comfortable than the lodgings he had elsewhere in the country . When the French expressed opposition to the U.S. role in the Vietnam War , Romney debated them in return , and his views were reinforced by those who yelled and slammed their doors . 
 In June 1968 , an automobile he was driving in southern France was hit by another vehicle , seriously injuring him and killing one of his passengers , the wife of the mission president . Romney was not at fault in the accident . He became co @-@ president of a mission that had become demoralized and disorganized after the May 1968 general strike and student uprisings and the car accident . With Romney rallying the others , the mission met a goal of 200 baptisms for the year , the most for them in a decade . By the end of his stint in December 1968 , he was overseeing the work of 175 others . As a result of his stay , Romney developed a lifelong affection for France and its people , and has remained fluent in French . 
 At their first meeting following his return , Romney and Ann Davies reconnected and decided to get married . Romney began attending Brigham Young University ( BYU ) , where she had been studying . The couple married on March 21 , 1969 , in a civil ceremony in Bloomfield Hills . The following day , they flew to Utah for a Mormon wedding ceremony at the Salt Lake Temple ( Ann had converted to the faith while he was away ) . 
 Mitt had missed much of the tumultuous American anti @-@ Vietnam War movement while away in France . Upon his return , it surprised him to learn that his father had joined the movement during his unsuccessful 1968 presidential campaign . George was now serving in President Richard Nixon 's cabinet as United States Secretary of Housing and Urban Development . In a June 1970 newspaper profile of children of cabinet members , Mitt said that U.S. involvement in the war had been misguided – " If it wasn 't a political blunder to move into Vietnam , I don 't know what is " – but supported Nixon 's ongoing Cambodian Incursion as a sincere attempt to bring the war to a conclusion . During the U.S. military draft for the Vietnam War , Romney sought and received two 2 @-@ S student deferments , then a 4 @-@ D ministerial deferment while living in France as a Mormon missionary . He later sought and received two additional student deferments . When those ran out , the result of the December 1969 draft lottery ensured he would not be selected . 
 At culturally conservative BYU , Romney remained isolated from much of the upheaval of that era . He became president of the Cougar Club booster organization and showed a new @-@ found discipline in his studies . During his senior year , he took a leave to work as driver and advance man for his mother Lenore Romney 's eventually unsuccessful 1970 campaign for U.S. Senator from Michigan ; together , they visited all 83 Michigan counties . He earned a Bachelor of Arts in English with highest honors in 1971 , giving commencement addresses to both the College of Humanities and to the whole of BYU . 
 The Romneys ' first son , Taggart , was born in 1970 while they were undergraduates at BYU and living in a basement apartment . Ann subsequently gave birth to Matthew ( 1971 ) and Joshua ( 1975 ) . Benjamin ( 1978 ) and Craig ( 1981 ) would arrive later , after Romney began his career . 
 Mitt Romney wanted to pursue a business career , but his father advised him that a law degree would be valuable to his career even if he did not become a lawyer . Thus , he enrolled in the recently created joint Juris Doctor / Master of Business Administration four @-@ year program coordinated between Harvard Law School and Harvard Business School . He readily adapted to the business school 's pragmatic , data @-@ driven case study method of teaching . Living in a Belmont , Massachusetts house with Ann and their two children , his social experience differed from most of his classmates ' . He was <unk> and did not involve himself in the political issues of the day . He graduated in 1975 cum laude from the law school , in the top third of that class , and was named a Baker Scholar for graduating in the top five percent of his business school class . 
 = = Business career = = 
 = = = Management consulting = = = 
 Recruited by several firms , Romney joined the Boston Consulting Group ( BCG ) , reasoning that working as a management consultant for a variety of companies would better prepare him for a future position as a chief executive . Part of a 1970s wave of top graduates who chose to go into consulting rather than join a large company directly , he found his legal and business education useful in his job . He applied BCG principles such as the growth @-@ share matrix , and executives viewed him as having a bright future there . At the Boston Consulting Group , he was a colleague of Benjamin Netanyahu , with whom he formed a thirty @-@ year friendship . 
 In 1977 , he was hired by Bain & Company , a management consulting firm in Boston formed a few years earlier by Bill Bain and other ex @-@ BCG employees . Bain would later say of the thirty @-@ year @-@ old Romney , " He had the appearance [ sic ] of confidence of a guy who was maybe ten years older . " Unlike other consulting firms , which issued recommendations and then departed , Bain & Company immersed itself in a client 's business and worked with them until changes were implemented . Romney became a vice @-@ president of the firm in 1978 , and worked with clients such as the Monsanto Company , Outboard Marine Corporation , Burlington Industries , and Corning Incorporated . Within a few years , the firm considered him one of their best consultants and clients sometimes sought to use him over more senior partners . 
 = = = Minor political issues = = = 
 Two family incidents during this time later came to light during Romney 's political campaigns . A state park ranger in 1981 told Romney his motorboat had an insufficiently visible license number and he would face a $ 50 fine if he took the boat onto the lake . Disagreeing about the license and wanting to continue a family outing , Romney took it out anyway , saying he would pay the fine . The ranger arrested him for disorderly conduct . The charges were dropped several days later . In 1983 , on a twelve @-@ hour family road trip , he placed the family 's dog in a windshield @-@ equipped carrier on the roof of their car , and then washed the car and carrier after the dog suffered a bout of diarrhea . The dog incident in particular later became fodder for Romney 's critics and political opponents . 
 = = = Private equity = = = 
 In 1984 , Romney left Bain & Company to <unk> the spin @-@ off private equity investment firm , Bain Capital . He had initially refrained from accepting Bill Bain 's offer to head the new venture , until Bain rearranged the terms in a complicated partnership structure so that there was no financial or professional risk to Romney . Bain and Romney raised the $ 37 million in funds needed to start the new operation , which had seven employees . Romney held the titles of president and managing general partner . The sole shareholder of the firm , publications also referred to him as managing director or CEO . 
 Initially , Bain Capital focused on venture capital investments . Romney set up a system in which any partner could veto one of these potential opportunities , and he personally saw so many weaknesses that few venture capital investments were approved in the initial two years . The firm 's first significant success was a 1986 investment to help start Staples Inc . , after founder Thomas G. <unk> convinced Romney of the market size for office supplies and Romney convinced others ; Bain Capital eventually reaped a nearly sevenfold return on its investment , and Romney sat on the Staples board of directors for over a decade . 
 Romney soon switched Bain Capital 's focus from startups to the relatively new business of leveraged buyouts : buying existing companies with money mostly borrowed from banking institutions using the newly bought companies ' assets as collateral , then taking steps to improve the companies ' value , and finally selling those companies once their value peaked , usually within a few years . Bain Capital lost money in many of its early leveraged buyouts , but then found deals that made large returns . The firm invested in or acquired <unk> Corporation , <unk> , Domino 's Pizza , Sealy Corporation , Sports Authority , and Artisan Entertainment , as well as some lesser @-@ known companies in the industrial and medical sectors . Much of the firm 's profit was earned from a relatively small number of deals ; Bain Capital 's overall success @-@ to @-@ failure ratio was about even . 
 Romney discovered few investment opportunities himself ( and those that he did , often failed to make money for the firm ) . Instead , he focused on analyzing the merits of possible deals that others brought forward and on recruiting investors to participate in them once approved . Within Bain Capital , Romney spread profits from deals widely within the firm to keep people motivated , often keeping less than ten percent for himself . Data @-@ driven , Romney often played the role of a devil 's advocate during exhaustive analysis of whether to go forward with a deal . He wanted to drop a Bain Capital hedge fund that initially lost money , but other partners disagreed with him and it eventually gained billions . He opted out of the Artisan Entertainment deal , not wanting to profit from a studio that produced R @-@ rated films . Romney served on the board of directors of Damon Corporation , a medical testing company later found guilty of defrauding the government ; Bain Capital tripled its investment before selling off the company , and the fraud was discovered by the new owners ( Romney was never implicated ) . In some cases , Romney had little involvement with a company once acquired . 
 Bain Capital 's leveraged buyouts sometimes led to layoffs , either soon after acquisition or later after the firm had concluded its role . Exactly how many jobs Bain Capital added compared to those lost because of these investments and buyouts is unknown , owing to a lack of records and Bain Capital 's penchant for privacy on behalf of itself and its investors . <unk> the value of acquired companies and the return to Bain 's investors , not job creation , was the firm 's fundamental goal . Bain Capital 's acquisition of Ampad exemplified a deal where it profited handsomely from early payments and management fees , even though the subject company itself ended up going into bankruptcy . Dade Behring was another case where Bain Capital received an eightfold return on its investment , but the company itself was saddled with debt and laid off over a thousand employees before Bain Capital exited ( the company subsequently went into bankruptcy , with more layoffs , before recovering and prospering ) . Referring to the layoffs that happened , Romney said in 2007 : " Sometimes the medicine is a little bitter but it is necessary to save the life of the patient . My job was to try and make the enterprise successful , and in my view the best security a family can have is that the business they work for is strong . " 
 In 1990 , facing financial collapse , Bain & Company asked Romney to return . Announced as its new CEO in January 1991 , he drew a symbolic salary of one dollar ( remaining managing general partner of Bain Capital during this time ) . He oversaw an effort to restructure Bain & Company 's employee stock @-@ ownership plan and real @-@ estate deals , while rallying the firm 's one thousand employees , imposing a new governing structure that excluded Bain and the other founding partners from control , and increasing fiscal transparency . He got Bain and other initial owners who had removed excessive amounts of money from the firm to return a substantial amount , and persuaded creditors , including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , to accept less than full payment . Within about a year , he had led Bain & Company through a turnaround and returned the firm to profitability . He turned Bain & Company over to new leadership and returned to Bain Capital in December 1992 . 
 Romney took a leave of absence from Bain Capital from November 1993 to November 1994 to run for the U.S. Senate . During that time , Ampad workers went on strike , and asked Romney to intervene . Against the advice of Bain Capital lawyers , Romney met the strikers , but told them he had no position of active authority in the matter . 
 By 1999 , Bain Capital was on its way towards becoming one of the foremost private equity firms in the nation , having increased its number of partners from 5 to 18 , with 115 employees overall , and $ 4 billion under its management . The firm 's average annual internal rate of return on realized investments was 113 percent and its average yearly return to investors was around 50 – 80 percent . 
 Romney took a paid leave of absence from Bain Capital in February 1999 to serve as the president and CEO of the 2002 Salt Lake City Olympic Games Organizing Committee . Billed in some public statements as keeping a part @-@ time role , Romney remained the firm 's sole shareholder , managing director , CEO , and president , signing corporate and legal documents , attending to his interests within the firm , and conducting prolonged negotiations for the terms of his departure . He did not involve himself in day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the firm or investment decisions for Bain Capital 's new private equity funds . He retained his position on several boards of directors during this time and regularly returned to Massachusetts to attend meetings . 
 In August 2001 , Romney announced that he would not return to Bain Capital . His separation from the firm concluded in early 2002 ; he transferred his ownership to other partners and negotiated an agreement that allowed him to receive a passive profit share as a retired partner in some Bain Capital entities , including buyout and investment funds . The private equity business continued to thrive , earning him millions of dollars in annual income . 
 = = = Personal wealth = = = 
 As a result of his business career , Romney and his wife have a net worth of between $ 190 and $ 250 million , including their retirement account , worth between $ 20 and $ 100 million . Most of that wealth has been held in blind trusts since 2003 , some of it offshore . An additional blind trust , valued at $ 100 million in 2012 , exists in the name of their children . In 2010 , Romney and his wife received about $ 22 million in income , almost all of it from investments such as dividends , capital gains , and carried interest ; and they paid about $ 3 million in federal income taxes , for an effective tax rate of 14 percent . For the years 1990 – 2010 , their effective federal tax rates were above 13 percent with an average rate of about 20 percent . 
 Romney has tithed to the LDS Church regularly , and donated to LDS Church @-@ owned BYU . In 2010 , for example , he and his wife gave $ 1 @.@ 5 million to the church . The Romney family 's Tyler Charitable Foundation gave out about $ 650 @,@ 000 in that year , some of which went to organizations that fight diseases . For the years 1990 – 2010 , the Romneys ' total charitable donations as portions of their income averaged 14 percent . 
 = = Local LDS Church leadership = = 
 During his business career , Romney held several positions in the local lay clergy . In 1977 , he became a counselor to the president of the Boston Stake . He served as bishop of the ward ( ecclesiastical and administrative head of his congregation ) at Belmont , Massachusetts , from 1981 to 1986 . As such , in addition to home teaching , he also formulated Sunday services and classes using LDS scriptures to guide the congregation . After the destruction of the Belmont meetinghouse by a fire of suspicious origins in 1984 , he forged links with other religious institutions , allowing the congregation to rotate its meetings to other houses of worship during the reconstruction of their building . 
 From 1986 to 1994 , Romney presided over the Boston Stake , which included more than a dozen wards in eastern Massachusetts with almost 4 @,@ 000 church members altogether . He organized a team to handle financial and management issues , sought to counter anti @-@ Mormon sentiments , and tried to solve social problems among poor Southeast Asian converts . An unpaid position , his local church leadership often took 30 or more hours a week of his time , and he became known for his considerable energy in the role . He earned a reputation for avoiding any overnight travel that might interfere with his church responsibilities . 
 Romney took a hands @-@ on role in general matters , helping in domestic maintenance efforts , visiting the sick , and counseling burdened church members . A number of local church members later credited him with turning their lives around or helping them through difficult times . Others , rankled by his leadership style , desired a more consensus @-@ based approach . Romney tried to balance the conservative directives from church leadership in Utah with the desire of some Massachusetts members to have a more flexible application of religious doctrine . He agreed with some requests from the liberal women 's group that published Exponent II for changes in the way the church dealt with women , but clashed with women whom he felt were departing too much from doctrine . In particular , he counseled women to not have abortions except in the rare cases allowed by LDS doctrine , and encouraged single women facing unplanned pregnancies to give up their baby for adoption . Romney later said that the years spent as an LDS minister gave him direct exposure to people struggling financially and empathy for those with family problems . 
 = = 1994 U.S. Senatorial campaign = = 
 For much of his business career , Romney did not take public , political stances . He had kept abreast of national politics since college , though , and the circumstances of his father 's presidential campaign loss had irked him for decades . He registered as an Independent and voted in the 1992 presidential primaries for the Democratic former senator from Massachusetts , Paul Tsongas . 
 By 1993 , Romney had begun thinking about entering politics , partly based upon Ann 's urging and partly to follow in his father 's footsteps . He decided to challenge incumbent Democratic U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy , who was seeking re @-@ election for the sixth time . Political pundits viewed Kennedy as vulnerable that year – in part because of the unpopularity of the Democratic Congress as a whole , and in part because this was Kennedy 's first election since the William Kennedy Smith trial in Florida , in which the senator had suffered some negative public relations regarding his character . Romney changed his affiliation to Republican in October 1993 and formally announced his candidacy in February 1994 . In addition to his leave from Bain Capital , he stepped down from his church leadership role in 1994 . 
 Radio personality Janet <unk> took an early lead in polls among candidates for the Republican nomination for the Senate seat , but Romney proved the most effective fundraiser . He won 68 percent of the vote at the May 1994 Massachusetts Republican Party convention ; businessman John <unk> finished a distant second , eliminating <unk> . Romney defeated <unk> in the September 1994 primary with more than 80 percent of the vote . 
 In the general election , Kennedy faced the first serious re @-@ election challenger of his career . The younger , telegenic , and well @-@ funded Romney ran as a businessman who stated he had created ten thousand jobs and as a Washington outsider with a solid family image and moderate stances on social issues . When Kennedy tried to tie Romney 's policies to those of Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush , Romney responded , " Look , I was an independent during the time of Reagan @-@ Bush . I 'm not trying to take us back to Reagan @-@ Bush . " Romney stated , " Ultimately , this is a campaign about change . " 
 Romney 's campaign was effective in portraying Kennedy as soft on crime , but had trouble establishing its own consistent positions . By mid @-@ September 1994 , polls showed the race to be approximately even . Kennedy responded with a series of ads that focused on Romney 's seemingly shifting political views on issues such as abortion ; Romney would respond on the latter by stating , " I believe that abortion should be safe and legal in this country . " Other Kennedy ads centered on layoffs of workers at the Ampad plant owned by Romney 's Bain Capital . The latter was effective in blunting Romney 's momentum . Kennedy and Romney held a widely watched late @-@ October debate that had no clear winner , but by then , Kennedy had pulled ahead in polls and stayed ahead afterward . Romney spent $ 3 million of his own money in the race and more than $ 7 million overall . In the November general election , despite a disastrous showing for Democrats nationwide , Kennedy won the election with 58 percent of the vote to Romney 's 41 percent , the smallest margin in any of Kennedy 's re @-@ election campaigns for the Senate . 
 The day after the election , Romney returned to Bain Capital , but the loss had a lasting effect ; he told his brother , " I never want to run for something again unless I can win . " When his father died in 1995 , Mitt donated his inheritance to BYU 's George W. Romney Institute of Public Management . He also joined the board , as vice @-@ chair , of the Points of Light Foundation , which had incorporated his father 's National Volunteer Center . Romney felt restless as the decade neared a close ; the goal of simply making more money was becoming inadequate for him . Although no longer in a local leadership position in his church , he still taught Sunday School . During the long and controversial approval and construction process for the $ 30 million Mormon temple in Belmont , he feared that , as a political figure who had opposed Kennedy , he would become a focal point for opposition to the structure . He thus kept to a limited , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes role in attempts to ease tensions between the church and local residents . 
 = = 2002 Winter Olympics = = 
 In 1998 , Ann Romney learned that she had multiple sclerosis ; Mitt described watching her fail a series of neurological tests as the worst day of his life . After experiencing two years of severe difficulties with the disease , she found – while living in Park City , Utah , where the couple had built a vacation home – a combination of mainstream , alternative , and equestrian therapies that enabled her to lead a lifestyle mostly without limitations . When her husband received a job offer to take over the troubled organization responsible for the 2002 Winter Olympics and Paralympics , to be held in Salt Lake City in Utah , she urged him to accept it ; eager for a new challenge , as well as another chance to prove himself in public life , he did . On February 11 , 1999 , the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic and Paralympic Winter Games of 2002 hired Romney as their president and CEO . 
 Before Romney took the position , the event was running $ 379 million short of its revenue goals . Officials had made plans to scale back the Games to compensate for the fiscal crisis , and there were fears it might be moved away entirely . Additionally , the image of the Games had been damaged by allegations of bribery against top officials including prior committee president and CEO Frank <unk> . The Salt Lake Organizing Committee forced <unk> and committee vice president Dave Johnson to resign . Utah power brokers , including Governor Mike Leavitt , searched for someone with a scandal @-@ free reputation to take charge of the Olympics , and chose Romney based on his business and legal expertise as well as his connections to both the LDS Church and the state . The appointment faced some initial criticism from non @-@ Mormons , and fears from Mormons , that it represented cronyism or made the Games seem too Mormon @-@ dominated . Romney donated to charity the $ 1 @.@ 4 million in salary and severance payments he received for his three years as president and CEO , and also contributed $ 1 million to the Olympics . 
 Romney restructured the organization 's leadership and policies . He reduced budgets and boosted fundraising , alleviating the concerns of corporate sponsors while recruiting new ones . Romney worked to ensure the safety of the Games following the September 11 , 2001 terrorist attacks by coordinating a $ 300 million security budget . He oversaw a $ 1 @.@ 32 billion total budget , 700 employees , and 26 @,@ 000 volunteers . The federal government provided approximately $ 400 million to $ 600 million of that budget , much of it a result of Romney 's having aggressively lobbied Congress and federal agencies . It was a record level of federal funding for the staging of a U.S. Olympics . An additional $ 1 @.@ 1 billion of indirect federal funding came to the state in the form of highway and transit projects . 
 Romney emerged as the local public face of the Olympic effort , appearing in photographs , in news stories , on collectible Olympics pins depicting Romney wrapped by an American flag , and on buttons carrying phrases like " Hey , Mitt , we love you ! " Robert H. Garff , the chair of the organizing committee , later said " It was obvious that he had an agenda larger than just the Olympics , " and that Romney wanted to use the Olympics to propel himself into the national spotlight and a political career . Garff believed the initial budget situation was not as bad as Romney portrayed , given there were still three years to reorganize . Utah Senator Bob Bennett said that much of the needed federal money was already in place . An analysis by The Boston Globe later stated that the committee had nearly $ 1 billion in committed revenues at that time . Olympics critic Steve Pace , who led Utahns for Responsible Public Spending , thought Romney exaggerated the initial fiscal state to lay the groundwork for a well @-@ publicized rescue . Kenneth Bullock , another board member of the organizing committee and also head of the Utah League of Cities and Towns , often clashed with Romney at the time , and later said that Romney deserved some credit for the turnaround but not as much as he claimed . Bullock said : " He tried very hard to build an image of himself as a savior , the great white hope . He was very good at characterizing and castigating people and putting himself on a pedestal . " 
 Despite the initial fiscal shortfall , the Games ended up with a surplus of $ 100 million . President George W. Bush praised Romney 's efforts and 87 percent of Utahns approved of his performance as Olympics head . It solidified his reputation as a " turnaround artist " , and Harvard Business School taught a case study based around his actions . U.S. Olympic Committee head William <unk> credited Romney with an extraordinary effort in overcoming a difficult time for the Olympics , culminating in " the greatest Winter Games I have ever seen " . Romney wrote a book about his experience titled Turnaround : Crisis , Leadership , and the Olympic Games , published in 2004 . The role gave Romney experience in dealing with federal , state , and local entities , a public persona he had previously lacked , and the chance to relaunch his political aspirations . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts = = 
 = = = 2002 gubernatorial campaign = = = 
 In 2002 , plagued by political missteps and personal scandals , the administration of Republican Acting Governor of Massachusetts Jane Swift appeared vulnerable , and many Republicans viewed her as unable to win a general election . Prominent party figures – as well as the White House – wanted Romney to run for governor and the opportunity appealed to him for reasons including its national visibility . A poll by the Boston Herald showed Republicans favoring Romney over Swift by more than 50 percentage points . On March 19 , 2002 , Swift announced she would not seek her party 's nomination , and hours later Romney declared his candidacy , for which he would face no opposition in the primary . In June 2002 , the Massachusetts Democratic Party challenged Romney 's eligibility to run for governor , noting that state law required seven years ' consecutive residence and that Romney had filed his state tax returns as a Utah resident in 1999 and 2000 . In response , the bipartisan Massachusetts State Ballot Law Commission unanimously ruled that he had maintained sufficient financial and personal ties to Massachusetts and was , therefore , an eligible candidate . 
 Romney again ran as a political outsider . He played down his party affiliation , saying he was " not a partisan Republican " but rather a " moderate " with " progressive " views . He stated that he would observe a moratorium on changes to the state 's laws on abortion , but reiterated that he would " preserve and protect a woman 's right to choose " and that his position was " unequivocal " . He touted his private sector experience as qualifying him for addressing the state 's fiscal problems and stressed his ability to obtain federal funds for the state , offering his Olympics record as evidence . He proposed to reorganize the state government while eliminating waste , fraud , and mismanagement . The campaign innovatively utilized <unk> techniques , identifying like @-@ minded groups of voters and reaching them with narrowly tailored messaging . 
 In an attempt to overcome the image that had damaged him in the 1994 Senate race – that of a wealthy corporate buyout specialist out of touch with the needs of regular people – the campaign staged a series of " work days " , in which Romney performed blue @-@ collar jobs such as herding cows and baling hay , unloading a fishing boat , and hauling garbage . Television ads highlighting the effort , as well as one portraying his family in gushing terms and showing him shirtless , received a poor public response and were a factor in his Democratic opponent , Massachusetts State Treasurer Shannon O 'Brien , leading in the polls as late as mid @-@ October . He responded with ads that accused O 'Brien of being a failed watchdog for state pension fund losses in the stock market and that associated her husband , a former lobbyist , with the Enron scandal . These were effective in capturing independent voters . O 'Brien said that Romney 's budget plans were unrealistic ; the two also differed on capital punishment and bilingual education , with Romney supporting the former and opposing the latter . 
 During the election , Romney contributed more than $ 6 million – a state record at the time – to the nearly $ 10 million raised for his campaign overall . On November 5 , 2002 , he won the governorship , earning 50 percent of the vote to O 'Brien 's 45 percent . 
 = = = Tenure , 2003 – 07 = = = 
 The swearing in of Romney as the 70th governor of Massachusetts took place on January 2 , 2003 . He faced a Massachusetts state legislature with large Democratic majorities in both houses , and had picked his cabinet and advisors based more on managerial abilities than partisan affiliation . He declined a governor 's salary of $ 135 @,@ 000 during his term . Upon entering office in the middle of a fiscal year , he faced an immediate $ 650 million shortfall and a projected $ 3 billion deficit for the next year . Unexpected revenue of $ 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 3 billion from a previously enacted capital gains tax increase and $ 500 million in new federal grants decreased the deficit to $ 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 billion . Through a combination of spending cuts , increased fees , and removal of corporate tax loopholes , the state achieved surpluses of around $ 600 – 700 million during Romney 's last two full fiscal years in office , although it began running deficits again after that . 
 Romney supported raising various fees , including those for drivers ' licenses and gun licenses , to raise more than $ 300 million . He increased a special gasoline retailer fee by two cents per gallon , generating about $ 60 million per year in additional revenue . Opponents said the reliance on fees sometimes imposed a hardship on those who could least afford them . Romney also closed tax loopholes that brought in another $ 181 million from businesses over the next two years and over $ 300 million for his term . He did so in the face of conservative and corporate critics who viewed these actions as tax increases . 
 The state legislature , with the governor 's support , cut spending by $ 1 @.@ 6 billion , including $ 700 million in reductions in state aid to cities and towns . The cuts also included a $ 140 million reduction in state funding for higher education , which led state @-@ run colleges and universities to increase fees by 63 percent over four years . Romney sought additional cuts in his last year as governor by vetoing nearly 250 items in the state budget ; a heavily Democratic legislature overrode all the vetoes . 
 The cuts in state spending put added pressure on localities to reduce services or raise property taxes , and the share of town and city revenues coming from property taxes rose from 49 to 53 percent . The combined state and local tax burden in Massachusetts increased during Romney 's governorship . He did propose a reduction in the state income tax rate that the legislature rejected . 
 Romney sought to bring near @-@ universal health insurance coverage to the state . This came after Staples founder <unk> told him at the start of his term that doing so would be the best way he could help people . Another factor was that the federal government , owing to the rules of Medicaid funding , threatened to cut $ 385 million in those payments to Massachusetts if the state did not reduce the number of uninsured recipients of health care services . Although the idea of universal health insurance had not come to the fore during the campaign , Romney decided that because people without insurance still received expensive health care , the money spent by the state for such care could be better used to subsidize insurance for the poor . 
 Determined that a new Massachusetts health insurance measure not raise taxes or resemble the previous decade 's failed " Hillarycare " proposal at the federal level , Romney formed a team of consultants from diverse political backgrounds to apply those principles . Beginning in late 2004 , they devised a set of proposals that were more ambitious than an incremental one from the Massachusetts Senate and more acceptable to him than one from the Massachusetts House of Representatives that incorporated a new payroll tax . In particular , Romney pushed for incorporating an individual mandate at the state level . Past rival Ted Kennedy , who had made universal health coverage his life 's work and who , over time , had developed a warm relationship with Romney , gave the plan a positive reception , which encouraged Democratic legislators to cooperate . The effort eventually gained the support of all major stakeholders within the state , and Romney helped break a logjam between rival Democratic leaders in the legislature . 
 On April 12 , 2006 , the governor signed the resulting Massachusetts health reform law , commonly called " <unk> " , which requires nearly all Massachusetts residents to buy health insurance coverage or face escalating tax penalties , such as the loss of their personal income tax exemption . The bill also established means @-@ tested state subsidies for people who lacked adequate employer insurance and whose income was below a threshold , using funds that had covered the health costs of the uninsured . He vetoed eight sections of the health care legislation , including a controversial $ 295 @-@ per @-@ employee assessment on businesses that do not offer health insurance and provisions guaranteeing dental benefits to Medicaid recipients . The legislature overrode all eight vetoes , but the governor 's office said the differences were not essential . The law was the first of its kind in the nation and became the signature achievement of Romney 's term in office . 
 At the beginning of his governorship , Romney opposed same @-@ sex marriage and civil unions , but advocated tolerance and supported some domestic partnership benefits . A November 2003 Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court decision required the state to recognize same @-@ sex marriages ( Goodridge v. Department of Public Health ) . Romney reluctantly backed a state constitutional amendment in February 2004 that would have banned those marriages but still allowed civil unions , viewing it as the only feasible way to accomplish the former . In May 2004 , in compliance with the court decision , the governor instructed town clerks to begin issuing marriage licenses to same @-@ sex couples . However , citing a 1913 law that barred out @-@ of @-@ state residents from getting married in Massachusetts if their union would be illegal in their home state , he said no marriage licenses were to be issued to those people not planning to move to Massachusetts . In June 2005 , Romney abandoned his support for the compromise amendment , stating that it confused voters who opposed both same @-@ sex marriage and civil unions . Instead , he endorsed a ballot initiative led by the Coalition for Marriage and Family ( an alliance of socially conservative organizations ) that would have banned same @-@ sex marriage and made no provisions for civil unions . In 2004 and 2006 , he urged the U.S. Senate to vote in favor of the Federal Marriage Amendment . 
 In 2005 , Romney revealed a change of view regarding abortion , moving from the pro @-@ choice positions expressed during his 1994 and 2002 campaigns to a pro @-@ life one in opposition to Roe v. Wade . Romney attributed his conversion to an interaction with Harvard University biologist Douglas Melton , an expert on embryonic stem cell biology , although Melton vehemently disputed Romney 's recollection of their conversation . Romney subsequently vetoed a bill on pro @-@ life grounds that expanded access to emergency contraception in hospitals and pharmacies ( the legislature overrode the veto ) . He also amended his position on embryonic stem cell research itself . 
 Romney used a bully pulpit approach towards promoting his agenda , staging well @-@ organized media events to appeal directly to the public rather than pushing his proposals in behind @-@ doors sessions with the state legislature . He dealt with a public crisis of confidence in Boston 's Big Dig project – that followed a fatal ceiling collapse in 2006 – by wresting control of the project from the Massachusetts Turnpike Authority . After two years of negotiating the state 's participation in the landmark Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative that instituted a cap @-@ and @-@ trade arrangement for power plant emissions in the Northeast , Romney pulled Massachusetts out of the initiative shortly before its signing in December 2005 , citing a lack of cost limits for industry . 
 During 2004 , Romney spent considerable effort trying to bolster the state Republican Party , but it failed to gain any seats in the state legislative elections that year . Given a prime @-@ time appearance at the 2004 Republican National Convention , political figures began discussing him as a potential 2008 presidential candidate . Midway through his term , Romney decided that he wanted to stage a full @-@ time run for president , and on December 14 , 2005 , announced that he would not seek re @-@ election for a second term . As chair of the Republican Governors Association , Romney traveled around the country , meeting prominent Republicans and building a national political network ; he spent all , or parts of , more than 200 days out of state during 2006 , preparing for his run . 
 The Governor had a 61 percent job approval rating in public polls after his initial fiscal actions in 2003 , although his approval rating subsequently declined , driven in part by his frequent out @-@ of @-@ state travel . Romney 's approval rating stood at 34 percent in November 2006 , ranking 48th of the 50 U.S. governors . Dissatisfaction with Romney 's administration and the weak condition of the Republican state party were among several factors contributing to Democrat Deval Patrick 's 20 @-@ point win over Republican Kerry Healey , Romney 's lieutenant governor , in the 2006 Massachusetts gubernatorial election . 
 Romney filed to register a presidential campaign committee with the Federal Election Commission on his penultimate day in office as governor . His term ended January 4 , 2007 . 
 = = 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 Romney formally announced his candidacy for the 2008 Republican nomination for president on February 13 , 2007 , in Dearborn , Michigan . Again casting himself as a political outsider , his speech frequently invoked his father and his family , and stressed experiences in the private , public , and voluntary sectors that had brought him to this point . 
 The campaign emphasized Romney 's highly profitable career in the business world and his stewardship of the Olympics . He also had political experience as a governor , together with a political pedigree courtesy of his father ( as well as many biographical parallels with him ) . Ann Romney , who had become an advocate for those with multiple sclerosis , was in remission and would be an active participant in his campaign , helping to soften his political personality . Media stories referred to the 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) Romney as handsome . Moreover , a number of commentators noted that with his square jaw and ample hair graying at the temples , he physically matched one of the common images of what a president should look like . 
 Romney 's liabilities included having run for senator and serving as governor in one of the nation 's most liberal states and having taken positions in opposition to the party 's conservative base during that time . Late during his term as governor , he had shifted positions and emphases to better align with traditional conservatives on social issues . Skeptics , including some Republicans , charged Romney with opportunism and a lack of core principles . As a Mormon , he faced suspicion and skepticism by some in the Evangelical portion of the party . 
 For his campaign , Romney assembled a veteran group of Republican staffers , consultants , and pollsters . He was little @-@ known nationally , though , and stayed around the 10 percent support range in Republican preference polls for the first half of 2007 . He proved the most effective fundraiser of any of the Republican candidates and also partly financed his campaign with his own personal fortune . These resources , combined with the mid @-@ year near @-@ collapse of nominal front @-@ runner John McCain 's campaign , made Romney a threat to win the nomination and the focus of the other candidates ' attacks . Romney 's staff suffered from internal strife ; the candidate himself was at times indecisive , often asking for more data before making a decision . 
 During all of his political campaigns , Romney has avoided speaking publicly about Mormon doctrines , referring to the U.S. Constitution 's prohibition of religious tests for public office . But persistent questions about the role of religion in Romney 's life , as well as Southern Baptist minister and former Governor of Arkansas Mike Huckabee 's rise in the polls based upon an explicitly Christian @-@ themed campaign , led to the December 6 , 2007 , " Faith in America " speech . In the speech Romney declared , " I believe in my Mormon faith and endeavor to live by it . My faith is the faith of my fathers . I will be true to them and to my beliefs . " Romney added that he should neither be elected nor rejected based upon his religion , and echoed Senator John F. Kennedy 's famous speech during his 1960 presidential campaign in saying , " I will put no doctrine of any church above the plain duties of the office and the sovereign authority of the law . " Instead of discussing the specific tenets of his faith , he said he would be informed by it , stating : " Freedom requires religion just as religion requires freedom . Freedom and religion endure together , or perish alone . " Academics would later study the role religion had played in the campaign . 
 The campaign 's strategy called for winning the initial two contests – the January 3 , 2008 , Iowa Republican caucuses and the adjacent @-@ to @-@ his @-@ home @-@ state January 8 New Hampshire primary – and propelling Romney nationally . However , he took second place in both , losing Iowa to a vastly outspent Huckabee who received more than twice the evangelical Christian votes , and losing New Hampshire to the resurgent McCain . Huckabee and McCain criticized Romney 's image as a flip <unk> and this label would stick to Romney through the campaign ( one that Romney rejected as unfair and inaccurate , except for his acknowledged change of mind on abortion ) . Romney seemed to approach the campaign as a management consulting exercise , and showed a lack of personal warmth and political feel ; journalist Evan Thomas wrote that Romney " came off as a phony , even when he was perfectly sincere . " The fervor with which Romney adopted his new stances and attitudes contributed to the perception of inauthenticity that hampered the campaign . Romney 's staff would conclude that competing as a candidate of social conservatism and ideological purity rather than of pragmatic competence had been a mistake . 
 A win by McCain over Huckabee in South Carolina , and by Romney over McCain in childhood @-@ home Michigan , set up a pivotal battle in the Florida primary . Romney campaigned intensively on economic issues and the burgeoning subprime mortgage crisis , while McCain attacked Romney regarding Iraq policy and benefited from endorsements from Florida officeholders . McCain won a 5 percentage point victory on January 29 . Although many Republican officials were now lining up behind McCain , Romney persisted through the nationwide Super Tuesday contests on February 5 . There he won primaries or caucuses in several states , but McCain won in more and in larger @-@ population ones . Trailing McCain in delegates by a more than two @-@ to @-@ one margin , Romney announced the end of his campaign on February 7 . 
 Altogether , Romney had won 11 primaries and caucuses , receiving about 4 @.@ 7 million votes and garnering about 280 delegates . He spent $ 110 million during the campaign , including $ 45 million of his own money . 
 Romney endorsed McCain for president a week later , and McCain had Romney on a short list for vice presidential running mate , where his business experience would have balanced one of McCain 's weaknesses . McCain , behind in the polls , opted instead for a high @-@ risk , high @-@ reward " game changer " , selecting Alaska Governor Sarah Palin . McCain lost the election to Democratic Senator Barack Obama . 
 = = Activity between presidential campaigns = = 
 Romney supported the Bush administration 's Troubled Asset Relief Program in response to the late @-@ 2000s financial crisis , later saying that it prevented the U.S. financial system from collapsing . During the U.S. automotive industry crisis of 2008 – 10 , he opposed a bailout of the industry in the form of direct government intervention , and argued that a managed bankruptcy of struggling automobile companies should instead be accompanied by federal guarantees for post @-@ bankruptcy financing from the private sector . 
 Following the 2008 election , Romney laid the groundwork for a likely 2012 presidential campaign by using his Free and Strong America political action committee ( PAC ) to raise money for other Republican candidates and pay his existing political staff 's salaries and consulting fees . A network of former staff and supporters around the nation were eager for him to run again . He continued to give speeches and raise funds for Republicans , but fearing overexposure , turned down many potential media appearances . He also spoke before business , educational , and motivational groups . From 2009 to 2011 , he served on the board of directors of Marriott International , founded by his namesake J. Willard Marriott . He had previously served on it from 1993 to 2002 . 
 In 2009 , the Romneys sold their primary residence in Belmont and their ski chalet in Utah , leaving them an estate along Lake Winnipesaukee in Wolfeboro , New Hampshire , and an oceanfront home in the La Jolla district of San Diego , California , which they had purchased the year before . The La Jolla home proved beneficial in location and climate for Ann Romney 's multiple sclerosis therapies and for recovering from her late 2008 diagnosis of mammary ductal carcinoma in situ and subsequent lumpectomy . Both it and the New Hampshire location were near some of their grandchildren . Romney maintained his voting registration in Massachusetts , however , and bought a smaller condominium in Belmont during 2010 . In February 2010 , Romney had a minor altercation with LMFAO member Skyler Gordy , known as Sky Blu , on an airplane flight . 
 Romney released his book , No Apology : The Case for American Greatness , in March 2010 , and undertook an 18 @-@ state book tour to promote the work . In the book , Romney writes of his belief in American exceptionalism , and presents his economic and geopolitical views rather than anecdotes about his personal or political life . It debuted atop The New York Times Best Seller list . Romney donated his earnings from the book to charity . 
 Immediately following the March 2010 passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , Romney attacked the landmark legislation as " an unconscionable abuse of power " and said the act should be repealed . The antipathy Republicans felt for it created a potential problem for the former governor , since the new federal law was in many ways similar to the Massachusetts health care reform passed during Romney 's term ; as one Associated Press article stated , " Obamacare ... looks a lot like <unk> . " While acknowledging that his plan was an imperfect work in progress , Romney did not back away from it . He defended the state @-@ level health insurance mandate that underpinned it , calling the bill the right answer to Massachusetts ' problems at the time . 
 In nationwide opinion polling for the 2012 Republican Presidential primaries , Romney led or placed in the top three with Palin and Huckabee . A January 2010 National Journal survey of political insiders found that a majority of Republican insiders and a plurality of Democratic insiders predicted Romney would be the party 's 2012 nominee . Romney campaigned heavily for Republican candidates in the 2010 midterm elections , raising more money than the other prospective 2012 Republican presidential candidates . Beginning in early 2011 , Romney presented a more relaxed visual image , including more casual attire . 
 = = 2012 presidential campaign = = 
 On April 11 , 2011 , Romney announced , via a video taped outdoors at the University of New Hampshire , that he had formed an exploratory committee for a run for the Republican presidential nomination . Quinnipiac University political science professor Scott McLean stated , " We all knew that he was going to run . He 's really been running for president ever since the day after the 2008 election . " 
 Romney stood to benefit from the Republican electorate 's tendency to nominate candidates who had previously run for president , and thus appeared to be next in line to be chosen . The early stages of the race found him as the apparent front @-@ runner in a weak field , especially in terms of fundraising prowess and organization . Perhaps his greatest hurdle in gaining the Republican nomination was party opposition to the Massachusetts health care reform law that he had shepherded five years earlier . As many potential Republican candidates with star power and fundraising ability decided not to run ( including Mike Pence , John Thune , Haley Barbour , Mike Huckabee , and Mitch Daniels ) , Republican party figures searched for plausible alternatives to Romney . 
 On June 2 , 2011 , Romney formally announced the start of his campaign . Speaking on a farm in <unk> , New Hampshire , he focused on the economy and criticized President Obama 's handling of it . He said , " In the campaign to come , the American ideals of economic freedom and opportunity need a clear and unapologetic defense , and I intend to make it – because I have lived it . " 
 Romney raised $ 56 million during 2011 , more than double the amount raised by any of his Republican opponents , and refrained from spending his own money on the campaign . He initially pursued a low @-@ key , low @-@ profile strategy . Michele Bachmann staged a brief surge in polls , which preceded a poll surge in September 2011 by Rick Perry who had entered the race the month before . Perry and Romney exchanged sharp criticisms of each other during a series of debates among the Republican candidates . The October 2011 decisions of Chris Christie and Sarah Palin not to run effectively settled the field of candidates . Perry faded after poor performances in those debates , while Herman Cain 's ' long @-@ shot ' bid gained popularity until allegations of sexual misconduct derailed it . 
 Romney continued to seek support from a wary Republican electorate ; at this point in the race , his poll numbers were relatively flat and at a historically low level for a Republican frontrunner . After the charges of flip @-@ flopping that marked his 2008 campaign began to accumulate again , Romney declared in November 2011 : " I 've been as consistent as human beings can be . " In the final month before voting began , Newt Gingrich experienced a significant surge – taking a solid lead in national polls and most of the early caucus and primary states – before settling back into parity or worse with Romney following a barrage of negative ads from Restore Our Future , a pro @-@ Romney Super PAC . 
 In the initial contest , the 2012 Iowa caucuses of January 3 , election officials announced Romney as ahead with 25 percent of the vote , edging out a late @-@ gaining Rick Santorum by eight votes ( an also @-@ strong Ron Paul finished third ) . Sixteen days later , however , they certified Santorum as the winner by a 34 @-@ vote margin . A week after the Iowa caucuses , Romney earned a decisive win in the New Hampshire primary with a total of 39 percent of the vote ; Paul finished second and Jon Huntsman , Jr. third . 
 In the run @-@ up to the South Carolina Republican primary , Gingrich launched ads criticizing Romney for causing job losses while at Bain Capital , Perry referred to Romney 's role there as " vulture capitalism " , and Sarah Palin pressed Romney to prove his claim that he created 100 @,@ 000 jobs during that time . Many conservatives rallied in defense of Romney , rejecting what they inferred as criticism of free @-@ market capitalism . During two debates in the state , Romney fumbled questions about releasing his income tax returns , while Gingrich gained support with audience @-@ rousing attacks on the debate moderators . Romney 's double @-@ digit lead in state polls evaporated ; he lost to Gingrich by 13 points in the January 21 primary . Combined with the delayed loss in Iowa , Romney 's admitted poor week represented a lost chance to end the race early , and he quickly decided to release two years of his tax returns . The race turned to the Florida Republican primary , where in debates , appearances , and advertisements , Romney launched a sustained barrage against Gingrich 's past record and associations and current electability . Romney enjoyed a large spending advantage from both his campaign and his aligned Super PAC , and after a record @-@ breaking rate of negative ads from both sides , Romney won Florida on January 31 , gaining 46 percent of the vote to Gingrich 's 32 percent . 
 Several caucuses and primaries took place during February , and Santorum won three in a single night early in the month , propelling him into the lead in national and some state polls and positioning him as Romney 's chief rival . Days later , Romney told the Conservative Political Action Conference that he had been a " severely conservative governor " ( while during his term in 2005 he had maintained that his positions were moderate and characterized reports that he was shifting to the right to attract conservative votes a media distortion ) . Romney won the other five February contests , including a closely fought one in his home state of Michigan at the end of the month . In the Super Tuesday primaries and caucuses of March 6 , Romney won six of ten contests , including a narrow victory in Ohio over a vastly outspent Santorum . Although his victories were not enough to end the race , they were enough to establish a two @-@ to @-@ one delegate lead over Santorum . Romney maintained his delegate margin through subsequent contests , and Santorum suspended his campaign on April 10 . Following a sweep of five more contests on April 24 , the Republican National Committee put its resources to work for Romney as the party 's presumptive nominee . Romney clinched a majority of the delegates with a win in the Texas primary on May 29 . 
 Polls consistently indicated a tight race for the November general election . Negative ads from both sides dominated the campaign , with Obama 's proclaiming that Romney shipped jobs overseas while at Bain Capital and kept money in offshore tax havens and Swiss bank accounts . A related issue dealt with Romney 's purported responsibility for actions at Bain Capital after taking the Olympics post . Romney faced demands from Democrats to release additional years of his tax returns , an action a number of Republicans also felt would be wise ; after being adamant that he would not do that , he released summaries of them in late September . During May and June , the Obama campaign spent heavily and was able to paint a negative image of Romney in voters ' minds before the Romney campaign could construct a positive one . 
 In July 2012 , Romney visited the United Kingdom , Israel , and Poland , meeting leaders in an effort to raise his credibility as a world statesman . Comments Romney made about the readiness of the 2012 Summer Olympics were perceived as undiplomatic by the British press . Israeli Prime Minister ( and former BCG colleague ) Benjamin Netanyahu , embraced Romney , though some Palestinians criticized him for suggesting that Israel 's culture led to their greater economic success . 
 On August 11 , 2012 , the Romney campaign announced the selection of Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin as his vice @-@ presidential running mate . 
 On August 28 , 2012 , the 2012 Republican National Convention in Tampa , Florida , officially nominated Romney as their candidate for the presidency . Romney became the first Mormon to be a major @-@ party presidential nominee . 
 In mid @-@ September , a video surfaced of Romney speaking before a group of supporters in which he stated that 47 percent of the nation pays no income tax , are dependent on the federal government , see themselves as victims , and will support President Obama unconditionally . Romney went on to say : " And so my job is not to worry about those people . I 'll never convince them that they should take personal responsibility and care for their lives . " After facing criticism about the tone and accuracy of these comments , he at first characterized them as " inelegantly stated " , then a couple of weeks later commented : " I said something that 's just completely wrong . " Exit polls published following the election showed that voters never saw Romney as someone who cared about people like them . 
 The first of three 2012 presidential election debates took place on October 3 , in Denver . Media figures and political analysts widely viewed Romney as having delivered a stronger and more focused presentation than did President Obama . That initial debate overshadowed Obama 's improved presentation in the last two debates later in October , and Romney maintained a small advantage in the debates when seen as a whole . 
 The election took place on November 6 , and Obama was projected the winner at about 11 : 14 pm Eastern Standard Time . Romney garnered 206 electoral college votes to Obama 's 332 , losing all but one of nine battleground states , and 47 percent of the nationwide popular vote to Obama 's 51 percent . Media accounts described Romney as " <unk> " by the result . He and his senior campaign staff had disbelieved public polls showing Obama narrowly ahead , and had thought they were going to win until the vote tallies began to be reported on the evening of the election . But Romney 's get out the vote operation had been inferior to Obama 's , both in person @-@ to @-@ person organization and in voter modeling and outreach technology ( the latter exemplified by the failure of the Project Orca application ) . In his concession speech to his supporters , he said , " Like so many of you , Paul and I have left everything on the field . We have given our all to this campaign . I so wish that I had been able to fulfill your hopes to lead this country in a different direction , but the nation chose another leader . " Reflecting on his defeat during a conference call to hundreds of fundraisers and donors a week after the election , Romney attributed the outcome to Obama 's having secured the votes of specific interest groups , including African Americans , Hispanic Americans , young people , and women , by offering them what Romney called " extraordinary financial gifts . " The remark drew heavy criticism from prominent members of the Republican party . 
 = = = Political positions = = = 
 In addition to calling for cuts in federal government spending to help reduce the national debt , Romney proposed measures intended to limit the growth of entitlement programs , such as introducing means testing and gradually raising the eligibility ages for receipt of Social Security and Medicare . He supported substantial increases in military spending and promised to invest more heavily in military weapons programs while increasing the number of active @-@ duty military personnel . He was very supportive of the directions taken by the budget proposals of Paul Ryan , although he later proposed his own budget plan . 
 Romney pledged to lead an effort to repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ( " Obamacare " ) and replace it with a system that gives states more control over Medicaid and makes health insurance premiums tax @-@ advantaged for individuals in the same way they are for businesses . He favored repeal of the Dodd – Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and the Sarbanes – Oxley Act and intended to replace them with what he called a " streamlined , modern regulatory framework " . 
 He also promised to seek income tax law changes that he said would help to lower federal deficits and would stimulate economic growth . These included : reducing individual income tax rates across the board by 20 percent , maintaining the Bush administration @-@ era tax rate of 15 percent on investment income from dividends and capital gains ( and eliminating this tax entirely for those with annual incomes less than $ 200 @,@ 000 ) , cutting the top tax rate on corporations from 35 to 25 percent , and eliminating the estate tax and the Alternative Minimum Tax . He promised that the loss of government revenue from these tax cuts would be offset by closing loopholes and placing limits on tax deductions and credits available to taxpayers with the highest incomes , but said that that aspect of the plan could not yet be evaluated because details would have to be worked out with Congress . 
 Romney opposed the use of mandatory limits on greenhouse gas emissions to deal with global warming . He stated that he believed climate change is occurring , but that he did not know how much of it could be linked to human activity . He was a proponent of increased domestic oil drilling , hydraulic fracturing ( " fracking " ) , building more nuclear power plants , and reducing the regulatory authority of the Environmental Protection Agency . He believed North American energy independence could be achieved by 2020 . 
 Romney labeled Russia as America 's " number one geopolitical foe " , and asserted that preventing Iran from obtaining a nuclear capability should be America 's " highest national security priority " . Romney stated his strong support for Israel . He planned to formally label China a currency manipulator and take associated <unk> unless that country changed its trade practices . Romney supported the Patriot Act , the continued operation of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp , and use of enhanced interrogation techniques against suspected terrorists . Romney opposed same @-@ sex marriage and civil unions , although he favored domestic partnership legislation that gives certain legal rights to same @-@ sex couples , such as hospital visitation . In 2011 , he signed a pledge promising to seek passage of an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to define marriage as the union of one man and one woman . 
 Since 2005 , Romney described himself as " pro @-@ life " . In that year , he wrote : " I believe that abortion is the wrong choice except in cases of incest , rape , and to save the life of the mother . " During his 1994 campaign for the senate , Romney had said , " I believe that abortion should be safe and legal in this country , " a stance he reiterated during his 2002 campaign for governor . While Romney would prefer to see passage of a constitutional amendment that would outlaw abortion , he did not believe the public would support such an amendment ; as an alternative , he promised to nominate Supreme Court justices who would help overturn Roe v. Wade , allowing each state to decide on the legality of abortion . 
 Romney said that he would appoint federal judges in the mold of U.S. Supreme Court justices John Roberts , Clarence Thomas , Antonin Scalia , and Samuel Alito . He advocated judicial restraint and strict constructionism as judicial philosophies . 
 = = Subsequent activities = = 
 During the first year following the election defeat , Romney generally kept a low profile , with his ordinary daily activities around San Diego being captured via social media glimpses . In December 2012 , he joined the board of Marriott International for a third stint as a director . In March 2013 , Romney gave a reflective interview on Fox News Sunday , stating , " It kills me not to be there , not to be in the White House doing what needs to be done " . He again expressed regret at the " 47 percent " remark , saying " There 's no question that hurt and did real damage to my campaign . " ( He was still echoing both of these sentiments a year later . ) Romney began working as executive partner group chairman for <unk> Capital , a private capital firm in Boston owned by his son Tagg . He was also involved in supporting several charitable causes . 
 The Romneys bought a home again in the Deer Valley area of Park City , Utah , followed by a property in Holladay , Utah , where they plan to tear down an existing house and build a new one . They also gained long @-@ sought permission to replace their La Jolla home with a much bigger one , including a car elevator that had brought some derision during the 2012 campaign . In addition , Romney and his siblings continue to own a cottage in the gated community called Beach O ' Pines located south of Grand Bend , Ontario , which has been in the family for more than sixty years . With the new acquisitions the couple briefly had five homes , located near each of their five sons and respective families , and the couple continued to spend considerable time with their grandchildren , who by 2013 numbered 22 . They then sold the condominium in Belmont and decided to make their main residence in Utah , including switching voter registration . The 2014 documentary film Mitt showed a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes , family @-@ based perspective on both of Romney 's presidential campaigns and received positive notices for humanizing the candidate and illustrating the toll that campaigning takes . 
 Romney himself thought he might be branded a " loser for life " and fade into an obscurity like Michael Dukakis ( a similar figure with no obvious base of political support who had lost what his party considered a winnable presidential election ) but , to the surprise of many political observers , that did not happen . Romney re @-@ emerged onto the political scene in the run @-@ up to the 2014 U.S. midterm elections , endorsing , campaigning , and fundraising for a number of Republican candidates , especially those running for the U.S. Senate . 
 By early 2014 , the lack of a clear mainstream Republican candidate for the 2016 presidential election led some supporters , donors , and pollsters to suggest Romney stage a third run . Regarding such a possibility , Romney at first responded , " Oh , no , no , no . No , no , no , no , no . No , no , no . " Nevertheless , speculation continued : the continuing unpopularity of Obama led to buyer 's remorse among some voters ; the 2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine made Romney 's " No. 1 geopolitical foe " remark look prescient ; and an August 2014 poll of Iowan Republicans showed Romney with a large lead there over other potential 2016 candidates . By early 2015 , Romney was actively considering the idea and contacting his network of supporters . In doing so he was positioning himself in the invisible primary – the preliminary jockeying for the backing of party leaders , donors , and political operatives – against former Florida governor Jeb Bush , who had already set a likely campaign in motion and would be a rival to Romney for establishment Republican support . Despite support in some quarters for a third bid for the presidency , there was a backlash against him from conservatives who wanted a fresher face without a history of presidential losses , and many of Romney 's past donors were not willing to commit to him again . Romney announced on January 30 , 2015 that he would not run for president in 2016 , saying that while he thought he could win the nomination , " one of our next generation of Republican leaders " would be better positioned to win the general election . 
 As the Republican presidential nomination race went into the primaries season , Romney had not endorsed anyone but was one of the Republican establishment figures who were becoming increasingly concerned about the front @-@ runner status of Donald Trump . Romney publicly criticized Trump for not releasing his taxes , saying there might be a " bombshell " in them . Trump responded by calling Romney " one of the dumbest and worst candidates in the history of Republican politics . " Then Romney gave a speech on March 3 , 2016 , at the Hinckley Institute of Politics , that represented a scathing attack on Trump 's personal behavior , business performance , and domestic and foreign policy stances . He said Trump was " a phony , a fraud ... He 's playing members of the American public for suckers " and that " If we Republicans choose Donald Trump as our nominee , the prospects for a safe and prosperous future are greatly diminished . " In response Trump dismissed Romney as a " choke artist " . Romney 's speech represented an unprecedented attack by a major U.S. party 's most recent presidential nominee against the party 's current front @-@ runner for the nomination . Romney encouraged Republicans to engage in tactical voting , by supporting whichever of the remaining rivals had the best chance to beat Trump in any given state , and as such Romney announced he was voting for , although not endorsing , Ted Cruz for president prior to the March 22 Utah caucus . As the race went on there was some evidence of tactical voting occurring , and some partial arrangements were formed among candidates , but by May 3 Trump had defeated all his opponents and became the party 's presumptive nominee . Romney then announced that he would not support Trump in the general election , saying , " I am dismayed at where we are now , I wish we had better choices " . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Romney has received a number of honorary doctorates , including in business from the University of Utah in 1999 , in law from Bentley College in 2002 , in public administration from Suffolk University Law School in 2004 , in public service from Hillsdale College in 2007 , and in humanities from Liberty University in 2012 . He also received one from Southern Virginia University in 2013 and ones in 2015 from Jacksonville University , Utah Valley University , and Saint Anselm College . 
 People magazine included Romney in its 50 Most Beautiful People list for 2002 , and in 2004 , a foundation that promotes the Olympic truce , gave him its inaugural Truce Ideal Award . The Cranbrook School gave him their Distinguished Alumni Award in 2005 . In 2008 , he shared with his wife Ann , the Canterbury Medal from The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty , for " refus [ ing ] to compromise their principles and faith " during the presidential campaign . 
 = = Published works = = 
 = George Campbell ( American football ) = 
 George Campbell IV ( born October 27 , 1996 ) is an American football wide receiver for the Florida State Seminoles . He is rated as the tenth best player ( and # 1 rated athlete ) by ESPN and as a top @-@ 10 wide receiver by Scout.com and Rivals.com in the national high school class of 2015 . He completed his junior season at East Lake High School during the 2013 – 14 school year . He committed to Michigan prior to his high school junior season , but decommitted following the season and is currently committed to FSU . He has also accepted an invitation to participate in the 2015 Under Armour All @-@ America Game . 
 = = High school = = 
 Son of Joyce Nix and George Campbell III , George , at the age of 5 and after his father 's imprisonment , developed a close bond with his uncle Ahmad Jackson . Nix is a certified nurse . 
 = = = Freshman = = = 
 Before his freshman season , he nearly attended Clearwater Central Catholic High School , as well as IMG Academy , but decided to attend his zoned school , East Lake High School in Tarpon Springs , Florida . As a freshman he played varsity football for East Lake , but mostly on defense . He had 1 reception for a 26 @-@ yard touchdown , 2 interceptions and 81 tackles , including 2 forced fumbles . That season East Lake compiled a 9 – 4 record before losing in the 2011 Florida High School Athletic Association ( FHSAA ) Class 8A region final in overtime to Plant High School on December 2 , 2011 . Plant had won state championships in 2006 , 2008 and 2009 . Plant went on to become state champion that year , marking four consecutive years it had reached a championship game . Campbell accumulated statistics in 12 of the 13 games ( not the November 4 game at Palm Harbor University High School ) . He was named a MaxPreps 2011 U.S. Air Force Freshman All @-@ American first team selection at linebacker , although his true position was safety . He was not selected to the Tampa Bay Times 2011 All @-@ Suncoast Region Football team for Hernando , Pasco , Hillsborough and Pinellas counties or even the Times 2011 All @-@ Pinellas County football team . 
 = = = Sophomore = = = 
 In 2012 , East Lake improved to 11 – 2 , but again lost in the FHSAA Class 8A region final , this time to Dr. Phillips High School on November 30 by a 31 – 21 margin . In the first game of the season , when starter <unk> Scott injured his ankle , Campbell stepped in at wide receiver . Later in the season , when the team struggled to get pressure on the quarterback , Campbell moved from safety to defensive end . As a sophomore , his tackle total declined to 56 , but his 764 receiving yards earned him 27 major Division I scholarship offers . His offers included Arkansas , Auburn , Boston College , Clemson , Florida , Florida State , Georgia , Georgia Tech , Illinois , Louisville , Miami ( FL ) , Mississippi , Mississippi State , North Carolina State , Notre Dame , Ohio State , South Florida , Tennessee , Texas A & M , UCF , UCLA , Vanderbilt , West Virginia . East Lake junior offensive lineman Mason Cole committed to Michigan 's class of 2014 on February 25 , which was one day before Cole was invited to participate in the 2014 U.S. Army All @-@ American Bowl . That year Campbell played basketball and ran track for East Lake before having surgery on his left wrist on April 19 . The following summer , he ran a 4 @.@ 36 second 40 yard dash . His 4 @.@ 36 time was on artificial turf , while he was timed a 4 @.@ 37 on grass on the same day . He was also measured at 37 inches ( 94 @.@ 0 cm ) in his vertical leap . He was a second team All @-@ Suncoast region and first team All @-@ Pinellas County team selection . 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Prior to his junior season , he verbally committed to the University of Michigan where he would play for Michigan Wolverines football as a freshman for the 2015 team via Twitter . At the time , he still attended East Lake High School , where he was about to play his junior year for the 2013 football team . At the time of his July 27 , 2013 verbal commitment , he was ranked as the number one athlete and number three player in the class of 2015 by ESPN . When Scout.com released its first list of 5 @-@ star rated football players on August 12 , 2013 , Campbell was included among the 20 players listed and the only wide receiver included . At the end of that summer prior to his junior year football season , he was one of two juniors selected to the 2013 USA Today preseason All @-@ USA team . He accepted an invitation to participate in the 2015 Under Armour All @-@ America Game in St. Petersburg before the end of October 2013 . The November 15 FHSAA Class 7A region quarterfinal that East Lake won 13 – 12 ended with an alleged punch by a Palmetto High School coach that left Campbell with a cut inside his mouth . Other players were involved in the altercation , which is being investigated by the FHSAA . On November 19 , 2013 , ESPN moved Campbell up to the number two overall position in the class of 2015 . This moved him ahead of Kevin <unk> II , but he remained behind <unk> Cornell . In Campbell 's third time in the FHSAA , East Lake finally got past the regional finals ( defeating Port Charlotte High School ) , only to lose the following week on December 6 , 2013 , in the state semifinals in overtime to Dwyer High School 31 – 24 , despite a 65 @-@ yard touchdown reception by Campbell . Following the season , Campbell decommitted from Michigan on December 13 . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 He subsequently named the 10 schools he was considering , while excluding Michigan on July 28 , 2014 . The 10 schools were LSU , Alabama , Florida , FSU , Georgia , Clemson , UCLA , Ole Miss , Auburn , and Maryland . On September 5 , he selected Florida State . 
 = Paracetamol toxicity = 
 Paracetamol toxicity is caused by excessive use or overdose of the medication paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) . Most people with paracetamol toxicity have no symptoms in the first 24 hours following overdose . Others may initially have nonspecific complaints such as vague abdominal pain and nausea . With time , signs of liver injury may develop ; these include low blood sugar , low blood pH , easy bleeding , and hepatic encephalopathy . Some will spontaneously resolve , although untreated cases may result in death . In the United States and the United Kingdom it is the most common cause of acute liver failure . Paracetamol toxicity is one of the most common causes of poisoning worldwide . 
 Damage to the liver , or hepatotoxicity , results not from paracetamol itself , but from one of its metabolites , N @-@ acetyl @-@ p @-@ <unk> ( NAPQI ) . NAPQI decreases the liver 's natural antioxidant glutathione and directly damages cells in the liver , leading to liver failure . Risk factors for toxicity include excessive long term alcohol intake , fasting , anorexia nervosa , and the use of certain drugs such as isoniazid . 
 Treatment is aimed at removing the paracetamol from the body and replacing glutathione . Activated charcoal can be used to decrease absorption of paracetamol if the patient presents for treatment soon after the overdose ; the antidote acetylcysteine acts as a precursor for glutathione , helping the body regenerate enough to prevent damage to the liver . N @-@ acetylcysteine can neutralize NAPQI by itself as well . A liver transplant is often required if damage to the liver becomes severe . Patients treated early have a good prognosis , whereas patients that develop major liver abnormalities typically have a poor outcome . Efforts to prevent paracetamol overdose include limiting individual sales of the drug and combining paracetamol with methionine , which is converted into glutathione in the liver . 
