 = Richard Appel = 
 Richard James " Rich " Appel ( born May 21 , 1963 ) is an American writer , producer and former attorney . Since 2012 , he has served as an Executive Producer and co @-@ showrunner of Family Guy on Fox . Growing up in Wilmette , Illinois , Appel developed a love of comedy and dreamed of a career as a comedy writer ; he attended Harvard University and wrote for the Harvard Lampoon . Following in his mother 's footsteps , Appel instead became a lawyer . After attending law school he started out as a law clerk for Judge John M. Walker , Jr. before becoming a federal attorney , serving as assistant U.S. attorney for the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York for three years . In 1994 , he moved into comedy writing when he was hired for The Simpsons , writing seven episodes of the show including " Mother Simpson " . He moved on to become showrunner and executive producer of King of the Hill before creating the sitcom <unk> .. He then worked on The Bernie Mac Show , Family Guy and American Dad ! before co @-@ creating The Cleveland Show . He was married to the writer Mona Simpson . 
 = = Early life and law career = = 
 Richard James Appel was born May 21 , 1963 in New York City , to Nina ( neé Schick ) and Alfred Appel . His mother was a lawyer , taught law and served as dean of Loyola University Chicago 's law school from 1983 – 2004 , and his father ( who died on May 2 , 2009 ) was professor of English at Northwestern University and an expert on Vladimir Nabokov . Appel has a sister , Karen <unk> . Appel lived in California while his parents taught at Stanford University before the family moved to Wilmette , Illinois , where Appel went to North Shore Country Day School . Appel became interested in comedy from a young age , noting : " I grew up watching The Dick Van Dyke Show and always thought that what Rob Petrie did for a living was what I wanted to do . " His father introduced him to the works of Buster Keaton and Laurel and Hardy and encouraged him to " read comic books and watch quality [ sic ] television " , and he and a friend produced parody adverts and news pieces with a Betamax and often engaged in prank phone calls . At high school , he wrote sketches and routines and dreamt of being a comedy writer but " didn 't know anyone who did it , and it didn 't seem like a career that was open to me . " 
 He attended Harvard University and wrote for the Harvard Lampoon , alongside Conan O 'Brien and Greg Daniels , both of whom he beat for the chance to give the comic graduation speech , the Ivy Oration . Tad Friend noted : " Everyone thought it would be Conan automatically , but Rich 's speech was funny and self @-@ deprecating , in a way that was both silly and profound . " After graduation in 1985 with a degree in history and literature , Appel attended Harvard Law School rather than moving into comedy , because the idea of following his mother and grandfathers into the legal profession " appealed " to him . He then worked for two years as a law clerk for Judge John M. Walker , Jr . , of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York , working on the trials of people such as Michael Milken and Leona Helmsley . Subsequently , for three years from 1990 , Appel served as an assistant U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York . Fellow attorney Geoffrey Berman stated Appel " was an excellent lawyer . He was good on his feet , articulate , with a sense of the law that was common @-@ sensical , more intuitive than based on books . " Appel still had dreams of becoming a comedy writer despite the security working as a lawyer offered him , but only in 1993 , after his wife became pregnant , was Appel " <unk> [ d ] that this was [ his ] life and [ he ] could shape it . " Three months later he had retained an agent , had written and submitted two spec @-@ scripts , and had moved to California . 
 = = Writing career = = 
 When starting out as a comedy writer , Appel recalled : " One reason I caught up to my contemporaries is that when I started to send out my scripts , the idea that I 'd been on the Lampoon , even 8 or 10 years before , was a credential I could use . " Appel got his first television job when David Mirkin hired him for the writing staff of The Simpsons in 1994 , initially on a ten @-@ week contract , and served as a writer and producer there for four years . There , he wrote seven episodes , often employing the use of " joke sequences , a narrative approach to humor that eschews the quick laugh in favor of something that develops over time . " Appel found work on The Simpsons to be a learning curve because it was a " very tough show to write for . " His first episode was season seven 's " Mother Simpson " . Appel was desperately trying to think of a story idea to show and decided that he had to really reach out and opted to do something about Homer 's mother , who previously had only been mentioned once . He named her Mona Simpson , after his wife . Many of the writers could not believe that an episode about Homer 's mother had not previously been produced . The writers used the episode to solve several little puzzles , such as where Lisa 's intelligence came from . Also for season seven he penned " Bart on the Road " , in which he utilized the plot devices of " go to work with your parents day " and Bart getting a driving license , and contributed to the episode " 22 Short Films About Springfield " ; the two segments he wrote for the episode ( one about Marge , the other about Lionel Hutz ) were both cut . Appel wrote two episodes from season eight , " Bart After Dark " and " The Secret War of Lisa Simpson " , as well as season nine 's " The Two Mrs Nahasapeemapetilons " and season 10 's " When You Dish Upon A Star " . 
 Daniels hired Appel as executive producer and showrunner on King of the Hill in 1997 , leading the show 's writing process and overseeing all aspects of the show . Daniels noted : " It was essential that Rich was a good writer who could deal with people , who could help manage the business in the room . But equally important was the fact that he was someone I could trust , who had a similar sense of taste and values . " He stayed until 2001 . For his work on The Simpsons and King of the Hill , Appel won three Primetime Emmy Awards . Appel created the short @-@ lived series A.U.S.A. , which aired in 2003 , which he based on his own experiences as an assistant U.S. attorney . He conceived it in 2001 and NBC ordered 13 episodes the following year ; the show 's original pilot used a single @-@ camera setup but NBC executives felt it would have more appeal as a multiple @-@ camera setup , so it was re @-@ shot . Appel noted of the show : " There 's a sense sometimes in Hollywood that writers and producers who come from animated shows maybe have something to prove to justify their credibility as live @-@ action show @-@ runners or writers . My own experience has been fortunate . I haven 't felt that . But I know it exists . " He was inspired by the comedic side of working as a lawyer when writing the show : " Whether you 're working on a case that you 're proud to tell you mother and grandmother about , you 're still going to encounter possibly really shifty dishonest lawyers , or a judge who is a little crazy , or witnesses who self @-@ destruct on the stand . " The show was not acclaimed : Scott D. Pierce of The Deseret News praised the premise but felt the show was " sort of like watching a train wreck , " while Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said it was " too cartoonish to work . " Appel then wrote and worked as a co @-@ executive producer on The Bernie Mac Show and Kitchen Confidential , and appeared as Josh in the 2004 film I ♥ Huckabees . In 2006 , Appel produced a pilot called My Ex Life about two divorcing couples for CBS , which was directed by Kelsey Grammer . 
 In 2008 , he served as a co @-@ executive producer on Family Guy and executive producer on American Dad ! from 2008 until 2009 . Appel wrote the Family Guy seventh season episode " Family Gay " . Appel co @-@ created , alongside Mike Henry and Seth MacFarlane , the Family Guy spin @-@ off The Cleveland Show , which they began discussing in 2007 and which premiered September 27 , 2009 . He and Henry serve as the show 's executive producers and showrunners , handling the day @-@ to @-@ day operations , with limited involvement from MacFarlane . Henry and Appel conceived the show as " more of a family show , a sweeter show " than Family Guy . The show , which was picked up to air a first season consisting of 22 episodes , was picked up by Fox for a second season , consisting of 13 episodes , bringing the total number to 35 episodes . The announcement was made on May 3 , 2009 before the first season even premiered . It was extended to a full second season . Appel signed a new three @-@ year , seven figure deal with Fox to continue serving as showrunner on The Cleveland Show in 2010 . Fox chairman Gary Newman commented : " What is special about him is his incredible leadership ability . He is a terrific showrunner , and he really sets the tone on a show that is exactly what you 're looking for . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He married novelist Mona Simpson , the biological sister of Apple founder Steve Jobs , in 1993 . They have two children . Appel and Simpson have since divorced . 
 = = Credits = = 
 Appel worked on the listed shows and wrote all the listed episodes : 
 The Simpsons ( 1994 – 1997 ) – writer , producer , co @-@ executive producer , consulting producer and story editor 
 " Mother Simpson " 
 " Bart on the Road " 
 " 22 Short Films About Springfield " ( co @-@ writer ) 
 " Bart After Dark " 
 " The Secret War of Lisa Simpson " 
 " The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons " 
 " When You Dish Upon a Star " 
 King of the Hill ( 1997 – 2001 ) – executive producer 
 A.U.S.A. ( 2003 ) – creator , executive producer , writer 
 " Pilot " 
 " 12 Happy Grandmothers " 
 The Bernie Mac Show ( 2003 – 2005 ) – co @-@ executive producer , writer 
 " Eye of the Tiger " 
 " That Old Mac Magic " 
 " Stiff Upper Lip " 
 " Nerdy Mac " 
 I ♥ Huckabees ( 2004 ) – Actor ( as Josh ) 
 Kitchen Confidential ( 2005 – 2006 ) – co @-@ executive producer , writer 
 " Praise Be Praise " 
 " Let 's Do Brunch " 
 My Ex Life ( 2006 ) – creator , executive producer , writer 
 Family Guy ( 2008 – 2009 , 2013 – ) – co @-@ executive producer , writer 
 " Family Gay " 
 American Dad ! ( 2008 – 2009 ) – executive producer 
 The Cleveland Show ( 2009 – 2013 ) – co @-@ creator , executive producer , writer 
 " Pilot " 
 = Jungle Strike = 
 Jungle Strike is a video game developed and published by Electronic Arts in 1993 for the Sega Mega Drive . The game was later released on several other consoles such as the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) , and an upgraded version was made for the Amiga . The Amiga and other home computer conversions were the responsibility of Ocean Software while the SNES version was that of Gremlin Interactive . It is the direct sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf ( a best @-@ seller released the previous year ) and is the second instalment in the Strike series . The game is a helicopter based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The plot concerns two villains intent on destroying Washington , D.C .. The player must use the helicopter and occasionally other vehicles to thwart their plans . 
 Its game engine was carried over from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Jungle Strike retained its predecessor 's core mechanics and expanded on the model with additional vehicles and settings . The game was well received by most critics upon release , with the Mega Drive release receiving critical acclaim from their respective reviewers . Publications praised its gameplay , strategy , design , controls and graphics , although there were some complaints regarding the interface , difficulty and perceived jingoistic politics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jungle Strike features two antagonists : Ibn Kilbaba , the son of Desert Strike 's antagonist , and Carlos Ortega , a notorious South American drug lord . The opening sequence depicts the two men observing a nuclear explosion on a deserted island , while discussing the delivery of " nuclear resources " and an attack on Washington D.C. ; Kilbaba seeks revenge for his father 's death at the hands of the US , while Ortega wishes to " teach the Yankees to stay out of my drug trade " . 
 The player takes control of a " lone special forces " pilot . The game 's first level depicts the protagonist repelling terrorist attacks on Washington , D.C. , including the President 's limousine . Subsequent levels depict counter @-@ attacks on the drug lord 's forces , progressing towards his " jungle fortress " . In the game 's penultimate level , the player pursues Kilbaba and Ortega to their respective hideouts before capturing them . 
 The final level takes place in Washington , D.C. again , where the two antagonists attempt to flee after escaping from prison . The player must destroy both Kilbaba and Ortega and stop four trucks carrying nuclear bombs from blowing up the White House . The PC version also extends the storyline with an extra level set in Alaska , in which the player must wipe out the remainder of Ortega 's forces under the command of a Russian defector named <unk> , who has taken control of oil tankers and is threatening to destroy the ecosystem with crude oil if his demands are not met . Once all levels are complete , the ending sequence begins and depicts the protagonist and his co @-@ pilot in an open @-@ topped car in front of cheering crowds . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Jungle Strike is a helicopter @-@ based shoot ' em up , mixing action and strategy . The player 's main weapon is a Comanche attack helicopter . Additional vehicles can be commandeered : a motorbike , hovercraft and F @-@ 117 . The latter in particular features variable height and unlimited ammunition , but is more vulnerable to crashes . The game features an " overhead " perspective " with a slight 3D twist " . The graphics uses a 2.5D perspective which simulates the appearance of being 3D . 
 Levels consist of several missions , which are based around the destruction of enemy weapons and installations , as well as rescuing hostages or prisoners of war , or capturing enemy personnel . The helicopter is armed with machine guns , more powerful Hydra rockets and yet more deadly Hellfire missiles . The more powerful the weapon , the fewer can be carried : the player must choose an appropriate weapon for each situation . Enemy weapons range from armoured cars , to artillery and tanks . 
 The player 's craft has a limited amount of armour , which is depleted as the helicopter is hit by enemy fire . Should the armour reach zero , the craft will be destroyed , losing the player a life . The player must outmanoeuvre enemies to avoid damage , but can replenish armour by means of power @-@ ups or by airlifting rescued friendlies or captives to a landing zone . The helicopter has a finite amount of fuel which is steadily depleted as the level progresses . Should the fuel run out the Comanche will crash , again costing the player a life . The craft can refuel by collecting fuel barrels . The helicopter also carries limited ammunition , which must be replenished by means of ammo crates . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Jungle Strike is the sequel to Desert Strike : Return to the Gulf , a similar game which parodied the Gulf War and which was released in 1992 . Desert Strike arose from a failed attempt at a flight simulator and was inspired by Matchbox toys and Choplifter . Central to the game 's concept were nonlinear gameplay and the eschewing of power @-@ ups and bosses . With the success of the original title , producer Scott <unk> , game director John Manley and associate producer Tony Barnes were tasked with creating the sequel . Jungle Strike retained the core mechanics of its predecessor , with the addition of various vehicles and settings . Desert Strike was at the time Electronic Arts ' highest selling video game and maintained a high sales chart position as Jungle Strike was released in 1993 . 
 The Amiga conversion of Desert Strike featured upgraded graphics and sound over the Mega Drive original . With regards to the Jungle Strike Amiga conversion , senior programmer Stuart Johnson stated he " tried to keep this conversion a lot more faithful to the Mega Drive version than Desert Strike was " . He attempted to make the Amiga conversion run more smoothly than the Mega Drive original . Graphical improvements were attempted : these were less successful on the A500 than the <unk> because of technical restrictions . The developers also struggled with technical challenges because of differences in hardware between the Mega Drive and Amiga . Amendments were also made to the workings of in @-@ mission plot screens . The Amiga conversion was released as sequel Urban Strike was published for the Mega Drive in 1994 . 
 Jungle Strike was followed by three further sequels : Urban Strike , Soviet Strike , and Nuclear Strike . As the series moved to more advanced consoles , series creator Mike Posehn became less involved in the programming side of development . Urban Strike , released for the Mega Drive , featured new vehicles and locations , as well as on @-@ foot sections . Soviet Strike , released for Sony 's PlayStation and the Sega Saturn in 1996 , featured 3D graphics , as did Nuclear Strike , released on PC and PlayStation in 1997 and the Nintendo 64 in 1999 . Another sequel provisionally titled Future Strike was planned , but the game was eventually released as Future Cop : LAPD , a mech @-@ based shooter game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was well received by critics upon release , with some reviews regarding it with critical acclaim . Adrian Pitt and Mat Yeo of Sega Force both reviewed the game . Adrian Pitt called the title a " strategy game " and commented it as the " greatest game in the genre " . Pritt said the controls were " without fault " and the graphics " superb " . The second reviewer , Mat Yeo , praised the " amazing playability and ' <unk> ' " and said the game was " twice as good " as Desert Strike . Yeo called the graphics " brilliant " and said the game was " the best shoot ' em up I 've seen in a long time " . The Mega Drive version was a best @-@ seller for 3 months . MegaTech magazine said the game has " impressive graphics and tons of missions " . Mega placed the game at No. 13 in their Top Mega Drive Games of All Time . 
 Lim Choon <unk> of New Straits Times praised the " simply wonderful " graphics but questioned whether the sound effects were enough to " create the environment of a full @-@ scale war " . Choon <unk> pointed to a high initial difficulty but said : " Once the skills are acquired , be ready for many hours of enjoyment and sleepless nights . " Chip and Jonathan Carter of St. Petersburg Times deemed the game one of the best of the year and felt the SNES version " loses nothing in the translation " . The duo said the Game Boy and Game Gear versions were " less impressive " due to their technical restrictions but " about as good as you can get on the small screen " . " Sir <unk> " of GamePro was impressed with the Game Boy version 's clear and detailed graphics , lack of slowdown , good controls , and faithfulness to the original version , but judged the Game Gear version to be " merely average " , saying issues such as poor collision detection hamper the game despite its outstanding graphics . Amiga CD32 Gamer called Jungle Strike " a <unk> gorilla among games " and praised its ease of control and " masses of gameplay and realistic detail " . 
 Amiga Computing said : " With its impressive graphics and superbly designed game system , it could well be the best chopper title yet " although the reviewer felt the difficulty curve was too steep . Amiga Format said of the game : " with a little more foresight and planning , it could have been a lot more fun " , as the reviewer was irritated by the fact that fuel , armour and ammunition levels were displayed on map screen . However the magazine also wrote : " The bottom line though , is that Jungle Strike is an incredibly good game " . Amiga Power called the game " an appreciable shoot ' em up " but said it was " clearly tailored for the shorter attention span " of a console gamer . CU Amiga Magazine wrote : " This blend of shooting and thinking action blends together seamlessly and in the process creates a classic blaster well worth a ride " . The One Amiga magazine wrote : " Jungle Strike 's a fine game , which will prove both a challenge for Desert Strike @-@ <unk> , and a good solid blast for first bloods " . ACAR observed the game 's " Good graphics , okay sound , smooth animation and tough game play . " Amiga Power complained that " Throughout the game you 're battered with uneasily right @-@ wing US politics " , while Amiga Format said " jingoism " was " rife " throughout the game . Amiga CD32 Gamer called the plot " typically ' ugly American ' idiocy " . 
 GamePro commented on the game 's skilful challenge and variety of locales , and particularly praised the Super NES version for retaining the same gameplay of the Genesis version while improving on the graphics and sound . 
 = U.S. Route 50 in Utah = 
 U.S. Route 50 ( US @-@ 50 ) in Utah crosses the center of the state . The highway serves no major population centers in Utah , with the largest city along its path being Delta . Most of the route passes through desolate , remote areas . Through the eastern half of the state the route is concurrent with Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) . US @-@ 50 both enters and exits Utah concurrent with US @-@ 6 , however the two routes are separate through the center of the state . 
 Three completely different routings of US @-@ 50 have existed between Green River and Ely , Nevada . The route between these cities has become progressively shorter as new roads have been paved through this largely uninhabited region of both states . The earlier routings were a result of a dispute between Utah and Nevada over which auto trails would be paved and converted to U.S. Highways . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway enters Utah from Nevada in a desolate portion of the Great Basin desert . Similar to many portions of the route in Nevada , there are no services from this point to Delta , a span of roadway that is about 100 miles ( 160 km ) . While passing through the Great Basin the highway crosses two mountain ranges , the Confusion Range via kings canyon and House Range via Skull Rock Pass , before arriving at the shore of Sevier Lake . Sevier Lake is an intermittent lake which is fed by snow melt from many mountain ranges in the eastern half of the Great Basin . From US @-@ 50 , water is only usually visible in the spring months . The highway follows Sevier Lake to Delta . 
 The scenery dramatically changes as US @-@ 50 approaches Delta , where U.S. Route 6 and 50 separate . As the road approaches Delta , a straight passage across desert changes to zigzags through farming areas . The highway continues to zigzag through farms until arriving at more mountainous terrain at Holden . At Holden , the highway merges with Interstate 15 to cross the Pavant Range at Scipio Summit . US @-@ 50 then separates from this freeway to meet Interstate 70 in Salina . The two highways run concurrent from this point east to Colorado . Yet again , there is a stretch of highway 110 miles ( 180 km ) long without services from Salina to Green River . 
 While co @-@ routed with I @-@ 70 , US @-@ 50 crosses the Wasatch Plateau and passes through the San Rafael Swell . The construction of I @-@ 70 through the swell is noted as one of the engineering marvels of the Interstate Highway System . One specific feat , the excavation through a portion called Spotted Wolf Canyon , required excavating 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cubic yards ( 2 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 m3 ) of rock to have a bed for just 8 miles ( 13 km ) of roadway . Construction workers noted that prior to the construction of the freeway a man could stand in this canyon and touch both sides of the canyon wall . 
 US @-@ 6 rejoins US @-@ 50 near Green River . The three routes run concurrent and follow the southern edge of the Book Cliffs to Grand Junction , Colorado . Once again , services are not present from Thompson Springs to Fruita , Colorado , a span of about 60 miles ( 97 km ) . This portion of US @-@ 50 is part of the Dinosaur Diamond Prehistoric Highway , a National Scenic Byway . The name of the byway comes from the large number of areas along the route with visible dinosaur remains . 
 = = History = = 
 The modern route of U.S. Route 50 between Ely , Nevada and Green River , Utah is the third iteration . 
 = = = First iteration = = = 
 In 1926 , when the U.S. Highway system was first announced , there was a gap in US @-@ 50 between Ely and Thistle . At the time the states of Utah and Nevada were feuding about which of the old auto trails would be paved and used for the new U.S. Highway System . Nevada favored the Lincoln Highway , which the modern US @-@ 50 closely follows in that state . Utah refused to consider the Lincoln Highway west of Salt Lake City . Officials perceived that route would carry all California bound traffic directly to Nevada while passing through very few communities in Utah . Utah instead favored the Victory Highway ( modern Interstate 80 west of Salt Lake ) and the Arrowhead Trail ( modern Interstate 15 ) . By favoring these routes Utah could force travelers destined for southern California to use a different route than those destined for northern California , with both of these traversing through more cities in Utah than the Lincoln Highway . The Arrowhead trail was especially beneficial to Utah as it passed through many communities in the state , but only Las Vegas in Nevada . 
 Utah prevailed and US @-@ 50 did not continue to follow the Lincoln Highway to Salt Lake City as Nevada had wanted . The first continuous route of US @-@ 50 across eastern Nevada and western Utah was an arch shaped route . US @-@ 50 proceeded north from Ely along what is now numbered U.S. Route 93 and Alternate US @-@ 93 where the highway would merge with the Victory Highway ( U.S. Route 40 along the Wendover Cut @-@ off , since replaced by I @-@ 80 ) to Salt Lake . From there the highway returned to Green River via what is now numbered State Route 201 , U.S. Route 89 and U.S. Route 6 . 
 = = = Second iteration = = = 
 The second iteration has its origins with the formation of US @-@ 6 . In 1937 , US @-@ 6 was extended west from its former terminus at Greeley , Colorado to Long Beach , California . In eastern Utah the route used the existing alignment of US @-@ 50 . However , in western Utah the route used an unpaved road through Delta reconnecting with US @-@ 50 in Ely . By 1954 , this route was fully paved and US @-@ 50 was moved to this shorter alignment . With this change US @-@ 6 / 50 ran concurrent from Ely to Grand Junction , Colorado . 
 The paved version did not exactly follow the unpaved roads . The dirt route passed through the numerous mountain ranges of the great basin with the most difficult being <unk> Canyon . The route was relocated to follow the north shore of Sevier Lake , which reduced the number of mountain ranges crossed . Although US @-@ 50 was moved to yet another alignment , this route remains US @-@ 6 today . 
 = = = Third iteration = = = 
 The modern route of US @-@ 50 was created in 1976 . This iteration of US @-@ 50 has its origins in a dispute over the route of Interstate 70 in Utah . While I @-@ 70 was in the planning stage Colorado lobbied for an extension of the original proposal to run across Colorado and into Utah . Utah supported an extension using then US @-@ 6 / 50 to connect Denver , Colorado with Salt Lake City . However , federal planners did not see value in this route and instead supported a route that could be used to connect Denver with Los Angeles , California . I @-@ 70 was built using the federally selected route . In 1976 , US @-@ 50 was changed again to a routing mostly concurrent with I @-@ 70 . The portion of modern US @-@ 50 between Delta and Scipio had been previously numbered State Route 26 , and the portion between Scipio and Salina had been numbered State Route 63 , with the SR @-@ 63 portion being transferred to SR @-@ 26 in 1971 . 
 East of Green River I @-@ 70 closely follows the original route of US @-@ 50 , with some minor straightening by Crescent Junction , Cisco , and Westwater . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Susanna Cole = 
 Susanna Cole ( née Hutchinson ; 1633 – c . 1713 ) was the lone survivor of an Indian attack in which many of her siblings and her famed mother , Anne Hutchinson , were killed . Following the attack , she was taken captive , and held for several years before her release . 
 Born in Alford , Lincolnshire , England , Hutchinson was less than a year old when her family sailed from England to New England in 1634 . She was less than five when her family settled on Aquidneck Island ( later Rhode Island ) in the Narragansett Bay following her mother 's banishment from Massachusetts during the Antinomian Controversy . Shortly after her father 's death , when she was about eight years old , she , her mother and six of her siblings left Rhode Island to live in New Netherland . They settled in an area that became the far northeastern section of The Bronx in New York City , near the Westchester County line . Caught in the middle of severe tensions between the local natives and the Dutch , the family , except for Susanna , was massacred in August 1643 . She was taken captive , and raised by the Indians , later to be traded back to the English . 
 Hutchinson was taken to Boston where her oldest brother and an older sister lived , was re @-@ introduced into English society , and at the age of 18 married John Cole , the son of Boston innkeeper Samuel Cole . They lived in Boston for a few years , but by 1663 had moved to the Narragansett country of Rhode Island ( later North Kingstown ) to look after the lands of her oldest brother , Edward Hutchinson . Here the couple remained and raised a large family . Susanna Cole was still alive in 1707 when given administration of her husband 's estate , but was deceased by December 1713 when her son William took receipts concerning his parents ' estate . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Baptized in Alford , Lincolnshire on 15 November 1633 , Susanna Hutchinson was the youngest child of William and Anne Hutchinson to accompany her parents on the voyage from England to New England in 1634 . She was the 14th child of her parents , of which 11 survived to make the trip to the New World ; a 15th child was born in New England . The family settled in Boston , and lived across the street from magistrate John Winthrop , who was a judge during the civil trial in 1637 that led to her mother 's banishment from the Massachusetts colony . While Hutchinson was still very young , her mother hosted popular religious discussions at their home . Her mother 's religious views , at odds with the rigid orthodoxy of the Puritan ministers , helped to create a major division in the Boston church and an untenable situation for the colony 's leaders . Forced to leave Massachusetts , the family settled with many of her mother 's supporters on Aquidneck Island in the Narragansett Bay , establishing the settlement of Portsmouth , which soon became a part of the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations . Hutchinson was less than five years old when the family left Boston , and was about eight when her father died in Portsmouth . 
 Frightened at the prospect of Massachusetts gaining influence or control over Rhode Island , Hutchinson 's widowed mother took her six youngest children , an older son , a son @-@ in @-@ law , and some servants and moved to the part of New Netherland that later became The Bronx in New York City . The Dutch and native Siwanoy were engaged in Kieft 's War during the family 's tenure there . In August 1643 <unk> attacked the emigrant household , and killed all members of the family , except for nine @-@ year @-@ old Hutchinson . According to one story , Susanna 's red hair spared her from the slaughter , while another account claimed that the girl was out picking blueberries some distance from the house and hid in the crevice of Split Rock . In any event , the attackers took Susanna Hutchinson captive , and held her for several years . 
 In his journal , Massachusetts governor John Winthrop provided an account of Susanna under the date of July 1646 : 
 A daughter of Mrs. Hutchinson was carried away by the Indians near the Dutch , when her mother and others were killed by them ; and upon the peace concluded between the Dutch and the same Indians , she was returned to the Dutch governor , who restored her to her friends here . She was about eight years old , when she was taken , and continued with them about four years , and she had forgot her own language , and all her friends , and was loath to have come from the Indians . 
 While Winthrop said that Hutchinson was captive about four years , his journal makes clear that her captivity lasted less than three years . When she returned to Boston , her known living siblings at the time were her oldest brother , Edward Hutchinson , another brother , Samuel , and her two oldest living sisters , Faith ( the wife of Thomas Savage ) , and Bridget ( the wife of John Sanford ) . Of these siblings , Faith lived in Mount Wollaston , about ten miles south of Boston ; Bridget lived in Portsmouth , Rhode Island ; and Samuel 's residence is unknown . Only her brother Edward is known to have lived in Boston proper , and it is likely that Hutchinson came to live with him and his family . On 30 December 1651 she married , in Boston , John Cole , the son of Boston innkeeper , Samuel Cole , who had established Boston 's first tavern in 1634 . 
 = = Adult life = = 
 Susanna and John Cole began raising a family in Boston , but by 1663 they had gone to look after her brother 's land in the Narragansett country , which was then in disputed territory , but later became North Kingstown , Rhode Island . Here the Coles lived for the remainder of their lives , rearing many children . The will of John Cole 's father , Samuel Cole , dated 21 December 1666 , left a property at Bendall 's Dock in Boston to Susanna and her children to satisfy an agreement with Susanna 'a brother Edward Hutchinson and uncle Samuel Hutchinson . This property was leased out in 1676 , and sold in 1698 for £ 160 . 
 In April 1667 , John Cole deeded their house in Boston to Susanna 's brother Edward and uncle Samuel , signifying that they intended to remain in Narragansett . They lived in the vicinity of Wickford , an area claimed by both Connecticut and Rhode Island . Many of the Wickford inhabitants preferred to be under the jurisdiction of Connecticut , and in the late 1660s John Cole became a magistrate and commissioner for the area under the auspices of the Connecticut government . Eventually , following many years of dispute and tension , Rhode Island was given control over the Narragansett lands , and in 1682 John Cole was made a conservator of the peace under the Rhode Island government . By 1707 John had died , and Susanna and her son William were given administration of his estate during that year . Susanna had died by 14 December 1713 when her son , William , " took receipts from heirs for their full proportion of estate of deceased father and mother ... " 
 = = Family and Legacy = = 
 Susanna and John Cole had 11 children : Susanna , Samuel , Mary , John , Ann , a second John , Hannah , William , Francis , Elizabeth , and Elisha ; at least 9 of them grew to maturity . Their oldest daughter , Susanna , married Thomas Eldred , but the fate of their oldest son , Samuel is not known . Mary lived into her 60s , never marrying , and John , Jr. died as a youngster . Ann married Henry Bull , the son of <unk> Bull , and grandson of Rhode Island colonial governor Henry Bull . A second John grew to maturity , Hannah married Thomas Place , and William married Ann Pinder . Francis grew to maturity , Elizabeth married Robert Potter , and Elisha married Elizabeth Dexter and was for many years a Deputy or Assistant in the Rhode Island colony . Among her well known descendants are two aspirants to the United States Presidency : Stephen Arnold Douglas , who lost to Abraham Lincoln in the 1860 election , and Willard Mitt Romney , who lost to incumbent Barack Obama in 2012 . Her grandson , John Cole , the son of Elisha Cole , was a chief justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court . 
 There have been numerous books and articles written about Susanna Cole 's famous mother , Anne Hutchinson , most of which mention Susanna . One book has been written about Cole , Trouble 's Daughter by Katherine Kirkpatrick , which presents a fictionalized account about her life with the Native Americans who captured her , but also presents some of the limited historical information that is available about her . 
 A bronze statue in front of the Massachusetts State House in Boston , dedicated in 1922 , displays an assumed likeness of Cole as a youngster , and her mother , Anne Hutchinson . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 Some of Susanna 's ancestry on her father 's side was published by John D. Champlin in 1913 , and he published much of her ancestry on her mother 's side the following year . 
 = Battleship = 
 A battleship is a large armored warship with a main battery consisting of heavy caliber guns . During the late 19th and early 20th centuries the battleship was the most powerful type of warship , and a fleet of battleships was vital for any nation that desired to maintain command of the sea . 
 The word battleship was coined around 1794 and is a contraction of the phrase line @-@ of @-@ battle ship , the dominant wooden warship during the Age of Sail . The term came into formal use in the late 1880s to describe a type of ironclad warship , now referred to by historians as pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . In 1906 , the commissioning of HMS Dreadnought heralded a revolution in battleship design . Subsequent battleship designs , influenced by HMS Dreadnought , were referred to as " dreadnoughts " . 
 Battleships were a symbol of naval dominance and national might , and for decades the battleship was a major factor in both diplomacy and military strategy . The global arms race in battleship construction began in Europe , following the 1890 publication of Alfred Thayer Mahan 's The Influence of Sea Power upon History , 1660 – 1783 . This arms race culminated at the decisive Battle of Tsushima in 1905 ; the outcome of which significantly influenced the design of HMS Dreadnought . The launch of Dreadnought in 1906 commenced a new naval arms race . Three major fleet action between steel battleships took place . The decisive battles of the Yellow Sea ( 1904 ) and Tsushima ( 1905 ) during the Russo @-@ Japanese War , and the Battle of Jutland ( 1916 ) during the First World War . Jutland was the largest naval battle and the only full @-@ scale clash of battleships in the war , and it was the last major battle fought primarily by battleships in world history . 
 The Naval Treaties of the 1920s and 1930s limited the number of battleships , though technical innovation in battleship design continued . Both the Allies and the Axis powers deployed battleships during World War II . However they were of lesser importance , especially after the Japanese aircraft carrier fleet sank the main American battleship fleet at Pearl Harbor in 1941 . 
 The value of the battleship has been questioned , even during the period of their prominence . In spite of the immense resources spent on battleships , there were few pitched battleship clashes . Even with their enormous firepower and protection , battleships were increasingly vulnerable to much smaller , cheaper weapons : initially the torpedo and the naval mine , and later aircraft and the guided missile . The growing range of naval engagements led to the aircraft carrier replacing the battleship as the leading capital ship during World War II , with the last battleship to be launched being HMS Vanguard in 1944 . Battleships were retained by the United States Navy into the Cold War for fire support purposes before being stricken from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in the 2000s . 
 = = Ships of the line = = 
 A ship of the line was a large , unarmored wooden sailing ship which mounted a battery of up to 120 smoothbore guns and carronades . The ship of the line developed gradually over centuries and , apart from growing in size , it changed little between the adoption of line of battle tactics in the early 17th century and the end of the sailing battleship 's heyday in the 1830s . From 1794 , the alternative term ' line of battle ship ' was contracted ( informally at first ) to ' battle ship ' or ' battleship ' . 
 The sheer number of guns fired broadside meant a sail battleship could wreck any wooden enemy , holing her hull , knocking down masts , wrecking her rigging , and killing her crew . However , the effective range of the guns was as little as a few hundred yards , so the battle tactics of sailing ships depended in part on the wind . 
 The first major change to the ship of the line concept was the introduction of steam power as an auxiliary propulsion system . Steam power was gradually introduced to the navy in the first half of the 19th century , initially for small craft and later for frigates . The French Navy introduced steam to the line of battle with the 90 @-@ gun Napoléon in 1850 — the first true steam battleship . Napoléon was armed as a conventional ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , but her steam engines could give her a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , regardless of the wind condition . This was a potentially decisive advantage in a naval engagement . The introduction of steam accelerated the growth in size of battleships . France and the United Kingdom were the only countries to develop fleets of wooden steam screw battleships , although several other navies operated small numbers of screw battleships , including Russia ( 9 ) , Turkey ( 3 ) , Sweden ( 2 ) , Naples ( 1 ) , Denmark ( 1 ) and Austria ( 1 ) . 
 = = Ironclads = = 
 The adoption of steam power was only one of a number of technological advances which revolutionized warship design in the 19th century . The ship of the line was overtaken by the ironclad : powered by steam , protected by metal armor , and armed with guns firing high @-@ explosive shells . 
 = = = Explosive shells = = = 
 Guns that fired explosive or incendiary shells were a major threat to wooden ships , and these weapons quickly became widespread after the introduction of 8 inch shell guns as part of the standard armament of French and American line @-@ of @-@ battle ships in 1841 . In the Crimean War , six line @-@ of @-@ battle ships and two frigates of the Russian Black Sea Fleet destroyed seven Turkish frigates and three corvettes with explosive shells at the Battle of Sinop in 1853 . Later in the war , French ironclad floating batteries used similar weapons against the defenses at the Battle of Kinburn . 
 Nevertheless , wooden @-@ hulled ships stood up comparatively well to shells , as shown in the 1866 Battle of Lissa , where the modern Austrian steam two @-@ decker SMS Kaiser ranged across a confused battlefield , rammed an Italian ironclad and took 80 hits from Italian ironclads , many of which were shells , but including at least one 300 pound shot at point blank range . Despite losing her bowsprit and her foremast , and being set on fire , she was ready for action again the very next day . 
 = = = Iron armor and construction = = = 
 The development of high @-@ explosive shells made the use of iron armor plate on warships necessary . In 1859 France launched Gloire , the first ocean @-@ going ironclad warship . She had the profile of a ship of the line , cut to one deck due to weight considerations . Although made of wood and reliant on sail for most journeys , Gloire was fitted with a propeller , and her wooden hull was protected by a layer of thick iron armor . Gloire prompted further innovation from the Royal Navy , anxious to prevent France from gaining a technological lead . 
 The superior armored frigate Warrior followed Gloire by only 14 months , and both nations embarked on a program of building new ironclads and converting existing screw ships of the line to armored frigates . Within two years , Italy , Austria , Spain and Russia had all ordered ironclad warships , and by the time of the famous clash of the USS Monitor and the CSS Virginia at the Battle of Hampton Roads at least eight navies possessed ironclad ships . 
 Navies experimented with the positioning of guns , in turrets ( like the USS Monitor ) , central @-@ batteries or barbettes , or with the ram as the principal weapon . As steam technology developed , masts were gradually removed from battleship designs . By the mid @-@ 1870s steel was used as a construction material alongside iron and wood . The French Navy 's Redoutable , laid down in 1873 and launched in 1876 , was a central battery and barbette warship which became the first battleship in the world to use steel as the principal building material . 
 = = Pre @-@ dreadnought battleship = = 
 The term " battleship " was officially adopted by the Royal Navy in the re @-@ classification of 1892 . By the 1890s , there was an increasing similarity between battleship designs , and the type that later became known as the ' pre @-@ dreadnought battleship ' emerged . These were heavily armored ships , mounting a mixed battery of guns in turrets , and without sails . The typical first @-@ class battleship of the pre @-@ dreadnought era displaced 15 @,@ 000 to 17 @,@ 000 tons , had a speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ) , and an armament of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns in two turrets fore and aft with a mixed @-@ caliber secondary battery amidships around the superstructure . An early design with superficial similarity to the pre @-@ dreadnought is the British Devastation class of 1871 . 
 The slow @-@ firing 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) main guns were the principal weapons for battleship @-@ to @-@ battleship combat . The intermediate and secondary batteries had two roles . Against major ships , it was thought a ' hail of fire ' from quick @-@ firing secondary weapons could distract enemy gun crews by inflicting damage to the superstructure , and they would be more effective against smaller ships such as cruisers . Smaller guns ( 12 @-@ pounders and smaller ) were reserved for protecting the battleship against the threat of torpedo attack from destroyers and torpedo boats . 
 The beginning of the pre @-@ dreadnought era coincided with Britain reasserting her naval dominance . For many years previously , Britain had taken naval supremacy for granted . Expensive naval projects were criticised by political leaders of all inclinations . However , in 1888 a war scare with France and the build @-@ up of the Russian navy gave added impetus to naval construction , and the British Naval Defence Act of 1889 laid down a new fleet including eight new battleships . The principle that Britain 's navy should be more powerful than the two next most powerful fleets combined was established . This policy was designed to deter France and Russia from building more battleships , but both nations nevertheless expanded their fleets with more and better pre @-@ dreadnoughts in the 1890s . 
 In the last years of the 19th century and the first years of the 20th , the escalation in the building of battleships became an arms race between Britain and Germany . The German naval laws of 1890 and 1898 authorised a fleet of 38 battleships , a vital threat to the balance of naval power . Britain answered with further shipbuilding , but by the end of the pre @-@ dreadnought era , British supremacy at sea had markedly weakened . In 1883 , the United Kingdom had 38 battleships , twice as many as France and almost as many as the rest of the world put together . By 1897 , Britain 's lead was far smaller due to competition from France , Germany , and Russia , as well as the development of pre @-@ dreadnought fleets in Italy , the United States and Japan . Turkey , Spain , Sweden , Denmark , Norway , the Netherlands , Chile and Brazil all had second @-@ rate fleets led by armored cruisers , coastal defence ships or monitors . 
 Pre @-@ dreadnoughts continued the technical innovations of the ironclad . Turrets , armor plate , and steam engines were all improved over the years , and torpedo tubes were introduced . A small number of designs , including the American Kearsarge and Virginia classes , experimented with all or part of the 8 @-@ inch intermediate battery superimposed over the 12 @-@ inch primary . Results were poor : recoil factors and blast effects resulted in the 8 @-@ inch battery being completely unusable , and the inability to train the primary and intermediate armaments on different targets led to significant tactical limitations . Even though such innovative designs saved weight ( a key reason for their inception ) , they proved too cumbersome in practice . 
 = = Dreadnought era = = 
 In 1906 , the British Royal Navy launched the revolutionary HMS Dreadnought . Created as a result of pressure from Admiral Sir John ( " Jackie " ) Fisher , HMS Dreadnought made existing battleships obsolete . Combining an " all @-@ big @-@ gun " armament of ten 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns with unprecedented speed ( from steam turbine engines ) and protection , she prompted navies worldwide to re @-@ evaluate their battleship building programs . While the Japanese had laid down an all @-@ big @-@ gun battleship , Satsuma , in 1904 and the concept of an all @-@ big @-@ gun ship had been in circulation for several years , it had yet to be validated in combat . Dreadnought sparked a new arms race , principally between Britain and Germany but reflected worldwide , as the new class of warships became a crucial element of national power . 
 Technical development continued rapidly through the dreadnought era , with steep changes in armament , armor and propulsion . Ten years after Dreadnought 's commissioning , much more powerful ships , the super @-@ dreadnoughts , were being built . 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 In the first years of the 20th century , several navies worldwide experimented with the idea of a new type of battleship with a uniform armament of very heavy guns . 
 Admiral Vittorio Cuniberti , the Italian Navy 's chief naval architect , articulated the concept of an all @-@ big @-@ gun battleship in 1903 . When the Regia Marina did not pursue his ideas , Cuniberti wrote an article in Jane 's proposing an " ideal " future British battleship , a large armored warship of 17 @,@ 000 tons , armed solely with a single calibre main battery ( twelve 12 @-@ inch { 305 mm } guns ) , carrying 300 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) belt armor , and capable of 24 knots ( 44 km / h ) . 
 The Russo @-@ Japanese War provided operational experience to validate the ' all @-@ big @-@ gun ' concept . At the Yellow Sea and Tsushima , pre @-@ dreadnoughts exchanged volleys at ranges of 7 @,@ 600 – 12 @,@ 000 yd ( 7 to 11 km ) , beyond the range of the secondary batteries . It is often held that these engagements demonstrated the importance of the 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) gun over its smaller counterparts , though some historians take the view that secondary batteries were just as important as the larger weapons . 
 In Japan , the two battleships of the 1903 @-@ 4 Programme were the first to be laid down as all @-@ big @-@ gun designs , with eight 12 @-@ inch guns . However , the design had armor which was considered too thin , demanding a substantial redesign . The financial pressures of the Russo @-@ Japanese War and the short supply of 12 @-@ inch guns which had to be imported from Britain meant these ships were completed with a mixed 10- and 12 @-@ inch armament . The 1903 @-@ 4 design also retained traditional triple @-@ expansion steam engines . 
 As early as 1904 , Jackie Fisher had been convinced of the need for fast , powerful ships with an all @-@ big @-@ gun armament . If Tsushima influenced his thinking , it was to persuade him of the need to standardise on 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns . Fisher 's concerns were submarines and destroyers equipped with torpedoes , then threatening to outrange battleship guns , making speed imperative for capital ships . Fisher 's preferred option was his brainchild , the battlecruiser : lightly armored but heavily armed with eight 12 @-@ inch guns and propelled to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ) by steam turbines . 
 It was to prove this revolutionary technology that Dreadnought was designed in January 1905 , laid down in October 1905 and sped to completion by 1906 . She carried ten 12 @-@ inch guns , had an 11 @-@ inch armor belt , and was the first large ship powered by turbines . She mounted her guns in five turrets ; three on the centerline ( one forward , two aft ) and two on the wings , giving her at her launch twice the broadside of any other warship . She retained a number of 12 @-@ pound ( 3 @-@ inch , 76 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns for use against destroyers and torpedo @-@ boats . Her armor was heavy enough for her to go head @-@ to @-@ head with any other ship in a gun battle , and conceivably win . 
 Dreadnought was to have been followed by three Invincible @-@ class battlecruisers , their construction delayed to allow lessons from Dreadnought to be used in their design . While Fisher may have intended Dreadnought to be the last Royal Navy battleship , the design was so successful he found little support for his plan to switch to a battlecruiser navy . Although there were some problems with the ship ( the wing turrets had limited arcs of fire and strained the hull when firing a full broadside , and the top of the thickest armor belt lay below the waterline at full load ) , the Royal Navy promptly commissioned another six ships to a similar design in the Bellerophon and St. Vincent classes . 
 An American design , South Carolina , authorized in 1905 and laid down in December 1906 , was another of the first dreadnoughts , but she and her sister , Michigan , were not launched until 1908 . Both used triple @-@ expansion engines and had a superior layout of the main battery , dispensing with Dreadnought 's wing turrets . They thus retained the same broadside , despite having two fewer guns . 
 = = = Arms race = = = 
 In 1897 , before the revolution in design brought about by HMS Dreadnought , the Royal Navy had 62 battleships in commission or building , a lead of 26 over France and 50 over Germany . In 1906 , the Royal Navy owned the field with Dreadnought . The new class of ship prompted an arms race with major strategic consequences . Major naval powers raced to build their own dreadnoughts . Possession of modern battleships was not only vital to naval power , but also , as with nuclear weapons today , represented a nation 's standing in the world . Germany , France , Japan , Italy , Austria , and the United States all began dreadnought programmes ; while Ottoman Turkey , Argentina , Russia , Brazil , and Chile commissioned dreadnoughts to be built in British and American yards . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The battleship , particularly the dreadnought , was the dominant naval weapon of the World War I era . There were few serious challenges at that time . The most significant naval battles of World War I , such as Jutland ( May 31 , 1916 – June 1 , 1916 ) , were fought by battleships and their battlecruiser cousins . 
 By virtue of geography , the Royal Navy was able to use her imposing battleship and battlecruiser fleet to impose a strict and successful naval blockade of Germany and kept Germany 's smaller battleship fleet bottled up in the North Sea : only narrow channels led to the Atlantic Ocean and these were guarded by British forces . Both sides were aware that , because of the greater number of British dreadnoughts , a full fleet engagement would be likely to result in a British victory . The German strategy was therefore to try to provoke an engagement on their terms : either to induce a part of the Grand Fleet to enter battle alone , or to fight a pitched battle near the German coastline , where friendly minefields , torpedo @-@ boats and submarines could be used to even the odds . Germany 's submarines were able to break out and raid commerce , but even though they sank many merchant ships , they could not successfully blockade Great Britain – in contrast to Britain 's successful battleship blockade of Germany , which was a major cause of Germany 's economic collapse in 1918 . The Royal Navy on the other hand , successfully adopted convoy tactics to combat Germany 's submarine blockade and eventually defeated it . 
 The first two years of war saw the Royal Navy 's battleships and battlecruisers regularly " sweep " the North Sea making sure that no German ships could get in or out . Only a few German surface ships that were already at sea , such as the famous light cruiser SMS Emden , were able to raid commerce . Even some of those that did manage to get out were hunted down by battlecruisers , as in the Battle of the Falklands , December 7 , 1914 . The results of sweeping actions in the North Sea were battles such as the Heligoland Bight and Dogger Bank and German raids on the English coast , all of which were attempts by the Germans to lure out portions of the Grand Fleet in an attempt to defeat the Royal Navy in detail . On May 31 , 1916 , a further attempt to draw British ships into battle on German terms resulted in a clash of the battlefleets in the Battle of Jutland . The German fleet withdrew to port after two short encounters with the British fleet . Less than two months later , the Germans once again attempted to draw portions of the Grand Fleet into battle . The resulting Action of 19 August 1916 proved inconclusive . This reinforced German determination not to engage in a fleet to fleet battle . 
 In the other naval theatres there were no decisive pitched battles . In the Black Sea , engagement between Russian and Turkish battleships was restricted to skirmishes . In the Baltic Sea , action was largely limited to the raiding of convoys , and the laying of defensive minefields ; the only significant clash of battleship squadrons there was the Battle of Moon Sound at which one Russian pre @-@ dreadnought was lost . The Adriatic was in a sense the mirror of the North Sea : the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought fleet remained bottled up by the British and French blockade . And in the Mediterranean , the most important use of battleships was in support of the amphibious assault on Gallipoli . 
 In September 1914 , the threat posed to surface ships by German U @-@ boats was confirmed by successful attacks on British cruisers , including the sinking of three British armored cruisers by the German submarine SM U @-@ 9 in less than an hour . The British Super @-@ dreadnought HMS Audacious soon followed suit as she struck a mine laid by a German U @-@ boat in October 1914 and sank . The threat that German U @-@ boats posed to British dreadnoughts was enough to cause the Royal Navy to change their strategy and tactics in the North Sea to reduce the risk of U @-@ boat attack . Further near @-@ misses from submarine attacks on battleships and casualties amongst cruisers led to growing concern in the Royal Navy about the vulnerability of battleships . 
 As the war wore on however , it turned out that whilst submarines did prove to be an incredibly dangerous threat to older pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , as shown by examples such as the sinking of the Mesûdiye , which was caught in the Dardanelles by a British submarine and the HMS Majestic and HMS Triumph were torpedoed by U @-@ 21 as well as HMS Formidable , HMS Cornwallis , HMS Britannia etc . , the threat posed to dreadnought battleships proved to have been largely a false alarm . HMS Audacious turned out to have been the only dreadnought sunk by a submarine in WWI . While battleships were never intended for anti @-@ submarine warfare , there was one instance of a submarine being sunk by a dreadnought battleship . HMS Dreadnought rammed and sank the German U @-@ 29 on March 18 , 1915 off Moray Firth . 
 Whilst the escape of the German fleet from the superior British firepower at Jutland was effected by the German cruisers and destroyers successfully turning away the British battleships , the German attempt to rely on U @-@ boat attacks on the British fleet failed . 
 Torpedo boats did have some successes against battleships in World War I , as demonstrated by the sinking of the British pre @-@ dreadnought HMS Goliath by <unk> @-@ i <unk> during the Dardanelles Campaign and the destruction of the Austro @-@ Hungarian dreadnought SMS Szent István by Italian motor torpedo boats in June 1918 . In large fleet actions , however , destroyers and torpedo boats were usually unable to get close enough to the battleships to damage them . The only battleship sunk in a fleet action by either torpedo boats or destroyers was the obsolescent German pre @-@ dreadnought SMS Pommern . She was sunk by destroyers during the night phase of the Battle of Jutland . 
 The German High Seas Fleet , for their part , were determined not to engage the British without the assistance of submarines ; and since the submarines were needed more for raiding commercial traffic , the fleet stayed in port for much of the war . 
 = = Inter @-@ war period = = 
 For many years , Germany simply had no battleships . The Armistice with Germany required that most of the High Seas Fleet be disarmed and interned in a neutral port ; largely because no neutral port could be found , the ships remained in British custody in Scapa Flow , Scotland . The Treaty of Versailles specified that the ships should be handed over to the British . Instead , most of them were scuttled by their German crews on June 21 , 1919 just before the signature of the peace treaty . The treaty also limited the German Navy , and prevented Germany from building or possessing any capital ships . 
 The inter @-@ war period saw the battleship subjected to strict international limitations to prevent a costly arms race breaking out . 
 While the victors were not limited by the Treaty of Versailles , many of the major naval powers were crippled after the war . Faced with the prospect of a naval arms race against the United Kingdom and Japan , which would in turn have led to a possible Pacific war , the United States was keen to conclude the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 . This treaty limited the number and size of battleships that each major nation could possess , and required Britain to accept parity with the U.S. and to abandon the British alliance with Japan . The Washington treaty was followed by a series of other naval treaties , including the First Geneva Naval Conference ( 1927 ) , the First London Naval Treaty ( 1930 ) , the Second Geneva Naval Conference ( 1932 ) , and finally the Second London Naval Treaty ( 1936 ) , which all set limits on major warships . These treaties became effectively obsolete on September 1 , 1939 at the beginning of World War II , but the ship classifications that had been agreed upon still apply . The treaty limitations meant that fewer new battleships were launched in 1919 – 39 than in 1905 – 14 . The treaties also inhibited development by putting maximum limits on the weights of ships . Designs like the projected British N3 @-@ class battleship , the first American South Dakota class , and the Japanese Kii class — all of which continued the trend to larger ships with bigger guns and thicker armor — never got off the drawing board . Those designs which were commissioned during this period were referred to as treaty battleships . 
 = = = Rise of air power = = = 
 As early as 1914 , the British Admiral Percy Scott predicted that battleships would soon be made irrelevant by aircraft . By the end of World War I , aircraft had successfully adopted the torpedo as a weapon . In 1921 the Italian general and air theorist Giulio Douhet completed a hugely influential treatise on strategic bombing titled The Command of the Air , which foresaw the dominance of air power over naval units . 
 In the 1920s , General Billy Mitchell of the United States Army Air Corps , believing that air forces had rendered navies around the world obsolete , testified in front of Congress that " 1 @,@ 000 bombardment airplanes can be built and operated for about the price of one battleship " and that a squadron of these bombers could sink a battleship , making for more efficient use of government funds . This infuriated the U.S. Navy , but Mitchell was nevertheless allowed to conduct a careful series of bombing tests alongside Navy and Marine bombers . In 1921 , he bombed and sank numerous ships , including the " unsinkable " German World War I battleship SMS Ostfriesland and the American pre @-@ dreadnought Alabama . 
 Although Mitchell had required " war @-@ time conditions " , the ships sunk were obsolete , stationary , defenseless and had no damage control . The sinking of Ostfriesland was accomplished by violating an agreement that would have allowed Navy engineers to examine the effects of various munitions : Mitchell 's airmen disregarded the rules , and sank the ship within minutes in a coordinated attack . The stunt made headlines , and Mitchell declared , " No surface vessels can exist wherever air forces acting from land bases are able to attack them . " While far from conclusive , Mitchell 's test was significant because it put proponents of the battleship against naval aviation on the back foot . Rear Admiral William A. Moffett used public relations against Mitchell to make headway toward expansion of the U.S. Navy 's nascent aircraft carrier program . 
 = = = Rearmament = = = 
 The Royal Navy , United States Navy , and Imperial Japanese Navy extensively upgraded and modernized their World War I – era battleships during the 1930s . Among the new features were an increased tower height and stability for the optical rangefinder equipment ( for gunnery control ) , more armor ( especially around turrets ) to protect against plunging fire and aerial bombing , and additional anti @-@ aircraft weapons . Some British ships received a large block superstructure nicknamed the " Queen Anne 's castle " , such as in the Queen Elizabeth and Warspite , which would be used in the new conning towers of the King George V @-@ class fast battleships . External bulges were added to improve both buoyancy to counteract weight increase and provide underwater protection against mines and torpedoes . The Japanese rebuilt all of their battleships , plus their battlecruisers , with distinctive " pagoda " structures , though the Hiei received a more modern bridge tower that would influence the new Yamato @-@ class battleships . <unk> were fitted , including steel tube arrays to improve both underwater and vertical protection along the waterline . The U.S. experimented with cage masts and later tripod masts , though after Pearl Harbor some of the most severely damaged ships such as West Virginia and California were rebuilt to a similar appearance to their Iowa @-@ class contemporaries ( called tower masts ) . Radar , which was effective beyond visual contact and was effective in complete darkness or adverse weather conditions , was introduced to supplement optical fire control . 
 Even when war threatened again in the late 1930s , battleship construction did not regain the level of importance which it had held in the years before World War I. The " building holiday " imposed by the naval treaties meant that the building capacity of dockyards worldwide was relatively reduced , and the strategic position had changed . 
 In Germany , the ambitious Plan Z for naval rearmament was abandoned in favor of a strategy of submarine warfare supplemented by the use of battlecruisers and Bismarck @-@ class battleships as commerce raiders . In Britain , the most pressing need was for air defenses and convoy escorts to safeguard the civilian population from bombing or starvation , and re @-@ armament construction plans consisted of five ships of the King George V class . It was in the Mediterranean that navies remained most committed to battleship warfare . France intended to build six battleships of the Dunkerque and Richelieu classes , and the Italians four Littorio @-@ class ships . Neither navy built significant aircraft carriers . The U.S. preferred to spend limited funds on aircraft carriers until the South Dakota class . Japan , also prioritising aircraft carriers , nevertheless began work on three mammoth Yamato @-@ class ships ( although the third , Shinano , was later completed as a carrier ) and a planned fourth was cancelled . 
 At the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War , the Spanish navy consisted of only two small dreadnought battleships , España and Jaime I. España ( originally named Alfonso XIII ) , by then in reserve at the northwestern naval base of El Ferrol , fell into Nationalist hands in July 1936 . The crew aboard Jaime I remained loyal to the Republic , killed their officers , who apparently supported Franco 's attempted coup , and joined the Republican Navy . Thus each side had one battleship ; however , the Republican Navy generally lacked experienced officers . The Spanish battleships mainly restricted themselves to mutual blockades , convoy escort duties , and shore bombardment , rarely in direct fighting against other surface units . In April 1937 , España ran into a mine laid by friendly forces , and sank with little loss of life . In May 1937 , Jaime I was damaged by Nationalist air attacks and a grounding incident . The ship was forced to go back to port to be repaired . There she was again hit by several aerial bombs . It was then decided to tow the battleship to a more secure port , but during the transport she suffered an internal explosion that caused 300 deaths and her total loss . Several Italian and German capital ships participated in the non @-@ intervention blockade . On May 29 , 1937 , two Republican aircraft managed to bomb the German pocket battleship Deutschland outside Ibiza , causing severe damage and loss of life . Admiral Scheer retaliated two days later by bombarding Almería , causing much destruction , and the resulting Deutschland incident meant the end of German and Italian support for non @-@ intervention . 
 = = World War II = = 
 The German battleship Schleswig @-@ Holstein — an obsolete pre @-@ dreadnought — fired the first shots of World War II with the bombardment of the Polish garrison at Westerplatte ; and the final surrender of the Japanese Empire took place aboard a United States Navy battleship , USS Missouri . Between those two events , it had become clear that aircraft carriers were the new principal ships of the fleet and that battleships now performed a secondary role . 
 Battleships played a part in major engagements in Atlantic , Pacific and Mediterranean theaters ; in the Atlantic , the Germans used their battleships as independent commerce raiders . However , clashes between battleships were of little strategic importance . The Battle of the Atlantic was fought between destroyers and submarines , and most of the decisive fleet clashes of the Pacific war were determined by aircraft carriers . 
 In the first year of the war , armored warships defied predictions that aircraft would dominate naval warfare . Scharnhorst and Gneisenau surprised and sank the aircraft carrier Glorious off western Norway in June 1940 . This engagement marked the last time a fleet carrier was sunk by surface gunnery . In the attack on Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir , British battleships opened fire on the French battleships in the harbor near Oran in Algeria with their heavy guns , and later pursued fleeing French ships with planes from aircraft carriers . 
 The subsequent years of the war saw many demonstrations of the maturity of the aircraft carrier as a strategic naval weapon and its potential against battleships . The British air attack on the Italian naval base at Taranto sank one Italian battleship and damaged two more . The same Swordfish torpedo bombers played a crucial role in sinking the German commerce @-@ raider Bismarck . 
 On December 7 , 1941 , the Japanese launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor . Within a short time five of eight U.S. battleships were sunk or sinking , with the rest damaged . The American aircraft carriers were out to sea , however , and evaded detection . They took up the fight , and eventually turned the tide of the war in the Pacific . The sinking of the British battleship Prince of Wales and her escort , the battlecruiser Repulse , demonstrated the vulnerability of a battleship to air attack while at sea without sufficient air cover , settling the argument begun by Mitchell in 1921 . Both warships were under way and en route to attack the Japanese amphibious force that had invaded Malaya when they were caught by Japanese land @-@ based bombers and torpedo bombers on December 10 , 1941 . 
 At many of the early crucial battles of the Pacific , for instance Coral Sea and Midway , battleships were either absent or overshadowed as carriers launched wave after wave of planes into the attack at a range of hundreds of miles . In later battles in the Pacific , battleships primarily performed shore bombardment in support of amphibious landings and provided anti @-@ aircraft defense as escort for the carriers . Even the largest battleships ever constructed , Japan 's Yamato class , which carried a main battery of nine 18 @-@ inch ( 46 cm ) guns and were designed as a principal strategic weapon , were never given a chance to show their potential in the decisive battleship action that figured in Japanese pre @-@ war planning . 
 The last battleship confrontation in history was the Battle of Surigao Strait , on October 25 , 1944 , in which a numerically and technically superior American battleship group destroyed a lesser Japanese battleship group by gunfire after it had already been devastated by destroyer torpedo attacks . All but one of the American battleships in this confrontation had previously been sunk by the attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequently raised and repaired . When Mississippi fired the last salvo of this battle , the last salvo fired by a battleship against another heavy ship , she was " firing a funeral salute to a finished era of naval warfare . " In April 1945 , during the battle for Okinawa , the world 's most powerful battleship , the Yamato , was sent out against a massive U.S. force on a suicide mission and sunk by overwhelming pressure from carrier aircraft with nearly all hands lost . 
 = = Cold War = = 
 After World War II , several navies retained their existing battleships , but they were no longer strategically dominant military assets . Indeed , it soon became apparent that they were no longer worth the considerable cost of construction and maintenance and only one new battleship was commissioned after the war , HMS Vanguard . During the war it had been demonstrated that battleship @-@ on @-@ battleship engagements like Leyte Gulf or the sinking of HMS Hood were the exception and not the rule , and with the growing role of aircraft engagement ranges were becoming longer and longer , making heavy gun armament irrelevant . The armor of a battleship was equally irrelevant in the face of a nuclear attack as tactical missiles with a range of 100 kilometres ( 60 mi ) or more could be mounted on the Soviet Kildin @-@ class destroyer and Whiskey @-@ class submarines . By the end of the 1950s , smaller vessel classes such as destroyers , which formerly offered no noteworthy opposition to battleships , now were capable of eliminating battleships from outside the range of the ship 's heavy guns . 
 The remaining battleships met a variety of ends . USS Arkansas and Nagato were sunk during the testing of nuclear weapons in Operation Crossroads in 1946 . Both battleships proved resistant to nuclear air burst but vulnerable to underwater nuclear explosions . The Italian battleship Giulio Cesare was taken by the Soviets as reparations and renamed Novorossiysk ; she was sunk by a leftover German mine in the Black Sea on October 29 , 1955 . The two Andrea Doria @-@ class ships were scrapped in 1956 . The French Lorraine was scrapped in 1954 , Richelieu in 1968 , and Jean Bart in 1970 . 
 The United Kingdom 's four surviving King George V @-@ class ships were scrapped in 1957 , and Vanguard followed in 1960 . All other surviving British battleships had been sold or broken up by 1949 . The Soviet Union 's Marat was scrapped in 1953 , Parizhskaya Kommuna in 1957 and Oktyabrskaya Revolutsiya ( back under her original name , Gangut , since 1942 ) in 1956 @-@ 7 . Brazil 's Minas Geraes was scrapped in Genoa in 1953 , and her sister ship São Paulo sank during a storm in the Atlantic en route to the breakers in Italy in 1951 . 
 Argentina kept its two Rivadavia @-@ class ships until 1956 and Chile kept Almirante Latorre ( formerly HMS Canada ) until 1959 . The Turkish battlecruiser Yavûz ( formerly SMS Goeben , launched in 1911 ) was scrapped in 1976 after an offer to sell her back to Germany was refused . Sweden had several small coastal @-@ defense battleships , one of which , HSwMS Gustav V , survived until 1970 . The Soviets scrapped four large incomplete cruisers in the late 1950s , whilst plans to build a number of new Stalingrad @-@ class battlecruisers were abandoned following the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953 . The three old German battleships Schleswig @-@ Holstein , Schlesien , and Hessen all met similar ends . Hessen was taken over by the Soviet Union and renamed Tsel . She was scrapped in 1960 . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was renamed Borodino , and was used as a target ship until 1960 . Schlesien , too , was used as a target ship . She was broken up between 1952 and 1957 . 
 The Iowa @-@ class battleships gained a new lease of life in the U.S. Navy as fire support ships . Radar and computer @-@ controlled gunfire could be aimed with pinpoint accuracy to target . The U.S. recommissioned all four Iowa @-@ class battleships for the Korean War and the New Jersey for the Vietnam War . These were primarily used for shore bombardment , New Jersey firing nearly 6 @,@ 000 rounds of 16 inch shells and over 14 @,@ 000 rounds of 5 inch projectiles during her tour on the gunline , seven times more rounds against shore targets in Vietnam than she had fired in the Second World War . 
 As part of Navy Secretary John F. Lehman 's effort to build a 600 @-@ ship Navy in the 1980s , and in response to the commissioning of Kirov by the Soviet Union , the United States recommissioned all four Iowa @-@ class battleships . On several occasions , battleships were support ships in carrier battle groups , or led their own battleship battle group . These were modernized to carry Tomahawk missiles , with New Jersey seeing action bombarding Lebanon in 1983 and 1984 , while Missouri and Wisconsin fired their 16 inch ( 406 mm ) guns at land targets and launched missiles during Operation Desert Storm in 1991 . Wisconsin served as the TLAM strike commander for the Persian Gulf , directing the sequence of launches that marked the opening of Desert Storm , firing a total of 24 TLAMs during the first two days of the campaign . The primary threat to the battleships were Iraqi shore based surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles ; Missouri was targeted by two Iraqi Silkworm missiles , with one missing and another being intercepted by the British destroyer HMS Gloucester . 
 = = Modern times = = 
 All four Iowa ships were decommissioned in the early 1990s , making them the last battleships to see active service . USS Iowa and USS Wisconsin were maintained to a standard where they could be rapidly returned to service as fire support vessels , pending the development of a superior fire support vessel . These last two battleships were finally stricken from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in 2006 . The Military Balance and Russian Foreign Military Review states the U.S. Navy listed one battleship in the reserve ( Naval Inactive Fleet / Reserve 2nd Turn ) in 2010 . The Military Balance states the U.S. Navy listed no battleships in the reserve in 2014 . The U.S. Marine Corps believes that the current naval surface fire support gun and missile programs will not be able to provide adequate fire support for an amphibious assault or onshore operations . 
 With the decommissioning of the last Iowa @-@ class ships , no battleships remain in service or in reserve with any navy worldwide . A number are preserved as museum ships , either afloat or in drydock . The U.S. has eight battleships on display : Massachusetts , North Carolina , Alabama , Iowa , New Jersey , Missouri , Wisconsin and Texas . Missouri and New Jersey are museums at Pearl Harbor and Camden , New Jersey , respectively . Iowa is on display as an educational attraction at the Los Angeles Waterfront in San Pedro , California . Wisconsin now serves as a museum ship in Norfolk , Virginia . Massachusetts , which has the distinction of never having lost a man during service , is on display at the Battleship Cove naval museum in Fall River , Massachusetts . Texas , the first battleship turned into a museum , is on display at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site , near Houston . North Carolina is on display in Wilmington , North Carolina . Alabama is on display in Mobile , Alabama . The wreck of the Arizona , sunk during the Pearl Harbor attack in 1941 , is designated a historical landmark and national gravesite . 
 The only other 20th @-@ century battleship on display is the Japanese pre @-@ dreadnought Mikasa . A replica of the Chinese ironclad Dingyuan was built by the Weihai Port Bureau in 2003 and is on display in Weihai , China . 
 = = Strategy and doctrine = = 
 = = = Doctrine = = = 
 Battleships were the embodiment of sea power . For Alfred Thayer Mahan and his followers , a strong navy was vital to the success of a nation , and control of the seas was vital for the projection of force on land and overseas . Mahan 's theory , proposed in The Influence of Sea Power Upon History , 1660 – 1783 of 1890 , dictated the role of the battleship was to sweep the enemy from the seas . While the work of escorting , blockading , and raiding might be done by cruisers or smaller vessels , the presence of the battleship was a potential threat to any convoy escorted by any vessels other than capital ships . This concept of " potential threat " can be further generalized to the mere existence ( as opposed to presence ) of a powerful fleet tying the opposing fleet down . This concept came to be known as a " fleet in being " – an idle yet mighty fleet forcing others to spend time , resource and effort to actively guard against it . 
 Mahan went on to say victory could only be achieved by engagements between battleships , which came to be known as the decisive battle doctrine in some navies , while targeting merchant ships ( commerce raiding or guerre de course , as posited by the Jeune École ) could never succeed . 
 Mahan was highly influential in naval and political circles throughout the age of the battleship , calling for a large fleet of the most powerful battleships possible . Mahan 's work developed in the late 1880s , and by the end of the 1890s it had a massive international impact , in the end adopted by many major navies ( notably the British , American , German , and Japanese ) . The strength of <unk> opinion was important in the development of the battleships arms races , and equally important in the agreement of the Powers to limit battleship numbers in the interwar era . 
 The " fleet in being " suggested battleships could simply by their existence tie down superior enemy resources . This in turn was believed to be able to tip the balance of a conflict even without a battle . This suggested even for inferior naval powers a battleship fleet could have important strategic impact . 
 = = = Tactics = = = 
 While the role of battleships in both World Wars reflected <unk> doctrine , the details of battleship deployment were more complex . Unlike the ship of the line , the battleships of the late 19th and early 20th centuries had significant vulnerability to torpedoes and mines , which could be used by relatively small and inexpensive craft . The Jeune École doctrine of the 1870s and 1880s recommended placing torpedo boats alongside battleships ; these would hide behind the larger ships until gun @-@ smoke obscured visibility enough for them to dart out and fire their torpedoes . While this tactic was vitiated by the development of smokeless propellant , the threat from more capable torpedo craft ( later including submarines ) remained . By the 1890s , the Royal Navy had developed the first destroyers , which were initially designed to intercept and drive off any attacking torpedo boats . During the First World War and subsequently , battleships were rarely deployed without a protective screen of destroyers . 
 Battleship doctrine emphasised the concentration of the battlegroup . In order for this concentrated force to be able to bring its power to bear on a reluctant opponent ( or to avoid an encounter with a stronger enemy fleet ) , battlefleets needed some means of locating enemy ships beyond horizon range . This was provided by scouting forces ; at various stages battlecruisers , cruisers , destroyers , airships , submarines and aircraft were all used . ( With the development of radio , direction finding and traffic analysis would come into play , as well , so even shore stations , broadly speaking , joined the battlegroup . ) So for most of their history , battleships operated surrounded by squadrons of destroyers and cruisers . The North Sea campaign of the First World War illustrates how , despite this support , the threat of mine and torpedo attack , and the failure to integrate or appreciate the capabilities of new techniques , seriously inhibited the operations of the Royal Navy Grand Fleet , the greatest battleship fleet of its time . 
 = = = Strategic and diplomatic impact = = = 
 The presence of battleships had a great psychological and diplomatic impact . Similar to possessing nuclear weapons today , the ownership of battleships served to enhance a nation 's force projection . 
 Even during the Cold War , the psychological impact of a battleship was significant . In 1946 , USS Missouri was dispatched to deliver the remains of the ambassador from Turkey , and her presence in Turkish and Greek waters staved off a possible Soviet thrust into the Balkan region . In September 1983 , when Druze militia in Lebanon 's <unk> Mountains fired upon U.S. Marine peacekeepers , the arrival of USS New Jersey stopped the firing . Gunfire from New Jersey later killed militia leaders . 
 = = = Value for money = = = 
 Battleships were the largest and most complex , and hence the most expensive warships of their time ; as a result , the value of investment in battleships has always been contested . As the French politician Etienne Lamy wrote in 1879 , " The construction of battleships is so costly , their effectiveness so uncertain and of such short duration , that the enterprise of creating an armored fleet seems to leave fruitless the perseverance of a people " . The Jeune École school of thought of the 1870s and 1880s sought alternatives to the crippling expense and debatable utility of a conventional battlefleet . It proposed what would nowadays be termed a sea denial strategy , based on fast , long @-@ ranged cruisers for commerce raiding and torpedo boat flotillas to attack enemy ships attempting to blockade French ports . The ideas of the Jeune Ecole were ahead of their time ; it was not until the 20th century that efficient mines , torpedoes , submarines , and aircraft were available that allowed similar ideas to be effectively implemented . The determination of powers such as Germany to build battlefleets with which to confront much stronger rivals has been criticised by historians , who emphasise the futility of investment in a battlefleet that has no chance of matching its opponent in an actual battle . 
 = Oryzomys = 
 Oryzomys is a genus of semiaquatic rodents in the tribe Oryzomyini living in southern North America and far northern South America . It includes eight species , two of which — the marsh rice rat ( O. palustris ) of the United States and O. couesi of Mexico and Central America — are widespread ; the six others have more restricted distributions . The species have had eventful taxonomic histories , and most species were at one time included in the marsh rice rat ; additional species may be recognized in the future . The name Oryzomys was established in 1857 by Spencer Fullerton Baird for the marsh rice rat and was soon applied to over a hundred species of American rodents . Subsequently , the genus gradually became more narrowly defined until its current contents were established in 2006 , when ten new genera were established for species previously placed in Oryzomys . 
 Species of Oryzomys are medium @-@ sized rats with long , coarse fur . The upperparts are gray to reddish and the underparts white to buff . The animals have broad feet with reduced or absent ungual tufts of hair around the claws and , in at least some species , with webbing between the toes . The rostrum ( front part of the skull ) is broad and the braincase is high . Both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi have 56 chromosomes , lack a gall bladder , and have a complex penis ( as is characteristic of the Sigmodontinae ) with some traits that are rare among oryzomyines ; these characteristics are unknown in the other species of this genus . 
 The habitat includes various kinds of wetlands , such as lakes , marshes , and rivers . Oryzomys species swim well , are active during the night , and eat both plant and animal food . They build woven nests of vegetation . After a gestation period of 21 to 28 days , about four young are born . Species of Oryzomys are infected by numerous parasites and carry at least three hantaviruses , one of which ( Bayou virus ) also infects humans . Two , maybe three , species have gone extinct over the last two centuries and at least one other is endangered , but the widespread marsh rice rat and O. couesi are not threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Oryzomys is one of about thirty genera within the tribe Oryzomyini , a diverse group of well over a hundred species , many of which were formerly also included in Oryzomys . Oryzomyini is one of several tribes within the subfamily Sigmodontinae of the family Cricetidae , which includes hundreds of other species of mainly small rodents , distributed mainly in the Americas and Eurasia . 
 Within Oryzomyini , a 2006 phylogenetic analysis by Marcelo Weksler which used both morphological and DNA sequence data found some evidence that Oryzomys is most closely related to a group including Holochilus , Lundomys , and Pseudoryzomys . Although analyses based on morphological and combined data supported this relationship , sequences of the Rbp3 gene alone instead placed Oryzomys among a group that included Nectomys , Sigmodontomys , and a few other genera . In all analyses , Oryzomys appeared within clade D of Oryzomyini . The relationship between Oryzomys and the Holochilus group was supported by five synapomorphies ( shared derived characters ) — absence or reduction of both the hypothenar and interdigital pads ; reduction of ungual tufts of hairs surrounding the claws ; having the back margin of the zygomatic plate of the skull at the same level as the front of the first upper molar ; and the anterocone ( front cusp ) of the first upper molar divided by an anteromedian fossette . The first three are adaptations to the semiaquatic lifestyle that Oryzomys and the members of the Holochilus group share , and may thus be examples of convergent evolution . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The name Oryzomys was introduced in 1857 by Spencer Fullerton Baird for the marsh rice rat ( now Oryzomys palustris ) of the eastern United States , which had been first described twenty years earlier by Richard Harlan . The name combines the Greek <unk> " rice " and mys " mouse " and refers to the feeding habits of the marsh rice rat . Baird placed Oryzomys as a subgenus of the now @-@ defunct genus Hesperomys and included only the marsh rice rat in it , a classification which was followed by Elliott Coues in 1874 and 1877 . In 1890 , Oryzomys was raised to generic rank , and in subsequent years numerous additional species were ascribed to it , many of which were soon moved to separate genera . In the 1898 Catalogus <unk> , Édouard Louis Trouessart listed 67 species of Oryzomys , including some that are now placed in Calomys , Necromys , Thomasomys , and other genera unrelated to Oryzomys . Some of the new genera proposed were soon subsumed in Oryzomys again , and in The Families and Genera of Living Rodents ( 1941 ) , John Ellerman listed <unk> , Oligoryzomys , Melanomys , Nesoryzomys , and Oecomys as synonyms of Oryzomys and included about 127 species in it . In 1948 , Philip Hershkovitz suggested that other oryzomyines like Nectomys and Megalomys could as well be included in Oryzomys , and Clayton Ray followed this suggestion in 1962 . 
 Hershkovitz and Ray 's classification was never widely followed , and from 1976 on authors started to reinstate some of the other groups lumped in Oryzomys as separate genera . The genus was reduced to 43 species ( out of 110 in Oryzomyini ) in the third edition ( 2005 ) of Mammal Species of the World , but it was still not a natural , monophyletic group ; rather , it mostly united those oryzomyines that lacked the conspicuous specializations of other genera . In 2006 , Marcelo Weksler 's comprehensive phylogenetic analysis produced further evidence that the genus was polyphyletic , as species of Oryzomys were dispersed all over the oryzomyine tree . He proposed that eleven new genera should be created to accommodate those species that were not closely related to the type species of Oryzomys , the marsh rice rat ; he considered other options that would require fewer new genera , but argued that that would result in less meaningful genus @-@ level groups in Oryzomyini . Later in the same year , Weksler , Percequillo , and Voss created ten new genera — Aegialomys , Cerradomys , Eremoryzomys , Euryoryzomys , Hylaeamys , Mindomys , Nephelomys , <unk> , Sooretamys , and Transandinomys — for species formerly placed in Oryzomys and placed six more species related to " Oryzomys " alfaroi in Handleyomys pending the description of more new genera for them . They left only five species in Oryzomys , which was now finally a natural , monophyletic group . Because of subsequent taxonomic work , the number of species has since increased to at least eight . 
 Some problems remain : ? Oryzomys pliocaenicus , a Miocene fossil from Kansas , is of uncertain identity but may belong in Bensonomys , and fossils from the Miocene of Oregon and Pliocene of New Mexico have also been ascribed to Oryzomys , but probably incorrectly . A possible Oryzomys has been recorded from the Irvingtonian ( Pleistocene ) of Saskatchewan . 
 = = = Species = = = 
 The current concept of Oryzomys derives from the palustris @-@ mexicanus group recognized within a much larger genus Oryzomys by Merriam ( 1901 ) and the palustris group proposed by Goldman ( 1918 ) . Merriam recognized 21 species within his group , but Goldman consolidated them into eight — the marsh rice rat in the United States , O. couesi in far southern Texas , Mexico , and Central America , and six others with small distributions . In 1960 , Raymond Hall united O. couesi and the marsh rice rat into a single species , Oryzomys palustris , and thereafter , other localized forms were also included in O. palustris . Hershkovitz described another species in the group , O. gorgasi from Colombia , in 1970 and the next year he noted that O. dimidiatus , previously classified as a Nectomys , was similar to O. palustris . After 1979 , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi were again regarded as separate as a result of further work in Texas , where their ranges meet . While reviewing O. gorgasi in 2001 , J. Sánchez H. and colleagues redefined and characterized the O. palustris group and listed O. couesi , O. dimidiatus , O. gorgasi , and the marsh rice rat as its members ; Guy Musser and Michael Carleton in the 2005 third edition of Mammal Species of the World additionally listed O. nelsoni from María Madre Island in western Mexico . 
 In 2006 , Weksler and colleagues followed the 2001 definition by Sánchez and others for the restricted genus Oryzomys , but added O. antillarum from Jamaica as a species . Carleton and Joaquin Arroyo @-@ Cabrales reviewed Oryzomys from western Mexico in 2009 and in this context provided an extended diagnosis of Oryzomys . They recognized eight species : the six previously mentioned plus O. albiventer and O. peninsulae . Also in 2009 , Robert Voss and Weksler identified the subfossil Oryzomys curasoae from Curaçao as an island population of O. gorgasi . The next year , Delton Hanson and colleagues published a study using DNA sequence data from the cytochrome b , interphotoreceptor retinoid @-@ binding protein , and alcohol dehydrogenase 1 genes to assess relationships within Oryzomys . They recommended that the marsh rice rat be split into two species and that O. couesi be split into four species on the basis of the observed sequence divergence and other data . 
 Merriam divided his palustris @-@ mexicanus group in two " series " according to the color of the underparts ( white or fulvous ) . Goldman divided his palustris group in two " sections " — a couesi section with O. couesi and six related species , and a palustris section with O. palustris only . He noted that the latter differed from the former in the generally darker , more brownish , longer fur , and larger sphenopalatine vacuities ( openings in the mesopterygoid fossa , the gap behind the end of the palate ) . As Weksler 's 2006 analysis included only O. couesi and the marsh rice rat among species of Oryzomys in the strict sense , he could not test those groups . Carleton and Arroyo @-@ Cabrales concurred with Goldman 's division , listing additional characters , and noted that the palustris group may be more semiaquatically adapted than the members of the couesi group are . In the latter , the fur is usually reddish @-@ brown , as opposed to grayish @-@ brown in the palustris group . Members of the couesi group have smaller sphenopalatine vacuities and a smaller sphenopalatine foramen , a foramen ( opening ) in the side of the skull above the molars , and a more highly developed anterolabial cingulum on the third lower molar ( a crest at the front of the tooth ) . The hypothenar pad of the hindfoot , located on the sole far from the fingers , is present in the couesi group , but absent in the palustris group . Interdigital webbing may be more highly developed in the palustris group . Using morphological data , Voss and Weksler found a closer relationship between O. couesi and O. gorgasi to the exclusion of O. palustris , but with low confidence . The DNA sequence data of Hanson and colleagues supported a deep separation between the palustris and couesi groups , but a Costa Rican sample ( assigned to O. couesi ) was about as distant from the two groups as they were from each other . 
 The genus currently includes the following species : 
 = = Description = = 
 Oryzomys contains medium @-@ sized , semiaquatically specialized oryzomyine rodents . They have long , coarse fur that is grayish to reddish on the upperparts and white to buff on the underparts . The marsh rice rat superficially resembles the introduced species black rat and brown rat , but has larger differences in color between the upper- and underparts . The vibrissae ( whiskers ) are short and the ears are small and well @-@ haired . The tail is usually as long as or longer than the head and body and is sparsely haired , but the hairs on the lower side are longer than those above . Females have eight mammae , as in most oryzomyines . The hindfeet are broad and have the first and fifth digits notably shorter than the middle three . The upper surface is hairy , but the underside is naked and covered with small irregularities ( squamae ) . The pads are generally poorly developed , as are the ungual tufts . Interdigital webbing may be present , but its development is variable within the genus . 
 The karyotype has been recorded in various populations of the marsh rice rat and O. couesi and is apparently stable within the genus at 56 chromosomes , with the fundamental number of chromosomal arms ranging from 56 to 60 ( 2n 
 = 56 , FN = 
 56 – 60 ) . In both species , the stomach has the characteristic pattern of sigmodontines ( unilocular @-@ hemiglandular ) : it is not split in two chambers by an incisura angularis and the front part ( antrum ) is covered by a glandular epithelium . Furthermore , the gall bladder is absent , a synapomorphy of Oryzomyini . 
 Oryzomys species have a large skull with a short rostrum and high braincase . The interorbital region , located between the eyes , is narrowest to the front and is flanked by well @-@ developed beads at its margins . The zygomatic plate is broad and has a well @-@ developed zygomatic notch at its front . The zygomatic arch is robust and contains a small but distinct jugal bone . The interparietal bone , part of the roof of the braincase , is narrow and short ; its narrowness is a synapomorphy for O. couesi plus the marsh rice rat according to Weksler 's analysis . The incisive foramina are long , with their back margin at the front of the first molars or further back . The palate is also long , extending beyond the back margin of the maxillary bone , and is perforated near the third molars by well @-@ developed posterolateral palatal pits . There is no alisphenoid strut , an extension of the alisphenoid bone that in some other oryzomyines separates two foramina in the skull . The auditory bullae are large . The condition of the arteries in the head is highly derived . In the mandible ( lower jaw ) , the coronoid process , a process at the back , is well developed and the capsular process , a raising of the mandibular bone housing the root of the lower incisor , is conspicuous . 
 As usual in oryzomyines , the molars are <unk> ( have the mesolophs and mesolophids , accessory crests , well developed ) and bunodont , with the cusps higher than the connecting crests . The cusps on the upper molars are arranged in two longitudinal series , not three as in the black and brown rats . The front cusps of the first upper and lower molar ( anterocone and anteroconid , respectively ) are broad and not divided completely by an anteromedian flexus or <unk> . Behind the anterocone , the anteroloph ( a smaller crest ) is complete and separated from the anterocone . On both the second and third lower molars , the anterolophid ( a crest on the inner front corner ) is present , a putative synapomorphy of the genus . The first molars have additional small roots in addition to the main ones , so that the upper first molar has four and the lower has three or four roots . 
 As is characteristic of Sigmodontinae , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi have a complex penis , with the baculum ( penis bone ) displaying large protuberances at the sides . The outer surface of the penis is mostly covered by small spines , but there is a broad band of nonspinous tissue . The papilla ( nipple @-@ like projection ) on the dorsal ( upper ) side of the penis is covered with small spines , a character these two species share only with Oligoryzomys among oryzomyines examined . On the urethral process , located in the crater at the end of the penis , a fleshy process ( the subapical lobule ) is present ; it is absent in all other oryzomyines with studied penes except Holochilus brasiliensis . Both traits are recovered as synapomorphies of O. couesi plus the marsh rice rat in Weksler 's analysis . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and behavior = = 
 The range of Oryzomys extends from New Jersey in the eastern United States through Mexico and Central America south to northwestern Colombia and east to northwestern Venezuela and Curaçao . Species of Oryzomys usually live in wet habitats such as marshes , streams , and mangroves , but both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi are also occasionally encountered in drier habitats . They occur or occurred on many continental @-@ shelf islands and one oceanic island , Jamaica ; their <unk> at colonizing islands may be caused by their close association with water and frequent occurrence in coastal wetlands . The oldest fossils date to the Rancholabrean of the United States , about 300 @,@ 000 years ago ; although there have been some earlier North American records , those are not in fact referable to Oryzomys or even Oryzomyini . Oryzomyines likely evolved in South America east of the Andes ; the presence of Oryzomys in Central America and other trans @-@ Andean regions is thought to be the result of one of several independent invasions of this region by oryzomyines . Alternatively , Oryzomys may have evolved from the Pliocene North American Jacobsomys . O. antillarum may have reached Jamaica during the last glacial period while sea levels were low . 
 Behavior is known mainly from the marsh rice rat and O. couesi , with some scattered data from the other species . Oryzomys are semiaquatic , spending much time in the water , and otherwise mainly live on the ground ; both the marsh rice rat and O. couesi are known to be excellent swimmers and will flee into the water when disturbed . Both are also active during the night and build nests of interwoven vegetation , which may be suspended above the water . Breeding may occur throughout the year in both species , but is known to be seasonally variable in the marsh rice rat . In both , gestation takes about 21 to 28 days and litter size is usually one to seven , averaging three to five . Young marsh rice rats and O. couesi become reproductively active when about 50 days old . 
 The marsh rice rat , O. couesi , and O. gorgasi are known to be omnivores , eating both plant and animal material . They eat both seeds and green plant parts and consume a variety of animals , including insects , crustaceans , and many others . The barn owl ( Tyto alba ) is a major predator on the marsh rice rat and remains of O. antillarum , O. couesi , and O. gorgasi have been found in owl pellet deposits . Several other animals are known to prey on Oryzomys . A variety of parasites are known from O. couesi and the marsh rice rat and two parasitic nematodes have been found in O. gorgasi . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Two species of Oryzomys , O. antillarum and O. nelsoni , have gone extinct since the 19th century , and a third , O. peninsulae , is unlikely to be still extant . Their extinction may have been caused by habitat destruction and by introduced species such as the small Asian mongoose and the brown and black rat . These same causes may threaten O. gorgasi , which the IUCN Red List assesses as " Endangered " . O. albiventer has been affected by human alteration of its habitat , but likely still survives . In contrast , the widespread species , the marsh rice rat and O. couesi , are common and of no conservation concern — indeed , both have been considered a pest — but some populations are threatened . Like these two species , O. dimidiatus is assessed as " Least Concern " by the Red List . 
 The marsh rice rat is the natural reservoir of the Bayou virus , the second most common cause of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in the United States . Two other hantaviruses , Catacamas virus and Playa de Oro virus , occur in O. couesi in Honduras and western Mexico , respectively , but are not known to infect humans . 
 = Philosophie Zoologique = 
 Philosophie Zoologique ( " Zoological Philosophy : Exposition with Regard to the Natural History of Animals " ) is an 1809 book by the French naturalist Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck , in which he outlines his pre @-@ Darwinian theory of evolution now known as Lamarckism . 
 In the book , Lamarck named two supposed laws that would enable animal species to acquire characteristics under the influence of their environment . The first law stated that use or disuse would cause body structures to grow or shrink over the generations . The second law asserted that such changes would be inherited . Those conditions together imply that species continuously change by adaptation to their environments , forming a branching series of evolutionary paths . 
 Lamarck was largely ignored by the major French zoologists , Buffon and Cuvier , but he attracted much more interest abroad . The book was read carefully , but its thesis rejected , by nineteenth century scientists including the geologist Charles Lyell and the comparative anatomist Thomas Henry Huxley . Darwin acknowledged Lamarck as an important zoologist , and his theory a forerunner of Darwin 's evolution by natural selection . 
 = = Context = = 
 Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck ( 1744 – 1829 ) was a member of the French Academy of Sciences and a professor of botany at the Jardin des Plantes and then became the first professor of zoology at the new Muséum national d 'Histoire naturelle . He became known for his work on the taxonomy of the invertebrates , especially of molluscs . However , he is mainly remembered for the theory that now bears his name , Lamarckism , and in particular his view that the environment ( called by Lamarck the conditions of life ) gave rise to permanent , inherited , evolutionary changes in animals . He described his theory in his 1802 Recherches sur l 'organisation des corps vivants , and in his 1809 Philosophie Zoologique , and later in his Histoire naturelle des animaux sans <unk> , ( 1815 – 1822 ) . 
 = = Book = = 
 In the Philosophie Zoologique , Lamarck proposed that species could acquire new characteristics from influences in their environment , in two rules that he named as laws . His first law stated that use or disuse of a body 's structures would cause them to grow or shrink in the course of several generations . His second law held that any changes made in this way would be inherited . Together , Lamarck 's laws imply the steady adaptation of animals to their environments . 
 He gave names to a number of vestigial structures in the book , among them " Olivier 's <unk> , which lives underground like the mole , and is apparently exposed to daylight even less than the mole , has altogether lost the use of sight : so that it shows nothing more than vestiges of this organ . " 
 Lamarck described speciation as follows : 
 " as new modifications will necessarily continue to operate , however slowly , not only will there continually be found new species , new genera , and new orders , but each species will vary in some part of its structure and form ... individuals which from special causes are transported into very different situations from those where the others occur , and then constantly submitted to other influences - the former , I say , assume new forms , and then they constitute a new species . " 
 He argued that gaps between differing kinds of animals resulted from the extinction of intermediate forms : 
 Species form " a branching series , irregularly graduated which has no discontinuity in its parts , or which , at least , if its true that there are some because of lost species , has not always had such . It follows that the species that terminate each branch of the general series are related , at least on one side , to the other neighboring species that shade into them " . 
 Lamarck proposed the transmutation of species ( " <unk> " ) , but did not believe that all living things shared a common ancestor . Rather he believed that simple forms of life were created continuously by spontaneous generation . He also believed that an innate life force , which he sometimes described as a nervous fluid , drove species to become more complex over time , advancing up a linear ladder of complexity similar to the mediaeval great chain of being . 
 = = Contents = = 
 Page numbers are given in parentheses . 
 <unk> 1 
 Avertissement ( I – XXV ) 
 Discours <unk> ( 1 ) 
 Première Partie 
 ( <unk> sur l 'Histoire naturelle des Animaux , leurs caractères , leurs rapports , leur organisation , leur distribution , leur classification et leur espèces ) 
 I. Des Parties de l 'art dans les productions de la Nature ( 17 ) 
 II . Importance des Rapports ( 39 ) 
 III . De l <unk> parmi les Corps vivans , et de l <unk> que nous <unk> <unk> à ce mot ( 53 ) 
 IV . <unk> sur les Animaux ( 82 ) 
 V. Sur l 'Etat <unk> de la Distribution et de la Classification des Animaux ( 102 ) 
 VI . <unk> et simplification de l 'organisation d 'une <unk> a l 'autre de la <unk> <unk> ( 130 ) 
 VII . De l <unk> des <unk> sur les actions et les habitudes des Animaux , et de celle des actions et des habitudes de ces Corps vivans , comme causes qui <unk> leur organisation et leurs parties ( 218 ) 
 VIII . De l 'Ordre naturel des Animaux et de la disposition qu 'il faut <unk> a leur distribution generale pour la <unk> <unk> a l 'ordre meme de la nature ( 269 ) 
 Seconde Partie 
 ( Considerations sur les Causes physiques de la Vie , les conditions qu 'elle <unk> pour <unk> , la force <unk> de ses <unk> , les facultes qu 'elle donne aux corps qui la <unk> , et les <unk> de son existence dans les corps ) ( 359 ) 
 Introduction ( 359 ) 
 I. Comparison des Corps <unk> avec les Corps vivans , <unk> d 'un Parallele entre les Animaux et les <unk> ( 377 ) 
 II . De la Vie , de ce qui la <unk> , et des Conditions <unk> a son existence dans un corps ( 400 ) 
 <unk> 2 [ 1830 edition ] 
 III . De la cause <unk> des <unk> <unk> ( 1 ) 
 IV . De l <unk> et de l <unk> ( 20 ) 
 V. Du <unk> <unk> , <unk> comme la gangue dans <unk> toute organisation a <unk> <unk> ( 46 ) 
 VI . Des generations <unk> ou <unk> ( 61 ) 
 VII . Des <unk> <unk> de la vie dans un corps ( 91 ) 
 VIII . Des facultes communes a tous les corps vivans ( 113 ) 
 IX . Des facultes <unk> a <unk> corps vivans ( 127 ) 
 <unk> Partie 
 Introduction ( 169 ) 
 I. Du système <unk> ( 180 ) 
 II . Du <unk> <unk> ( 235 ) 
 III . De la <unk> physique et du <unk> des sensations ( 252 ) 
 IV . Du sentiment intérieur , des <unk> qu 'il est susceptible d <unk> , et de la puissance ( 276 ) 
 V. De la force <unk> des actions des animaux ( 302 ) 
 VI . De la <unk> ( 330 ) 
 VII . De l <unk> , de son origine , et de celle des idees ( 346 ) 
 VIII . Des <unk> actes de l <unk> ( 388 ) 
 De l <unk> ( 411 ) 
 De la raison et de sa <unk> avec l <unk> ( 441 ) 
 Additions relatives aux <unk> VII et VIII de la premiere partie ( 451 ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lamarck 's evolutionary theory made little immediate impact on his fellow zoologists , or on the public at the time . The historian of science Richard Burkhardt argues that this was because Lamarck was convinced his views would be poorly received , and made little effort to present his theory persuasively . 
 In the French @-@ speaking world in his lifetime , Lamarck and his theories were rejected by the major zoologists of the day , Buffon and Cuvier . However , he made more of an impact outside France and after his death , where leading scientists such as Ernst Haeckel , Charles Lyell and Darwin himself recognised him as a major zoologist , with theories that presaged Darwinian evolution . 
 In 1830 – 1833 , Charles Lyell , in his Principles of Geology , carefully summarised Lamarck 's theory ( in about 6 pages , with cross @-@ references to the Philosophie Zoologique ) and then roundly criticised it . Lyell begins by noting that Lamarck gives no examples at all of the development of any entirely new function ( " the substitution of some entirely new sense , faculty , or organ " ) but only proves that the " dimensions and strength " of some parts can be increased or decreased . Lyell says that with this " disregard to the strict rules of induction " Lamarck " resorts to fictions " . Lyell goes on , assuming for the sake of argument that Lamarck was right about the creation of new organs , that Lamarck 's theory would mean that instead of the nature and form of an animal giving rise to its behaviour , its behaviour would determine 
 the form of its body , the number and condition of its organs , in short , the faculties which it enjoys . Thus otters , beavers , waterfowl , turtles , and frogs , were not made web @-@ footed in order that they might swim ; but their wants having attracted them to the water in search of prey , they stretched out the toes of their feet to strike the water and move rapidly along its surface . By the repeated stretching of their toes , the skin which united them at the base , acquired a habit of extension , until , in the course of time , the broad membranes which now connect their extremities were formed . 
 Lyell similarly criticises the way Lamarck supposed the antelope and gazelle acquired " light agile forms " able to run swiftly ; or the " <unk> " ( giraffe ) became " gifted with a long flexible neck " . 
 Lamarckism was popularised in the English @-@ speaking world by the speculative Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , published anonymously by Robert Chambers in 1844 . 
 In 1887 Thomas Henry Huxley , the comparative anatomist known as " Darwin 's Bulldog " for his energetic advocacy of Darwinian evolution , wrote that 
 With respect to the Philosophie Zoologique , it is no reproach to Lamarck to say that the discussion of the Species question in that work , whatever might be said for it in 1809 , was miserably below the level of the knowledge of half a century later . In that interval of time the elucidation of the structure of the lower animals and plants had given rise to wholly new conceptions of their relations ; histology and embryology , in the modern sense , had been created ; physiology had been reconstituted ; the facts of distribution , geological and geographical , had been prodigiously multiplied and reduced to order . To any biologist whose studies had carried him beyond mere species @-@ mongering in 1850 , one @-@ half of Lamarck 's arguments were obsolete and the other half erroneous , or defective , in virtue of omitting to deal with the various classes of evidence which had been brought to light since his time . Moreover his one suggestion as to the cause of the gradual modification of species — effort excited by change of conditions — was , on the face of it , inapplicable to the whole vegetable world . I do not think that any impartial judge who reads the Philosophie Zoologique now , and who afterwards takes up Lyell 's trenchant and effectual criticism ( published as far back as 1830 ) , will be disposed to allot to Lamarck a much higher place in the establishment of biological evolution than that which Bacon assigns to himself in relation to physical science generally , — buccinator tantum . 
 = = Versions = = 
 Lamarck : Contents 
 1809 , vol . I : ( Oxford ) 
 1830 , vol . I : ( Harvard ) 
 1830 , vol . I : ( Michigan ) 
 1830 , vol . II : ( Michigan ) 
 = Spanish general election , 1933 = 
 Elections to Spain ’ s legislature , the Cortes Generales , were held on 19 November 1933 for all 473 seats in the unicameral Cortes of the Second Spanish Republic . Since the previous elections of 1931 , a new constitution had been ratified , and the franchise extended to more than six million women . The governing Republican @-@ Socialist coalition had fallen apart , with the Radical Republican Party beginning to support a newly united political right . 
 The right formed an electoral coalition , as was favoured by the new electoral system enacted earlier in the year . The Spanish Socialist Workers ' Party ( Partido Socialista Obrero Español , or PSOE ) won only 59 seats . The newly formed Catholic conservative Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right ( Confederación Española de Derechas Autónomas or CEDA ) gained 115 seats and the Radicals 102 . The right capitalised on disenchantment with the government among Catholics and other conservatives . CEDA campaigned on reversing the reforms that had been made under the Republic , and on freeing political prisoners . Anarchists favoured abstention from the vote . These factors helped the election to result in significant victory for the right over the left . 
 = = Background = = 
 Elections in June 1931 had returned a large majority of Republicans and Socialists to the Cortes , with the PSOE gaining 116 seats and the Radical Republican Party 94 . The state 's financial position was poor . Wealth redistribution supported by the new government attracted criticism from the wealthy . The government also attempted to tackle poverty in rural areas by instituting an eight @-@ hour day and giving security of tenure to farm workers , drawing criticism from landlords . 
 An effective parliamentary opposition was led by three groups . The first included Catholic movements such as the Catholic Association of <unk> ( Asociación Católica de <unk> ) . The second group consisted of organisations that had supported the monarchy , such as the Renovación Española and Carlists , who wanted to see the new republic overthrown in a violent uprising . The third group were fascist organisations . Members of the National Confederation of Labour ( Confederación Nacional del Trabajo , or CNT ) trade union movement willing to cooperate with the Republic were forced out of the CNT , which continued to oppose the government . Opposition parties had the support of the church . A new constitution was ratified on 9 December 1931 . It included many controversial articles , some of which were aimed at curbing the influence of the Catholic Church . The constitution was reformist , liberal , and democratic in nature , and was welcomed by the Republican @-@ Socialist coalition , but opposed by landowners , industrialists , the organised church , and army officers . In opposing educational and religious reforms , Spanish Catholics were forced to oppose the government . The press criticised government actions as barbaric , unjust , and corrupt . 
 In October 1931 Prime Minister Niceto Alcalá Zamora resigned and was succeeded by Manuel Azaña . Radical Party leader Alejandro Lerroux had wanted that job himself and became alienated , switching his party 's support to the opposition . This left Azaña dependent on the Socialists , but both the Socialists , who favoured reform , and the conservative right , who were against reform , were critical of the government . Socialists continued to support Azaña , but the left became fractured , driving the Socialists to the left , while the right united into CEDA , which tacitly embraced fascism . 
 On 1 October 1933 , Socialist left leader Largo <unk> spoke out against Lerroux 's Republicans , suggesting the reform programme of the government , and thus the basis for the Republic itself , was under threat . He warned that if the government itself were the threat , the Socialists would have to withdraw support for it . The following day another Socialist leader , Indalecio Prieto , declared that the Socialists would no longer participate in government , which precipitated its collapse . Alcalá Zamora , who became President in 1931 , now requested that Republican Martínez Barrio form a new government . Socialist opposition on both constitutional and ideological grounds meant the PSOE withheld its support for the Barrio government , which was formed on 8 October , but called for fresh elections to be held on 19 November 1933 . 
 = = Election = = 
 In common with the 1936 election , Spain was divided into multi @-@ member constituencies ; for example , Madrid had 17 representatives . However , each member of the electorate could vote for somewhat less than that – in Madrid 's case , 13 . This favoured coalitions , as in Madrid when the Socialists won 13 members and the right , with only 5 @,@ 000 votes less , secured only the remaining 4 . This system had been passed in 1933 . There would be two rounds of voting ; 40 % of the vote was necessary in the first round to win . In the event that no list of candidates reached 40 % , then a second round would be composed of those achieving at least 8 % in the first round . It was the first election in Spain where women had the vote , following the new constitution . This incorporated a new 6 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 electors . 
 The governing leftist parties went to the polls divided . The political right , on the other hand , formed the Union of the Right ( Spanish : Unión de Derechas ) which incorporated CEDA , agrarian parties and traditionalists . It stood on a three @-@ point programme : religious and social reforms would be examined and rolled back where needed ; agrarian reform would be reversed ; political prisoners would be released . These parties threw vast resources into their campaign , with ten million leaflets , 300 @,@ 000 posters , radio and cinema addresses and aerial propaganda drops . They called upon Catholics to defend order and religion against the bourgeois Republic . The Radical Party campaigned primarily against the Socialists , since they would need the help of the political right if in government . They used mass @-@ appeal slogans such as ' Republic , order , freedom , social justice , amnesty ' and were confident following successes at municipal level in 1933 . Anarchists such as the CNT @-@ FAI called for <unk> : politicians were ' vultures ' , who must be overthrown by revolution . If the right were to win the election , there would be an uprising , they promised . Thus , anarchists should avoid voting for the left , since overthrowing the government would be preferable . Abstention was supported by Benito <unk> and Miguel <unk> . 
 Elections were held on 19 November 1933 . A second round of voting was held in sixteen constituencies on 3 December . 
 = = Outcome = = 
 It resulted in an overwhelming victory for the right , with the CEDA and the Radicals together winning 219 seats . Although the political situation was complicated , parties of the right won around 3 @,@ 365 @,@ 700 votes , parties of the centre 2 @,@ 051 @,@ 500 votes , and parties of the left 3 @,@ 118 @,@ 000 according to one estimate . Turnout was around 8 @,@ 535 @,@ 200 votes , 67 @.@ 5 % of the electorate . The right had spent far more on their election campaign than the Socialists , who campaigned alone . Women , in their first election , mainly voted for the centre @-@ right . The Communist Party , with perhaps 3 @,@ 000 members , were at this point not significant . Nationalist Basques won twelve of seventeen Basque seats , a considerable victory . Keeping their promise , the CNT proclaimed a revolution . There were many reasons the Socialists and Republicans lost out ; the female vote alone cannot explain the shift . Among them was the disunity of the political left compared to the right , in a system that favoured broad coalitions . The Radicals and their supporters had also shifted to the right . <unk> hindered Socialist and Republican candidates . Overall , the political system in Spain had changed dramatically since the last election . 
 The Renovación Española and the Spanish Nationalist Party ( Spanish : Partido Nacionalista Español , <unk> ) formed the National Block ( Spanish : <unk> Nacional ) , with a total of 14 deputies . Similarly , the Republican Left of Catalonia ( Catalan : Esquerra Republicana de Catalunya , ERC ) , the Socialist Union of Catalonia ( Unió Socialista de Catalunya , USC ) and the Union of <unk> ( Unió de <unk> , <unk> ) formed the Catalan Left ( Esquerra Catalana ) with 18 deputies . Five independents joined the Agrarians and one joined CEDA . The other seven , along with one member of Conservative Republican Party ( Spanish : Partido <unk> <unk> , PRC ) , formed a group of independents called the Independent Right ( Independiente de Derechas ) . The <unk> <unk> deputy joined the Catalan League ( <unk> Catalana ) , and the independent in favour of the Estella Statute joined the Basque Nationalist Party ( Partido Nacionalista Vasco ) . 5 members of the Agrarians and one of the PRC joined CEDA , although the Agrarians as a whole resisted pressure to join CEDA , and formed the Spanish Agrarian Party ( Partido Agrario Español ) . 
 President of the Republic , Niceto Alcalá Zamora entrusted the formation of a cabinet to Alejandro Lerroux , who was reliant on the support of CEDA . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Seats = = = 
 Party divisions at the start of the Cortes , after seats had been awarded between coalitions : 
 = = = After reorganisation = = = 
 This left the following divisions in the Cortes : 
 = New York State Route 812 = 
 New York State Route 812 ( NY 812 ) is a state highway in the North Country of New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 12 and NY 26 in the Lewis County village of Lowville . Its northern terminus is at the Canada – United States border in Ogdensburg , where it crosses the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge and connects to Highway 16 in Ontario . While most of NY 812 passes through rural areas of the North Country , the route also serves several villages and small communities . 
 The origins of NY 812 date back to the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , when the portion of modern NY 812 from Lowville to Croghan became part of NY 26A and the segment of modern NY 812 between De Kalb and Ogdensburg was designated as the northernmost portion of New York State Route 87 . NY 87 originally extended as far south as Harrisville ; however , it was truncated north to Edwards in the 1940s and farther north to De Kalb in the 1970s . 
 In June 1978 , all of NY 87 and the Lowville – Croghan leg of NY 26A were replaced with NY 812 , a new route that began in Lowville and passed through Croghan , Harrisville , Gouverneur , and De Kalb before ending near Ogdensburg . At the time , two sections of the route — from the Croghan village line to a point west of Harrisville and from Harrisville to Fowler — were maintained by the counties that they passed through , and a piece between NY 126 and the Croghan village line was maintained by the village itself . The state of New York assumed maintenance of the Croghan – Harrisville segment in 1980 and took over the Harrisville – Fowler section in 1982 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Lewis County = = = 
 NY 812 begins at an intersection with NY 12 and NY 26 in the center of village of Lowville , which is located in the town of the same name . NY 26 , concurrent with NY 12 south of this point , leaves NY 12 and follows NY 812 for several blocks along North State Street before NY 812 turns northeast onto Bostwick Street . Just before Bostwick ends at East State Street , NY 812 turns off and begins its progression northward through a largely rural area of the North Country . As it exits the village of Lowville ( but remains in the town of the same name ) , it begins to parallel the western bank of the Black River . The two entities remain close for roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) before NY 812 crosses over the river and enters New Bremen . 
 In the hamlet of New Bremen , NY 812 intersects County Route 33 ( CR 33 ) , a riverside roadway bypassing both Croghan and Beaver Falls along the east bank of the Black River , southwest of <unk> Airport . NY 812 continues onward , crossing the Black Creek as it enters Croghan , a village situated on the New Bremen – Croghan town line . At the center of the community , NY 812 meets the eastern terminus of NY 126 . 
 Outside of Croghan , NY 812 traverses the Beaver River just north of the village line . The route and the river continue northward along parallel routings for a brief distance before the two separate near the hamlet of High Falls . While the river curves east toward the hamlet , NY 812 presses northward through the rural hamlets of Indian River and Dutton Corners into the town of Diana , where NY 812 starts to parallel the west branch of the Oswegatchie River as both continue north through the town . At Tylers Corners , NY 812 intersects NY 3 and joins the route eastward into Harrisville , where the conjoined routes cross over the Oswegatchie . Northeast of Harrisville in extreme southwestern St. Lawrence County , NY 812 breaks from NY 3 and heads northwest through Pitcairn ( crossing over the Oswegatchie once more in the process ) . 
 = = = St. Lawrence County = = = 
 From Harrisville , NY 812 travels north through an area of Pitcairn and Fowler . This area contains numerous small lakes and rivers and is predominantly rural in nature . Within Fowler , the route serves the hamlet of Balmat ( located on the eastern edge of Sylvia Lake ) before intersecting NY 58 in the hamlet of Fowler . Here , NY 812 joins NY 58 northeast along the southern bank of the now @-@ unified Oswegatchie River to the village of Gouverneur , located in the town of the same name , where NY 812 leaves NY 58 but joins U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) at the heart of the community . 
 Outside of the village , US 11 and NY 812 head northeast , roughly paralleling the Oswegatchie once more into the De Kalb village of Richville . The routes quickly exit the village and separate shortly thereafter south of the hamlet of De Kalb , with the Oswegatchie leaving the path of US 11 and following NY 812 . NY 812 heads north , serving De Kalb and crossing over the Oswegatchie south of an intersection with CR 14 , a connector leading to Rensselaer Falls that was once NY 186 . Here , NY 812 begins to the northwest as it approaches the village of Heuvelton . 
 Within the village , located in the town of Oswegatchie , NY 812 , here known as State Street , intersects NY 184 just before traversing the Oswegatchie one final time . The name remains for three blocks before NY 812 departs the village . Farther north , NY 812 passes by the Ogdensburg International Airport before meeting NY 37 at an interchange just south of the Ogdensburg city limits . NY 812 joins NY 37 here , following the route through the southern reaches of the city . The conjoined routes intersect NY 68 before separating near the northeastern city limits . Past NY 37 , NY 812 continues onto the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge over the St. Lawrence River , where it becomes Highway 16 upon crossing the Canada – United States border into Ontario . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , what is now NY 812 between Lowville and Croghan became the southern leg of NY 26A , an alternate route of NY 26 between Lowville and Carthage . Farther north , the portion of modern NY 812 between De Kalb and Ogdensburg became part of NY 87 , a route extending from Harrisville to Ogdensburg via Edwards , Russell and De Kalb . From Harrisville to Fowler , NY 87 followed a parallel alignment to modern NY 812 along Hands Flats , Stone , and Pitcairn roads , and CR 24 . Between Fowler and De Kalb , NY 87 used what is now NY 58 , CR 24 , and CR 17 before following current NY 812 north to Ogdensburg . The portion of NY 87 between De Kalb Junction and De Kalb was concurrent with US 11 . Both US 11 and NY 87 were shifted south onto a new highway c . 1936 , at which time the former routing of US 11 between the new road and De Kalb became part of NY 87 . 
 NY 87 was gradually truncated northward over time . The first change to the route 's southern end came in the early 1940s when it was moved northeastward to the eastern terminus of its former overlap with NY 58 in Edwards . It was moved once more , this time to what was the west end of its overlap with US 11 in De Kalb , in the early 1970s . In 1975 , officials from New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) Region 7 proposed eliminating NY 87 in favor of NY 812 , a new route that would extend from Lowville to Ogdensburg via Croghan , Harrisville , Gouverneur , and De Kalb . The designation would also supplant NY 26A south of Croghan . The proposed route was part of a larger plan to connect the Delaware River at Deposit to the Ogdensburg – Prescott International Bridge over the Saint Lawrence River by way of as few numbered routes as possible . All of the suggested changes were implemented in June 1978 . 
 When NY 812 was first assigned , it was locally maintained from NY 126 in Croghan to NY 3 in Diana and from NY 3 in Pitcairn to NY 58 in Fowler . The section of the route between NY 126 and the Croghan village line was maintained by the village of Croghan ; however , the rest of the two locally maintained sections were maintained by Lewis and St. Lawrence counties . Most of the Lewis County @-@ owned section was co @-@ designated as CR 11 ; however , the short piece between the Croghan village line and Belfort Road was part of CR 10 . In St. Lawrence County , NY 812 was overlaid on the existing CR 73 from NY 3 to Stone Road , CR 99 between Stone Road and Balmat , and CR 56 from Balmat to Fowler . The state of New York assumed ownership and maintenance of NY 812 between Croghan and Diana on April 1 , 1980 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and Lewis County that transferred NY 194 to the county . Ownership of NY 812 from Pitcairn to Fowler was transferred to the state on September 1 , 1982 , as part of a highway maintenance swap between the state and St. Lawrence County . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Runcorn = 
 Runcorn is an industrial town and cargo port in Cheshire , England , located within the Borough of Halton . In 2010 , Runcorn 's population was recorded to be 61 @,@ 000 . In May 2014 , it became a member of the Liverpool City Region Combined Authority . The town is on the southern bank of the River Mersey , where the estuary narrows to form the Runcorn Gap . Directly to the north across the River Mersey is the town of Widnes . Upstream and 8 miles ( 12 @.@ 9 km ) to the northeast is the town of Warrington , and downstream 16 miles ( 26 km ) to the west is the city of Liverpool . 
 Runcorn railway station is on a branch of the West Coast Main Line and provides frequent services to the Liverpool Lime Street , Birmingham New Street , and London Euston stations . The A533 road passes through the town from the south , crossing the Runcorn Gap over the Silver Jubilee Bridge , the lowest bridge crossing of the River Mersey . The Manchester Ship Canal runs alongside the Runcorn bank of the River Mersey ; the Bridgewater Canal terminates in the canal basin in the town centre , as the staircase of locks leading down to the ship canal was filled in many decades ago . 
 Runcorn was a small , isolated village until the Industrial Revolution . It was a health resort in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Towards the end of the 18th century , a port began to develop on the south bank of the River Mersey . During the 19th century , industries developed the manufacture of soap and alkali , quarrying , shipbuilding , engineering , and tanning . In the early 20th century , the prime industries were chemicals and tanning . The original village has grown to include what were outlying villages . 
 Except for chemicals , all of the old industries have disappeared and there has been diversification , in particular because of the close links to the motorway system and the development of warehousing and distribution centres . A new town was built to the east of the existing town in the 1960s and 1970s , and areas of private housing have been established farther to the east ; this has resulted in the population more than doubling from around 26 @,@ 000 to its present level of 70 @,@ 000 . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest written reference to the town is in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , where it is spelled " <unk> " , literally meaning " a wide cove or bay " . This word is derived from the Old English words " <unk> " ( " wide " or " broad " ) and " <unk> " ( " cave " or " cove " ) . Other historical spellings of Runcorn include " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , and " <unk> " . 
 Little is known about the early history of the settlement but isolated findings of objects from the Stone , Bronze , and Iron Ages have been made and there is evidence of a Roman presence in the area . The earliest recorded event in its history is the building by Ethelfleda of a fortification at Runcorn to protect the northern frontier of her kingdom of Mercia against the Vikings in 915 . The fort was built on Castle Rock overlooking the River Mersey at Runcorn Gap . 
 Following the Norman conquest , Runcorn was not mentioned in the 1086 Domesday survey , although surrounding settlements were . William the Conqueror granted the earldom of Chester to Hugh d 'Avranches who granted the barony of Halton to Nigel . It is likely that Nigel erected a motte and bailey castle on Halton Hill in the 1070s . In 1115 , Nigel 's son , William <unk> , founded an Augustinian Priory at Runcorn . In 1134 the priory was moved to Norton , about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 6 km ) away . In 1391 the priory was raised to the higher status of abbey . In 1536 the monastery was dissolved , and around nine years later the buildings and some of the monastic lands were sold to Sir Richard Brooke who converted the habitable part of the abbey into a house . 
 During the Civil War Halton Castle was held for the Royalists by John Savage , 2nd Earl Rivers , the Steward of Halton . It fell twice to Parliamentarian Roundheads . The first siege was led by Sir William Brereton in 1643 ; the second was during the following year . Following this , a " Council of War " was held in Warrington in 1646 at which it was decided that the castle should be slighted . In 1656 , Runcorn was described as being " nothing but a fair parish church , a parsonage and a few scattered tenements " . And so it remained for over a century , an isolated and poor hamlet . The only through traffic used the ferry which crossed from Runcorn to the north bank of the River Mersey . Towards the end of the 18th century and in the early years of the 19th century the town was a health resort . 
 During the 18th century water transport had been improved in the area by the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , the Bridgewater Canal and the Trent and Mersey Canal . This gave Runcorn waterway connections with most of the interior of England through the canal system and with the sea along the River Mersey , thus forming the basis for the development of the Port of Runcorn . Later came the Runcorn to Latchford Canal linking with the Mersey and Irwell Navigation , and the Weston Canal which gave better access to the Weaver Navigation system . Industries began to develop within and around the town , in particular quarrying for Runcorn sandstone , shipbuilding , engineering , the manufacture of soap and chemicals and tanning . Runcorn was becoming an industrialised and highly polluted town . During the later 19th century the town became increasingly dominated by the chemical and tanning industries . 
 In 1868 the Runcorn Railway Bridge was opened across the Mersey , giving Runcorn direct rail links with Liverpool and the rest of the country . In the 1880s a pipeline was opened between Northwich and Weston Point , supplying brine to the salt and chemical works . In 1894 the Manchester Ship Canal was opened throughout its length . This allowed ocean @-@ going ships to travel inland as far as Salford , some of them calling at the port of Runcorn . The rise in population between 1881 and 1891 and the drop by 1901 is explained by the number of people involved in constructing the ship canal . In 1905 the Widnes @-@ Runcorn Transporter Bridge opened , giving a direct link for vehicular traffic for the first time between the two towns . 
 During the first half of the 20th century the industry of the town continued to be dominated by chemicals and tanning . This growth was largely due to government fixed @-@ priced cost contracts for tanned hides . In 1926 four chemical companies merged to form Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) . As the century progressed there was diversification of industry . In 1961 the Transporter Bridge was replaced by Runcorn Road Bridge ( since named the Silver Jubilee Bridge ) which allowed a more efficient means of road traffic across Runcorn Gap . The designation of Runcorn as a new town in 1964 brought major changes and more than doubled the population . Much of the architecture of the new town was innovative , especially the Southgate development designed by Sir James Stirling and built between 1970 and 1977 . Stirling 's housing development was beset with problems and it was demolished in the early 1990s . During the second half of the 20th century the tanneries closed ( the last to close was the Highfield Tannery in the late 1960s ) and the chemical industry declined . At the same time , light industry developed together with warehouses and distribution centres . 
 = = Governance = = 
 = = = Civic history = = = 
 At the time of the Domesday survey , Runcorn was in the hundred of <unk> , but later , and until the early 19th century , Runcorn was part of the Bucklow hundred . Under the Runcorn Improvement Act 1852 , a board of Improvement Commissioners was established to administer the civil government of the town . By the Local Government Act 1894 , the administration of the town and the surrounding areas was divided into Runcorn Urban District and Runcorn Rural District . Initially the urban district consisted of only the built @-@ up area of Runcorn itself . By 1937 , this area had been extended to include the communities of Weston and Weston Point to the south . By 1971 it had been further extended to the east to incorporate the village of Halton . 
 In 1964 , Runcorn was designated as a new town . In 1974 , as part of the Local Government Act 1972 , Runcorn Urban District was abolished and its territory amalgamated with Widnes to form the borough of Halton . In 1998 , this borough became a unitary authority within the ceremonial county of Cheshire . 
 = = = Political representation = = = 
 Before the Reform Act 1832 , Runcorn was in the parliamentary constituency of Cheshire which was represented by two Members of Parliament . Following the Reform Act , the town was placed in the North Cheshire constituency and from 1868 in the Mid Cheshire constituency . From 1885 to 1950 the town was in the constituency of Northwich . By an act of Parliament in 1948 , the constituency of Runcorn was created , and in 1950 Runcorn 's first Member of Parliament , Dennis Vosper , was elected . He continued to represent the constituency until 1964 , when he was succeeded by Mark Carlisle . 
 Runcorn is part of two parliamentary constituencies . The western part of the town , which includes the old town area and part of the new town , is in the constituency of Halton and the eastern part , containing the rest of the new town and private housing to the east of this , is in the Weaver Vale constituency . Being a predominantly working class Labour area and shunted into a voting pool with affluent areas outside Runcorn , has caused much resentment in the town . As Runcorn and Halton as a whole hasn 't been a part of Cheshire since 1998 , locals oppose these changes . Since the 1997 general election the Member of Parliament for the Halton constituency has been Derek Twigg of the Labour party , and he continued to hold the seat in the 2010 general election . In the 2007 election the Weaver Vale constituency was won by Mike Hall , also the Labour candidate . Hall retired at the 2010 election when the seat was won by Graham Evans , the Conservative candidate . The local authority is the borough of Halton . The town is divided into ten electoral wards , with councillors serving for up to four years . Runcorn is in the European parliamentary constituency of North West England . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Runcorn is situated on a spur projecting into the River Mersey , which flows to the north and then to the west of the town . On the north bank of the river is another spur forming the West Bank area of Widnes ; together these form Runcorn Gap , a narrowing of the River Mersey . Runcorn Gap is crossed by the Runcorn Railway Bridge , which carries the Liverpool branch of the West Coast Main Line , and the Silver Jubilee Bridge , which carries the A533 . To the south of the town is the River Weaver and the Weston Canal . Both open into the ship canal . To the southeast of the town run the M56 motorway , the Chester – Manchester railway line , and the main branch of the West Coast Main Line . The town has a system of " expressways " , roads designed to divert traffic away from the residential areas . The Central Expressway runs through the centre of the town in a north @-@ south direction . To the west of it lie most of the former settlements which formed the older part of the town , namely Runcorn , Higher Runcorn , Weston , Weston Point and Clifton ( formerly <unk> ) , and the new town areas of Halton Brook and Halton Lodge . To the east are the village of Halton , the old settlements of Norton and Stockham , and the new town areas of <unk> , <unk> , Windmill Hill , Murdishaw , Brookvale and <unk> Park . 
 The density of housing is generally high , but there are open green areas , in particular heathland on Runcorn Hill and the extensive Town Park created as part of the new town . The older industries , particularly the remaining chemical factories , are concentrated mainly to the southwest of the town bordering the Mersey , while newer industries , including warehousing , are to the northeast and southeast . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The Runcorn area drains into the River Mersey to the north and the River Weaver to the south . The bedrock of the western and northeastern parts of the town is made up of rock from the Sherwood sandstone group ; in the other areas the bedrock is from the Mercia mudstone group . In places there are prominent outcrops of sandstone , particularly at Runcorn Hill and Halton Hill . Elsewhere the bedrock is covered by drift . At the northwestern periphery of the town the drift consists of recently blown sand . Farther to the east and bordering the River Mersey is recent alluvium . Elsewhere the drift consists of till . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Being close to the west coast and the Irish Sea , the climate is generally temperate with few extremes of temperature or weather . The mean average temperature in the years 1971 to 2000 was 9 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 7 ° C , which was slightly above the average for the United Kingdom as was the average amount of annual sunshine at 1 @,@ 391 to 1 @,@ 470 hours . The average annual rainfall was 741 to 870 mm , which was slightly below the average for the UK . The average number of days in the year when snow is on the ground is 0 to 6 , which is low for the United Kingdom . The average number of days of air frost is 2 to 39 , which is also low . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Since the borough of Halton became a unitary authority in 1998 , demographic statistics have been collated for the authority as a whole , rather than separately for the towns of Runcorn and Widnes . While the two towns have different histories and come from different historic counties , their demographic features are similar . 
 The population of Halton in 2011 was 125 @,@ 700 . The change in population during the 20th and 21st centuries is shown in the following table . 
 In 2003 Halton had the largest proportion of the population in Cheshire in the age groups under 5 , 5 to 15 and 16 to pension age and , at 16 @.@ 1 % the lowest proportion of people at pension age or older . At 1 @.@ 2 % the proportion of non @-@ white ethnic groups in 2001 equalled the lowest in all local authorities in Cheshire . At 11 @.@ 5 per 1 @,@ 000 population , the live birth rate in Halton and Warrington is the highest in the county . At 121 the standardised mortality ratio is the highest in Cheshire , as is the percentage of persons with limiting long @-@ term illness ( 21 @.@ 5 % ) . 
 There has been an increase in the number of households from 47 @,@ 214 in 1991 to 52 @,@ 501 in 2006 . The average household size has fallen from 2 @.@ 70 in 1991 to 2 @.@ 44 in 2001 . In 1991 , 75 @.@ 8 % of houses were centrally heated , compared with 89 @.@ 8 % in 2001 . The type of housing has also changed , with an increase from 15 @.@ 5 % to 19 @.@ 2 % in detached houses from 1991 to 2001 , an increase over the same years in semi @-@ detached houses from 30 @.@ 0 % to 33 @.@ 0 % , and a corresponding decrease in terraced houses from 44 @.@ 0 % to 37 @.@ 5 % . The percentage of dwellings in council tax bands A – B is , at 69 % , the highest in any Cheshire local authority . The percentages in bands E – F ( 8 % ) and G – H ( 1 % ) are the lowest . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Of Runcorn 's former industries , all but the chemical industry have disappeared . The industry was dominated for many years by ICI 's <unk> Chemical division ; since divested and taken over by Ineos . In Runcorn , Ineos manufactures chemicals including chlorine , chlorine @-@ containing compounds including vinyl chloride , heavy chemicals including alkalis , and fluorine @-@ containing compounds . A separate business within the same company manufactures salt from brine transported by pipeline from the <unk> of central Cheshire . The former ICI offices and laboratories now comprise the Heath Business and Technical Park , which provides office , laboratory , conference , and leisure facilities . To the east of the town , diverse industries have been developed including , because of the proximity to the motorway system , warehouses and distribution centres . The town continues to act as a port on the Manchester Ship Canal . There are two adjacent ports . Runcorn Docks is owned by the Manchester Ship Canal Company , which is part of the Peel Ports Group . The Port of Weston is owned by the Stobart Group . In March 2014 the UK 's largest incinerator for burning refuse @-@ derived fuel , managed by Viridor , commenced operation in Weston Point . 
 There has been a shift in employment from manufacturing to service industries . In 1991 , 34 % worked in the manufacturing sector and 61 % were in the service sector . By 2004 17 % were in manufacturing jobs and 78 % were in service jobs . This trend in the local region is demonstrated in this chart which shows the regional " gross value added " of Halton and Warrington at current basic prices , with figures in millions of pounds . 
 ^ includes hunting and forestry 
 ^ includes energy and construction 
 ^ includes financial intermediation services indirectly measured 
 ^ Components may not sum to totals due to rounding 
 Runcorn has two shopping centres . The original shopping area was in the older part of the town on High Street , Regent Street and Church Street . This centre continues to exist , but with the coming of the new town , has declined . There is a small supermarket and some specialist shops , but with a higher @-@ than @-@ average proportion of charity shops and take @-@ away food outlets . A small market has been rebuilt adjacent to the old town bus station . In the centre of the new town area Runcorn Shopping Centre ( formerly Halton Lea ) is an enclosed shopping mall with an attached bus station . Adjacent to it is Trident Park containing shopping outlets and a cinema and further away is an Asda supermarket . 
 <unk> has its head office in Runcorn . 
 = = Landmarks and places of interest = = 
 The major landmark in the town is Halton Castle on the top of Halton Hill near the geographical centre of the town . Only ruins of the castle exist , but there are widespread views from the top of the hill . The interior of the castle grounds is open at advertised times . Incorporated in the castle walls is the Castle Hotel , which used to include a courthouse on the first floor . Another landmark is Norton water tower , built of Runcorn sandstone , 112 feet ( 34 m ) high , which holds 672 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 3 million litres ) of water and supplies water to Liverpool . 
 An important historical site and the major visitor centre in the town is Norton Priory , now a museum . The site contains the remains of a priory with adjacent gardens , formerly of a country house . Nearby are a walled garden , including a national collection of tree quinces , and an ice house . 
 Much of the architecture of the town is undistinguished , but there are listed buildings of some importance . The listed churches are All Saints Parish Church and Holy Trinity Church in the centre of the older part of the town , St Mary 's in Halton village , St John 's in Weston , and Christ Church in Weston Point . All Saints ' Church , a Grade II * listed building , dates from 1849 and was built by Anthony Salvin in red sandstone . The oldest existing houses are the Seneschal 's House in Halton village ( 1598 ) , Weston Old Hall ( 1607 ) , Brookfield Farmhouse ( 1691 ) and Halton Old Hall ( 1693 ) . Other outstanding houses include Runcorn Town Hall ( formerly Halton Grange ) , Camden House and Cottage in High Street and Bridgewater House near the ship canal . 
 A war memorial to those who lost their lives in the First and Second World Wars , as well as those killed later conflicts , is located at the end of Moughland Lane . There is a memorial in Castle Road , Halton village , commemorating residents of the village who served in the Boer War . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Theatre and cinema = = = 
 The Brindley is a theatre and arts centre which opened in 2004 . It is situated in the old town centre and named after James Brindley , engineer of the adjacent Bridgewater Canal . It contains a proscenium theatre seating 420 and a multi @-@ purpose theatre seating 108 , The Studio , which doubles as a cinema . There is an exhibition space for art installations , a small café and multi @-@ purpose rooms . The centre is owned and administered by Halton Borough Council which runs community events in the building . In 2007 , it won the title of " Best Arts Project in the UK " at the National Lottery Awards . A multiplex cinema run by Cineworld is in Trident Park . 
 = = = Filmography = = = 
 Runcorn has been used for the shooting of films and television programmes . Some of the sequences in the first two series of the BBC police drama Merseybeat were filmed in and around the town . The BBC situation comedy Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps was set in Runcorn . External shots of the Waterloo Hotel in the area of High Street known as Top Locks ( which is known in the show as The Archer ) appear as well . The opening credits show the Silver Jubilee Bridge and Halton Castle . Drop Dead Gorgeous , a drama on BBC Three , was set in Runcorn . Norton Priory has been used as a location in films and television programmes . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Runcorn is served by two weekly papers , the Runcorn Weekly News and the Runcorn World . The town is also home to Halton Community Radio , which broadcasts over the Runcorn and Widnes area on the frequency <unk> This is a non @-@ commercial radio station which is run by volunteers . HCR was launched on 8 August 2008 , and currently has a five @-@ year licence to broadcast . 
 = = = The Runcorn Ferry = = = 
 Before the building of Runcorn Railway Bridge and its attached footbridge , the only way to cross the Mersey at or near Runcorn Gap , other than by the dangerous method of fording , was by ferry . The ferry has a history going back to the 12th century . The ferry was celebrated in the monologue entitled The Runcorn Ferry , written by Marriott Edgar and popularised by Stanley Holloway . It includes the lines : 
 = = Community facilities = = 
 The main library is at Halton Lea with a branch library in the old town centre . Runcorn has two locations offering One @-@ Stop @-@ Shop facilities ; one is Halton Direct Link in Halton Lea , and the other is in the old town library . Runcorn Direct Link also includes a Tourist Information Centre . 
 Runcorn Hill Local Nature Reserve has been developed on the site of a quarry and consists of heathland . Adjacent to it is a park which includes a bandstand , a model boating lake and sports facilities . Wigg Island is a nature reserve on a former industrial site . The reserve is on an island between the Manchester Ship Canal and the River Mersey and consists of open spaces and woodland with bird hides and pathways . Other nature reserves in the town are Murdishaw Valley , Oxmoor Woods and Ponds , and Dorchester Park . Further public open areas are Rock Park , Town Hall Park and Phoenix Park . Open areas in Runcorn form part of Mersey Forest , one of Britain 's community forests . 
 Runcorn 's hospital is Halton General Hospital , which is administered by the Warrington and Halton Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust . Originally planned as a District General Hospital , it was never large enough to provide a full range of services . Acute medical services have been transferred to Warrington Hospital and Halton General has become a centre for non @-@ emergency surgery and rehabilitation . Although it never had its own accident and emergency department the hospital has a minor injuries unit for basic emergency care . On the same site is the Cheshire and Merseyside NHS Treatment Centre , a purpose @-@ built hospital for orthopaedic surgery . Halton Haven Hospice is in the Murdishaw area of the town . The body responsible for planning health services in Runcorn , including primary care , is the Halton Clinical Commissioning Group . 
 = = Transport = = 
 When plans for Runcorn New Town were drawn up , they included three distinct types of road : local roads , expressways and the Busway . The expressways are intended to keep all through traffic off the local roads . This system links to the north by the A533 over the Silver Jubilee Bridge to Widnes and Merseyside , to the northeast to Warrington by the A56 , to the east to Northwich and north Cheshire by the A533 , and to the southeast by the A557 to the M56 and to Frodsham . The M56 links to the M6 and , to the north of Widnes , the A557 links to the M62 . The Busway is a system of roads for use by buses only , and bears no resemblance to guided busways or bus lanes in use elsewhere , as it is a totally separate road system , not running alongside ( or down the middle of ) existing roads . In addition , there is a network of dedicated cycleways in the town . 
 There are two railway stations . Runcorn Mainline Station , located in the old town , is on the Liverpool branch of the West Coast Main Line , and is managed by Virgin Trains , who provide services between Liverpool Lime Street and London Euston . London Midland run a service between Liverpool and Birmingham New Street that calls at the station . Runcorn East station , located in the Murdishaw district of the new town , is managed by Arriva Trains Wales , and provides services to Warrington , Manchester and Chester . Bus services are provided by Halton Transport and Arriva . National Express coaches call at Runcorn , and other coach services are provided by <unk> Travel , and Anthony 's Travel , who are both based in the town . 
 The Silver Jubilee Bridge was widened in the mid @-@ 1970s by bolting a new pedestrian way to the side of the original structure and widening the roadways over the old footpaths . It is a bottleneck and becomes congested at peak travel times , and in the event of a breakdown or accident on the bridge , traffic in the area comes to a standstill . To resolve this problem , a second crossing of the Mersey is planned , to be known as the Mersey Gateway . 
 Runcorn is 8 miles ( 13 km ) from Liverpool John Lennon Airport and 22 miles ( 35 km ) from Manchester Airport . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are 29 primary schools in the town and one nursery school at the Grange . The five secondary schools are Ormiston Bolingbroke Academy ( formerly Halton High School ) , St Chad 's RC & CE High , the Grange , and the Heath and <unk> School . Two institutions , Halton College and Runcorn Sixth Form College , merged in 2006 to form Riverside College . There is one special school in the town , Cavendish School . There are opportunities for adult education in information technology at the Acorn Lifelong Learning Centre . Other courses for adults are held at different venues in the town . 
 = = = Performance table = = = 
 The following table shows the percentage of pupils gaining five GCSE A * – C level grades , including and excluding English and Maths in 2007 . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The 2001 census showed , that of the people living in the borough of Halton , 83 @.@ 8 % declared themselves to be Christian , 8 @.@ 7 % stated that they had " no religion , " and 7 @.@ 0 % made no religious claims at all . Those stating their religions as Buddhist , Hindu , Jewish , Islam or Sikh amounted to 0 @.@ 5 % . 
 The Anglican churches are part of the Diocese of Chester and the deanery of Frodsham . In Runcorn , the parish church is All Saints in the old town centre . Ten other Anglican churches are in the town . Five Roman Catholic churches can be found in Runcorn and are administered by the Diocese of Shrewsbury . There are three Methodist chapels and one Welsh Presbyterian chapel . <unk> Drive Christian Centre is shared between the Church of England and the Methodists . <unk> Ecumenical Parish in Beechwood and Palace Fields consists of 3 churches all recognised by the Church of England , the Methodists and the United Reformed Church . Norton Ecumenical Parish , covering Windmill Hill , Norton and Murdishaw , is served by an Ecumenical Partnership between St <unk> 's Church ( Anglican ) and Murdishaw Ecumenical Church ( Methodist run ) . 
 There is an Independent Baptist chapel , three independent Christian churches , and a LDS Church . The Jehovah 's Witnesses have two Kingdom Halls , and there is a Spiritualist church . In 2013 the former Waterloo Hotel was converted into a Buddhist temple by Wat Phra Singh UK . 
 = = Sports = = 
 The main sport played in Runcorn is football , with the town having two senior football teams – Runcorn Linnets FC and Runcorn Town FC – both playing in the North West Counties League , with the town also having a thriving Sunday League and Junior League . There is also an open age women 's team Runcorn Ladies FC , who have recently formed . They are affiliated to Liverpool FA , and play in the Liverpool County Women 's Open Age Division . 
 Runcorn Linnets were formed as a trust @-@ based team in 2006 from the now defunct Runcorn F.C. Halton . It has existed in various guises since 1918 , and its performance peaked in 1982 when it won the Alliance Premier League , then the highest division below the Football League . The club initially did not have their own ground so , up until the 2009 – 10 season , they took part in a groundshare with Witton Albion to play their home matches at <unk> Park , Northwich . In their first season the club gained promotion to Division 1 of the North West Counties League . In October 2009 planning permission was granted for the club to build a new ground in the Murdishaw area of Runcorn . 
 Runcorn Town was formed in 1970 as Mond Rangers FC with the club changing their name in 2005 in order to " try and bring a more professional look to the club in general , and increase support from both businesses and individuals in the local community . " After finishing in third place in the West Cheshire League at the end of the 2009 / 10 season , the club were elected to join the North West Counties League at their AGM , the highest level that they have ever played at . 
 Runcorn Cricket Club and Runcorn Hockey Club are based at the Runcorn Sports Club in Moughland Lane . Runcorn Rugby Union FC is based at Halton Sports Club in Murdishaw . There is an 18 hole golf course at Runcorn Golf Club in Clifton Road and a golf driving range at Sutton Fields . Runcorn Sports Club is a privately run sports club in Moughland Lane and provides facilities and coaching for cricket and hockey . Halton Sports Club is in Murdishaw Avenue . Privately run swimming pools are at Beechwood local centre and Stockham Lodge <unk> and Health Club . Adjacent to the latter are two artificial ski slopes administered by Runcorn Ski Centre . The Runcorn Rowing Club rows on the River Weaver Navigation near Clifton Village . The local authority runs several sports centres , including : Runcorn Swimming Pool ; Brookvale Recreation Centre , offering indoor sporting facilities ; and Phoenix Park , with outdoor sporting facilities . Other sports are also catered for . Runcorn also has its own professional wrestling training @-@ school ( The Runcorn Wrestling Academy ) based in <unk> , set up in 2005 by Andy Baker and Neil Davis . 
 In the late 19th century , and prior to the 1895 schism , rugby union footballers from the now defunct Runcorn , Harry <unk> Speakman played during the 1888 British Lions tour to New Zealand and Australia and Samuel Houghton played for England . When the rugby football schism occurred in 1895 , Runcorn became founder members of the Northern Rugby Football Union ( now Rugby Football League ) . Runcorn played from the 1895 – 96 season through to the end of 1914 – 15 season , they won the Lancashire League in both the 1895 – 96 and 1899 – 1900 seasons , and were losing semi @-@ finalists in 1906 – 07 Rugby Football League Championship , and during the early part of the 20th century five rugby league players from the now defunct Runcorn played for both Great Britain , and England . Runcorn finish bottom of the league in the 1914 – 15 Northern Rugby Football Union season , and did not recommence playing following the aftermath of the First World War . Rugby league in the town is now represented by Runcorn RLC . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Arts and entertainment = = = 
 John Bishop ( born 1966 ) , comedian , spent part of his teenage years in Runcorn 
 Francis William Bourdillon ( 1852 – 1921 ) , poet born in Runcorn 
 Hall Caine ( 1853 – 1931 ) , novelist and playwright 
 Lewis Carroll ( 1832 – 1898 ) , writer of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , born near Runcorn 
 Phil Collins ( born 1970 ) , artist 
 Anna <unk> ( 1949 – 2004 ) , actress 
 Kym Marsh ( born 1976 ) , singer and actress 
 Susan Nickson ( born 1982 ) , television writer and producer 
 Alistair Taylor ( 1935 – 2004 ) , assistant to Brian Epstein and General Manager of Apple Corps 
 Nicola Roberts ( born 1985 ) , singer and member of girl band Girls Aloud 
 Martin Roscoe ( born 1952 ) , classical pianist 
 Raymond Waring ( 1977 ) , actor 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 Nathan Alcock ( 1707 – 1779 ) , physician 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Thomas Alfred Jones ( 1880 – 1956 ) , awarded the Victoria Cross and Distinguished Conduct Medal during World War II 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Richard Brooke ( died 1569 ) , bought the manor of Norton 
 Sir John <unk> ( 1662 – 1738 ) , lawyer 
 Sir William Edward Dudley ( 1868 – 1938 ) , president of the Co @-@ operative Wholesale Society 
 Thomas Hazlehurst ( 1779 – 1842 ) , founder of soap and alkali manufacturer Hazlehurst & Sons 
 John Riley Holt ( 1918 – 2009 ) , Professor of Experimental Physics at Liverpool University who played a part in the development of the atom bomb 
 John Savage , 2nd Earl Rivers ( c . 1603 – 1654 ) , royalist 
 = = = Religious = = = 
 Thomas Alcock ( 1709 – 1798 ) , Vicar of Runcorn , writer , cider maker 
 Thomas Hazlehurst ( 1816 – 1876 ) , Methodist who paid for the construction of 12 chapels and three schools in the area 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Graham Abel ( born 1960 ) , footballer 
 Scott Brown ( born 1985 ) , footballer 
 Shauna <unk> ( born 1993 ) , professional rock climber 
 Robert Done ( 1904 – 1982 ) , footballer 
 Ray Dutton ( born 1945 ) , rugby league player 
 Jack Fish ( 1880 – 1940 ) , rugby league player 
 Samuel Houghton ( 1870 – 1920 ) , rugby union and rugby league player 
 Michael Jackson ( born 1973 ) , footballer 
 Kenny Lunt ( born 1979 ) , footballer 
 James McNulty ( born 1985 ) , footballer 
 Dick Padbury ( 1886 – unknown ) , rugby league player 
 Harry Speakman ( 1864 – 1915 ) , rugby union player 
 Robin Reid ( born 1971 ) , boxer 
 Lorna Webb ( born 1983 ) , professional cyclist 
 = Mary Brewster Hazelton = 
 Mary Brewster Hazelton ( November 23 , 1868 – September 13 , 1953 ) was an American portrait painter . She attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , where she was later an instructor . Among her other achievements , Hazelton was the first woman to win an award open to both men and women in the United States when she won the <unk> Prize from the National Academy of Design in 1896 . Her portrait paintings are in the collections of the Massachusetts State House , Harvard University , Peabody Essex Museum , and Wellesley Historical Society . The professional organizations that Hazelton was affiliated with included the Wellesley Society of Artists , of which she was a founding member , and The Guild of Boston Artists , of which she was a charter member . She lived her adult life with her sisters in the Hazelton family home in Wellesley , Massachusetts . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mary Brewster Hazelton was born on November 23 , 1868 in Milton , Massachusetts to Dr. Isaac Hills Hazelton ( 1838 – 1929 ) and Mary Allen Brewster Hazelton ( 1843 – 1923 ) . A Harvard College graduate , Dr. Hazelton served for the United States Navy during the Civil War as an assistant surgeon . He was an innovator in the treatment of the mentally ill . Mary had a brother , Isaac Brewster ( I. B. ) Hazelton ( 1873 – 1943 ) , and two sisters , Olivia Bowditch Hazelton ( 1873 – 1967 ) and Margaret Page Hazelton ( 1876 – 1965 ) . The family moved to Wellesley , Massachusetts , in 1873 . She began making artwork in the 1880s , which she often signed with her nickname , " Daisy " . In 1886 , Hazelton graduated from Wellesley High School . The three sisters lived together in the family home at 319 Washington Street over the course of their lives . The house has been called " Clapp House " and " Hazelton House " . 
 = = Education = = 
 Hazelton attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston ( <unk> ) under Edmund Tarbell . She was Philip Hale 's assistant and completed her education at <unk> in 1892 . She was a drawing class assistant for Frank Weston Benson after graduation and the following year became an assistant drawing instructor . Both Benson and Tarbell were noted Boston Impressionists . 
 Rupert Hughes described Hazelton 's painting , Margaret , made by 1895 , as a " more than usually tender bit of Impressionism " . She studied with Impressionist painters in Paris and also studied in Spain , England , the Netherlands and Italy after winning the Paige Traveling Scholarship from the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in 1899 . Hazelton was the organization 's first traveling scholar and received $ 800 each year of her two @-@ year study program . 
 = = Style = = 
 Hazelton was one of the women that collector Everette James identified as having " demonstrate [ d ] remarkable individual artistic skill " who attended the School of the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston in the late 19th @-@ century . This was at a time , though , that women were not recognized for their individual style and abilities . " <unk> " was a phrase used at the time that reflected the belief that women 's skill was derived from their mentors , like Edmund C. Tarbell . Greater public exposure has helped to highlight the individual and unique qualities of some of the women portrait painters " that would rival a Tarbell , Benson or De Camp , " according to James in Antiques Journal . 
 In his 2001 article Early Women Artists at the Guild of Boston Artists , Bob Jackman noted that Hazelton painted in a creative and assertive style that included " a loose Impressionist manner " that rivals the works of many other Boston painters . Her technical abilities in composition and use and capture of light are exemplified in the painting Two Sisters at the Piano that she made about 1894 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Women did not win non @-@ gender specific awards until 1896 when Hazelton won the National Academy of Design <unk> Prize for her oil painting In a Studio . It was determined to be the best oil painted made by a person under the age of 35 in the United States that year . The Museum of Fine Arts in Boston awarded her the first Paige Traveling Scholarship in 1899 . Hazelton won an Honorable Mention at the Pan @-@ American Exposition in Buffalo , New York in 1901 . 
 Hazelton had a studio at the old Harcourt Building in Boston in 1904 , when a severe fire burned the life 's work of several artists including Hazelton , Joseph DeCamp , and William M. Paxton . In the aftermath , a group of artists planned for a new building , which became Fenway Studios ( 30 Ipswich Street ) . Hazelton was among the initial group of artists that signed up , and arranged for studio 304 . From 1906 to 1940 , she had a studio at Fenway . 
 In 1912 , the Wellesley Hills First Congregational Church commissioned Hazelton , who was a member , to paint wall murals for the church . One mural depicts the four virtues — truth , charity , justice , and faith — in eight @-@ foot figures of three women and one man . For instance , the male figure carries a sword and scales to represent justice . She also created murals of the Four Evangelists and a representation of the Trinity . 
 During World War I , Hazelton designed a Liberty Loan campaign poster , using her painting Victory 's Record . She exhibited The Letter and Reverie at the Panama – Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco , California , in 1915 , where she won a bronze medal . She won the Popular Prize in Newport , Rhode Island in 1916 for The Lady in Black . She also won a prize for The Letter at Newport . John Singer Sargent considered her " one of the foremost portrait painters of her time " , according to Wellesley author Jennifer A. <unk> . 
 Hazelton was a Wellesley Society of Artists founder and treasurer , charter member of The Guild of Boston Artists , and an early member of the Copley Society . She was a member of the Concord Art Association , American Federation of Arts , and Connecticut Academy of Fine Arts . 
 = = Death = = 
 Hazelton suffered a stroke in 1952 , which required her to switch to painting with her left hand . She died at the Newton @-@ Wellesley Hospital on September 13 , 1953 . 
 In 1965 , the Wellesley Historical Society began purchasing paintings by Hazelton for its collection . <unk> , correspondence , sketchbooks , diaries , photographs , and other materials are also held by the Wellesley Historical Society . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Harvard Club of Boston , Harvard University 
 John Adams , 1914 , after John Singleton Copley 
 Harvard University , Cambridge , Massachusetts 
 Paul Jean Louis <unk> , 1918 , oil on canvas 
 George Cheyne Shattuck , 1910 , copy after Gilbert Stuart 
 Dr. John Warren 
 Massachusetts General Hospital 
 William Appleton 
 Massachusetts State House , Boston , Massachusetts 
 William Stoughton , 1924 
 Peabody Essex Museum , Salem , Massachusetts 
 Francis Henry Appleton 
 Wellesley Historical Society , Massachusetts – Some of the portraits in their collection of 50 paintings are : Seldon L. Brown 
 Ralph Coburn 
 Herbert M. Hazelton 
 Margaret Page Hazelton 
 Mrs. John Oldham 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Paintings by Mary Brewster Hazelton 
 = John J. Crittenden = 
 John Jordan Crittenden ( September 10 , 1787 – July 26 , 1863 ) was a politician from the U.S. state of Kentucky . He represented the state in both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate and twice served as United States Attorney General in the administrations of William Henry Harrison , John Tyler and Millard Fillmore . He was also the 17th governor of Kentucky and served in the state legislature . Although frequently mentioned as a potential candidate for the U.S. presidency , he never consented to run for the office . 
 During his early political career , Crittenden served in the Kentucky House of Representatives and was chosen as speaker on several occasions . With the advent of the Second Party System , he allied with the National Republican ( later Whig ) Party and was a fervent supporter of Henry Clay and opponent of Democrats Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren . Jackson supporters in the Senate refused to confirm Crittenden 's nomination by John Quincy Adams to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1828 , but after his brief service as Kentucky Secretary of State , the state legislature elected him to the second of his four non @-@ consecutive stints in the U.S. Senate . Upon his election as president , William Henry Harrison appointed Crittenden as Attorney General , but 5 months after Harrison 's death , political differences prompted him to resign rather than continue his service under Harrison 's successor , John Tyler . 
 He was returned to the Senate in 1842 , serving until 1848 , when he resigned to run for governor , hoping his election would help Zachary Taylor win Kentucky 's vote in the 1848 presidential election . Taylor was elected , but Crittenden refused a post in his cabinet , fearing he would be charged with making a " corrupt bargain " , as Clay had been in 1825 . Following Taylor 's death in 1850 , Crittenden resigned the governorship and accepted Millard Fillmore 's appointment as attorney general . 
 As the Whig Party crumbled in the mid @-@ 1850s , Crittenden joined the Know Nothing ( or American ) Party . After the expiration of his term as attorney general , he was again elected to the U.S. Senate , where he urged compromise on the issue of slavery to prevent the breakup of the United States . As bitter partisanship increased the threat of secession , Crittenden sought out moderates from all parties and formed the Constitutional Union Party , though he refused the party 's nomination for president in the 1860 election . In December 1860 , he authored the Crittenden Compromise , a series of resolutions and constitutional amendments he hoped would avert the Civil War , but Congress would not approve them . Crittenden was elected to the House of Representatives in 1861 and continued to seek reconciliation between the states throughout his term . He declared his candidacy for re @-@ election to the House in 1863 , but died before the election took place . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Jordan Crittenden was born September 10 , 1787 , near Versailles , Woodford County , Kentucky . He was the second child and first son of Revolutionary War veteran John Crittenden and his wife Judith Harris . John and Judith Crittenden had four sons and five daughters , all but one of whom survived infancy . On his father 's side , he was of Welsh ancestry , while his mother 's family was French Huguenot . His father had surveyed land in Kentucky with George Rogers Clark , and settled there just after the end of the American Revolution . Two of Crittenden 's brothers , Thomas and Robert , became lawyers , while the third , Henry , was a farmer . 
 Crittenden began a college preparatory curriculum at Pisgah Academy in Woodford County . He was then sent to a boarding school in Jessamine County . Among his classmates were Thomas Alexander Marshall and Francis P. Blair . Crittenden became especially close friends with Blair , and later political differences did little to diminish their friendship . After a year at boarding school , Crittenden moved to the Lexington , Kentucky , home of Judge George M. Bibb to study law . He began his tertiary studies at Washington College ( now Washington and Lee University ) in Lexington , Virginia . During his brief tenure there , he studied mathematics and belles @-@ lettres and became friends with Hugh Lawson White . Crittenden was dissatisfied with the curriculum at Washington College and matriculated to the College of William and Mary . He studied under St. George Tucker and became acquainted with John Tyler . Crittenden completed his studies in 1806 , and was admitted to the bar the following year . He began his practice in Woodford County , but as central Kentucky was well already supplied with able lawyers , he moved to Logan County , Kentucky , on the then western frontier and opened his practice in Russellville . At age twenty @-@ two , he was appointed by Governor Ninian Edwards of Illinois Territory as its attorney general . The following year , Edwards also made Crittenden his aide @-@ de @-@ camp . [ a ] 
 On May 27 , 1811 , Crittenden married Sarah O. Lee at her home in Versailles . Lee was a cousin of future U.S. President Zachary Taylor and aunt of US Senator Wilkinson Call . They had seven children before Sarah 's death in mid @-@ September 1824 . Among their children were Confederate major general George Crittenden and Union general Thomas Leonidas Crittenden . Their daughter Sallie Lee " Maria " Crittenden was the mother of John C. Watson , a Rear Admiral in the U.S. Navy during the late 19th century . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Crittenden 's career as an elected official began in the Kentucky House of Representatives , where he represented Logan County from 1811 to 1817 . After the 1811 legislative session , he volunteered as an aide to General Samuel Hopkins in an expedition against the Indians . On the outbreak of the War of 1812 , Kentucky governor Charles Scott appointed him as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp for the First Kentucky Militia . In 1813 , he became an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Governor Isaac Shelby , serving at the Battle of the Thames in Canada . Following the war , the governor issued him a special commendation for faithfulness in carrying out his orders . He then resumed his law practice in Russellville . 
 In 1814 , Governor Shelby appointed Crittenden to fill the U.S. Senate seat vacated by his former teacher , George M. Bibb ; later , however , Shelby learned that Crittenden was only twenty @-@ seven years old , three years shy of the constitutional age requirement for senators . Hence he returned to his seat in the Kentucky House , where was elected speaker over John Rowan . He would retain the position from 1815 to 1817 . 
 As speaker , Crittenden presided over a particularly tumultuous time in the legislature . In October 1816 , recently elected governor George Madison died . He was succeeded by Lieutenant Governor Gabriel Slaughter . Slaughter immediately made two extremely unpopular appointments , and quickly fell out of favor with many Kentuckians . A group of legislators , led by John C. Breckinridge , pointed out that the Kentucky Constitution provided only that the lieutenant governor would serve as governor until a new gubernatorial election was held and a qualified successor was chosen . Slaughter , they claimed , was only the " acting governor " . The group presented a bill to the House that called for new elections . The bill was defeated , but Crittenden supported it . 
 Crittenden 's support of a new election was both popular and politically expedient . When the U.S. Senate term of Martin D. Hardin , one of Slaughter 's unpopular nominees , expired in 1817 , the Kentucky General Assembly chose Crittenden to fill the vacancy . Though he was the youngest member of the body , he served as the second @-@ ever chairman of the newly created Committee on the Judiciary . He was also a member of the Committee on Naval Affairs . During his term , he introduced legislation to reimburse and indemnify persons who were fined under the 1798 Sedition Act . He found state politics more interesting , however , and this fact , coupled with increased financial responsibilities incurred by the birth of his third and fourth children , prompted his decision to resign his seat on March 3 , 1819 . 
 = = = Legislative interim = = = 
 After leaving Congress , Crittenden moved to Frankfort , the state capital , to attract more legal clients and be nearer the center of the state 's political activity . Among his clients after moving to Frankfort were former Presidents Madison and Monroe , future Vice @-@ President Richard Mentor Johnson , and future governors James T. Morehead , John Breathitt , and Robert P. Letcher . During this period , he collaborated with Henry Clay in defending Charles Wickliffe , son of Robert C. Wickliffe . Wickliffe was charged with the murder of the editor of the Kentucky Gazette . Crittenden argued that the slaying was self @-@ defense , and Clay delivered a passionate closing argument . The jury returned a verdict of " not guilty " only minutes after the case was submitted to them . 
 In January 1820 , Crittenden and John Rowan were chosen to help resolve Kentucky 's boundary dispute with Tennessee . The boundary was supposed to run along the line at 36 degrees , 30 minutes north latitude , but when Dr. Thomas Walker surveyed it , he erroneously marked the line farther south . Crittenden and Rowan proposed either that the " Walker Line " remain the boundary from the Cumberland Mountains to the Tennessee River and Tennessee would compensate for the error west of the Tennessee River , or that the boundary be reset at 36 degrees , 30 minutes throughout . Tennessee 's commissioners rejected both proposals , asking instead that the Walker Line be accepted east of the Tennessee River and a more southerly line west of it , with reciprocal agreements between the states to honor existing land grants . Crittenden was inclined to accept the offer , but Rowan was not . The Kentucky commissioners proposed that the matter be submitted to arbitration , but Tennessee refused . In a report to the General Assembly , Crittenden recommended that Kentucky accept the Tennessee proposal . The legislators were swayed by Crittenden 's report , and the articles of agreement were signed on February 2 , 1820 . 
 Crittenden was elected to the board of trustees for Transylvania University in 1823 , possibly due to lobbying by Henry Clay . A year later , the faculty of the university awarded him an honorary doctor of laws . Crittenden also served as a trustee and attorney for the Kentucky Seminary in Frankfort . Crittenden used his influence in support of Clay in the 1824 presidential election until Clay was eliminated from contention . He then threw his support to Andrew Jackson until he learned that John Quincy Adams , if elected , would likely make Clay Secretary of State . Critics termed Adams ' alleged promise to Clay the " corrupt bargain " , but it resulted in Adams ' election . Upon his appointment as Secretary of State , Clay was prepared to recommend Crittenden to replace him as chief counsel in Kentucky for the Second Bank of the United States , but the bank chose not to hire a replacement . 
 = = = Old Court – New Court controversy = = = 
 Crittenden was drawn back into public service by the Old Court – New Court controversy . When legislation aimed at providing relief to the state 's debtors was struck down by the Kentucky Court of Appeals , supporters of the legislation in the General Assembly passed a bill abolishing the Court and creating a new court , which they stocked with sympathetic justices . Opponents of the legislation held that the Assembly 's action was unconstitutional , and for a time , both courts claimed authority as the court of last resort in the state . Though he had served as president of the New Court @-@ backed Bank of the Commonwealth since its formation in 1820 , Crittenden publicly identified himself with the Old Court supporters in April 1825 . In the legislative election of 1825 , friends called on Crittenden to seek election to the state House of Representatives . Many believed that he was the only Old Court supporter that commanded enough respect to win one of the two seats allotted to Franklin County , a bastion of the New Court . When Crittenden consented to run , New Court supporters nominated the state 's Attorney General Solomon P. Sharp and Lewis Sanders , a prominent lawyer . Crittenden and Sharp were elected to the two seats . 
 In the early hours of the morning of November 7 , 1825 , the very morning the legislature was to convene , Sharp was assassinated . Charges were made that Old Court supporters had instigated the murder . Crittenden tried to blunt these charges by introducing a resolution condemning Sharp 's murder and offering $ 3 @,@ 000 for the murderer 's capture . When assassin Jereboam O. Beauchamp was apprehended , it became clear that the motivation for the killing was personal , not political . ( Beauchamp 's wife had married him on the condition that he kill Sharp , who had refused to claim the child he had fathered with her previously . ) Despite this , Crittenden refused a request to represent Beauchamp in his murder trial because he wanted to avoid any implication in the matter . 
 The court controversy dominated the legislative session . Crittenden joined the Old Court majority in the House in passing a measure to abolish the New Court . The bill was killed in the Senate , however , by the tie @-@ breaking vote of Lieutenant Governor Robert B. McAfee . Crittenden later served on a committee of six to resolve the conflict , but to no avail . He was unwilling to accept a solution whereby all the justices resigned from both courts , and the governor would appoint a reorganized court made up equally of Old Court and New Court supporters . This position cost him the support of some New Court partisans that had voted for him in the previous election , and he was not returned to the House in 1826 . Ultimately , Old Court partisans gained control of both houses of the legislature , and the New Court was abolished permanently in December 1826 . 
 On November 15 , 1826 , Crittenden married Maria Knox Todd , a widow who was the daughter of Judge Harry Innes . Crittenden took Todd 's three children as his own , and the couple had two more children : John and Eugene . Todd 's daughter Catherine married her stepbrother , Crittenden 's son Thomas ; their son , John Jordan Crittenden III , was killed at the Battle of the Little Bighorn . Maria Knox Todd Crittenden died on September 8 , 1851 of an unknown illness . 
 = = Association with the National Republicans = = 
 As a result of the Old Court – New Court controversy , Kentucky 's politicians became divided between the Democrats and the National Republicans . Crittenden 's alliance with Henry Clay and his own personal political views put him squarely in the National Republican Party . Because of Crittenden 's support of his presidential bid , President Adams appointed him United States district attorney for the district of Kentucky in 1827 . In 1828 , Adams nominated him to replace Kentuckian Robert Trimble as an associate justice of the Supreme Court , but Jackson supporters in the Senate refused to confirm him . When Jackson defeated Adams in the 1828 presidential election , he removed Crittenden from his post as district attorney because of his association with Clay and his opposition to Jackson 's financial policies . 
 Crittenden supporters sought to make him the National Republican nominee for governor in the election of 1828 . Though his nomination was all but certain , Crittenden declined the opportunity , fearing that his association with Clay , who was losing popularity in the state , would cost his party the election . Instead , he threw his support behind Thomas Metcalfe , who went on to carry a very close election over Democrat William T. Barry . Crittenden instead sought another term in the Kentucky House , but was again denied the seat . 
 In 1829 , Crittenden was elected to the Kentucky House via a special election . He served as Speaker of the House for his entire term . In 1830 , he was the Whig nominee to replace John Rowan in the Senate . Secretly , the party wished to nominate Henry Clay , giving him a springboard from which to launch another presidential campaign , but it was unknown whether he would be able to secure enough votes for confirmation ; it was decided that Crittenden would be the nominee , and if the voting favored the Whigs by a large enough margin , Crittenden would withdraw and allow them to confirm Clay instead . The Democrats countered successively with Richard Mentor Johnson , John Rowan , Charles A. Wickliffe , and John Breathitt . None of them polled more than sixty @-@ four of the sixty @-@ nine votes needed for confirmation . Crittenden garnered sixty @-@ eight votes on fourteen different ballots , but he refused to vote for himself because he wanted Clay to be the nominee . Some of Crittenden 's supporters , however , refused to vote for Clay , and the seat was left vacant . 
 The following year , a clear majority of the House of Representatives were pledged to Crittenden for the open Senate seat . However , Clay allies pressured Crittenden to step aside and allow Clay to be the Whig nominee . Crittenden obliged , and Clay was elected by a margin of nine votes over Richard M. Johnson . Crittenden went on to manage both the unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign of Richard Aylett Buckner and the campaign to help Clay win Kentucky in the 1832 presidential election . After Clay 's defeat in 1832 , he offered to resign his Senate seat and allow Crittenden to succeed him , but Crittenden refused the offer . Later that year , Crittenden retired from the General Assembly . 
 = = Association with the Whigs = = 
 Crittenden was active in organizing the Whig Party from the remnants of the defunct National Republican Party in 1834 . On July 4 , 1834 , he called to order the party 's first organizational meeting in the state at Cove Spring , Kentucky . He was chosen as chair of the committee on resolutions and in a speech on July 5 , bitterly condemned President Jackson . Later in 1834 , Kentucky governor James T. Morehead appointed Crittenden Secretary of State . In the August elections , Whigs won a majority in both houses of the General Assembly . When the Assembly convened , they elected Crittenden to the U.S. Senate over Democrat James Guthrie by a vote of 94 – 40 . 
 Immediately upon taking his seat in the Senate , Crittenden was named to the Committee on Public Lands and the Committee on the Judiciary , probably due to Clay 's influence . Early in his term , Crittenden vociferously opposed Senator Thomas H. Benton 's proposal to spend the federal budget surplus on public land graduation and military fortifications along the eastern seaboard . He also blasted the Jackson administration for issuing the Specie Circular , requiring that all payment for government land be made in gold or silver . He pointed out that the principles of the circular had been presented in a resolution on the Senate floor , but had been tabled by a large majority . Crittenden maintained that the tabling of the resolution was a condemnation by the Senate , yet the administration issued the circular only months later , overstepping , as Crittenden saw it , the bounds of the executive branch 's authority . Crittenden debated the issue at length with Senator Benton , and Congress ultimately passed a bill requiring the government to accept the notes of specie @-@ paying banks for the purchase of government lands , but President Jackson employed his pocket veto to prevent it from becoming law . 
 During his term , Crittenden remained an outspoken critic of Jackson and his successor , Martin Van Buren . He supported Henry Clay 's plan for distributing proceeds from the sale of public lands among the states , and also joined Clay in opposing the administration @-@ backed Second Seminole War . One of the few administration proposals he supported was the recognition of the new Republic of Texas . During this period of Crittenden 's service in the Senate , the issue of slavery rose to prominence . Crittenden was regarded as a moderate on the issue , seeking to keep it out of politics altogether . In 1836 , he resisted petitions by the Quakers to abolish slavery in Washington , D.C. , but he also opposed radical pro @-@ slavery measures such as John C. Calhoun 's proposal to ban abolitionist literature from being delivered by mail in the Southern states . 
 In contrast to his usually conciliatory nature , Crittenden was drawn into a disagreement between congressmen Jonathan Cilley and William J. Graves that ended in a duel . On the floor of the House , Cilley had attacked the integrity of Whig newspaper editor James Watson Webb . Webb demanded a retraction of Cilley 's comments through his friend , Congressman Graves . When Cilley refused to receive the communication from Graves , Graves charged that Cilley was questioning Webb 's honor and challenged him to a duel . Graves , accompanied by Kentucky Congressman Richard Menefee and Virginia Congressman Richard Wise asked Crittenden to serve as a second for Graves in the duel ; Crittenden initially protested , but finally agreed . After two misses by both combatants , Cilley was killed on the third exchange . The House proposed the expulsion of Graves and the censure of the other participants ( excluding Crittenden , who was a senator and not subject to House censure ) . The resolutions of expulsion and censure were eventually tabled , but Crittenden personally felt the sting of what he considered an indirect censure and later regretted his actions . 
 = = = Harrison and Tyler administrations = = = 
 In the 1840 presidential election , Crittenden again encouraged Kentucky Whigs to support the nomination of Henry Clay . After Clay lost the nomination , Crittenden supported eventual victor William Henry Harrison . Crittenden was re @-@ elected to the Senate in 1840 even though he was widely expected to be named to a position in Harrison 's presidential cabinet . He was apparently given his choice of cabinet positions , and chose that of Attorney General . He resigned his Senate seat to take this post . 
 As attorney general , Crittenden issued only one notable opinion . The plaintiff in the case was an individual whose property had been damaged during Andrew Jackson 's invasion of what would become the Florida Territory in 1818 . The case was still being adjudicated in 1841 . A Florida court found in favor of the plaintiff and ordered the federal government to compensate him for the damages and to pay him interest on his claim from the time the damages were incurred . Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing asked Crittenden whether the court had the authority to award interest and whether or not it should be paid . Crittenden opined that it did not , and Ewing did not pay the interest . Crittenden 's opinion was used as a precedent in similar cases by future attorneys general . 
 Only a week after being appointed by Harrison , Crittenden was dispatched to New York to mediate tensions with Great Britain over the sinking of the steamboat Caroline by a group of Canadian rebels . In this diplomatic endeavor , Crittenden was acting separately from his official duties as attorney general . He spoke with New York Governor William H. Seward and secured his promise to pardon Alexander McLeod , who had seized and burned the Caroline , if he were convicted of a crime in New York . Ultimately , McLeod was acquitted . 
 Shortly after the Caroline affair , President Harrison died and Vice @-@ President John Tyler ascended to the presidency . Tyler resisted Clay 's attempts to set the Whig agenda , and vetoed two bank bills against Crittenden 's advice . Crittenden and the other Whigs in Tyler 's cabinet — excepting Daniel Webster — resigned in protest of Tyler 's deviation from the traditional Whig agenda . Crittenden 's resignation was effective September 11 , 1841 . He returned to Kentucky with no political office and very little money . A group of his friends in Woodford County purchased his boyhood home and presented it to him as a gift on his return to Kentucky . 
 Crittenden was appointed to the United States Senate in 1842 , filling the vacancy caused by Clay 's resignation . In January 1843 , he was elected to a full term over Richard Mentor Johnson . The Whigs ' feud with President Tyler continued unabated , and some even talked of impeaching him , but Crittenden condemned that course of action . During the 27th and 28th Congresses , he served on the Committee on Military Affairs . He was an advocate of moderate protective tariffs and federal internal improvements . He opposed giving states the option to forgo apportionment , which would have allowed them to elect their congressmen at @-@ large . 
 = = = Polk administration = = = 
 Crittenden again supported Clay 's presidential bid in 1844 . Clay was widely considered the favorite not only for the Whig nomination , but to win the general election . None of the traditional campaign issues — Tyler 's " executive usurpation , " Clay 's " corrupt bargain " with John Quincy Adams , or the protective tariff — seemed to excite the electorate . However , the issue of the annexation of Texas changed the entire campaign . Clay made a tour of the South just before the Whig nominating convention and concluded that the sentiment in favor of annexation in that part of the country was not as strong as had been assumed in Washington , D.C. Acting on this belief , and against Crittenden 's advice , Clay sent a letter opposing annexation to Crittenden , asking him to have it published in the National Intelligencer . 
 Clay believed the Democrats would again nominate Martin Van Buren , who was ardently opposed to annexation , and this would keep annexation from becoming an issue in the campaign . Clay was nominated by acclamation at the Whig convention in Baltimore a week later . At the Democratic nominating convention a month later , however , Van Buren was unable to secure his party 's nomination , and the Democrats instead nominated James K. Polk , who strongly favored annexation . Clay tried to moderate his views on annexation , but his changes of position drew opposition from supporters of both sides of the issue as he attempted to find a middle ground . Polk went on to win the election in a close race . This was the last time Clay would be nominated for president , and many Whigs believed that , following Clay 's defeat , Crittenden was the new leader of their party . 
 In 1845 , the Senate took up the question of ending the joint occupancy of the Oregon Territory with Great Britain . Lewis Cass , a senator from Michigan , supported an immediate termination of the joint occupation agreement and maintained that a war with the British over the matter was inevitable . Crittenden disagreed , and insisted that Britain be given two years notice before the joint occupation of the territory was ended in order to allow time for a diplomatic resolution . Ultimately , Crittenden 's position prevailed , and a compromise with Britain was effected , setting the dividing line between the two nations ' claims at the 49th parallel north . 
 In 1846 , the United States entered the Mexican – American War in an attempt to gain control of Texas . Crittenden did not support the war , and after war was declared , he insisted that commissioners accompany the U.S. armies and attempt to broker peace at every opportunity . Throughout the war , he corresponded regularly with Generals Zachary Taylor and Winfield Scott . Crittenden 's sons , George and Thomas , both served in the war ; Thomas Crittenden served on Scott 's staff . President Polk consulted Crittenden regarding the terms of peace that should be accepted to end the war . Crittenden insisted that the terms of peace should not include the acquisition of territory to which the United States did not have a " just claim " , but the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo submitted to Congress in 1848 called for Mexico to give up not only its claims to Texas , but also to New Mexico , California , and all the territory in between . A few Whigs joined the Democratic majority in Congress to ratify the treaty and defeat the Wilmot Proviso , which would have banned slavery in the newly acquired territory . 
 Friends encouraged Crittenden to run for president in the 1848 election . A Nashville newspaper declared its support for him as early as 1846 . A Democratic senator from Rhode Island opined that Crittenden could win support from a sizable number of Democrats in addition to the support of his own party . George B. Kinkead desired to have the Kentucky General Assembly nominate Crittenden for president in 1847 . None of these overtures swayed Crittenden . " For Heaven 's sake don 't talk to me about the Presidency , " he said , rebuffing one early offer . Clay hoped Crittenden would again support him , but Crittenden concluded that Clay was no longer a viable candidate and threw his support behind Kentuckian Zachary Taylor . This decision caused a rift between the two friends , and they were not reconciled until years later when Clay lay on his deathbed . 
 = = = Campaigns of 1848 = = = 
 The Whig Party was also divided in Kentucky , not only between Clay and Taylor , but between gubernatorial candidates . William J. Graves , out of politics since his fatal shooting of Representative Cilley , had the backing of sitting Whig governor William Owsley , while Archibald Dixon had secured support from former Whig governor Robert P. Letcher . Letcher wrote to Crittenden that a Whig split and Democratic victory in the gubernatorial election would have an injurious effect on Whig hopes of carrying Kentucky in the 1848 presidential election ; another former Whig governor , Thomas Metcalfe , concurred . At the Whig nominating convention , both Graves and Dixon withdrew their names and a delegate from Logan County put forward Crittenden 's name without his consent . The nomination easily carried before Crittenden 's friends could block it . The governorship was less prestigious and paid less than Crittenden 's position in the Senate . He would also have to abandon his growing legal practice before the Supreme Court and would lose input on national issues of importance to him such as the territorial questions that grew out of the Mexican War . Nevertheless , he believed that his candidacy would unite the Whigs and help Taylor win Kentucky 's electoral votes in the general election . He accepted the nomination a week after it was made . 
 Elijah Hise , Chief Justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals , was the leading candidate for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination , but after the Whig nomination of Crittenden , Hise withdrew from consideration . The Democratic state convention then nominated Congressman Linn Boyd , but Boyd also declined the nomination . The Democrats were finally able to nominate Henderson lawyer Lazarus W. Powell . As Crittenden canvassed the state , his opponents charged him with disloyalty to Clay because he refused to support him in the 1848 election . Crittenden maintained that he supported Clay for the presidency over anyone else , but he had believed that Clay did not intend to seek the Whig nomination in 1848 . After Clay announced his candidacy , Crittenden said , he remained neutral in the Whigs ' choice . In the gubernatorial election , Crittenden defeated Powell by a vote of 65 @,@ 860 to 57 @,@ 397 . He resigned his Senate seat to assume the governorship . 
 With his own campaign at a close , Crittenden resumed direction of Taylor 's presidential campaign , dispatching accomplished Whig speakers to all parts of the country . After Taylor was elected , he offered Crittenden the post of Secretary of State . Appeals came in from both Whig and Democratic leaders across the country urging him to serve in the cabinet ; Taylor was inexperienced , and many felt that without Crittenden to guide him , his administration would fail . Taylor personally visited Crittenden in Frankfort on February 15 , 1849 , in hopes of persuading him to accept the appointment . Crittenden refused Taylor 's overtures , and Taylor similarly rejected Crittenden 's appeals to appoint his friend , Robert P. Letcher , as Postmaster General . Crittenden 's input is believed to have contributed significantly to the appointments of John M. Clayton as Secretary of State and Orlando Brown as Commissioner of Indian Affairs . 
 Crittenden 's reasons for refusing Taylor 's appointment were many . Partially , he declined out of respect for Clay 's feelings and partially he felt it would be viewed in the same way as Clay and Adams ' " corrupt bargain " in 1825 . Resigning the governorship also would have amounted to admitting to the Democrats ' charges that he only sought the office to help Taylor win the presidency . Finally , he had not been able to fully heal the breach in the Whig Party , and he wanted to remedy that situation . 
 = = = Gubernatorial administration = = = 
 During Crittenden 's term , he gave strong support to superintendent of public education , Robert Jefferson Breckinridge , who would come to be known as the " Father of public school system in Kentucky . " In response to Crittenden 's call for financial support for the improvement of public education , the General Assembly passed a common school law on February 26 , 1849 . This law established guidelines for several public officials regarding their administration of the common schools . The Assembly also reserved tolls collected on the Kentucky , Green , and Barren rivers for education , and passed a two percent property tax to fund the state 's schools . 
 Crittenden ordered the refurbishing of the state penitentiary , which had been damaged by a fire , and called for an extensive state geological survey . He also advised the creation of a sinking fund to retire the state 's debt . The state adopted a new constitution during Crittenden 's term , though Crittenden was not a delegate to the constitutional convention and apparently had little influence on the drafting of the document . Most Whigs opposed the calling of a constitutional convention because it would necessarily involve reapportionment of the state 's legislative districts and threaten Whig dominance in the General Assembly ; nevertheless , Crittenden belatedly supported the call for a convention during his 1848 gubernatorial campaign . 
 With the question of slavery becoming even more critical following the territorial acquisitions of the Mexican – American War , John C. Calhoun delivered an inflammatory address in December 1848 urging leaders of the southern states to resist " Northern aggression " , even if it meant secession from the Union . Crittenden strongly denounced secession in his annual messages to the legislature in 1848 and 1849 . In response , the state senate passed a resolution calling on Kentucky 's citizens to cherish the Union and resist any efforts to secede . 
 = = = Second term as attorney general = = = 
 Vice @-@ President Millard Fillmore ascended to the presidency upon Taylor 's death and offered Crittenden the post of Attorney General . Believing the rift in the Whig Party was now much improved , he accepted the offer and resigned the governorship in 1850 . Fillmore , an opponent of slavery , requested an opinion from Crittenden on the constitutionality of the fugitive slave law , one of the bills involved in the Compromise of 1850 . Specifically , he asked if the law suspended the writ of habeas corpus . Crittenden said that it did not , opining that it discharged a duty placed on Congress by the Constitution to return runaway slaves . Crittenden 's opinion was probably motivated by a desire to see the Compromise pass and avert further sectional tension . Fillmore , his misgivings assuaged , signed the bill , keeping the Compromise intact . 
 Questions regarding claims in Florida , some already considered by Crittenden during his first term as attorney general , continued during his second term . Specifically , some of the claimants objected to a legal provision , passed by Congress years after the Adams – Onís Treaty , that allowed the Secretary of the Treasury to refuse to pay claims awarded by Florida courts that he found not to be " just and equitable " . The claimants contended that this allowed an executive officer to overrule a judicial decision in violation of the doctrine of separation of powers . Crittenden held that the secretary 's ruling was just as much a judicial action as that of the Florida judges . Further , he reiterated his 1841 decision that no interest could be paid on claims arising from damages resulting from Jackson 's invasion . Despite this opinion , a Florida judge awarded interest to one of the claimants , and the government appealed the case to the Supreme Court , with Crittenden serving as the government 's counsel . The Court upheld Crittenden 's entire opinion in its ruling . 
 Crittenden was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Harvard University in 1851 . Later that year , he acted as Secretary of State during the illness of Daniel Webster . In this capacity , he wrote a vigorous warning to both Britain and France about interfering in the question of Cuban independence . He also encouraged adherence to the United States ' traditional policy of non @-@ interference in Europe during the celebrated visit of Hungarian revolutionary Louis Kossuth to the United States in 1851 . 
 In November 1851 , the General Assembly convened to elect a successor to Senator Joseph R. Underwood . Underwood , whose term would expire in 1853 , desired re @-@ election , and Whigs Charles S. Morehead and George Robertson had also announced their respective candidacies . Crittenden , whose term as attorney general also expired in 1853 , had publicly announced that he wished to return to the Senate after his service in President Fillmore 's cabinet , and upon learning this , Underwood and Morehead both withdrew from the race . Robertson was not expected to seriously challenge Crittenden , but following the withdrawals of the other candidates , Archibald Dixon entered the race . Historically an ally of Crittenden , Dixon 's entrance into the race after Crittenden 's announcement showed that he had switched his allegiance from Crittenden to Clay . Democrats , desirous to defeat Crittenden and embarrass the Whigs , pledged to vote against him at all costs , even if it meant electing Dixon . Crittenden 's friends , therefore , held back his name from nomination to spare him almost certain defeat . Balloting deadlocked for several days , with Clay supporters throwing their support to Dixon , Robertson , and Lieutenant Governor John B. Thompson , a compromise candidate . Another compromise was proposed whereby Clay , his health failing , would resign his Senate seat , creating two Senate vacancies and allowing both Dixon and Crittenden to be elected , but Clay refused to cooperate . Finally , on the night of December 11 , 1851 , the Whigs met in caucus and agreed to withdraw both Dixon and Crittenden and elect Thompson . 
 A week after the election , Clay resigned , but Crittenden now declined the appointment to fill his unexpired term . Instead , the legislature elected Dixon to the remainder of Clay 's term , set to expire in March 1855 . Three weeks before Clay 's death in 1852 , he sent for Crittenden , and the two were reconciled ; <unk> delivered a eulogy for Clay in September 1852 , publicly dispelling the feud . After Clay 's death , Crittenden became the most prominent Whig leader in Kentucky . He encouraged the party to support the nomination of Millard Fillmore for the presidency in 1852 , but the nomination ultimately went to Winfield Scott . Crittenden was proposed as the nominee for vice @-@ president , but he declined . Democrat Franklin Pierce carried the state by 2 @,@ 700 votes in the general election and Democrats also captured the governorship that year ; both were harbingers of the demise of the Whig Party in Kentucky . 
 = = = Return to the Senate = = = 
 On February 27 , 1853 , the twice @-@ widower Crittenden married his third wife , Elizabeth Moss . Moss was twice @-@ widowed , most recently to General William Henry Ashley . Moss was Crittenden 's wife until his death . Crittenden served as attorney general until the expiration of Fillmore 's term in 1853 . Following his service as attorney general , he returned to private life . He made a substantial amount of money establishing mining claims for his clients in the former Mexican territory . 
 In 1853 , the legislature was to elect a successor to Senator Dixon . Now satisfied that the feud between Clay and Crittenden had ended , Dixon did not seek re @-@ election , leaving Crittenden with no Whig opposition . On a joint vote of the two houses of the General Assembly , Crittenden was elected 78 – 59 over governor Lazarus Powell . 
 In the period between his election and his taking office , Crittenden was the lead defense counsel in the murder trial of Matt F. Ward , the son of one of Crittenden 's lifelong friends . Ward 's younger brother had been disciplined by the principal at Louisville Male High School the preceding November , and the elder Ward went to argue with the principal on behalf of his brother . In the ensuing encounter , Ward shot and killed the principal with a pistol . Public sentiment was heavily against Ward , and the trial was moved to Hardin County . During the week @-@ long trial , which began in April 1854 , Crittenden emphasized inconsistencies in the accounts of eyewitnesses and called prominent character witnesses such as Louisville mayor James Stephens Speed , Congressman William Preston , and Courier @-@ Journal editor George D. Prentice . He presented a case that Ward had acted in self @-@ defense . Because the prosecution sought the death penalty , Crittenden asserted that if the jury rendered an erroneous conviction , they would have no peace of mind knowing they had sentenced an innocent man to hang . 
 There was a tremendous public outcry when Ward was found not guilty . Newspapers across the nation condemned the verdict and Crittenden for his role in securing it . Only Prentice , in the Courier @-@ Journal , defended Crittenden and the Ward family . Several public meetings passed resolutions calling for Crittenden 's resignation from the Senate . After one such meeting , a mob gathered and Crittenden , Prentice , the Wards , and the twelve jurors were burned in effigy . 
 When he assumed his Senate seat in 1855 , Crittenden was sixty @-@ nine years old , the eldest member of that body . The Whig Party had practically dissolved by this time , and he joined many of his fellow Kentuckians in associating with the Know Nothing Party . Although he did not agree with all of the party 's principles , he would not associate with the Democrats , the party he had spent much of his career denouncing , nor would he associate with the new Republican Party because of their stance against slavery . Despite his misgivings about some of the party platform , he campaigned on behalf of Millard Fillmore , the party 's candidate in the 1856 presidential election . 
 In the early part of his term , Crittenden was concerned with quelling the violence in Kansas Territory . An opponent of the Kansas – Nebraska Act of 1854 , Crittenden also opposed repealing the Missouri Compromise unless the North agreed to substitute popular sovereignty for the exclusion of slavery north of the 36 ° 30 ' line . In early 1856 , he proposed sending General Winfield Scott to the Kansas Territory to ensure that fair elections were held there , but the proposal was blocked by the Pierce administration . He did not agree with all of the act proposed by Robert Toombs to allow for a constitutional convention in Kansas Territory , but he supported it as a step to bring peace there . He regarded the ratifications of both the Topeka Constitution and the Lecompton Constitution as invalid , and made one of the most highly regarded speeches of his career in opposition to the latter . His substitute bill that would have resubmitted the Lecompton Constitution to Kansas for another ratification vote was supported by Republicans , but it was ultimately defeated . So great was Crittenden 's influence after his actions on the Kansas question that Abraham Lincoln felt that Crittenden 's endorsement of Stephen Douglas cost Lincoln the Illinois senatorial election in 1858 . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 From 1858 to 1860 , Crittenden sought out moderates from all sections of the country to effect compromise on the territorial and slavery issues , thus averting war . In 1860 , he was named chair of the National Union Executive Committee , a group of congressmen and journalists who feared that sectional differences would destroy the Union . His efforts helped form the Constitutional Union Party later that year . Chosen as the keynote speaker at the party 's national convention on May 9 , 1860 , many urged him to become their nominee for president . At age seventy @-@ three , however , Crittenden was already contemplating retirement and instead orchestrated the nomination of John Bell , whom he actively supported in the 1860 presidential race . 
 Even after the election of Abraham Lincoln as president in 1860 , Crittenden rejected the idea that secession was inevitable and continued to work for the preservation of the Union . He believed that the current sectional crisis could — like all past disagreements in U.S. history — be resolved through compromise . However , he believed that this compromise must not be a simple legislative action , which could be altered or even repealed by a successive Congress , but amendments to the U.S. Constitution , which would be much more difficult to change . To that end , he proposed the Crittenden Compromise — a package of six constitutional amendments and four congressional resolutions — in December 1860 . Among the resolutions were a condemnation of Northern personal liberty laws and an assertion of the constitutionality of the fugitive slave law . The amendments would have restored the Missouri Compromise line and extended it to California as a line of demarcation between slave and free territories . Crittenden 's other amendments would have further guaranteed that slavery would remain legal indefinitely in Washington , D.C. , so long as it was legal in either Maryland or Virginia and that slaveholders would be reimbursed for runaway slaves . Also , the amendments denied Congress any power to interfere with the interstate slave trade or with slavery in the existing Southern states and made the fugitive slave law and Three @-@ Fifths Compromise perpetual in duration . 
 The compromise proposal was referred to a special committee proposed by Crittenden 's fellow Kentucky senator , Lazarus Powell . Though it was believed that Republicans in general , including their representatives on the committee , were disposed to accept Crittenden 's compromise or one substantially similar to it , President @-@ elect Lincoln had already instructed his trusted allies in the legislature to resist any plan to extend slavery into the territories . Consequently , when the committee held its first meeting , the Republican members blocked Crittenden 's plan and six others from coming to the floor for a vote . Despite their opposition , however , the Republicans presented no alternative plan . After the rejection of Crittenden 's plan in committee , Florida , Mississippi , Alabama , and Georgia followed South Carolina 's lead and passed ordinances of secession . 
 On January 3 , 1861 , Crittenden tried to salvage his plan by recommending to the full Senate that it be submitted to the people in referendum . It was widely believed that a referendum would recommend adoption of Crittenden 's plan , and Republicans in Congress used a variety of procedures to prevent a vote on allowing it . On January 16 , with procedural delays exhausted , New Hampshire Senator Daniel Clark moved to substitute for Crittenden 's plan a resolution stating that constitutional amendments were unnecessary to preserve the Union , and that enforcement of the Constitution and the present laws would eliminate the need for special sectional guarantees . With the senators from southern states ( both those that had seceded and those that had not ) refusing to vote , Republicans were left with a majority in the chamber and passed Clark 's substitute resolution , effectively killing Crittenden 's proposal . 
 Crittenden remained in Washington for a few weeks after Congress adjourned . Having learned that John Archibald Campbell , an <unk> serving on the Supreme Court , had decided to resign in light of his state 's secession , President Lincoln proposed to appoint Crittenden to the vacant seat . Lincoln 's cabinet approved , and the nomination papers were drafted , but Campbell belatedly reconsidered his resignation , and by the time he definitely determined to resign , Lincoln had changed his mind regarding Crittenden 's nomination . 
 Having failed to secure compromise at the federal level , Crittenden returned to Kentucky in early 1861 , attempting to persuade his home state to reject the overtures of fellow southern states and remain in the Union . On May 10 , 1861 , a conference was held to decide Kentucky 's course in the war . Crittenden joined Archibald Dixon and S. S. Nicholas as Unionist representatives at the conference ; the Southern Rights position was represented by John C. Breckinridge , Governor Beriah Magoffin , and Richard Hawes . The conference failed to produce a united course of action , but adopted the policy of armed neutrality . Unionists in the legislature , however , feared that the state militia and its commander Simon Bolivar Buckner , had Confederate sympathies . To counter any threat that the militia would seize control of the state for the South , the General Assembly organized the Home Guard , a separate militia controlled by a five @-@ man , pro @-@ Union commission . Crittenden enlisted in the Home Guard as a private and was part of a group styled the " Union Defense Committee " that secured weapons for the Home Guard from the federal government . 
 In April , the General Assembly called a border states convention to be held in Frankfort in May . Slates of delegates were nominated by both the Unionists and Southern <unk> , but war broke out before the election of delegates ; the Southern Rights delegates withdrew from the election , and the Unionist slate , including Crittenden , was chosen by default . On May 27 , 1861 , Crittenden was chosen chair of the convention and called it to order . With war having largely precluded any good the meeting could have accomplished , only nine of Kentucky 's twelve delegates were present , along with four from Missouri ( out of seven elected ) , and one from Tennessee ( and his election was questionable ) ; Virginia , Maryland , and Delaware sent no delegates . Ultimately , the convention accomplished little beyond calling on the southern states to reconsider their secession and on the northern states to moderate their demands . 
 Against his father 's wishes , Crittenden 's son George resigned his position as a lieutenant colonel in the U.S. Army to join the Confederate States Army ( in which he was promoted brigadier then major general ) , only to effectively lose his career in the early Confederate defeat at Mill Springs , Kentucky . George 's brother , Thomas Leonidas Crittenden , had been a member of Buckner 's State Guard , but joined the Union Army in September 1861 and was advanced to the rank of brigadier general , serving under Don Carlos Buell . Another son , Eugene , also served in the Union Army and attained the rank of colonel . One of John Crittenden 's grandsons , John Crittenden Coleman , enlisted with the Confederate Army , while another grandson , John Crittenden Watson , graduated from the U.S. Naval Academy and participated in David Farragut 's capture of New Orleans during the war . 
 = = = Service in the House of Representatives and death = = = 
 President Lincoln called a special session of Congress to convene July 4 , 1861 , and Kentucky held special elections in June to select congressmen for the special session . Crittenden had expressed his desire to retire from public service and initially refused pleas to become a candidate , but he finally consented to run in late May . He was elected over secessionist candidate William E. Simms ; in all , nine of Kentucky 's ten congressional districts selected Unionist candidates in the special election . Upon taking his seat , he was assigned to the Committee on Foreign Affairs . On July 10 , 1861 , he accompanied Simon B. Buckner on a visit to President Lincoln to secure a renewed commitment from Lincoln to respect Kentucky 's neutrality ; Lincoln agreed only to issue a declaration that he had no present designs on Kentucky but would not commit to restrict his future actions . In order to calm the fears of border state citizens concerned about the Union 's objectives in the war , he introduced the Crittenden – Johnson Resolution , which blamed the secessionist states for the war and stated that the object of the war was not the subjugation of those states , but the defense of the Constitution and the preservation of the Union . When those ends were achieved , the resolution stated , the war should cease . Kentucky Representative Henry C. Burnett asked that the question be divided . Burnett was one of only two votes against the portion of the resolution blaming the Southern states for the war ; the only dissent on the remaining portion came from Wisconsin 's John F. Potter and Ohio 's Albert G. Riddle . In the Senate , the resolution passed 30 – 5 , with Kentucky senators Breckinridge and Powell voting in the minority . In December 1861 the House refused , by a vote of 76 – 65 , to reaffirm the resolution . 
 After Congress adjourned in late July 1861 , Crittenden returned home to Frankfort , but soon had to flee the city as Confederate generals Braxton Bragg and Edmund Kirby Smith invaded Kentucky , capturing both Frankfort and Lexington . He took up temporary residence at Louisville 's Galt House hotel and was still residing there when Union General William " Bull " Nelson was killed by a fellow soldier there in 1862 . He returned to his home in Frankfort shortly after the Battle of Perryville drove the Confederates from the state on October 8 , 1862 . Returning for the regular congressional session , he became the conduit through which many reports of unconstitutional military arrests in Kentucky were channeled . He spoke against the admission of West Virginia to the Union on the grounds that Virginia had not consented to the creation of the state from its territory . He also opposed the Emancipation Proclamation and the use of slaves as soldiers in the war . 
 When he returned to Kentucky following the 37th Congress , Crittenden 's health was failing , and he frequently complained of shortness of breath and chest pain . He had determined to retire from Congress , but once again , friends persuaded him to stand for re @-@ election . Shortly after his nomination , Crittenden and his wife were en route to an alum spring in Indiana to seek treatment to alleviate the symptoms of his failing health when he collapsed in Louisville . After remaining <unk> at the home of a local doctor , he returned home to Frankfort , where he died on July 26 , 1863 . He was interred at the State Cemetery in Frankfort . Among his other notable kinsmen were nephews Thomas Theodore Crittenden , congressman from Missouri , and Thomas Turpin Crittenden , a general in the Union Army . In Kentucky , Crittenden County and the town of Crittenden are named for him . 
 = Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) = 
 " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " is a song by English musician George Harrison , released on his 1970 triple album All Things Must Pass . Harrison wrote the song as a tribute to Frank Crisp , a nineteenth @-@ century lawyer and the original owner of Friar Park – the Victorian Gothic residence in Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames , Oxfordshire , that Harrison purchased in early 1970 . Commentators have likened the song to a cinematic journey through the grand house and the grounds of the estate . 
 The recording features backing from musicians such as Pete Drake , Billy Preston , Gary Wright , Klaus Voormann and Alan White . It was co @-@ produced by Phil Spector , whose heavy use of reverb adds to the ethereal quality of the song . AllMusic critic Scott Janovitz describes " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " as offering " a glimpse of the true George Harrison – at once mystical , humorous , solitary , playful , and serious " . 
 Crisp 's eccentric homilies , which the former Beatle discovered inscribed inside the house and around the property , inspired subsequent compositions of Harrison 's , including " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " and " The Answer 's at the End " . Together with the Friar Park @-@ shot album cover for All Things Must Pass , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " established an association between Harrison and his Henley estate that has continued since his death in November 2001 . The composition gained further notability in 2009 when it provided the title for Harrison 's posthumous compilation Let It Roll . My Morning Jacket lead singer Jim James and Dhani Harrison are among the artists who have covered the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 Since 1965 , George Harrison and his wife , Pattie Boyd , had lived in Kinfauns in Surrey , south of London . The house was a bungalow and too small to accommodate a home recording studio , so the couple began a year @-@ long search for a larger property , concentrating on an area west of London encompassing the counties of Berkshire and Oxfordshire . In January 1970 , Harrison purchased the 120 @-@ room Friar Park , set on 33 acres of land , just west of Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames . Previously the home of an order of Roman Catholic nuns , the Salesians of Don Bosco , the four @-@ storey house and its grounds were in a dilapidated state , and it was not until the start of March that the Harrisons moved from a worker 's cottage and into the main residence . 
 The house was built in the 1898 , on the site of a thirteenth @-@ century monastery , by Sir Frank Crisp , a successful City of London solicitor , microscopist and horticulturalist well known for his eccentricities . Harrison described Crisp as a cross between Lewis Carroll and Walt Disney . While compiling Harrison 's autobiography , I , Me , Mine , in the late 1970s , Derek Taylor observed that Harrison " frequently talks as if [ Crisp ] were still alive " . Clean @-@ up work during the first few months at Friar Park unearthed various legacies of Crisp 's time there , such as stone and wood engravings containing whimsical homilies , some of which the Salesian nuns had concealed or painted over . The 10 acres of Crisp 's formal gardens were so overrun with weeds that Harrison and his friend from the Hare Krishna movement , Shyamasundar Das , used World War II @-@ era flamethrowers to clear some of the land . Among the garden features was a series of tiered lakes connected by tunnels , to the south @-@ east of the house , and an Alpine rock garden topped by a 100 @-@ foot replica of the Matterhorn , to the north @-@ west . 
 On 17 March 1970 , despite the property 's state of disrepair , the Harrisons threw a party to celebrate Pattie 's 26th birthday and St Patrick 's Day . According to their friend and assistant Chris O 'Dell , the guest list comprised all the other Beatles and their wives , as well as insiders such as Derek and Joan Taylor , Neil Aspinall and his wife Susie , Peter Brown , and Klaus and Christine Voormann . In what was a rare social get @-@ together for the Beatles , three weeks before Paul McCartney announced he was leaving the band , the party was a " great success " , O 'Dell writes . Shortly afterwards , Harrison invited members of the London @-@ based Hare Krishna movement to help with the restoration work , primarily in the grounds of Friar Park , and accommodated the devotees and their families in a wing of the house . While satisfying Harrison 's spiritual convictions , these visitors proved less welcome to Boyd , who found herself shut out of her husband 's life . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Following the Beatles ' break @-@ up on 10 April 1970 , and having long discussed the possibility of recording a solo album of his songs , Harrison committed to the project over dinner at Friar Park with Boyd , O 'Dell and Terry Doran , his friend and temporary estate manager . The following month , Harrison performed a selection of his compositions in London for Phil Spector , his co @-@ producer on All Things Must Pass , one of which was " Everybody , Nobody " . With its reference to roads and the UK 's Highway Code , " Everybody , Nobody " has been described by musical biographer Simon Leng as Harrison 's first " motoring " song . Harrison soon completely rewrote the lyrics and took part of the melody for his first musical tribute to Crisp and Friar Park – titled " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " . The result , in Leng 's opinion , was a signpost to its composer 's future involvement in film , an interest that , like gardening and motorsport , would flourish in a dwelling that offered " privacy without imprisonment " . 
 Leng writes that the song 's lyrics read " like a movie script " , with verse one " panning " from the house outside to the garden : 
 Let it roll across the floor 
 Through the hall and out the door 
 To the fountain of perpetual mirth 
 Let it roll for all it 's worth ... 
 In his book The Words and Music of George Harrison , Ian Inglis similarly views the song as " a guided tour of the house and grounds " , with Harrison " pointing out features of particular interest " . After " scene two " ' s setting – " among the weeds " and inside Friar Park 's formal maze – the third verse focuses on the property 's grottos and extended woodland . Verse three includes the lines " Through ye <unk> , here may ye rest awhile / <unk> and matching tie " , the last of which Leng describes as Harrison 's " first clear reference " to Monty Python , his favourite comedy troupe . 
 The song 's " final scene " focuses on what Leng calls " the illusions within the illusion " , as the narrative returns to the interior of the house and the " real people " living there . The lyrics include mentions of housekeepers and " the spiritually awakened Lord and Lady " , Leng writes , before the scene " rolls off into the unknown beyond " : 
 Fools ' illusions everywhere 
 Joan and Molly sweeps the stair 
 Eyes that shining full of inner light 
 Let it roll into the night ... 
 Rather than people , Inglis views the first of these lines as a reference to the " many extraordinary features Crisp had installed " , among them " fantastic statues , bizarre gargoyles , illuminated caverns ... and hidden stepping @-@ stones " . In a song otherwise free of religiosity , theologian Dale Allison interprets " Fools illusions everywhere " as a typical Harrison statement regarding māyā – the illusory nature of human existence . 
 According to Harrison 's later recollection , Spector suggested that " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " might attract a few cover versions if he changed the lyrics . In I , Me , Mine , Harrison acknowledges that the song was " a piece of personal indulgence " , but " those words were written because that 's what it was " – a tribute to Frank Crisp . A number of Crisp 's homilies directly inspired other Harrison songs during the first half of the 1970s , such as " Ding Dong , Ding Dong " and " The Answer 's at the End " . Harrison went on to identify philosophically with Crisp , of whom he writes elsewhere in I , Me , Mine : " Sir Frank helped my awareness ; whatever it was I felt became stronger , or found more expression by moving into that house , because everything stepped up or was heightened . " Leng considers that the song , along with " All Things Must Pass " , predicts Harrison 's eventual " retreat into an internal musical dialogue , set amid the woods and gardens of Friar Park " , a change of perspective marked by his 1979 eponymous solo album . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Harrison 's solo performance of " Everybody , Nobody " for Phil Spector took place at Abbey Road Studios on 20 May 1970 , a recording since made available unofficially on the Beware of ABKCO ! bootleg . Harrison completed the rewrite , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " , within a matter of weeks , judging by the appearance of pedal steel virtuoso Pete Drake on the session , which was held at Abbey Road between 26 May and early June . By late June , Drake was home in Nashville producing Ringo Starr 's second solo album , Beaucoups of Blues ( 1970 ) , the recording of which , author Bob Woffinden suggested in 1981 , " was probably completed more quickly than any one of the tracks on All Things Must Pass " . Part of the reason for Harrison taking so long to make his album was the interruption to recording caused by his frequent visits to Liverpool 's neurological hospital , where his mother was dying of cancer . Following her death on 7 July , Harrison invited his elder brothers Harry and Peter to live on the Friar Park estate and manage a team of full @-@ time gardeners and botanists . 
 The released recording of " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " , in Leng 's words , is as " an ethereal and echoey version of the Band 's minimalist melodicism " , in which Drake 's pedal steel guitar represents the " ectoplasmic " Crisp floating through the song , and Harrison " sounds like he 's recorded his vocal track in one of the park 's legendary caves " . The line @-@ up of musicians included three keyboards players , which Leng and author Bruce Spizer list as Bobby Whitlock ( on piano ) , Billy Preston ( organ ) and Gary Wright ( electric piano ) . Whitlock himself has stated that he played piano very rarely during the All Things Must Pass sessions , however . In his song @-@ by @-@ song discussion of the album , Whitlock offers a line @-@ up that includes Preston on piano and he writes of the other keyboard parts : " This track is swimming with the two <unk> " – Wright and Gary Brooker . 
 Although Leng credits the song 's two acoustic guitar parts to Harrison alone , Spizer suggests that guitarist Peter Frampton may have supplied one of these parts . Playing the bass , as he did on most of All Things Must Pass , was Klaus Voormann , who would be another to find sanctuary at Friar Park . Harrison offered him refuge from the media in March and April 1971 , when reports had Voormann linked to a supposed Beatles offshoot band , along with Harrison , Starr and John Lennon . 
 While relatively free of the Wall of Sound production style found elsewhere on the album , the song 's " sense of the mysterious " is conveyed through Spector 's liberal use of reverb , Alan Clayson writes , particularly on Alan White 's snare drum and Harrison 's murmured backing vocals following verses two and four . The words that Harrison half @-@ sings are " Oh , Sir Frankie Crisp " ; this part and the lead vocal were overdubbed at Trident Studios in central London , at Spector 's suggestion . Aided by the swirling sound of Hammond organ , and Leslie treatment on the piano and pedal steel tracks , the effect of Spector 's production enshrouded " the whole tale in a reverb @-@ induced haze " , as Scott Janovitz of AllMusic puts it . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Delayed from its intended release date by over a month due to the extended period of production , All Things Must Pass was issued on Apple Records in late November 1970 to great acclaim . The triple album featured a cover photo of Harrison dressed in gardening attire , seated on the main lawn of Friar Park 's south garden and surrounded by four figures from Crisp 's extensive collection of Bavarian gnomes . Having been stolen " in about 1871 " , according to photographer Barry Feinstein , the figures had just been returned to Friar Park and placed on the grass . Commentators interpret Feinstein 's photo as representing Harrison 's removal from the Beatles ' collective identity , and the cover helped establish a <unk> between Harrison and Friar Park that Alan Clayson has described as equalling that between Queen Elizabeth II and Windsor Castle . 
 On release , " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " ' s lyrical affectations provoked comment from American reviewers in particular . Ben Gerson of Rolling Stone remarked that there were " lots of ' Ye 's ' to remind us it 's a ballad " , but identified the song as part of the album 's " musical core " , the " brooding essays on living , loving , and dying " . Village Voice contributor Nicholas Schaffner recognised it as an " olde English ballad " dedicated to what he mistakenly called " George 's 17th @-@ century castle " . To the NME 's Alan Smith , the track was a " meandering song @-@ tale ... which may take a little longer for me to appreciate " . Acknowledging that listeners in 1970 – 71 might have been " mystified " by Harrison 's lyrics , Bruce Spizer has written of this " catchy ballad " : " its beautiful melody and hook @-@ laden refrain ensured that it would be one of the album 's highlights . " 
 More recently , Clayson has described " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as " [ c ] <unk> in mediaeval expression " and the most " Beatle @-@ esque " of all the songs found on All Things Must Pass , featuring an arrangement that is " a breath of fresh air " . Former Mojo editor Mat Snow also acknowledges the cryptic quality of the lyrics – " unless one happened to know that George and Pattie had just moved to ... a magnificent Gothic pile near Henley @-@ on @-@ Thames " – and considers the song " hauntingly beautiful " . Less impressed , in The Rough Guide to the Beatles , Chris Ingham deems the track " drearily whimsical " and an example of how " the main song set [ on All Things Must Pass ] dips in the middle " . 
 Along with his description of it as a " rolling filmic snapshot " of Friar Park , Simon Leng views " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as a " musical companion piece " to Feinstein 's album cover image : " [ The song ] conjures an allegorical dream world , populated by smirking gnomes ... a disembodied Victorian lawyer , and , in George Harrison , a refugee from the world 's attention . " Leng sees Harrison 's 1976 film clip for " Crackerbox Palace " as " the celluloid realization of the ' Let it Roll ' script " . Scott Janovitz likewise views the track as " a tour of the grounds " while praising its " darkly beautiful " melody . " Like no other Harrison song , " Janovitz adds , " ' The Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ' offers a glimpse of the true George Harrison – at once mystical , humorous , solitary , playful , and serious . " 
 = = Subsequent releases and cover versions = = 
 The title of Harrison 's only career @-@ spanning compilation album , Let It Roll : Songs by George Harrison ( 2009 ) , was derived from " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp ( Let It Roll ) " , which also appears on the album . Shortly after Harrison 's death on 29 November 2001 , My Morning Jacket lead singer Jim James recorded the track for his EP of George Harrison cover songs , Tribute To , issued in August 2009 . 
 In 2010 , the producers of CBS 's situation comedy How I Met Your Mother used " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " as a musical theme bookending season 6 of the show . Coinciding with the release of Martin Scorsese 's documentary George Harrison : Living in the Material World , a version of the song by Alessi 's Ark appeared on Harrison Covered , a tribute CD accompanying the November 2011 issue of Mojo magazine . 
 Los Angeles band Big Black Delta and Harrison 's son Dhani performed " Ballad of Sir Frankie Crisp " on the US television show Conan in September 2014 . The performance was part of a week @-@ long promotion for George Harrison 's The Apple Years 1968 – 75 box set . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musicians who performed on the recording are believed to be as follows : 
 George Harrison – vocals , acoustic guitars , backing vocals 
 Pete Drake – pedal steel 
 Bobby Whitlock – piano 
 Billy Preston – organ 
 Gary Wright – electric piano 
 Klaus Voormann – bass 
 Alan White – drums 
 uncredited – tambourine 
 = The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz = 
 The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz is a 2005 American @-@ Canadian television film directed by Kirk Thatcher and starring Ashanti and The Muppets with supporting roles done by Jeffrey Tambor , Quentin Tarantino , David Alan Grier , and Queen Latifah . The film was produced by Bill Barretta and written by Debra Frank , Steve L. Hayes , Tom Martin , and Adam F. Goldberg based on a story by Frank and Hayes . 
 A modernized adaptation of L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , the story follows young Dorothy Gale , who works in her Aunt Em 's diner , but dreams of becoming a singer somewhere beyond her small Kansas town . Swept up by a tornado , in her trailer home with pet prawn Toto , she lands in Oz and embarks on a journey to meet the Wizard who can help make her dreams come true . 
 The film co @-@ produced by The Muppets Studio , Touchstone Television , and Fox Television Studios , in association with The Jim Henson Company . Right after Disney bought the rights to The Muppets in 2004 , pre @-@ production on The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz took place throughout February 2004 , and filming occurred during September 2004 . ABC made several changes to the film after the initial script was written , ultimately deciding to adapt plot elements from Baum 's original novel rather than the 1939 MGM film , The Wizard of Oz . As with the preceding Muppet films , The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz became a musical , and included five new songs written and composed by Michael Giacchino . The production marked the feature film debut of Eric Jacobson as the performer of Sam Eagle , a character originally performed by Frank Oz . 
 The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz premiered on April 27 , 2005 at the Tribeca Film Festival . The film 's television premiere was broadcast on ABC on May 20 , 2005 , as the final ABC Movie of the Week . Overall , the film ended up receiving negative reviews from critics . Most critics agreed that the film was too mature for young audiences , and that the cameo scenes and popular culture references were unnecessary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dorothy Gale ( Ashanti ) is an orphaned teenage girl living in a trailer park in Kansas . Her Aunt Em ( Queen Latifah ) and Uncle Henry ( David Alan Grier ) own a diner , to which Dorothy works for room and board . Her dream of becoming a singer is slim , but when waiting on some truckers Dorothy overhears that the Muppets are conducting a cross @-@ country show called " Star Hunt " and are looking for a backup singer . Aunt Em disapproves , but with Uncle Henry 's best wishes , she goes to the audition . However , the Muppets are about to end the audition , and Dorothy only manages to give them a demo CD that she created beforehand . In returning home , the civil defense sirens sound as a tornado is headed for Dorothy 's trailer park . When Aunt Em and Uncle Henry run into the county storm shelter for safety , Dorothy hurries back to her family 's mobile home to get Toto , her pet prawn . She does not make it out in time , and the two are swept by the tornado across the vast fields of Kansas . When Dorothy climbs out of the wreckage , she finds that Toto ( Pepé the King Prawn ) can talk and that she is no longer in Kansas . 
 Dorothy and Toto discover that they are in Munchkinland , a small town part of the vast Land of Oz . After discussing her situation with the town 's people , the Munchkins ( played by Rizzo the Rat and the other rats ) , she learns that the land 's ruler the Wizard , has the power to grant her wish of becoming a famous singer . She meets the Good Witch of the North ( Miss Piggy ) , and receives a pair of magic silver slippers from the Wicked Witch of the East ( Miss Piggy ) , the Witch of the North 's sister who was killed when Dorothy 's trailer fell on her . Soon after , she embarks on a journey with Toto on the yellow brick road to meet the Wizard of Oz , who lives in the Emerald City , the capital of Oz . On her journey , she meets three creatures : a Scarecrow ( Kermit ) , a Tin Thing ( Gonzo ) , and a Cowardly Lion ( Fozzie ) . They are also seeking the Wizard of Oz to give them a brain , heart , and courage , respectively . The group meets various obstacles involving a deep gorge where the Kalidah Critics ( Statler and Waldorf ) are heckling them and a Poppy Field Club run by Clifford which nearly puts them to sleep . After arriving at the Emerald City and meeting the Wizard , Dorothy and her friends are sent to retrieve the Wicked Witch of the West 's magic eye , a tool she uses to see anything she desires in the Land of Oz . 
 The group assumes that completing this task will result in the granting of their wishes . The Wicked Witch of the West ( Miss Piggy ) sees them coming and consults with her pet Foo @-@ Foo and her henchman Johnny <unk> . When the Wicked Witch of the West plans to have either her pack of 40 great man @-@ eating wolves , a flock of 40 crows of despair , a swarm of angry black bees , a group of vicious squirrels , or a group of bloodthirsty cockatoos to do away with them , Johnny tells her that the animals that work for her are unavailable due to various reasons . This forces her to resort to using her Magic Biker Cap to call Sal Minella and the other Flying Monkeys ( played by Sweetums , Crazy Harry , Black Dog , Calico , Old Tom , Spotted Dick , and Aretha from Fraggle Rock ) to deal with them . The Witch and the Flying Monkeys capture Dorothy and Lion while Scarecrow and Tin Thing are dismantled by the Flying Monkeys . 
 After being threatened to be killed by her , Toto calls the Munchkins , who set Dorothy free and hold up the witch . During the final battle , it cuts away to a scene where Quentin Tarantino is with Kermit , discussing ideas for how Dorothy can defeat the Wicked Witch of the West . Tarantino 's ideas are deemed too expensive and too violent for a Muppet movie , so they agree for Dorothy to do a powerful kick on the witch . Cutting back to the action , Dorothy kicks the witch into her own " bottled water bath " which contains tap water ( to which she is severely allergic ) . Angel Marie admitted that he filled the water bottles with tap water to restock them . This action causes the Wicked Witch of the West to melt as Johnny averts Foo @-@ Foo 's eyes . With the Wicked Witch of the West dead , Dorothy finds the magic eye unharmed and floating in the tub and grabs it . 
 Dorothy gains control of the Flying Monkeys by giving back the group 's Magic Biker Cap to Sal Minella . She has Scarecrow and Tin Thing rebuilt by the Flying Monkeys . Then she and her friends travel back to the Emerald City to have their wishes granted . When they all storm into the Wizard 's room , they discover it is merely a Hollywood effects stage and that the Wizard ( Jeffrey Tambor ) is just an ordinary man , pretending . He asked for the witch 's eye so that she could not see him for who he really was . Even so , he still proceeds to grant their wishes . Dorothy finally becomes a singer in the Land of Oz , but she realizes that all she ever really wanted was to go back home and be with her family . After traveling back to Munchkinland , she meets Glinda the Good Witch of the South ( Miss Piggy ) , who tells her that if she clicks her heels together three times , she will be able to go anywhere she desires , contrary to how the Good Witch of the North said to get to the Emerald City . She does so , saying " take me home to Aunt Em " . 
 She is then spun by the slippers ' charm into Kansas , and , much to her surprise , she finds out that Kermit was looking for her , saying that she had the best voice they heard on the whole search , and that she has been chosen to go on the Star Hunt . Dorothy , having been reunited with her aunt and uncle , and feeling that she is not ready to leave Kansas to become a real star , rejects , but Aunt Em says that she wants her to go with the Muppets on their Star Hunt , much to her even bigger surprise . She then sings " Good Life " on television with them as the film ends . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ashanti as Dorothy Gale : A Kansas teen dreaming of leaving her home and becoming a singer . 
 Queen Latifah as Aunt Em : Dorothy 's aunt and co @-@ owner of the family diner in Kansas . 
 David Alan Grier as Uncle Henry : Dorothy 's uncle and co @-@ owner of the family diner . 
 Jeffrey Tambor as The Wizard of Oz : The legendary Wizard of Oz . This is Tambor 's second appearance in a Muppet film , the first being Muppets from Space . 
 Quentin Tarantino as Himself ( Extended version ) : In a short appearance with Kermit the Frog , Tarantino discusses ideas on how to stop the Wicked Witch of the West . Despite the fact that his role is small his name is still mentioned in the movie trailer and listed on the cover of both the Video and DVD . 
 Kelly Osbourne as Dorothy Gale ( post @-@ makeover ) ( Extended version ) : Appears in a brief cameo as Dorothy when she first comes out of the Magic Makeover Machine in Emerald City . 
 = = = Muppet performers = = = 
 Steve Whitmire as : 
 Kermit the Frog as Himself / Scarecrow : A scarecrow in search of a brain . Scarecrow is constantly mocked by the crows in Oz , as he is defenseless and cannot do anything to stop them . Prior to Dorothy 's journey , Kermit organizes a talent scout for a star for a new show . After Dorothy 's return , he hires her . 
 Beaker : He appears as an Emerald City Technician . Beaker also appears at the end in the Muppets ' show . 
 Rizzo the Rat as Mayor of Munchkinland / Himself . He occasionally aids Dorothy when she is in danger . Prior to Dorothy 's journey , Rizzo is seen assisting Bean Bunny in loading equipment into the Muppets ' bus . He returns for the Muppets ' show at the end of the film . 
 Statler as Kalidah Critic # 1 . He heckles Dorothy and her friends as they try to cross a log . 
 Dave Goelz as : 
 The Great Gonzo as the Tin Thing / Himself : A robot in search of a heart . Originally human , the Tin Thing was turned into a robot by the Wicked Witch of the West who was angry at him for asking to leave her palace and marry his fiancée , Camilla the Chicken . He also appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . 
 Dr. Bunsen Honeydew : He appears as an Emerald City Technician . He also appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . 
 Waldorf as Kalidah Critic # 2 . He and the other Kalidah Critic heckles Dorothy and her friends as they try to cross a log . 
 Zoot : He performs backup for the songs " Naptime " , and for the " The Witch is in the House " , and appears at the end of the film in the Muppets ' new show . 
 Bill Barretta as : 
 Pepé the King Prawn as Toto : Dorothy 's pet prawn and first companion on her journey . In Kansas , Toto was a prawn that lived in a fish bowl in Dorothy 's room . Strangely , Pepé doesn 't appear in the finale with the other Muppets . 
 Dr. Teeth : He performs " Naptime " , and also performs in " The Witch is in the House " . He appears again at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . 
 Johnny <unk> : He appears as one of the henchmen of the Wicked Witch of the West , and is supposedly her love interest . 
 Lew Zealand : He briefly appears in Emerald City at the red carpet event , asking Dorothy to sign his boomerang fish . 
 The Swedish Chef : He provides the Bran Flakes for the Wizard . 
 Bubba the Rat : He assists the Mayor of Munchkin Land in getting Dorothy and the Lion out of <unk> . 
 Eric Jacobson as : 
 Miss Piggy as Herself : She appears early on with Kermit , and tries to get rid of Dorothy . She returns at the end of the film for the Muppets ' show . 
 as The Wicked Witch of the West : The Wicked Witch that terrifies all that meet her . 
 as The <unk> the Good Witch of the North : The Good Witch that gives Dorothy the silver slippers . 
 as The Glinda the Good Witch of the South : The other Good Witch that shows Dorothy how to get home . 
 as The Wicked Witch of the East : The original owner of the magic slippers who was killed by Dorothy 's falling mobile home . 
 Fozzie Bear as The Cowardly Bear / Himself : A nervous and frightened lion stand @-@ up comic that accompanies Dorothy and the others on their journey . Fozzie shows up at the end of the film in the Muppets ' show . 
 Animal : He performs in the songs " Naptime " and " The Witch is in the House " . 
 Sam Eagle : He appears as the Guardian of the Gates . Sam doesn 't appear in the Muppets ' show at the end of the film . 
 Brian Henson as : 
 Sal Manilla as Sal , a Flying Monkey : He accompanies Johnny for much of the film . 
 Kevin Clash as : 
 Clifford : He appears as the manager of the Poppy Field Club . 
 Mulch : He appears briefly in <unk> . 
 Black Dog as a Flying Monkey 
 John Kennedy as : 
 Angel Marie as a Flying Monkey : A servant of the Wicked Witch of the West . 
 Floyd Pepper : He performs in " Naptime " and " The Witch is in the House " . 
 Rickey Boyd as : 
 Scooter : He appears as the Wizard 's Assistant . 
 Crazy Harry as a Flying Monkey 
 Tyler Bunch as : 
 Janice : She performs in " Naptime " and " The Witch is in the House " . 
 Old Tom as a Flying Monkey 
 Pop and <unk> 
 Julianne Buescher as 
 Wizard 's Green Lady and Chicken Forms 
 John Henson as 
 Sweetums as a Flying Monkey : He provides the keys for the Cowardly Lion 's escape from his cage . 
 Mike Quinn as 
 Spotted Dick as a Flying Monkey 
 Allan Trautman as 
 Crow : He bothers the Scarecrow . 
 Old Tom as a Flying Monkey 
 Alice <unk> as : 
 Camilla the Chicken : The Tin Thing 's girlfriend . The two are reunited later on in the film . 
 Foo @-@ Foo : Foo @-@ Foo appears as the pet of the Wicked Witch of the West . 
 Additional Muppets performed by Adam Behr , <unk> Cassidy , Drew Massey , Gord Robertson , Geoff Redknap , and James Rowley . 
 Steve Whitmire and Dave Goelz appear as audience members at Aunt Em 's Diner during the finale . 
 = = Production = = 
 When The Walt Disney Company acquired the Muppets franchise from The Jim Henson Company in February 2004 , the Muppets were re @-@ introduced to the public by marketing products and guest appearing on television shows such as Good Morning America and America 's Funniest Home Videos . After a new film titled The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz was announced by The Jim Henson Company , Fox Television Studios , Touchstone Television , and the Muppets Holding Company signed on to help produce it . 
 Filming took place throughout September 2004 in Vancouver , British Columbia . Before filming , ABC announced that the production would adapt elements from the original 1900 book , rather than the 1939 <unk> such as the Silver Shoes instead of the Ruby slippers . On August 25 , 2004 , it was announced that Hilary Duff , Jessica Simpson , and Ashanti had auditioned for the role of Dorothy Gale , but Ashanti had won the part . When asked about how she felt about working with the Muppets , Ashanti replied , " I love children , and to me , the Muppets are just like little kids . " She also stated , " The director had to give me a few pointers and tips for acting with them , but the most important thing that I learned was to keep eye contact . " Also in August 2004 , BBC News reported that Quentin Tarantino would appear in the film . 
 = = Music = = 
 Michael Giacchino , who had previously worked on a Muppet @-@ related project which is video game Muppet Monster Adventure and would become an Academy Award @-@ winning composer , worked with Jeannie Lurie , Adam Cohen , Debra Frank , and Steve Hayes to write five original songs for the film . The five songs created were " Kansas " , " When I 'm With You " , " It 's a Good Life " , " The Witch is in the House " , and " Nap Time " . " When I 'm With You " was later nominated for a Primetime Emmy in the Outstanding Music and Lyrics category , but lost to " Mary Jane / Mary Lane " from Reefer Madness . Ashanti and the Muppet cast , mainly Bill Barretta and Eric Jacobson , contributed the vocals for each of the songs . Ted <unk> produced the album , Booker T. Washington White prepared the songs for recording , and Paul Silveira and Brandon Christy mixed the film 's songs . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz official soundtrack was released on May 17 , 2005 . The album was an enhanced soundtrack titled Best of Muppets featuring The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz as it was not a film @-@ specific soundtrack , but an album featuring the Muppets ' best songs from The Muppet Show as well as songs from the film . 
 Track listing 
 " ( Gotta Get Outta ) Kansas " - Ashanti 
 " When I 'm With You " – Ashanti , Kermit , Gonzo , Fozzie & Pepe 
 " The Witch Is in the House " – Miss Piggy with Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem 
 " Calling All Munchkins " – The Munchkin Tap @-@ Your @-@ Knuckles Choir 
 " Good Life " – Ashanti 
 " Nap Time " – Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem 
 " The Muppet Show Theme " – The Muppets 
 " Mah Nà Mah Nà " – Mahna Mahna & the Two <unk> 
 " Bein ' Green " – Kermit the Frog 
 " Rainbow Connection " – Kermit & Muppets With Sesame Street Gang 
 " Lady of Spain " – Marvin Suggs & his <unk> 
