 " The Great Money Caper " is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' twelfth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 10 , 2000 . In the episode , Homer , along with his son Bart , con people out of their money in order to pay for Homer 's broken car . However , after having paid for the repairs , the two decide to continue grifting , which leads to some troublesome situations . 
 The episode was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Michael Polcino . The episode 's title is a parody on The Great Muppet Caper . The episode features American actor Edward Norton as con artist Devon Bradley , and would feature The Doors guitarist Robby Krieger as himself , however the scene in which he appeared was removed because Mike Scully , the show runner for the episode , felt the scene was unnecessary . In its original American broadcast , the episode received a 9 @.@ 7 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The family goes to a magic @-@ themed restaurant . While there , Marge gets drunk on Long Island Iced Teas and Bart becomes so fascinated with magic that he buys a magician 's kit from the gift shop . On the way home , a sturgeon falls from the sky ( implicitly from the space station Mir ) onto the family car 's hood , which is severely damaged . Homer and Bart start their magic show as a way to make money , but the act becomes a failure , and Homer leaves Bart to do the rest of the act on his own . Bart is left out on the street , and people begin giving him money so he can get home on public transportation . 
 As Homer drives home , he sees Bart in a taxi , and when he gets home he sees him eating a steak dinner . They decide they can make money grifting , however Marge and Lisa begin suspecting of them after they " worked " without Bart 's kit , which they both left behind at home . Homer and Bart continue to grift after they have fixed the car , and Grampa volunteers to help them grift , since he was a con @-@ artist during the Great Depression . Grampa , Homer and Bart grift the residents at the Springfield Retirement Castle . While performing the grift , they are arrested by an FBI agent . When Homer and Bart get to jail , they realize the FBI agent himself is a con man , and conned them out of their money and the car . 
 Homer and Bart say the car was stolen in the church parking lot . The next morning they are surprised however to learn that Groundskeeper Willie was arrested for stealing the car , as he matched the description they gave of the carjacker as a " foreign loner with a wild , bushy hair " . Not wanting to admit they were conned , Homer and Bart go along with Marge 's theory . At the trial , the Blue Haired Lawyer leads Homer to say that it was Willie who stole the car . After Willie is proven guilty , he snatches Wiggum 's gun and shoots Principal Skinner . At this point Homer finally confesses that he got conned but Marge and the townspeople themselves tell Homer and Bart that they set up the trial and the carjacking to teach them a lesson on conning people , revealing that Skinner was not really shot ( it was a fake blood pack ) , the judge was Grampa wearing a latex mask , and the con man who stole their car was an actor called Devon Bradley . As Lisa is ready to explain why the town , media and police officials had " nothing better to do " than show them the consequences of their actions , Otto runs through the courtroom doors , shouting , ' Surf 's Up ! ' . The scene then cuts to Springfield at the beach , with characters from the episode surfing , including the waiter from the restaurant , the two astronauts from the Mir space station and the sturgeon swimming in the sea . Watching July 7 . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Great Money Caper " was written by Carolyn Omine and directed by Michael Polcino . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on December 10 , 2000 . 
 Originally , the episode would be about pool hustling , however as writing ensued , the script went through several incarnations until the Simpsons writers settled on the grifting story seen in the episode . Omine read several books about <unk> for preparation for writing the episode . The other writers also prepared themselves by watching several heist films , including House of Games , Paper Moon and The Sting , the latter two of which are referenced in the episode . For example , the revelation that Devon Bradley , the FBI agent in the episode who is revealed to be a con artist , was inspired by such films . 
 In a scene in the episode , Homer and Bart exit the Magic Palace 's gift shop , only to end up in another gift shop . The scene was based on an experience of the episode 's show runner Mike Scully , who , in order to exit the Lance Burton Theatre after a magic show , had to pass through a gift shop . The ending scene of the episode went through several changes and was as a result completed late in the episode 's production . The writers had conceived the courtroom scene , but they were stuck trying to come up with an ending after Skinner had been shot . They eventually decided that the trial was a scam staged by the townspeople , and Simpsons writer George Meyer pitched the surfing scene that closed the episode . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 A scene that was eventually dropped from the episode featured Robby Krieger , guitarist of the American rock band The Doors , as himself . Krieger had been promised a guest role on The Simpsons after the staff were allowed to use the Doors song " The End " for the season 11 episode " Hello Gutter , Hello <unk> " . However , during production , Scully thought that the scene stood out too much and that Krieger 's cameo felt " too obviously shoe @-@ horned in , " so the scene ended up being cut from the episode . The scene was later included in The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season DVD set . To this day , Krieger has not officially been featured in an episode of The Simpsons . The con artist Devon Bradley was portrayed by American actor and director Edward Norton . Scully hired Norton for the role after James L. Brooks , one of The Simpsons ' producers , told Scully that Norton was " a big fan of the show " and was willing to guest star in an episode . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , Scully noted that Norton was very versatile and could imitate many Simpsons characters perfectly . The announcer at the " Magic Palace " who says the line " Folks , this is not part of the act " was voiced by Scully . According to him , the line was " a last @-@ minute addition " to the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode 's plot is loosely based on the American comedy film Paper Moon , which was also the inspiration for Bart and Homer 's swindle of Ned Flanders in the episode . The title of the episode is a parody of the 1981 film The Great Muppet Caper . The title was pitched by Simpsons writer Matt Selman . The episode 's ending lampoons the cliche of having twist endings at the end of heist films . ” Magic Palace ” , the magic @-@ themed restaurant that the Simpsons visit in the beginning of the episode , is a parody on The Magic Castle , a nightclub in the Hollywood district of Los Angeles , California . Marge 's line " I didn 't say that for clapping " is a reference to a speech given by John Wayne while he was intoxicated . Homer wants to buy a singing rubber fish after their first con . At the end of the episode , Bart exclaims “ Cowabunga ! ” , a catch @-@ phrase of the main characters in the animated television series Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles . In the scene where Grampa joins Bart and Homer , Grampa mentions the film The Sting II . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 10 , 2000 , " The Great Money Caper " received a 9 @.@ 7 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , meaning it was seen by 9 @.@ 7 % of the population at the time of its broadcast . Among children , the episode was watched by 2 @.@ 8 million viewers . 
 In his review of The Simpsons : The Complete Twelfth Season DVD box set , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide praised the episode . He wrote that , unlike other episodes in the season , " The Great Money Caper " did not " rely on too many gimmicks " and therefore felt more realistic , even though he does not consider grifting an " everyday activity . " He concluded his review by writing that the episode " does well for itself . " Jason Bailey of DVD Talk described the episode as being one of the season 's highlights . On the other hand , Matt Haigh of Den of Geek cited " The Great Money Caper " as one of the worst episodes of the season , as well as the whole series . In his review , Haigh criticized the Simpsons writers for not making sense of the story , and denounced the episode 's ending for being " abrupt " . He described the episode as " a bad stain on an otherwise great franchise " . 
 = Kuiper belt = 
 The Kuiper belt / <unk> / or Dutch pronunciation : [ ' <unk> ] , sometimes called the Edgeworth – Kuiper belt , is a circumstellar disc in the Solar System beyond the planets , extending from the orbit of Neptune ( at 30 AU ) to approximately 50 AU from the Sun . It is similar to the asteroid belt , but it is far larger — 20 times as wide and 20 to 200 times as massive . Like the asteroid belt , it consists mainly of small bodies , or remnants from the Solar System 's formation . Although many asteroids are composed primarily of rock and metal , most Kuiper belt objects are composed largely of frozen volatiles ( termed " ices " ) , such as methane , ammonia and water . The Kuiper belt is home to three officially recognized dwarf planets : Pluto , Haumea , and Makemake . Some of the Solar System 's moons , such as Neptune 's Triton and Saturn 's Phoebe , are also thought to have originated in the region . 
 The Kuiper belt was named after Dutch @-@ American astronomer Gerard Kuiper , though he did not actually predict its existence . In 1992 , 1992 QB1 was discovered , the first Kuiper belt object ( KBO ) since Pluto . Since its discovery , the number of known KBOs has increased to over a thousand , and more than 100 @,@ 000 KBOs over 100 km ( 62 mi ) in diameter are thought to exist . The Kuiper belt was initially thought to be the main repository for periodic comets , those with orbits lasting less than 200 years . However , studies since the mid @-@ 1990s have shown that the belt is dynamically stable , and that comets ' true place of origin is the scattered disc , a dynamically active zone created by the outward motion of Neptune 4 @.@ 5 billion years ago ; scattered disc objects such as Eris have extremely eccentric orbits that take them as far as 100 AU from the Sun . 
 The Kuiper belt should not be confused with the theorized Oort cloud , which is a thousand times more distant and is mostly spherical . The objects within the Kuiper belt , together with the members of the scattered disc and any potential Hills cloud or Oort cloud objects , are collectively referred to as trans @-@ Neptunian objects ( TNOs ) . 
 Pluto is the largest and most @-@ massive member of the Kuiper belt and the largest and the second @-@ most @-@ massive known TNO , surpassed only by Eris in the scattered disc . Originally considered a planet , Pluto 's status as part of the Kuiper belt caused it to be reclassified as a dwarf planet in 2006 . It is compositionally similar to many other objects of the Kuiper belt , and its orbital period is characteristic of a class of KBOs , known as " plutinos " , that share the same 2 : 3 resonance with Neptune . 
 = = History = = 
 After the discovery of Pluto in 1930 , many speculated that it might not be alone . The region now called the Kuiper belt was hypothesized in various forms for decades . It was only in 1992 that the first direct evidence for its existence was found . The number and variety of prior speculations on the nature of the Kuiper belt have led to continued uncertainty as to who deserves credit for first proposing it . 
 = = = Hypotheses = = = 
 The first astronomer to suggest the existence of a trans @-@ Neptunian population was Frederick C. Leonard . Soon after Pluto 's discovery by Clyde Tombaugh in 1930 , Leonard pondered whether it was " not likely that in Pluto there has come to light the first of a series of ultra @-@ Neptunian bodies , the remaining members of which still await discovery but which are destined eventually to be detected " . That same year , astronomer Armin O. Leuschner suggested that Pluto " may be one of many long @-@ period planetary objects yet to be discovered . " 
 In 1943 , in the Journal of the British Astronomical Association , Kenneth Edgeworth hypothesized that , in the region beyond Neptune , the material within the primordial solar nebula was too widely spaced to condense into planets , and so rather condensed into a myriad of smaller bodies . From this he concluded that " the outer region of the solar system , beyond the orbits of the planets , is occupied by a very large number of comparatively small bodies " and that , from time to time , one of their number " wanders from its own sphere and appears as an occasional visitor to the inner solar system " , becoming a comet . 
 In 1951 , in an article for the journal Astrophysics , Gerard Kuiper speculated on a similar disc having formed early in the Solar System 's evolution ; however , he did not think that such a belt still existed today . Kuiper was operating on the assumption common in his time that Pluto was the size of Earth and had therefore scattered these bodies out toward the Oort cloud or out of the Solar System . Were Kuiper 's hypothesis correct , there would not be a Kuiper belt today . 
 The hypothesis took many other forms in the following decades . In 1962 , physicist Al G.W. Cameron postulated the existence of " a tremendous mass of small material on the outskirts of the solar system " . In 1964 , Fred Whipple , who popularised the famous " dirty snowball " hypothesis for cometary structure , thought that a " comet belt " might be massive enough to cause the purported discrepancies in the orbit of Uranus that had sparked the search for Planet X , or , at the very least , massive enough to affect the orbits of known comets . Observation , however , ruled out this hypothesis . 
 In 1977 , Charles Kowal discovered 2060 Chiron , an icy planetoid with an orbit between Saturn and Uranus . He used a blink comparator , the same device that had allowed Clyde Tombaugh to discover Pluto nearly 50 years before . In 1992 , another object , <unk> <unk> , was discovered in a similar orbit . Today , an entire population of comet @-@ like bodies , called the centaurs , is known to exist in the region between Jupiter and Neptune . The centaurs ' orbits are unstable and have dynamical lifetimes of a few million years . From the time of Chiron 's discovery in 1977 , astronomers have speculated that the centaurs therefore must be frequently replenished by some outer reservoir . 
 Further evidence for the existence of the Kuiper belt later emerged from the study of comets . That comets have finite lifespans has been known for some time . As they approach the Sun , its heat causes their volatile surfaces to sublimate into space , gradually dispersing them . In order for comets to continue to be visible over the age of the Solar System , they must be replenished frequently . One such area of replenishment is the Oort cloud , a spherical swarm of comets extending beyond 50 @,@ 000 AU from the Sun first hypothesised by Dutch astronomer Jan Oort in 1950 . The Oort cloud is thought to be the point of origin of long @-@ period comets , which are those , like Hale – Bopp , with orbits lasting thousands of years . 
 There is , however , another comet population , known as short @-@ period or periodic comets , consisting of those comets that , like Halley 's Comet , have orbital periods of less than 200 years . By the 1970s , the rate at which short @-@ period comets were being discovered was becoming increasingly inconsistent with their having emerged solely from the Oort cloud . For an Oort cloud object to become a short @-@ period comet , it would first have to be captured by the giant planets . In 1980 , in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , Uruguayan astronomer Julio Fernández stated that for every short @-@ period comet to be sent into the inner Solar System from the Oort cloud , 600 would have to be ejected into interstellar space . He speculated that a comet belt from between 35 and 50 AU would be required to account for the observed number of comets . Following up on Fernández 's work , in 1988 the Canadian team of Martin Duncan , Tom Quinn and Scott Tremaine ran a number of computer simulations to determine if all observed comets could have arrived from the Oort cloud . They found that the Oort cloud could not account for all short @-@ period comets , particularly as short @-@ period comets are clustered near the plane of the Solar System , whereas Oort @-@ cloud comets tend to arrive from any point in the sky . With a " belt " , as Fernández described it , added to the formulations , the simulations matched observations . Reportedly because the words " Kuiper " and " comet belt " appeared in the opening sentence of Fernández 's paper , Tremaine named this hypothetical region the " Kuiper belt " . 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 In 1987 , astronomer David Jewitt , then at MIT , became increasingly puzzled by " the apparent emptiness of the outer Solar System " . He encouraged then @-@ graduate student Jane Luu to aid him in his endeavour to locate another object beyond Pluto 's orbit , because , as he told her , " If we don 't , nobody will . " Using telescopes at the Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona and the Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory in Chile , Jewitt and Luu conducted their search in much the same way as Clyde Tombaugh and Charles Kowal had , with a blink comparator . Initially , examination of each pair of plates took about eight hours , but the process was sped up with the arrival of electronic charge @-@ coupled devices or CCDs , which , though their field of view was narrower , were not only more efficient at collecting light ( they retained 90 % of the light that hit them , rather than the 10 % achieved by photographs ) but allowed the blinking process to be done virtually , on a computer screen . Today , CCDs form the basis for most astronomical detectors . In 1988 , Jewitt moved to the Institute of Astronomy at the University of Hawaii . Luu later joined him to work at the University of Hawaii 's 2 @.@ 24 m telescope at Mauna Kea . Eventually , the field of view for CCDs had increased to 1024 by 1024 pixels , which allowed searches to be conducted far more rapidly . Finally , after five years of searching , on August 30 , 1992 , Jewitt and Luu announced the " Discovery of the candidate Kuiper belt object " ( 15760 ) 1992 QB1 . Six months later , they discovered a second object in the region , ( <unk> ) 1993 FW . 
 Studies conducted since the trans @-@ Neptunian region was first charted have shown that the region now called the Kuiper belt is not the point of origin of short @-@ period comets , but that they instead derive from a linked population called the scattered disc . The scattered disc was created when Neptune migrated outward into the proto @-@ Kuiper belt , which at the time was much closer to the Sun , and left in its wake a population of dynamically stable objects that could never be affected by its orbit ( the Kuiper belt proper ) , and a population whose perihelia are close enough that Neptune can still disturb them as it travels around the Sun ( the scattered disc ) . Because the scattered disc is dynamically active and the Kuiper belt relatively dynamically stable , the scattered disc is now seen as the most likely point of origin for periodic comets . 
 = = = Name = = = 
 Astronomers sometimes use the alternative name Edgeworth – Kuiper belt to credit Edgeworth , and KBOs are occasionally referred to as <unk> . However , Brian G. Marsden claims that neither deserves true credit : " Neither Edgeworth nor Kuiper wrote about anything remotely like what we are now seeing , but Fred Whipple did " . David Jewitt comments : " If anything ... Fernández most nearly deserves the credit for predicting the Kuiper Belt . " 
 KBOs are sometimes called <unk> , a name suggested by Clyde Tombaugh . The term trans @-@ Neptunian object ( TNO ) is recommended for objects in the belt by several scientific groups because the term is less controversial than all others — it is not an exact synonym though , as TNOs include all objects orbiting the Sun past the orbit of Neptune , not just those in the Kuiper belt . 
 = = Structure = = 
 At its fullest extent , including its outlying regions , the Kuiper belt stretches from roughly 30 to 55 AU . However , the main body of the belt is generally accepted to extend from the 2 : 3 mean @-@ motion resonance ( see below ) at 39 @.@ 5 AU to the 1 : 2 resonance at roughly 48 AU . The Kuiper belt is quite thick , with the main concentration extending as much as ten degrees outside the ecliptic plane and a more diffuse distribution of objects extending several times farther . Overall it more resembles a torus or doughnut than a belt . Its mean position is inclined to the ecliptic by 1 @.@ 86 degrees . 
 The presence of Neptune has a profound effect on the Kuiper belt 's structure due to orbital resonances . Over a timescale comparable to the age of the Solar System , Neptune 's gravity destabilises the orbits of any objects that happen to lie in certain regions , and either sends them into the inner Solar System or out into the scattered disc or interstellar space . This causes the Kuiper belt to have pronounced gaps in its current layout , similar to the Kirkwood gaps in the asteroid belt . In the region between 40 and 42 AU , for instance , no objects can retain a stable orbit over such times , and any observed in that region must have migrated there relatively recently . 
 = = = Classical belt = = = 
 Between the 2 : 3 and 1 : 2 resonances with Neptune , at approximately 42 – 48 AU , the gravitational influence of Neptune is negligible , and objects can exist with their orbits essentially unaltered . This region is known as the classical Kuiper belt , and its members comprise roughly two thirds of KBOs observed to date . Because the first modern KBO discovered , ( 15760 ) 1992 QB1 , is considered the prototype of this group , classical KBOs are often referred to as cubewanos ( " Q @-@ B @-@ 1 @-@ os " ) . The guidelines established by the IAU demand that classical KBOs be given names of mythological beings associated with creation . 
 The classical Kuiper belt appears to be a composite of two separate populations . The first , known as the " dynamically cold " population , has orbits much like the planets ; nearly circular , with an orbital eccentricity of less than 0 @.@ 1 , and with relatively low inclinations up to about 10 ° ( they lie close to the plane of the Solar System rather than at an angle ) . The cold population also contain a concentration of objects , referred to as the kernel , with semi @-@ major axes at 44 – 44 @.@ 5 AU . The second , the " dynamically hot " population , has orbits much more inclined to the ecliptic , by up to 30 ° . The two populations have been named this way not because of any major difference in temperature , but from analogy to particles in a gas , which increase their relative velocity as they become heated up . Not only are the two populations in different orbits , the cold population also differs in color and albedo , being redder and brighter , has a larger fraction of binary objects , has a different size distribution , and lacks very large objects . The difference in colors may be a reflection of different compositions , which suggests they formed in different regions . The hot population is proposed to have formed near Jupiter , and to have been ejected out by movements among the giant planets . The cold population , on the other hand , has been proposed to have formed more or less in its current position . Although it has been suggested that the cold population was also swept outwards by Neptune during its migration , particularly if Neptune 's eccentricity was transiently increased , the loose binaries among the cold population are unlikely to survive encounters with Neptune during this migration . Although the Nice model appears to be able to at least partially explain a compositional difference , it has also been suggested the color difference may reflect differences in surface evolution . 
 = = = Resonances = = = 
 When an object 's orbital period is an exact ratio of Neptune 's ( a situation called a mean @-@ motion resonance ) , then it can become locked in a synchronised motion with Neptune and avoid being perturbed away if their relative alignments are appropriate . If , for instance , an object orbits the Sun twice for every three Neptune orbits , and if it reaches perihelion with Neptune a quarter of an orbit away from it , then whenever it returns to perihelion , Neptune will always be in about the same relative position as it began , because it will have completed 1 1 ⁄ 2 orbits in the same time . This is known as the 2 : 3 ( or 3 : 2 ) resonance , and it corresponds to a characteristic semi @-@ major axis of about 39 @.@ 4 AU . This 2 : 3 resonance is populated by about 200 known objects , including Pluto together with its moons . In recognition of this , the members of this family are known as plutinos . Many plutinos , including Pluto , have orbits that cross that of Neptune , though their resonance means they can never collide . <unk> have high orbital eccentricities , suggesting that they are not native to their current positions but were instead thrown haphazardly into their orbits by the migrating Neptune . IAU guidelines dictate that all plutinos must , like Pluto , be named for underworld deities . The 1 : 2 resonance ( whose objects complete half an orbit for each of Neptune 's ) corresponds to semi @-@ major axes of ~ <unk> , and is sparsely populated . Its residents are sometimes referred to as <unk> . Other resonances also exist at 3 : 4 , 3 : 5 , 4 : 7 and 2 : 5 . Neptune has a number of trojan objects , which occupy its Lagrangian points , gravitationally stable regions leading and trailing it in its orbit . Neptune trojans are in a 1 : 1 mean @-@ motion resonance with Neptune and often have very stable orbits . 
 Additionally , there is a relative absence of objects with semi @-@ major axes below 39 AU that cannot apparently be explained by the present resonances . The currently accepted hypothesis for the cause of this is that as Neptune migrated outward , unstable orbital resonances moved gradually through this region , and thus any objects within it were swept up , or gravitationally ejected from it . 
 = = = " Kuiper cliff " = = = 
 The 1 : 2 resonance appears to be an edge beyond which few objects are known . It is not clear whether it is actually the outer edge of the classical belt or just the beginning of a broad gap . Objects have been detected at the 2 : 5 resonance at roughly 55 AU , well outside the classical belt ; however , predictions of a large number of bodies in classical orbits between these resonances have not been verified through observation . 
 Based on estimations of the primordial mass required to form Uranus and Neptune , as well as bodies as large as Pluto ( see below ) , earlier models of the Kuiper belt had suggested that the number of large objects would increase by a factor of two beyond 50 AU , so this sudden drastic <unk> , known as the " Kuiper cliff " , was completely unexpected , and its cause , to date , is unknown . In 2003 , Bernstein and Trilling et al. found evidence that the rapid decline in objects of 100 km or more in radius beyond 50 AU is real , and not due to observational bias . Possible explanations include that material at that distance was too scarce or too scattered to accrete into large objects , or that subsequent processes removed or destroyed those that did . Patryk Lykawka of Kobe University has claimed that the gravitational attraction of an unseen large planetary object , perhaps the size of Earth or Mars , might be responsible . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The precise origins of the Kuiper belt and its complex structure are still unclear , and astronomers are awaiting the completion of several wide @-@ field survey telescopes such as Pan @-@ STARRS and the future <unk> , which should reveal many currently unknown KBOs . These surveys will provide data that will help determine answers to these questions . 
 The Kuiper belt is thought to consist of planetesimals , fragments from the original protoplanetary disc around the Sun that failed to fully coalesce into planets and instead formed into smaller bodies , the largest less than 3 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) in diameter . Studies of the crater counts on Pluto and Charon suggest that such objects formed directly as sizeable objects in the range of tens of kilometers in diameter rather than being accreted from much smaller , roughly kilometer scale bodies . Hypothetical mechanisms for the formation of these larger bodies include the gravitational collapse of clouds of pebbles concentrated between eddies in a turbulent protoplanetary disk or in streaming instabilities . These collapsing clouds may fragment , forming binaries . 
 Modern computer simulations show the Kuiper belt to have been strongly influenced by Jupiter and Neptune , and also suggest that neither Uranus nor Neptune could have formed in their present positions , because too little primordial matter existed at that range to produce objects of such high mass . Instead , these planets are estimated to have formed closer to Jupiter . Scattering of planetesimals early in the Solar System 's history would have led to migration of the orbits of the giant planets : Saturn , Uranus , and Neptune drifted outwards , whereas Jupiter drifted inwards . Eventually , the orbits shifted to the point where Jupiter and Saturn reached an exact 2 : 1 resonance ; Jupiter orbited the Sun twice for every one Saturn orbit . The gravitational repercussions of such a resonance ultimately destabilized the orbits of Uranus and Neptune , causing them to be scattered outward onto high @-@ eccentricity orbits that crossed the primordial planetesimal disc . While Neptune 's orbit was highly eccentric , its mean @-@ motion resonances overlapped and the orbits of the planetesimals evolved chaotically , allowing planetesimals to wander outward as far as Neptune 's 2 : 1 resonance to form a dynamically cold belt of low @-@ inclination objects . Later , after its eccentricity decreased , Neptune 's orbit expanded outward toward its current position . Many planetesimals were captured into and remain in resonances during this migration , others evolved onto higher @-@ inclination and lower @-@ eccentricity orbits and escaped from the resonances onto stable orbits . Many more planetesimals were scattered inward , with small fractions being captured as Jupiter trojans , as irregular satellites orbiting the giant planets , and as outer belt asteroids . The remainder were scattered outward again by Jupiter and in most cases ejected from the Solar System reducing the primordial Kuiper belt population by 99 % or more . 
 While the original version of the currently most popular model , the " Nice model " , reproduces many characteristics of the Kuiper belt such as the " cold " and " hot " populations , resonant objects , and a scattered disc , it still fails to account for some of the characteristics of their distributions . The model predicts a higher average eccentricity in classical KBO orbits than is observed ( 0 @.@ 10 – 0 @.@ 13 versus 0 @.@ 07 ) and its predicted inclination distribution contains too few high inclination objects . In addition , the frequency of binary objects in the cold belt , many of which are far apart and loosely bound , also poses a problem for the model . These are predicted to have been separated during encounters with Neptune , leading some to propose that the cold disc formed at its current location . 
 A recent modification of the Nice model has the Solar System begin with five giant planets , including an additional ice giant , in a chain of mean @-@ motion resonances . About 400 million years after the formation of the Solar System the resonance chain is broken . Instead of being scattered into the disc , the ice giants first migrate outward several AU . This divergent migration eventually leads to a resonance crossing , destabilizing the orbits of the planets . The extra ice giant encounters Saturn and is scattered inward onto a Jupiter @-@ crossing orbit and after a series of encounters is ejected from the Solar System . The remaining planets then continue their migration until the planetesimal disc in nearly depleted with small fractions remaining in various locations . 
 As in the original Nice model , objects are captured into resonances with Neptune during its outward migration . Some remain in the resonances , others evolve onto higher @-@ inclination , lower @-@ eccentricity orbits , and are released onto stable orbits forming the dynamically hot classical belt . The hot belt 's inclination distribution can be reproduced if Neptune migrated from 24 AU to 30 AU on a 30 Myr timescale . When Neptune migrates to 28 AU , it has a gravitational encounter with the extra ice giant . Objects captured from the cold belt into the 2 : 1 mean @-@ motion resonance with Neptune are left behind as a local concentration at 44 AU when this encounter causes Neptune 's semi @-@ major axis to jump outward . If Neptune 's eccentricity remains small during this encounter the chaotic evolution of orbits of the original Nice model is avoided and a primordial cold belt is preserved . In the later phases of Neptune 's migration a slow sweeping of mean @-@ motion resonances removes the higher @-@ eccentricity objects from the cold belt truncating its eccentricity distribution . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Being distant from the Sun and major planets , Kuiper belt objects are thought to be relatively unaffected by the processes that have shaped and altered other Solar System objects ; thus , determining their composition would provide substantial information on the makeup of the earliest Solar System . However , due to their small size and extreme distance from Earth , the chemical makeup of KBOs is very difficult to determine . The principal method by which astronomers determine the composition of a celestial object is spectroscopy . When an object 's light is broken into its component colors , an image akin to a rainbow is formed . This image is called a spectrum . Different substances absorb light at different wavelengths , and when the spectrum for a specific object is unravelled , dark lines ( called absorption lines ) appear where the substances within it have absorbed that particular wavelength of light . Every element or compound has its own unique spectroscopic signature , and by reading an object 's full spectral " fingerprint " , astronomers can determine what it is made of . 
 Analysis indicates that Kuiper belt objects are composed of a mixture of rock and a variety of ices such as water , methane , and ammonia . The temperature of the belt is only about 50 K , so many compounds that would be gaseous closer to the Sun remain solid . The densities and rock – ice fractions are known for only a small number of objects for which the diameters and the masses have been determined . The diameter can be determined by imaging with a high @-@ resolution telescope such as the Hubble Space Telescope , by the timing of an occultation when an object passes in front of a star , or , most commonly , by using the albedo of an object calculated from its infrared emissions . The masses are determined using the semi @-@ major axes and periods of satellites , which are therefore known only for a few binary objects . The densities range from less than 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 6 g / cm3 . The least dense objects are thought to be largely composed of ice and have significant porosity . The densest objects are likely composed of rock with a thin crust of ice . There is a trend of low densities for small objects and high densities for the largest objects . One possible explanation for this trend is that ice was lost from the surface layers when differentiated objects collided to form the largest objects . 
 Initially , detailed analysis of KBOs was impossible , and so astronomers were only able to determine the most basic facts about their makeup , primarily their color . These first data showed a broad range of colors among KBOs , ranging from neutral grey to deep red . This suggested that their surfaces were composed of a wide range of compounds , from dirty ices to hydrocarbons . This diversity was startling , as astronomers had expected KBOs to be uniformly dark , having lost most of the volatile ices from their surfaces to the effects of cosmic rays . Various solutions were suggested for this discrepancy , including resurfacing by impacts or outgassing . However , Jewitt and Luu 's spectral analysis of the known Kuiper belt objects in 2001 found that the variation in color was too extreme to be easily explained by random impacts . The radiation from the Sun is thought to have chemically altered methane on the surface of KBOs , producing products such as tholins . Makemake has been shown to possess a number of hydrocarbons derived from the radiation @-@ processing of methane , including ethane , ethylene and acetylene . 
 Although to date most KBOs still appear spectrally featureless due to their faintness , there have been a number of successes in determining their composition . In 1996 , Robert H. Brown et al. acquired spectroscopic data on the KBO 1993 SC , which revealed that its surface composition is markedly similar to that of Pluto , as well as Neptune 's moon Triton , with large amounts of methane ice . For the smaller objects only colors and in some cases the albedos have been determined . These objects largely fall into two classes : gray with low albedos , or very red with higher albedos . The difference in colors and albedos is hypothesized to be due to the retention or the loss of hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) on the surface of these objects , with the surfaces of those that formed far enough from the Sun to retain H2S being reddened due to irradiation . 
 The largest KBOs , such as Pluto and Quaoar , have surfaces rich in volatile compounds such as methane , nitrogen and carbon monoxide ; the presence of these molecules is likely due to their moderate vapor pressure in the 30 – 50 K temperature range of the Kuiper belt . This allows them to occasionally boil off their surfaces and then fall again as snow , whereas compounds with higher boiling points would remain solid . The relative abundances of these three compounds in the largest KBOs is directly related to their surface gravity and ambient temperature , which determines which they can retain . Water ice has been detected in several KBOs , including members of the Haumea family such as 1996 <unk> , mid @-@ sized objects such as <unk> <unk> and 20000 Varuna , and also on some small objects . The presence of crystalline ice on large and mid @-@ sized objects , including 50000 Quaoar where ammonia hydrate has also been detected , may indicate past tectonic activity aided by melting point lowering due to the presence of ammonia . 
 = = Mass and size distribution = = 
 Despite its vast extent , the collective mass of the Kuiper belt is relatively low . The total mass is estimated to range between 1 / 25th and 1 / 10th the mass of the Earth . Conversely , models of the Solar System 's formation predict a collective mass for the Kuiper belt of 30 Earth masses . This missing > 99 % of the mass can hardly be dismissed , because it is required for the accretion of any KBOs larger than 100 km ( 62 mi ) in diameter . If the Kuiper belt had always had its current low density these large objects simply could not have formed by the collision and mergers of smaller planetesimals . Moreover , the eccentricity and inclination of current orbits makes the encounters quite " violent " resulting in destruction rather than accretion . It appears that either the current residents of the Kuiper belt have been created closer to the Sun or some mechanism dispersed the original mass . Neptune 's current influence is too weak to explain such a massive " vacuuming " , though the Nice model proposes that it could have been the cause of mass removal in the past . Although the question remains open , the conjectures vary from a passing star scenario to grinding of smaller objects , via collisions , into dust small enough to be affected by solar radiation . The extent of mass loss by collisional grinding , however , is limited by the presence of loosely bound binaries in the cold disk , which are likely to be disrupted in collisions . 
 Bright objects are rare compared with the dominant dim population , as expected from accretion models of origin , given that only some objects of a given size would have grown further . This relationship between N ( D ) ( the number of objects of diameter greater than D ) and D , referred to as brightness slope , has been confirmed by observations . The slope is inversely proportional to some power of the diameter D : 
 <formula> where the current measures give q = 4 ± 0 @.@ 5 . 
 This implies ( assuming q is not 1 ) that 
 <formula> 
 ( The constant may be non @-@ zero only if the power law doesn 't apply at high values of D. ) 
 Less formally , if q is 4 , for example , there are 8 ( = 23 ) times more objects in the 100 – 200 km range than in the 200 – 400 km range , and for every object with a diameter between 1000 and 1010 km there should be around 1000 ( = 103 ) objects with diameter of 100 to 101 km . 
 If q is 1 or less , the law implies an infinite number and mass of large objects in the Kuiper belt . If 1 < q ≤ 4 there will be a finite number of objects greater than a given size , but the expected value of their combined mass would be infinite . If q is 4 or more , the law would imply an infinite mass of small objects . More accurate models find that the " slope " parameter q is in effect greater at large diameters and lesser at small diameters . It seems that Pluto is somewhat unexpectedly large , having several percent of the total mass of the Kuiper belt . It is not expected that anything larger than Pluto exists in the Kuiper belt , and in fact most of the brightest ( largest ) objects at inclinations less than 5 ° have probably been found . 
 Of course , only the absolute magnitude is actually known , the size is inferred assuming a given albedo ( not a safe assumption for larger objects ) . 
 Recent research has revealed that the size distributions of the hot classical and cold classical objects have differing slopes . The slope for the hot objects is q 
 = 5 @.@ 3 at large diameters and q = 
 2 @.@ 0 at small diameters with the change in slope at 110 km . The slope for the cold objects is q 
 = 8 @.@ 2 at large diameters and q = 
 2 @.@ 9 at small diameters with a change in slope at 140 km . The size distributions of the scattering objects , the plutinos , and the Neptune trojans have slopes similar to the other dynamically hot populations , but may instead have a divot , a sharp decrease in the number of objects below a specific size . This divot is hypothesized to be due to either the collisional evolution of the population , or to be due to the population having formed with no objects below this size , with the smaller objects being fragments of the original objects . 
 As of December 2009 , the smallest Kuiper belt object detected is 980 m across . It is too dim ( magnitude 35 ) to be seen by Hubble directly , but it was detected by Hubble 's star tracking system when it occulted a star . 
 = = Scattered objects = = 
 The scattered disc is a sparsely populated region , overlapping with the Kuiper belt but extending to beyond 100 AU . Scattered disc objects ( SDOs ) have very elliptical orbits , often also very inclined to the ecliptic . Most models of Solar System formation show both KBOs and SDOs first forming in a primordial belt , with later gravitational interactions , particularly with Neptune , sending the objects outward , some into stable orbits ( the KBOs ) and some into unstable orbits , the scattered disc . Due to its unstable nature , the scattered disc is suspected to be the point of origin of many of the Solar System 's short @-@ period comets . Their dynamic orbits occasionally force them into the inner Solar System , first becoming centaurs , and then short @-@ period comets . 
 According to the Minor Planet Center , which officially catalogues all trans @-@ Neptunian objects , a KBO , strictly speaking , is any object that orbits exclusively within the defined Kuiper belt region regardless of origin or composition . Objects found outside the belt are classed as scattered objects . However , in some scientific circles the term " Kuiper belt object " has become synonymous with any icy minor planet native to the outer Solar System assumed to have been part of that initial class , even if its orbit during the bulk of Solar System history has been beyond the Kuiper belt ( e.g. in the scattered @-@ disc region ) . They often describe scattered disc objects as " scattered Kuiper belt objects " . Eris , which is known to be more massive than Pluto , is often referred to as a KBO , but is technically an SDO . A consensus among astronomers as to the precise definition of the Kuiper belt has yet to be reached , and this issue remains unresolved . 
 The centaurs , which are not normally considered part of the Kuiper belt , are also thought to be scattered objects , the only difference being that they were scattered inward , rather than outward . The Minor Planet Center groups the centaurs and the SDOs together as scattered objects . 
 = = = Triton = = = 
 During its period of migration , Neptune is thought to have captured a large KBO , Triton , which is the only large moon in the Solar System with a retrograde orbit ( it orbits opposite to Neptune 's rotation ) . This suggests that , unlike the large moons of Jupiter , Saturn , and Uranus , which are thought to have coalesced from rotating discs of material around their young parent planets , Triton was a fully formed body that was captured from surrounding space . Gravitational capture of an object is not easy : it requires some mechanism to slow down the object enough to be caught by the larger object 's gravity . A possible explanation is that Triton was part of a binary when it encountered Neptune . ( Many KBOs are members of binaries . See below . ) Ejection of the other member of the binary by Neptune could then explain Triton 's capture . Triton is only 14 % larger than Pluto , and spectral analysis of both worlds shows that their surfaces are largely composed of similar materials , such as methane and carbon monoxide . All this points to the conclusion that Triton was once a KBO that was captured by Neptune during its outward migration . 
 = = Largest KBOs = = 
 Since 2000 , a number of KBOs with diameters of between 500 and 1 @,@ 500 km ( 932 mi ) , more than half that of Pluto ( diameter 2370 km ) , have been discovered . 50000 Quaoar , a classical KBO discovered in 2002 , is over 1 @,@ 200 km across . Makemake and Haumea , both announced on July 29 , 2005 , are larger still . Other objects , such as <unk> Ixion ( discovered in 2001 ) and 20000 Varuna ( discovered in 2000 ) measure roughly 500 km ( 311 mi ) across . 
 = = = Pluto = = = 
 The discovery of these large KBOs in similar orbits to Pluto led many to conclude that , aside from its relative size , Pluto was not particularly different from other members of the Kuiper belt . Not only are these objects similar to Pluto in size , but many also have satellites , and are of similar composition ( methane and carbon monoxide have been found both on Pluto and on the largest KBOs ) . Thus , just as Ceres was considered a planet before the discovery of its fellow asteroids , some began to suggest that Pluto might also be reclassified . 
 The issue was brought to a head by the discovery of Eris , an object in the scattered disc far beyond the Kuiper belt , that is now known to be 27 % more massive than Pluto . ( Eris was originally thought to be larger than Pluto by volume , but the New Horizons mission found this not to be the case . ) In response , the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) , was forced to define what a planet is for the first time , and in so doing included in their definition that a planet must have " cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit " . As Pluto shared its orbit with so many KBOs , it was deemed not to have cleared its orbit , and was thus reclassified from a planet to a member of the Kuiper belt . 
 Although Pluto is currently the largest known KBO , there is at least one known larger object currently outside the Kuiper belt that probably originated in it : Neptune 's moon Triton ( which , as explained above , is probably a captured KBO ) . 
 As of 2008 , only five objects in the Solar System ( Ceres , Eris , and the KBOs Pluto , Makemake and Haumea ) are listed as dwarf planets by the IAU . However , <unk> Orcus , <unk> Ixion and many other Kuiper @-@ belt objects are large enough to be in hydrostatic equilibrium ; most of them will probably qualify when more is known about them . 
 = = = Satellites = = = 
 Of the five largest TNOs , four ( Eris , Pluto , Makemake and Haumea ) are known to have satellites , and two have more than one . A higher percentage of the larger KBOs have satellites than the smaller objects in the Kuiper belt , suggesting that a different formation mechanism was responsible . There are also a high number of binaries ( two objects close enough in mass to be orbiting " each other " ) in the Kuiper belt . The most notable example is the Pluto – Charon binary , but it is estimated that around 11 % of KBOs exist in binaries . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 On 19 January 2006 , the first spacecraft to explore the Kuiper belt , New Horizons , was launched , which flew by Pluto on 14 July 2015 . 
 Scientists awaited data from the Pan @-@ STARRS survey project to ensure as wide a field of options as possible . The Pan @-@ STARRS project , partially operational since May 2010 , will , when fully online , survey the entire sky with four 1 @.@ 4 <unk> digital cameras to detect any moving objects , from near @-@ Earth objects to KBOs . To speed up the detection process , the New Horizons team established Ice Hunters , a citizen science project that allowed members of the public to participate in the search for suitable KBO targets ; the project has subsequently been transferred to another site , Ice Investigators , produced by <unk> . 
 On 15 October 2014 , it was revealed that Hubble 's search had uncovered three potential targets , provisionally designated PT1 ( " potential target 1 " ) , PT2 and PT3 by the New Horizons team . All are objects with estimated diameters in the 30 – 55 km range , too small to be seen by ground telescopes , at distances from the Sun of 43 – 44 AU , which would put the encounters in the 2018 – 2019 period . The initial estimated probabilities that these objects are reachable within New Horizons ' fuel budget are 100 % , 7 % , and 97 % , respectively . All are members of the " cold " ( low @-@ inclination , low @-@ eccentricity ) classical Kuiper belt , and thus very different from Pluto . PT1 ( given the temporary designation " <unk> " on the HST web site ) , the most favorably situated object , is magnitude 26 @.@ 8 , 30 – 45 km in diameter , and will be encountered around January 2019 . A course to reach it will require about 35 % of New Horizons ' available trajectory @-@ adjustment fuel supply . A mission to PT3 was in some ways preferable , in that it is brighter and therefore probably larger than PT1 , but the greater fuel requirements to reach it would have left less for maneuvering and unforeseen events . Once sufficient orbital information was provided , the Minor Planet Center gave official designations to the three target KBOs : 2014 <unk> ( PT1 ) , 2014 <unk> ( PT2 ) , and 2014 <unk> ( PT3 ) . By the fall of 2014 , a possible fourth target , 2014 <unk> , had been eliminated by follow @-@ up observations . PT2 was out of the running before the Pluto flyby . 
 On 26 August 2015 , the first target , 2014 <unk> , was chosen . Course adjustment took place in late October and early November 2015 , leading to a flyby in January 2019 . In order to complete the mission , funding will need to be secured following a senior review of planetary science missions in 2016 , with the results of that review to be announced in August or September 2016 . 
 On 2 December 2015 , New Horizons detected 1994 JR1 from 270 million kilometres ( 170 × 10 ^ 6 mi ) away , and the photographs show the shape of the object and one or two details . 
 = = Extrasolar Kuiper belts = = 
 By 2006 , astronomers had resolved dust discs thought to be Kuiper belt @-@ like structures around nine stars other than the Sun . They appear to fall into two categories : wide belts , with radii of over 50 AU , and narrow belts ( tentatively like that of the Solar System ) with radii of between 20 and 30 AU and relatively sharp boundaries . Beyond this , 15 – 20 % of solar @-@ type stars have an observed infrared excess that is suggestive of massive Kuiper @-@ belt @-@ like structures . Most known debris discs around other stars are fairly young , but the two images on the right , taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in January 2006 , are old enough ( roughly 300 million years ) to have settled into stable configurations . The left image is a " top view " of a wide belt , and the right image is an " edge view " of a narrow belt . Computer simulations of dust in the Kuiper belt suggest that when it was younger , it may have resembled the narrow rings seen around younger stars . 
 = 2014 – 15 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team = 
 The 2014 – 15 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team represented the University of Michigan during the 2014 – 15 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . The team played its home games in Ann Arbor , Michigan for the 48th consecutive year at the Crisler Center , which has a capacity of 12 @,@ 707 . This season marked the program 's 99th season and its 98th consecutive year as a member of the Big Ten Conference . The team was led by 8th year head coach John Beilein , who was voted 2014 Big Ten Coach of the Year by the Big Ten media . The 2013 – 14 team was Big Ten champion , earning the school 's first outright title since 1986 . The program entered the season coming off its winningest two @-@ year stretch , having won 59 games in the two previous seasons . The team was also coming off four consecutive NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament appearances . 
 The 2014 – 15 team needed to replace the losses of Nik Stauskas , Mitch McGary and Glenn Robinson III to the 2014 NBA draft and Jon Horford and Jordan Morgan to graduation . It began the season ranked in both the AP Poll ( # 24 ) and Coaches ' Poll ( # 23 ) . Guard Caris LeVert was named a preseason All @-@ American according to numerous media outlets and preseason All @-@ Big Ten according to the Big Ten media . LeVert , however , suffered a season @-@ ending foot injury in January . At the end of that month , Derrick Walton was sidelined for the season . The team struggled without two of its leaders as it went from a 6 – 3 win – loss record in conference to finish 8 – 10 . After falling in the quarterfinals of the 2015 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament the team 's season ended with a 16 – 16 record . 
 = = Roster changes = = 
 = = = Departures = = = 
 Jordan Morgan graduated after using all of his eligibility . Horford announced on April 10 that he would use his 5th year of redshirt eligibility by transferring to a graduate program at another school for the 2014 – 15 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . On April 26 , Horford announced he was transferring to play for the Florida Gators men 's basketball team . 
 On April 15 , in a joint press conference on the Big Ten Network , Glenn Robinson III and Nik Stauskas announced that they were declaring themselves eligible for the 2014 NBA draft . On April 25 , Mitch McGary declared for the draft . He was facing a season @-@ long NCAA suspension after testing positive for marijuana after the Wolverines ' NCAA tournament win over Tennessee , a game for which he dressed but was not able to play . When all three players were drafted , it marked the first time Michigan had at least three draft picks since the 1990 NBA draft . 
 = = = 2014 – 15 team recruits = = = 
 After Stauskas and Robinson declared for the NBA , Michigan signed Muhammad Ali Abdur @-@ Rahkman on April 19 . On April 28 , Michigan signed Aubrey Dawkins , son of former Duke Naismith College Player of the Year , National Basketball Association point guard and Stanford head coach Johnny Dawkins . 
 = = = Future recruits = = = 
 On August 6 , Duncan Robinson announced that he would transfer to Michigan with three years of eligibility remaining and sit out the 2014 – 15 season after Division III Williams College head coach Mike Maker announced his departure to coach at Marist . On August 8 , 2014 , 6 @-@ foot @-@ 11 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) Jon Teske became Michigan basketball 's first class of 2016 commit . 
 = = Post @-@ tournament predictions = = 
 Immediately following the 2014 NCAA Tournament , the earliest predictions started being made by the media despite draft status uncertainty . While uncertainty about Stauskas ' , Robinson 's and McGary 's returns remained speculation , projections abounded : 9 by Yahoo ! Sports , 14 by Bleacher Report , 17 by ESPN , 18 by USA Today , 20 by NBC Sports and CBS Sports . Following the April 27 NBA draft entry deadline , revised predictions had Michigan a little lower : 19 by Bleacher Report , 24 by ESPN and NBC Sports , unranked by CBS Sports and USA Today . Despite the projected rankings the Las Vegas 2015 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament betting lines showed only 11 schools with shorter odds than Michigan who was in a 6 @-@ way tie for 12th place at 33 : 1 on April 29 . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 On May 12 , LeVert underwent surgery to repair a stress fracture in his foot . He was expected to be sidelined for 8 – 10 weeks , but be available for the team 's August trip to play in Europe . Beilein announced on June 3 that Max Bielfeldt had undergone hip surgery and was expected to miss most of the summer . On August 6 , D. J. Wilson was sidelined for 4 – 6 weeks following surgery on his pinky finger . This announcement came prior to the team 's August 15 departure for its summer trip to Italy . 
 The team participated in a four @-@ game exhibition tour of Italy that included stops in Rome , Verona , Vicenza , Venice and Lake Como from August 15 – 24 . On August 28 , Beilein became the 2013 – 14 recipient of the NCAA 's Bob Frederick Sportsmanship Award , which honors " an NCAA member institution coach or administrator who exhibits a lifelong commitment to sportsmanship and ethical conduct , leading by example and promoting positive fan involvement in and out of competition . " 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Michigan began the season ranked number 23 in the Coaches ' Poll and number 24 in the AP Poll . In the Sports Illustrated preseason top 25 ranking Michigan was listed # 25 . ESPN 's Jeff Goodman expected Michigan to be Wisconsin 's main competition in the conference despite all of the talent it lost . Athlon Sports and Blue Ribbon College Basketball Yearbook ranked Michigan 23 in their preseason rankings . Bleacher Report listed Michigan at number 20 . 
 Caris LeVert was a preseason All @-@ Big Ten selection . He was an NBCSports.com Preseason All @-@ American first team selection , a SB Nation , Sports Illustrated , Bleacher Report , Athlon Sports , Blue Ribbon College Basketball Yearbook , and CBSSports.com second team selection and a USA Today third team selection . He was also named to the Lute Olson Award and John R. Wooden Award preseason watchlists . LeVert also was named to the Oscar Robertson Trophy Watch List on November 24 and the Naismith Award Top 50 list on December 3 . 
 In its preseason top 100 player rankings , ESPN ranked LeVert # 13 and Walton # 87 . Prior to the season LeVert and Spike Albrecht were named co @-@ captains . 
 = = Roster = = 
 In July , the team reclassified Max Bielfeldt from a redshirt junior to a senior , which freed up Bielfeldt 's scholarship for the Class of 2015 , implying Bielfeldt would play his final year of eligibility elsewhere . In November , Beilein announced that the team would redshirt Andrew Dakich so that he could play a fifth year somewhere else . However , a pair of January backcourt injuries caused Dakich 's services to be needed and he played instead of redshirting . D. J. Wilson missed most of the season due to a knee injury and was redshirted . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 Michigan played the 2014 – 15 Arizona Wildcats on the road at <unk> Center as part of their home @-@ and @-@ away that had begun at home against the 2013 – 14 Wildcats . Michigan played a home @-@ and @-@ away with the 2014 – 15 and 2015 – 16 SMU Mustangs with the 2014 game being played on December 20 , 2014 at Crisler Center , and trip in December 2015 to face the 2015 – 16 Mustangs in Dallas . On July 15 , the non @-@ conference schedule was announced . On August 21 , the team announced the conference schedule , which included three ESPN Super Tuesday broadcasts . 
 November 
 On November 10 , Michigan won an exhibition game against Wayne State . The biggest storyline was that Austin Hatch scored for the team . Hatch had survived two plane crashes at ages 8 and 16 ; the first killed his mother and both of his siblings , and the second killed his father and stepmother and left him in a coma for two months . After raising its 2014 Big Ten Championship banner on November 15 , Michigan opened its season with a 92 – 68 victory over Hillsdale College . The game was the first time the team had had three 20 @-@ point scorers ( Derrick Walton @-@ 22 , Zak Irvin @-@ 21 , and Caris LeVert @-@ 20 ) since the 2011 – 12 team defeated the Oakland Golden Grizzlies on December 10 , 2011 behind Trey Burke , Tim Hardaway , Jr. and Evan Smotrycz . On November 17 , the team opened the Progressive Legends Classic at home against Bucknell . The game was highlighted by Max Bielfeldt 's career @-@ high 18 @-@ point performance and Irvin 's second consecutive 20 plus @-@ point performance . In the second home game of the Legends Classic on November 20 , Michigan faced a Detroit Titans team that was led by Juwan Howard , Jr . — the son of former Michigan star Juwan Howard . Detroit led at the half and tied the score with 5 : 39 remaining before Michigan went on to win 71 – 62 despite 24 points and 8 rebounds from Howard . In the semifinals of the Legends Classic at the Barclays Center on November 24 , Michigan defeated Oregon . The next day , Michigan lost to ( # 12 AP Poll / # 11 Coaches Poll ) Villanova in the championship game . This was the first meeting between the two teams since the quarterfinals of the 1985 <unk> Tournament , which Villanova also won . Villanova went on a 9 – 0 run to end the first half , and led by as many as 13 points early in the second half . Michigan cut the lead to 35 – 31 following an 11 – 2 run . Michigan led by as many as eight points with just under six minutes left in the game , before Villanova came back to retake the lead for good with 13 seconds remaining . Caris LeVert helped lead the second half comeback scoring eight of his 16 points in the second half , including Michigan 's final six points of the game . On November 29 , the team defeated Nicholls State as five players scored in double figures . 
 December 
 On December 2 , Michigan defeated Syracuse in a ACC @-@ Big Ten Challenge game that went down to the wire . After blowing a 10 @-@ point second half lead Michigan needed a three point shot from Albrecht with 31 seconds remaining for the victory . On December 6 , Michigan suffered its first home loss of the season to the New Jersey Institute of Technology by a 72 – 70 margin , despite a career @-@ high 32 points by Levert . With the loss , Michigan 's 30 @-@ game home win streak versus unranked opponents was snapped . NJIT shot 11 @-@ for @-@ 17 on its three @-@ point shots in the game . The team lost its three subsequent games to Eastern Michigan , ( # 3 ) Arizona , and SMU . The loss to Eastern Michigan , which is separated from the University of Michigan by a 6 @-@ mile stretch of Washtenaw Avenue , ended a Big Ten @-@ high 59 @-@ game streak without consecutive losses . Eastern Michigan was led in assists ( 6 ) by Michael Talley , son of Michigan Basketball point guard and alum Michael Talley , Jr . The December 9 80 – 53 loss to # 3 ranked Arizona was one point shy of being the largest defeat of the Beilein era . The December 20 SMU game marked the first career start by Ricky Doyle . On December 22 , the team snapped its 4 @-@ game losing streak with a victory over Coppin State who was coached by Michael Grant , the brother of former Wolverine and Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year Gary Grant . One of the game 's big storylines was the first regular season point by Austin Hatch . Doyle 's game @-@ high 16 points marked the first time he led the team in scoring . Michigan won its Big Ten Conference home opener against Illinois in overtime on December 30 on the day it announced Jim Harbaugh would become the new Michigan Wolverines football head coach . Aubrey Dawkins , who had a career total of 15 points entering the game , scored a game @-@ high 20 @-@ points . 
 January 
 Michigan lost to Purdue on January 3 , by making only 4 second half field goals after taking an 8 @-@ point half time lead . The team defeated Penn State on January 6 with Albrecht in the starting lineup in place of Chatman . On January 10 , the team wore throwback uniforms honoring the 1988 – 89 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team that won the 1989 NCAA Tournament . Michigan was down 49 – 40 with less than nine minutes remaining , before coming back to defeat Minnesota by a margin of 62 – 57 . Michigan lost to ( Receiving votes / # 25 ) Ohio State on January 13 . On January 17 Michigan defeated Northwestern , but lost LeVert for the season after he reinjured the foot that he had had surgery on the prior May . In the game , Muhammad @-@ Ali Abdur @-@ Rahkman made his first start ( in place of an ailing Albrecht ) and made the game winning three @-@ point shot . At the time of his injury , LeVert led Michigan in scoring ( 14 @.@ 9 ) , rebounds ( 4 @.@ 9 ) , assists ( 3 @.@ 7 ) , steals ( 1 @.@ 7 ) and minutes ( 35 @.@ 8 ) . Nonetheless , the team defeated Rutgers in its first game without LeVert and with Dawkins making his first start . With LeVert absent , Walton scored 10 of the team 's 15 points as it rallied from a 42 – 37 deficit to assume a 52 – 44 lead with just 32 @.@ 5 seconds left . On January 24 , Michigan fell to ( AP # 6 / Coaches # 5 ) Wisconsin in overtime after Walton , who had a team @-@ high 17 points , scored Michigan 's final seven points , including a game @-@ tying three point shot with 1 @.@ 3 seconds remaining in regulation . The game had been the featured College GameDay game of the week . On January 27 with Walton and Mark Donnal sidelined Michigan defeated Nebraska , as Irvin recorded his first career double @-@ double , leading the team with 14 points and a career @-@ high 12 rebounds . Eventually , Walton missed final 12 of the season due to a toe injury . Due to the backcourt injuries , Dakich burned his redshirt season . Michigan finished the first half of its conference schedule with a 6 – 3 record . 
 February 
 Michigan began February with 5 consecutive Big Ten Conference losses . On February 1 , the team lost a rivalry game in overtime to Michigan State , despite career @-@ high 18 @-@ point performances by Albrecht and Abdur @-@ Rahkman and a career best 9 @-@ rebound performance by Max <unk> . On February 5 and February 8 , Michigan lost to Iowa and Indiana . February 5 marked the return of Donnal to the lineup . On February 12 against Illinois , Michigan lost in overtime after surrendering a 7 @-@ point lead with a little more than 3 minutes remaining . Illinois finished the game on a 21 – 2 run that was only spoiled by Michigan free throws with 13 seconds remaining . The 17 @,@ 087 in attendance established a record for the State Farm Center . On February 17 , Michigan lost again to Michigan State . On February 22 , Michigan ended its losing streak by defeating ( # 24 / # 23 ) Ohio State . On February 28 , Michigan ended February with a loss to ( # 14 / # 14 ) Maryland in the first Big Ten Conference game between the two teams and Senior night for Maryland . 
 March 
 On March 3 , Michigan tied a school record with its fifth overtime game of the season ( the first multiple overtime game since March 20 , 2006 ) against Northwestern on Northwestern 's Senior night . Michigan gave up last second game @-@ tying three @-@ point shots by Tre Demps in both regulation and the first overtime before losing in double overtime , despite career @-@ high 28 @-@ point and 21 @-@ point performances by Irvin and Dawkins , respectively . Irvin posted his own and the team 's second double @-@ double of the season . On March 7 , Michigan won its Big Ten Conference finale against Rutgers to finish the regular season at 15 – 15 ( 8 – 10 Big Ten ) . The game marked career @-@ high scoring efforts by Dawkins ( 31 ) and Chatman ( 13 ) , career @-@ high assist efforts by Bielfeldt ( 3 ) and Albrecht ( 9 ) and a career @-@ high rebounding effort by Bielfeldt ( 13 ) . Bielfeldt made his first career start on this Senior night effort . Freshmen team managers Jon Rubenstein and Ryan <unk> played in the game . Dawkins ' 31 points was the most by a Michigan freshman since Trey Burke had 32 in 2012 and his 8 three pointers was the second most in school history , the most by a Wolverine since Glen Rice posted 8 in the 1989 NCAA Tournament and the most by a Big Ten player during the season , earning Dawkins the final Big Ten Freshman of the Week honor . In the second round of the 2015 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament on March 12 , Michigan defeated Illinois after splitting a pair of overtime games won by the home teams during the regular season . The game marked Michigan 's ninth consecutive win in its opening round of the Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament and Michigan 's largest margin of victory over a conference opponent this season . In the quarterfinals of the Big Ten Tournament on March 13 , Michigan lost to No. 1 seeded Wisconsin , despite a double @-@ double and game @-@ high 21 points and 11 rebounds by Irvin . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 The team posted the following statistics : 
 = = Rankings = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 The United States Basketball Writers Association named Michigan 's Austin Hatch as its recipient for the men 's version of its Most Courageous Award for 2015 . Dawkins earned the final Big Ten Freshman of the Week honor on March 9 . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 Michigan did not participate in any postseason tournaments , ending a streak of four consecutive NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament appearances . Following the season , Spike Albrecht had offseason surgery on his right hip to correct for a genetic condition that may also necessitate left hip surgery . Albrecht and Irvin were voted team co @-@ MVPs . On April 21 , LeVert announced that he would return for his senior season . 
 = = = Team players drafted into the NBA = = = 
 Sources : 
 = Strapping Young Lad = 
 Strapping Young Lad was a Canadian extreme metal band formed by Devin Townsend in Vancouver , British Columbia in 1994 . The band started as a one @-@ man studio project ; Townsend played most of the instruments on the 1995 debut album , Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing . By 1997 , he had recruited permanent members ; this line @-@ up , which consisted of Townsend on vocals and guitar , Jed Simon on guitar , Byron Stroud on bass , and Gene Hoglan on drums , lasted until the band 's dissolution . 
 Containing elements of death metal , thrash metal , black metal , progressive metal and industrial metal , Strapping Young Lad 's music was characterized by the use of complex time signatures , polyrhythmic guitar riffing and drumming , blast beats and Wall of Sound production . The band 's musical direction was mainly determined by Townsend , whose battle with bipolar disorder and dark sense of humour were major influences on his songwriting . Townsend was also noted for his eccentric appearance and on @-@ stage behaviour , which greatly contributed to the band 's intense live performances . 
 The band gained critical success and a growing underground fan base from their 1997 album City . After a hiatus between 1999 and 2002 , the band released three more albums , reaching their commercial peak with the 2006 effort , The New Black . Townsend disbanded Strapping Young Lad in May 2007 , announcing his decision to retreat from public view while continuing to record solo albums . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing and City ( 1994 – 1998 ) = = = 
 Strapping Young Lad began in 1994 as a solo project of Canadian musician Devin Townsend . Following his work as vocalist on Steve Vai 's 1993 album Sex & Religion and its 1994 tour , Townsend believed he had been a " musical whore " , spending " the first five years of [ his ] career working at the behest of other people " . During a brief stint as touring guitarist for The Wildhearts , Townsend received a phone call from an A & R representative for Roadrunner Records , expressing an interest in his demos and an intention to sign him . The offer was ultimately rescinded by the head of Roadrunner , who regarded Townsend 's recordings as " just noise " . He faced further rejection by Relativity Records , the label behind Vai 's Sex & Religion , who saw no commercial appeal in his music . Century Media Records subsequently contacted the musician , offering him a contract to " make us some extreme albums " . Townsend agreed to a five @-@ album deal with the record label . 
 Following his tour with The Wildhearts , Townsend began recording and producing his debut album , Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing , under the moniker Strapping Young Lad . According to Townsend , the recording process took " about a week " . Embracing The Wildhearts ' anarchist approach , " while focusing on dissonance and just being as over @-@ the @-@ top as [ he ] could " , Townsend sang on the record and performed the majority of its instrumental tracks ( with the assistance of a drum machine ) . A few songs , however , featured local session musicians , including guitarist Jed Simon , Townsend 's future band mate . 
 Released on April 4 , 1995 , Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing was not widely recognized in the metal community . The album sold 143 copies in its first six months , but received favorable reviews from the heavy metal press . Its unusual musical ideas — a synthesis of death , thrash , and industrial metal influences — prompted Andy Stout from Metal Hammer to call it " one of the most disturbing albums you 'll hear for a very long time " . Nevertheless , Townsend has repeatedly expressed his distaste for the recording . He dismissed the album in the liner notes of the record 's 2006 reissue , contending it contained only two great songs . He also deemed its production poor in interviews , referring to the album as " basically a collection of demos that were remixed " . When Century Media advertised the reissue of Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing as the " rebirth of a genre @-@ defying classic " , Townsend called it " record company bullshit " . 
 Townsend recruited a permanent line @-@ up for the second album : Jed Simon on guitar , Byron Stroud on bass , and Gene Hoglan on drums . City was released on February 11 , 1997 , and received highly favorable critical reception . Kerrang ! praised the album for its heaviness , claiming it sounded like " sticking your head into the jet nozzle of a Stealth Bomber " , while Metal Hammer ranked it No. 13 on its " Top 20 Albums of 1997 " list . The album soon gained a cult following and a loyal fan base for the band . City is considered to be the band 's best effort by a large number of fans and critics alike . In 2002 , the album was No. 45 on Revolver magazine 's " 69 Greatest Metal Albums of All Time " list , and also appeared on their " Must Have Metal Albums " list in 2005 . It also appeared on the " 100 Most Important Albums of the Nineties " list conducted by Terrorizer . Townsend himself stated City " is the real Strapping record . That 's the ultimate one out of all of them " . 
 The band embarked on a world tour in 1997 to promote the album , which included dates in Europe , the US and Australia . On May 30 , 1998 , they performed at the Dynamo Open Air festival in Eindhoven , Netherlands , then continued touring the next month in Europe . In June 1998 , the group released No Sleep ' till Bedtime , a live album containing songs performed at a 1997 performance at the HiFi Bar and Ballroom in Melbourne , Australia . Century Media was not initially interested in releasing a live record , but impressed with Townsend 's production , the label agreed to release it . The band closed the year playing a few more dates in Japan and Australia . 
 = = = On hiatus ( 1999 – 2002 ) = = = 
 At the end of 1998 , Townsend placed Strapping Young Lad on hiatus to concentrate on his solo career and on his work as a record producer . He had already released two solo albums , Ocean Machine : Biomech in 1997 and Infinity in 1998 and produced several other artists ' albums . Townsend explained numerous conflicts with Century Media , and his struggle with bipolar disorder ( for which he checked himself into a psychiatric hospital in early 1998 ) , contributed to the curtailment of Strapping Young Lad 's activities : 
 What happened ? I signed a shitty deal , but luckily it was non @-@ exclusive . I got tired of doing Strapping so I said , ' I can 't do it anymore . ' Then I freaked out and went into a hospital . My lawyer said that I was under mental duress when I signed the contract so the contract is void . At that point it was like , ' I just won 't do another Strapping record . ' Yeah , I went down saying ' CM was the <unk> label ever . ' And they went down as saying that I was ' a complete , arrogant <unk> 
 Townsend remained productive between 1999 and 2002 , recording two more solo albums , Physicist in 2000 and Terria in 2001 , and producing albums for Zimmers Hole , Stuck Mojo and Soilwork , among others . Although Strapping Young Lad was officially on hiatus , they gave occasional live performances , including an appearance on the Foot In Mouth Tour in 2001 with Fear Factory . During this period , Townsend 's bandmates were active musically ; both Stroud and Hoglan recorded with other bands , and all three were involved in Townsend 's solo efforts as studio musicians and as part of his live band as well . Hoglan and Simon also formed a side project called Tenet with Grip Inc. bassist Stuart Carruthers and Interzone frontman Rob <unk> in early 2002 . 
 In December 2001 Townsend announced , contrary to his earlier public statements , a new Strapping Young Lad album would be released in 2002 . He emphasized he was not " forcing " his product upon fans to generate record sales , arguing his band — and its contract with Century — was never a lucrative endeavor . Instead , Townsend 's motivation was the " creative anger " sparked by the September 11 , 2001 attacks and further cultivated during their 2001 tour . For the first time , the album would be a product of collaborative writing ; the band wrote " about half " of the material on the 2001 Foot In Mouth Tour , and the rest at home , starting January 2002 . After playing a small number of festivals in 2002 , Strapping Young Lad entered the studio in September of that year , to record their third album . 
 = = = Strapping Young Lad and Alien ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = 
 The self @-@ titled Strapping Young Lad was released on February 11 , 2003 , and became the band 's first charting album , entering Billboard 's Top Heatseekers at No. 97 . The album received moderate critical success , Nate Smith from <unk> called it a " solid addition to the Townsend catalog " , but " not an instant classic " , Xander Hoose from Chronicles of Chaos called it " a good album " , but also pointed out it is inferior to City . Strapping Young Lad differed from City because it was less industrial and more reminiscent of death metal ; the humor pervading the previous two albums became more subdued . The song Devour would later appear on the soundtrack for the 2005 film Alone in the Dark . 
 The band toured heavily throughout 2003 and 2004 , making stops in the United States , Europe , Canada , and Australia . Although Townsend stated Strapping Young Lad might be the last album , the band re @-@ signed with Century Media Worldwide in March 2004 and announced plans for a new album . On November 2 , 2004 , Strapping Young Lad released a DVD entitled For Those <unk> to Rock : Live at the Commodore , which documented the band 's January 16 , 2004 , performance at the Commodore Ballroom in Vancouver . Bonus features included two music videos , " Relentless " and " Detox " , and interviews with band members . 
 Alien was released on March 22 , 2005 , selling 3 @,@ 697 copies in its first week . It reached No. 32 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart , and No. 35 on the Top Independent Albums chart . Critics praised Townsend 's inventiveness and the dynamism of the songs in which " melody and discord meet midway " ; Adrien Begrand of PopMatters wrote that " Strapping Young Lad have raised the bar yet again " , while Blabbermouth.net 's Krista G. called it one of the best albums of the year . Townsend and Hoglan were the primary writers of the album , since Simon and Stroud were busy with other commitments . To prepare for the recording of Alien , Townsend had stopped taking the medication prescribed to treat his bipolar disorder ; he explained the experimental noise track " Info Dump " is a reflection on the panicked state of mind that ensued after he stopped taking his medication . The making of Alien was documented and made viewable online on Century Media 's official site in February 2005 . It was also available as a bonus DVD of the limited first edition of the album . 
 " Love ? " was chosen as the sole single from the album . Its accompanying music video , inspired by the cult horror film , The Evil Dead , was directed by Joe Lynch . The video garnered the band wider attention , and helped " Love ? " become one of their most recognizable songs . Jed Simon admitted to having produced a video for this particular song because it had " the most commercial potential " . " Love ? " was originally one of two confirmed songs for an EP that was supposed to contain four new songs and four covers . Although planned for release in 2003 , the EP was eventually canceled . A music video was also filmed for Zen ; the video itself would also appear in the 2007 film Shoot ' Em Up . 
 The band embarked on a headlining tour in the United States in April and May 2005 , then went on to tour in Europe . Starting at the end of June , they toured North America as part of the Sounds of the Underground tour , then joined Fear Factory on the Transgression Tour in the U.S. Throughout the tour , Fear Factory bassist Stroud performed with both bands at every concert . Strapping Young Lad concluded the year with a tour in the UK . While on tour , the band started writing the next album , then continued the work in January 2006 , and finished the album by May . In the same month , Townsend announced his intention to " take a hiatus from making records for a while " after the end of touring due to exhaustion from continuous recording and producing for the past ten years . 
 = = = The New Black ( 2006 ) = = = 
 The New Black , Strapping Young Lad 's fifth and final studio album , was released on July 11 , 2006 . Century Media imposed a strict deadline on the release date of the album ; it was to be ready before the 2006 Ozzfest . Despite this , Townsend stated the recording was not rushed , and The New Black became a critical , as well as a commercial , success . It was more melodic than any of the band 's previous albums and brought back the debut album 's tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor . Having sold more than 4 @,@ 000 copies during its first week , The New Black reached No. 200 on the Billboard 200 chart , No. 15 on the Top Independent Albums , and No. 8 on the Top Heatseekers charts . Stylus Magazine 's Cosmo Lee described it as " heavy , catchy , and with no filler " , and About.com 's Chad Bowar was also positive , stating that " this is a CD that 's dense and heavy , but also has some memorable hooks " . 
 A music video was shot in late May to accompany the sole single from the album , " Wrong Side " . In June 2006 Strapping Young Lad embarked on a short festival tour of Europe , including performances at the Rock am Ring and Rock im Park festivals in Germany and the Download Festival in England , which was followed by a second stage appearance at Ozzfest in July and August , where they played to some of their largest audiences in their career . 
 = = = Dissolution ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Townsend recalls that after Alien , he already knew that he wouldn 't want to continue SYL as a project , and that he already wished to abandon SYL after the release of City already , considering the project 's purpose fulfilled . In an interview conducted by Terrorizer in August 2006 , Townsend explained why he decided to put the band on hold : 
 At the end of the day , man , I 'm just tired , and old , and bald , and fat , and grouchy , and bored . You know ? So I was just like , I 'm going to make this record , and do this stupid Ozzfest thing , and tell a bunch of stupid jokes in front of a lot of people at Download , then I 'm just going to fuck off for a while . The bigger this gets , the less I care , to the point where I just need to go spend some time with my family . I don 't wanna <unk> Strapping and all these other projects by doing it for the money . Strapping was about the big middle finger , and it still is , but I don 't think it needs to go any further than this . 
 Although Hoglan initially denied the definitive break @-@ up of the band , saying they would go on tour in March 2007 , he later stated Strapping Young Lad is on " extended hiatus " , and might never reunite again . In May 2007 , during a press conference held to promote his new solo album , Ziltoid the Omniscient , Townsend announced his plans to retreat from public view , including giving interviews and touring , to concentrate on his family , and producing solo albums , as well as other people 's music . As a result , Strapping Young Lad were effectively disbanded . Townsend discussed his future projects in a May 2007 Metal Hammer interview , where he stated " there may be some stuff I do in the future that is as brutal and heavy as Strapping , it 's just not going to be Strapping " . 
 The remastered 10th anniversary edition of City was released on June 7 , 2007 , in similar vein to the 2006 remaster of Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing , with bonus tracks and extended liner notes by Townsend . A career spanning best of album , entitled 1994 – 2006 Chaos Years , was released on March 31 , 2008 , with a bonus DVD of live performances and all of the band 's music videos . 
 During his career @-@ retrospective concert The Retinal Circus in October 2012 , Townsend introduced Jed Simon on stage and performed two SYL songs , " Love ? " and " Detox " . Townsend has since stated that this was a one off performance and that he is not interested getting SYL back together or playing songs at future shows . He posted to Twitter that he no longer feels the same connection to SYL 's music and that this performance was closure for him and Strapping . In an interview on the Metal Hammer podcast , Townsend said that while he still connects to the music , SYL required him to go to extremes that took a toll on him . On his own website , he reiterates that SYL was a project that he eventually perceived to be harmful to his mental and physical health . In 2013 , he played Love ? at concerts in Mexico and Chile as a " cover song " , but later expressed regretting the decision saying it " confuses people " . 
 Townsend also performed an acoustic version of Love ? during his " An Evening with Devin Townsend " shows through the UK in 2015 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Strapping Young Lad 's music was a diverse mix of extreme metal genres ; death metal , thrash metal , black metal , progressive , experimental and industrial metal . Many of the band 's songs showcased Townsend 's versatile vocal style , often changing from screaming , and growling to clean vocals , or even falsetto , within the course of a single song . According to Townsend , the band functioned as his " outlet to freak out " , and his two main projects , the more melodic The Devin Townsend Band and the aggressive Strapping Young Lad were " supposed to be the positive and the negative " . To achieve a chaotic and <unk> sound the band utilized complex time signatures , polyrhythmic composition , blast beats , sampling , keyboard effects and intricately layered production . Townsend used the newest technology available , such as Pro Tools , Steinberg Cubase and Logic Pro , when recording , mixing and producing the band 's songs . As a self @-@ proclaimed " fan of multitracking " , he created an atmospheric , layered " wall of sound " , which became a hallmark of the band 's production style ( with the exception of their self @-@ titled album which featured no samples , or vocal layering ) . Townsend 's musical ideas and production style have drawn comparisons to Phil Spector and Frank Zappa . Strapping Young Lad mostly eschewed guitar solos until The New Black , which featured a more heightened emphasis on melody than their previous albums . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Strapping Young Lad drew influence from a wide range of music genres , most prominently , but not exclusively , heavy metal . Townsend cited , amongst others , Judas Priest , Jane 's Addiction , <unk> France , Grotus , and Frank Zappa as his influences , and also expressed his admiration for Meshuggah on several occasions , calling them " the best metal band on the planet " . Simon and Stroud listed classic hard rock bands , like AC / DC , Led Zeppelin and Kiss , and old school thrash and death metal bands , like Exodus , Slayer and Morbid Angel among their influences , while Hoglan 's influences range wildly in style from Stevie Wonder to progressive rock drummers like Neil Peart , Terry Bozzio and Nick Mason . Townsend stated his main influences for Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing were Napalm Death and Fear Factory , City was influenced by bands such as Foetus and White Noise , and The New Black 's influences were Meshuggah , and " more traditional metal " like Metallica . 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 Townsend was the band 's primary songwriter . While the first two albums were solely his work , subsequent albums featured a minority of " riffs , lyrical ideas , and song titles " by his band mates . 
 Despite the brutality of Strapping Young Lad 's music , their songs contain hints of tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor and self @-@ parody . Frequently , Townsend 's lyrics approached serious personal or political issues with a morbid sense of humor . He has likened the band 's sense of silliness to that of " Weird Al " Yankovic . Townsend 's lyrical influences covered a wide range of themes , including warfare , mathematical theorems , and movies . He also used the technique of cross @-@ referencing , repeating lines from his own works , such as older Strapping Young Lad , or solo material . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Strapping Young Lad was known for its energetic live performances , mostly owing to the eccentric appearance and persona of Devin Townsend . Adrian Begrand of PopMatters wrote " Nobody in metal today has the same kind of commanding stage presence as the self @-@ professed Bald Bastard , Devin Townsend " , and called Strapping Young Lad " one of the best live bands around " . Townsend was famous for his on @-@ stage antics ; he integrated his ironic and tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor into live shows and interacted heavily with the audience . He would deliver comical , and often insulting remarks to them , organize circle pits , and parody heavy metal clichés as well as the genre itself . 
 The band 's humorous approach was also evidenced by a song frequently performed live from 1997 , entitled " Far Beyond Metal " , a parody of classic heavy metal . It became a live staple and a fan favorite , with lyrics changing practically every performance . Although it was recorded live on No Sleep ' till Bedtime , and on the For Those <unk> to Rock DVD , a studio version was not recorded until 2006 during The New Black sessions . The band was also sarcastic about their own Canadian heritage , they used " Blame Canada " , a comedic anti @-@ Canada song from South Park : Bigger , Longer & Uncut as intro music at many concerts in 2003 and 2004 . 
 For a period of time , Strapping Young Lad also played Townsend 's solo material live . In 1998 , after the release of Infinity , they began performing both Strapping Young Lad and Townsend 's solo songs , as two separate sets . It was not until the 2003 release of Accelerated Evolution when Townsend formed a separate band , called The Devin Townsend Band , to act as his full @-@ fledged solo band . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Heavy as a Really Heavy Thing ( 1995 ) 
 City ( 1997 ) 
 Strapping Young Lad ( 2003 ) 
 Alien ( 2005 ) 
 The New Black ( 2006 ) 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Final line @-@ up = = = 
 Devin Townsend – guitar , lead vocals , keyboards ( 1994 – 2007 ) 
 Jed Simon – guitar , backing vocals ( 1994 – 2007 ) 
 Byron Stroud – bass guitar , backing vocals ( 1996 – 2007 ) 
 Gene Hoglan – drums ( 1996 – 2007 ) 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 Adrian White – drums ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Ashley Scribner – bass ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 Mike Sudar – guitar ( 1994 – 1995 ) 
 = = = Session members = = = 
 Chris Bayes – drums ( 1994 ) 
 Smokin ' Lord Toot – drums ( 1994 ) 
 Chris Meyers – keyboards ( 1994 ) 
 Note : The pre @-@ City touring line @-@ up consisted of Townsend , Simon , White , Scribner , Sudar and Meyers . 
 Dave Young - Keyboards ( 2005 ) ( played on Alien ) 
 = = = Touring members = = = 
 John Morgan – keyboards ( 1997 ) 
 Matteo <unk> – keyboards ( 1997 – 1998 , 2003 ) 
 Jamie Meyer – keyboards ( 1998 – 1999 ) 
 Jason <unk> – keyboards ( 1999 ) 
 Chris <unk> – keyboards ( 2002 ) 
 Will Campagna – keyboards ( 2002 , 2005 – 2006 ) 
 <unk> Sami – keyboards ( 2003 – 2004 ) 
 Jon Miller – bass ( substituting Byron Stroud , July 14 – 31 , 2005 ) 
 James MacDonough – bass ( substituting Byron Stroud , August 1 – 13 , 2006 ) 
 = Evan Turner = 
 Evan Marcel Turner ( born October 27 , 1988 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Portland Trail Blazers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . He was drafted second overall by the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2010 NBA draft and played for them until he was traded in February 2014 to the Indiana Pacers . Turner plays the point guard , shooting guard and small forward positions . 
 Turner was a first @-@ team 2010 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American and the 2010 National Player of the Year while playing at Ohio State University . Turner was also a two @-@ time Big Ten Conference scoring champion and the 2010 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year . He was twice the only player named as a unanimous first @-@ team selection by both the coaches and the media to the All @-@ Big Ten team ( 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 ) . By finishing first in scoring and second in both rebounds and assists in the conference in the 2009 – 10 season , he was the first men 's basketball player to finish in the top two in each of these categories and the first to finish in the top five in each category in the same season . He is the conference record @-@ holder for most career and single @-@ season record for Conference Player of the Week awards . 
 Turner attended St. Joseph High School in Westchester , Illinois . By his senior season , he was one of the top high school basketball players at his position in the nation . As a true freshman , he helped lead the Buckeyes to the 2008 National Invitation Tournament championship . The following year , he was the Big Ten Conference scoring champion for the 2008 – 09 season and was a first @-@ team 2009 All @-@ Big Ten selection . That season , he was also an honorable mention All @-@ American and was selected as a member of the 2009 All @-@ Big Ten Conference Tournament team , and he became one of five Big Ten players to have been among the top ten in the conference in average points , rebounds , and assists in the same season . He is the conference record @-@ holder for most career Player of the Week awards and despite missing over a month of his junior season for the 2009 – 10 Ohio State Buckeyes men 's basketball team he also set the single @-@ season record for Player of the Week awards . As a pro , he has participated in the Rising Stars Challenge and helped the 76ers reach the NBA playoffs in his first two NBA seasons . During his third season he became an everyday starter . With an impending free agent status , he was traded to Indiana during his fourth season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Turner was born weighing 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) . Within his first year , he endured chicken pox , pneumonia , asthma , and measles . The 1989 Chicago measles epidemic caused Turner to desperately need emergency room services . He encountered severe breathing problems that required the removal of his adenoids and tonsils . At the age of three , he was hit by a car , resulting in a concussion and stitches . Oversized baby teeth and an overbite caused a speech impediment that necessitated speech therapy . 
 = = High school career = = 
 Before high school , Turner and fellow NBA player Iman Shumpert were teammates on the 8th grade basketball team at Gwendolyn Brooks Middle School in Oak Park , Illinois . Turner was a star on the 2002 – 03 Brooks 's 8th grade boys basketball team that finished the 2002 – 03 season with a record of 23 – 2 . He played in the Summer 2004 AAU Boys 15 @-@ under Basketball National Championship Tournament for the Illinois Knights . As a high school sophomore , he helped lead St. Joseph to a run in the Illinois AA Boys High School basketball tournament , which helped him get the attention of NCAA Division I basketball coaches . At St. Joseph 's , which had once produced Isiah Thomas , he was part of a Chicago area sophomore class that was considered to be the best in the history of the state of Illinois . It included Derrick Rose , and his St. Joseph 's teammate Demetri McCamey , who overshadowed him as the second best Chicago area prospect in the class behind Rose . The class of 2007 was compared to the Chicago area class of 1979 that included Thomas , Terry Cummings , and Darrell Walker as well as the class of 1998 that included Quentin Richardson , Corey Maggette , Frank Williams , Bobby Simmons , Michael Wright . 
 Turner started getting major Division I offers early in his junior year , and he and McCamey attended 2005 Midnight Madness with the Wisconsin Badgers men 's basketball team . At the beginning of his junior season , Chicago Tribune named him to its annual top Chicago metropolitan area basketball players list , and it ranked St. Josephs number three in the area . The team went to the state sectional final before its season ended with a 75 – 72 sectional final loss to Proviso East High School . After his junior season , he was considered one of the top 25 prospects in the country in his class according to one scout , and he was given special mention by the Chicago Tribune and honorable mention by the Associated Press for all @-@ state honors . During the summer of 2006 , he committed to Ohio State , which is located in Columbus , Ohio . Turner 's decision was influenced by his relationship with his father , James Turner , who lived in Columbus , Ohio and whom Turner had visited every summer since he was ten years old . 
 During his senior season , his team was listed second to Rose 's Simeon Career Academy in the preseason Tribune Chicago area high school basketball team rankings . That season , he and Rose were both named to the first @-@ team Associated Press 2006 – 07 Class AA all @-@ state team , a day before Rose 's Simeon eliminated Turner 's St. Joseph in the Illinois Class AA supersectional . Turner and McCamey finished third and sixth to Rose in the Illinois Mr. Basketball voting , and the Chicago Tribune chose both of them as first team All @-@ state selections along with Rose . Turner was ranked as the # 7 , # 13 and # 16 small forward in the nation as a high school senior by ESPN , <unk> , and <unk> respectively . He received scholarship offers from five Big Ten Conference basketball programs , as well as Wake Forest , DePaul and Notre Dame . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman year = = = 
 As a freshman , he averaged 27 @.@ 1 minutes per game , 8 @.@ 5 points per game , and 4 @.@ 4 rebounds per game over the course of the season and finished second on the team in assists and third in steals . Turner recorded his first career double double on January 19 , 2008 at Thompson @-@ Boling Arena against the Tennessee Vols with his first 20 @-@ point game and first 10 @-@ rebound game . That season , he helped Ohio State win the 2008 National Invitation Tournament by averaging 18 @.@ 5 points , 7 rebounds , 4 @.@ 5 assists and 3 steals in the tournament 's semifinal and final round at Madison Square Garden . He had also scored in double digits in the quarterfinal round . He was also in the starting lineup for the other two NIT games . He contributed at least 24 minutes as a starter in each of the five tournament games . 
 = = = Sophomore year = = = 
 As a sophomore , Turner was named player of the week three times during the 2008 – 09 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season ( December 8 , 2008 , February 2 , 2009 , and February 9 , 2009 ) . On February 26 , Turner became the only Big Ten player selected by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) as a Top 15 finalist for the Oscar Robertson Trophy . As a guard / forward for the Ohio State Buckeyes men 's basketball team of the Big Ten Conference , he led his team in the following per @-@ game statistical categories : points , rebounds , assists , and steals . Turner led the Big Ten in scoring as a sophomore . He and Manny Harris became the 4th and 5th players in conference history to finish in the top ten in the conference in points , rebounds and assists since assists became a statistic in 1983 – 84 , following Steve Smith , Jim Jackson , and Brian Evans . 
 Although he was not selected as a preseason All @-@ Big Ten conference player , he was the only person chosen as a unanimous first @-@ team All Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media at the end of the regular season . On March 5 , the National Association of Basketball Coaches honored Turner as a District 7 ( Big Ten ) first @-@ team selection along with four other sophomores . He was also chosen on March 10 by the U.S. Basketball Writers Association for its 2008 – 09 Men 's Division I District V ( OH , IN , IL , MI , MN , WI ) Team , based on voting from its national membership . He was selected as a 2009 All @-@ American honorable mention by the Associated Press . On March 15 , he was selected to the 2009 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament team , despite Ohio State 's loss in the final game to Purdue . Turner played for the 2009 Junior USA World University Championships team , along with conference foes Robbie Hummel of Purdue and Talor Battle of Penn State . He helped them to the bronze medal and a 6 – 1 record . 
 = = = Junior year = = = 
 His junior season began with numerous accolades . ESPN chose both Kalin Lucas and Turner to its 2009 – 10 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season preseason second @-@ team All @-@ American list . FOX Sports preseason All @-@ American list included him on its fifth team . Turner was named among the 50 preseason Wooden Award watch list nominees and the 50 preseason Naismith College Player of the Year watchlist nominees . The 24 @-@ member Big Ten media panel selected him as a first @-@ team preseason All @-@ Big Ten team member . 
 Turner , nicknamed " The Villain " , opened the season by recording the first triple double by a Big Ten player since January 13 , 2001 , and the second in school history ( Dennis Hopson was the first ) during the Coaches vs. Cancer classic against Alcorn State University . This earned him his fourth career Big Ten player of the week honor and first of the 2009 – 10 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season . The following week , he ran his streak of double doubles to four to earn back @-@ to @-@ back player of the week honors . Two weeks after his first triple @-@ double , he repeated the feat at home against Lipscomb University on November 24 . This earned him his third consecutive Big Ten player of the week award . On December 5 , 2009 , in the fourth week of the season , he suffered transverse process fractures of the second and third lumbar vertebrae in his back , which was expected to cause him to be inactive for two months . Turner returned early from his injury on January 6 , 2010 . This occurred two days after Ohio State fell out of the top 25 in the 2009 – 10 NCAA Division I men 's basketball rankings on January 4 in his absence . With Turner back in the lineup , Ohio State returned to the top 25 on January 18 , and Turner earned his fourth Big Ten Player of the Week award on the same day after leading his team to wins over two ranked conference foes . Then on February 8 , Turner established a new Big Ten Conference record with his eighth career Conference Player of the Week award , surpassing Glenn Robinson and Jackson . The fifth of the season also tied Robinson 's single @-@ season record . Two weeks after tying the single @-@ season record , he broke the record when he averaged 24 @.@ 5 points , 8 @.@ 5 rebounds and 5 @.@ 5 assists against two ranked conference opponents ( No. 4 Purdue and at No. 11 Michigan State ) . Then he won the award again on March 1 . 
 Turner helped lead the Buckeyes to the regular @-@ season co @-@ championship of the Big Ten Conference and helped them earn the number one seed in the 2010 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament . On March 12 , 2010 , in their first game in the tournament , Turner helped the Buckeyes get a win over their arch @-@ rival Michigan Wolverines with a last @-@ second 37 @-@ foot three @-@ pointer . In the second game , against Illinois , Turner scored 31 points , scoring the game @-@ tying points to send the game to overtime and then the final four points in overtime to send the game into double overtime . Turner scored a total of 12 points in overtime . He then led Ohio State to victory in the championship game against Minnesota with another 31 points . Turner was named Tournament Most Outstanding Player and part of the All @-@ Tournament team . Turner also repeated as the Big Ten scoring champion , and although he lost the rebounding championship to Mike Davis ( 9 @.@ 167 to 9 @.@ 161 ) , he led the conference in defensive rebounds . He also ranked second in assists and third in steals . He improved upon his sophomore showing by becoming the first player to finish in the top two in average points ( 1st , 20 @.@ 4 ) , rebounds ( 2nd , 9 @.@ 2 ) and assists ( 2nd , 6 @.@ 0 ) , becoming the first men 's basketball player to do so and the first to finish in the top five in all three categories . 
 = = = = Awards = = = = 
 Turner was selected as a Midseason Top @-@ 30 finalist for the 2010 John Wooden Award in January . He was included on the March 15 , 26 @-@ man final national ballot for the Wooden Award . From that ballot he was selected to the ten @-@ man Wooden All @-@ American team . Then the list was shortened to five finalists ( Turner , Sherron Collins , John Wall , Wesley Johnson and Da 'Sean Butler ) who were flown out to Los Angeles for the announcement . On April 9 , Turner was announced as the winner . In February , he was named a midseason Top 30 candidate for the Naismith College Player of the Year and was announced the recipient of the award in Indianapolis April 5 , 2010 . Turner won the USBWA 's Robertson Trophy as the consensus choice by voters in all nine geographical districts . Fox , Associated Press and Sporting News selected him as their National Player of the Year . He earned 54 of the 65 Associated Press panel members ' votes . He was recognized the National Association of Basketball Coaches ' Division I Player of the Year . 
 By winning the Wooden , Naismith , Robertson , Fox Sports , NABC , TSN , and AP Player of the Year awards , he nearly swept all of the major player of the year awards . Wall won the Adolph Rupp Trophy ( and Yahoo ! Sports player of the year ) . Turner was again the only person chosen as a unanimous first @-@ team All Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media at the end of the regular season and was selected as the 2010 Big Ten Men 's Basketball Player of the Year . Turner was also selected as the Big Ten Conference male Athlete of the Year for all sports . 
 Turner was selected as a first @-@ team 2010 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American by Associated Press , Sporting News , Fox Sports , National Association of Basketball Coaches , United States Basketball Writers Association and Yahoo ! Sports . He was also selected in March as one of six finalists for the Bob Cousy Award . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Philadelphia 76ers ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On April 7 , 2010 , Turner held a press conference and announced that he would forgo his final season of collegiate eligibility and enter the 2010 NBA draft , where he was expected to be selected as one of the top 3 draft picks . Turner signed with Michael Jordan 's agent , David Falk . 
 He was selected with the 2nd overall pick by the Philadelphia 76ers in the 2010 NBA draft , and signed a 2 @-@ year deal with a third @-@ year option worth an estimated $ 12 million . 
 On October 27 , 2010 , in his debut on the Philadelphia 76ers ( also his 22nd birthday ) , Turner recorded 16 points , 7 rebounds , and 4 assists , coming off the bench for 30 minutes to lead the team in scoring in a 97 – 87 loss to the Miami Heat . On November 7 , 2010 , Turner got his first NBA start and ended the game with a double @-@ double , recording 14 points and 10 rebounds to go with his 3 assists , in a 106 – 96 win over the New York Knicks in place of the injured Andre Iguodala . On December 29 , 2010 , Turner scored a career @-@ high 23 points in a 123 – 110 win against the Phoenix Suns , going 9 – 12 from the field and a perfect 4 – 4 from the free throw line . He ended the season with fourteen starts and two double @-@ doubles . The team had gone 27 @-@ 55 the previous season , but were able to improve to 41 @-@ 41 in Turner 's first season . They reached the 2011 NBA Playoffs as the seventh seed , and were matched up against the new @-@ look Miami Heat led by LeBron James and Dwyane Wade . Turner was praised for his aggressiveness in the series , handling Wade on the defensive side , and scoring 17 points and six rebounds on 50 % shooting in the Sixers win in Game 4 . That would be Philadelphia 's only win of the series however , as they fell to the eventual Eastern Conference Champions Miami in five games . 
 On February 8 , 2012 , Turner was selected to play in the 2012 Rising Stars competition . During the game , he unveiled a new model of Li @-@ Ning shoes . On March 7 , 2012 , in only his second start of the season , Turner recorded a career @-@ high , 26 points , against the Boston Celtics . On March 9 , 2012 , and March 11 , 2012 , against the Utah Jazz and the New York Knicks , he posted back @-@ to @-@ back double doubles in his third and fourth consecutive start . He again scored 26 points on April 3 , 2012 , against the Miami Heat . On April 25 , 2012 , he recorded another double @-@ double while setting a career @-@ high with 29 points and adding 13 rebounds . Over the course of the season , he made twenty starts and recorded five double @-@ doubles . He posted his first postseason double double on May 12 , 2012 , against the Boston Celtics in the first game of the Eastern Conference semifinals of the 2012 NBA Playoffs , with 16 points and 10 rebounds . He repeated the feat on May 21 in game five of the series , recording 10 rebounds and 11 points . He started 12 of Philadelphia 's 13 playoff games , but the team was eliminated in the second round of the playoffs . 
 Turner started all 82 games during the 2012 – 13 NBA season and tallied 14 double @-@ doubles , while averaging a career high 13 @.@ 3 points 6 @.@ 3 rebounds and 4 @.@ 3 assists . On December 7 , 2012 , he posted a 26 @-@ point , 10 @-@ rebound double @-@ double against the Boston Celtics and made the game @-@ winning shot in overtime with 3 @.@ 9 seconds remaining . On March 1 , 2013 , he fell one assist short of a triple @-@ double with 22 points , 10 rebounds and 9 assists against the Golden State Warriors . 
 The 76ers did not sign Turner to an extension prior to the October 31 , 2013 , deadline , meaning that the 76ers had the right to make him a restricted free agent at the end of the season . On November 9 , 2013 , Turner established a new career high with 31 points , including the game @-@ tying basket with 8 @.@ 7 seconds remaining in the first overtime against the Cleveland Cavaliers . Turner hit the game @-@ winning buzzer beater on December 20 against the Brooklyn Nets . Turner sat out on December 28 due to knee soreness , but he returned to the lineup the following night against the Los Angeles Lakers with 22 points , 7 rebounds and 6 assists . On January 22 , 2014 , Turner recorded a career @-@ high 34 points in a 110 @-@ 106 win over the New York Knicks , he also recorded 11 rebounds in the game . Turner hit the game @-@ winning buzzer beater on January 29 , 2014 against the Boston Celtics . 
 = = = Indiana Pacers ( 2014 ) = = = 
 On February 20 , 2014 , Turner and Lavoy Allen were traded to the Indiana Pacers in exchange for Danny Granger and a second @-@ round draft pick . Turner debuted for the Pacers on February 25 , 2014 . He scored 13 points and added 6 rebounds as part of the Pacers bench that scored a season @-@ high 50 points against the Los Angeles Lakers . When the Pacers benched their entire starting lineup on April 6 , he scored 23 to help the team to a win over the Milwaukee Bucks . Turner was reported to have an acrimonious relationship with Indiana teammate Lance Stephenson because both were " free agents to be ... looking for their first big contract " who played the same style and they were both trying to fill the role of " next big thing " . The conflict led to a fist fight between the two on April 21 , 2014 , in a team practice on the eve of the team 's second game of the first round of the 2014 NBA Playoffs . Stephenson has a reputation for irritating people however . Less than a month earlier , Turner had come to the rescue when Stephenson had derailed against Dwyane Wade . In game 6 of the first round series against Atlanta with Indiana trailing 3 – 2 , head coach Frank Vogel changed the rotation and Turner was left out , playing no minutes , while some of his playing time went to <unk> Butler . In Round 2 against the Washington Wizards , he returned to the lineup . In the first game of Round 3 against the two @-@ time defending champion Miami Heat , he sat out with strep throat . 
 = = = Boston Celtics ( 2014 – 2016 ) = = = 
 After Indiana elected not to make Turner an $ 8 @.@ 7 million qualifying offer , he became an unrestricted free agent . According to his agent , Turner agreed to sign with the Boston Celtics on July 21 , 2014 . He officially signed with the Celtics on September 29 , 2014 . He began the season as a reserve , but when Marcus Smart and Rajon Rondo endured concurrent injuries , Turner scored a team @-@ high 19 points in a starting role in a win against the Chicago Bulls . On December 8 , 2014 , against the Washington Wizards , Turner forced overtime by sinking a three @-@ point shot with 0 @.@ 9 seconds left in regulation , but missed a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) jump shot with 0 @.@ 9 seconds remaining in the second overtime which would have given the Celtics the lead . When he was inserted into the starting lineup at point guard on December 31 , 2014 , against the Sacramento Kings , he posted a double double with 11 assists and 10 points . Chicago native Turner posted a season @-@ high 29 points at the United Center against the Chicago Bulls on January 3 . Turner hit his fourth ( in eight attempts ) career last second game winning shot with a three @-@ pointer with 1 @.@ 9 seconds left as his team trailed 89 – 87 against the Portland Trail Blazers on January 22 , 2015 . Then on February 11 , 2015 , he hit a game winner with 0 @.@ 2 seconds left against Atlanta Hawks . Evan Turner posted his first career triple double on February 25 , 2015 , against the New York Knicks with 10 points , 10 assists and 12 rebounds . On March 13 , 2015 , Turner scored 24 of his season @-@ high 30 points in the second half , including 16 in the fourth quarter to help the Celtics rally past the Orlando Magic . He posted two more triple doubles on March 23 against the Brooklyn Nets ( 19 points , 10 rebounds , and 12 assists ) and on April 1 against the Indiana Pacers ( 13 points , 11 rebounds , and 12 assists ) . On April 10 , he recorded a career @-@ high 13 assists against the Cleveland Cavaliers . Turner played every game in the 2014 – 15 season and finished with averages of 9 @.@ 5 points , 5 @.@ 1 rebounds , and a career @-@ high 5 @.@ 5 assists per game . During the offseason , he was named as a participant in the first @-@ ever NBA Africa Game . 
 On January 4 , 2016 , Turner started in place of an injured Avery Bradley and posted a 12 @-@ point , 11 @-@ rebound double @-@ double against the Brooklyn Nets . He posted a 14 @-@ point , 10 @-@ rebound double @-@ double off the bench against Boston on February 2 . On February 16 , at halftime of the Ohio State – Michigan game at Value City Arena , Turner 's collegiate number , 21 , was retired by Ohio State . On March 26 , Turner posted a 17 @-@ point , 11 @-@ rebound double @-@ double and blocked Devin Booker 's potential game @-@ tying shot with 3 @.@ 9 seconds left against the Phoenix Suns . 
 = = = Portland Trail Blazers ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 6 , 2016 , Turner signed a four @-@ year , $ 70 million contract with the Portland Trail Blazers . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Turner 's mother is Iris James , and he has two older brothers named Darius and Richard . 
 On August 23 , 2010 , CNBC reported that Turner had signed a multi @-@ year endorsement contract with Chinese apparel maker Li Ning Company Limited . 
 = Ted Frank = 
 Theodore H. " Ted " Frank ( born December 14 , 1968 ) , is an American lawyer , activist , legal writer , and blogger , based in Washington , D.C .. He is noted for writing the vetting report of vice @-@ presidential candidate Sarah Palin for the John McCain campaign in the 2008 presidential election . He is the founder and president of the Center for Class Action Fairness ( CCAF ) , established in 2009 . The New York Times calls him the " leading critic of abusive class @-@ action settlements " ; the Wall Street Journal has referred to him as " a leading tort @-@ reform advocate . " 
 Frank graduated from Brandeis University in 1991 , and the University of Chicago Law School in 1994 with a Juris Doctor . A litigator from 1995 to 2005 , and a former clerk for Frank H. Easterbrook on the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals , Frank was a director and fellow of the Legal Center for the Public Interest at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington , D.C. Since 2011 , he has been an adjunct fellow at Manhattan Institute ’ s Center for Legal Policy , where he is also editor of the Institute 's web magazine , <unk> He is also on the Executive Committee of the Federalist Society 's Litigation Practice Group and contributes regularly to conservative legal <unk> , and , as of 2008 , is a member of the American Law Institute . 
 = = Background and early career = = 
 Frank was born in 1968 . He is a grandson of journalist Nelson Frank , a nephew of author Johanna Hurwitz , and a cousin of the politics editor of The Atlantic Online , <unk> Franke @-@ <unk> . 
 He graduated from the Benjamin Franklin High School in New Orleans , then earned his Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics from Brandeis University in May 1991 . He wrote columns for his campus newspaper and political magazines and was a member of the student senate . He objected to a campaign to stop serving pork at the Jewish university , which was noted in The New York Times . 
 In 1994 Frank earned his Juris Doctor with high honors from the University of Chicago Law School . At Chicago he earned Order of the Coif and served on the law review . While at Chicago Law , he was a known presence on Usenet groups and researched urban legends ; he was an early contributor to the Baseball Prospectus collective through essays on the Usenet group <unk> He has also been described as one of the most notorious contributors along with <unk> to an activity then known as " trolling for newbies " ( the term " trolling " was not negative in connotation ) . 
 After clerking for Judge Frank H. Easterbrook of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , Frank entered private practice between 1995 and 2005 as a litigator on class action tort cases at law firms Kirkland & Ellis , <unk> & <unk> , and O ’ <unk> & Myers . Among his earliest cases were two sudden acceleration cases , where he represented the automakers . As part of his practice , Frank defended a lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) to delay the 2003 California gubernatorial recall election , defended Vioxx liability cases , and served on defense teams for antitrust and patent cases . 
 = = Advocacy of tort reform = = 
 In 2003 , Frank began contributing regularly to Overlawyered , a legal weblog edited by Walter Olson that advocates tort reform ; he continued there through 2010 . 
 Frank joined the American Enterprise Institute in 2005 when AEI offered him a fellowship to research the effects of the Class Action Fairness Act . As the director of the AEI Legal Center for the Public Interest he spoke and wrote about civil justice issues and liability . Frank also sits on the Executive Committee of the Federalist Society 's Litigation Practice Group . 
 Frank is a leading proponent for tort reform in the United States . According to Frank , he became disillusioned at class action tactics , and the willingness of judges to approve settlements he felt were poor for consumers . He has strongly criticized obesity lawsuits , calling them " rent @-@ seeking vehicles that are neither good law nor good public policy . " 
 In April 2008 , several members of Congress brought up the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act under Title VII , a revision of law " to state that prior acts outside the 180 day statute of limitations could be included " , affecting employment financial issues . Frank was against the revision , saying that wages and hiring would be reduced to counter the possibility of litigation from a hired employee . The law was eventually passed in January 2009 . 
 In February 2011 , Frank was part of a three @-@ member panel at Vanderbilt University in Tennessee which consisted of himself , James Blumstein , who is a law professor at the university , and Charlie Ross , a former State Senator in Mississippi , presenting their perspectives on how the business and people of the state would benefit from tort reform . Frank and the other panelists argued that " Tennessee ’ s current civil justice system is both inconsistent and unsustainable " and it was argued that , based on reforms in other states , a reform in this area could result in 30 @,@ 000 jobs a year or 577 jobs each week in Tennessee and significantly improve the health system . 
 = = = Issues and conflicts = = = 
 In 2006 , Frank published an op @-@ ed in The Washington Post arguing for various tort reforms and criticizing the Association of Trial Lawyers of America for " show [ ing ] much more of an interest in benefiting trial lawyers than in fairness or justice . Jon Haber , CEO of ATLA , responded in the Post , accusing Frank of proposing to destroy " the nation 's civil justice system to benefit the insurance industry , drug companies and other corporate powers " , of a " laughable " claim that too many lawsuits " may transform the nation into a ' banana republic ' " , of " find [ ing ] the fight for justice trivial " and making " nothing more than an attack on the Constitution of the United States " . The next day , Frank described Haber 's op @-@ ed as " a collection of ad <unk> and insults and non sequiturs " , " purport [ ing ] to be responding to [ Frank , but ] in fact responding to a fictional straw @-@ man " . He accused Haber of " dishonest change of subject : at no point does Haber defend the lawsuits I actually criticize " , and ended by noting that Haber did not respond to " the most important part of my op @-@ ed " about " trial lawyers ... trying to undo [ the concept that a deal is a deal ] retroactively " . 
 In a Wall Street Journal opinion piece in 2007 , Frank said that the Department of Treasury and SEC should urge the Supreme Court to reject expanded securities litigation liability in <unk> v. Scientific @-@ Atlanta . Congressmen John Conyers , Jr. and Barney Frank criticized this op @-@ ed in their saying that Frank 's argument substituted policy considerations for the plain text of statute . Frank rebutted the allegation on the Overlawyered weblog . Also in 2007 , Frank posted an article regarding tort trial lawyer Arthur Alan Wolk on Overlawyered , a website he has regularly posted on since 2003 about tort reform issues , that prompted Wolk to sue Frank for defamation . The case was dismissed as barred by the one year statute of limitations . On appeal , the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press , the Society of Professional Journalists , the American Society of News Editors , the New York Times , the Washington Post , the Associated Press , and law professors and First Amendment experts Eugene Volokh and Glenn Reynolds , among others , filed amicus briefs in support of the defendants saying that there was no actionable claim of libel . 
 Frank , who worked on the Vioxx case early in his career , was called " perhaps the loudest critic of the Vioxx litigation , " and debated trial lawyer Mark Lanier about the issue . Frank continued his criticism in a 2011 article . " A final sordid chapter in the tort litigation over Vioxx closed , as Judge Eldon Fallon <unk> up $ 315 million to be paid to the plaintiffs ' attorneys who worked on the litigation . This sum was in addition to the more than $ 1 @.@ 2 billion already paid to such attorneys . When you add in what Merck paid to plaintiffs and for its own attorneys , the Vioxx litigation cost it more than $ 7 billion . Yet Merck almost certainly did not do anything wrong . Even as an unsympathetic corporate defendant , it won the vast majority of cases that went to trial , and another dozen or more that plaintiffs ' attorneys dismissed on the eve of trial rather than risk the publicity of a certain loss . Even in the handful of cases that Merck lost at trial , such as the $ 253 million verdict in the Ernst case that generated much of the publicity that led to tens of thousands of cases being filed , Merck won reversals of most of those on appeal because the verdicts were based on <unk> junk @-@ science expert testimony that should not have been admitted into evidence . " Lanier defended the settlement as fair . 
 = = Sarah Palin vetting = = 
 According to the book Game Change : Obama and the Clintons , McCain and Palin , and the Race of a Lifetime , on the weekend before John McCain made his vice @-@ presidential pick , McCain 's advisor Arthur <unk> asked Ted Frank to prepare a written report on Sarah Palin , " Thrown together from scratch in less than forty hours , the document highlighted her vulnerabilities : " Democrats upset at McCain 's anti @-@ Obama ' celebrity ' advertisements will mock Palin as an inexperienced beauty queen whose main national exposure was a photo @-@ spread in Vogue in February 2008 . Even in campaigning for governor , she made a number of gaffes , and the Anchorage Daily News expressed concern that she often seemed ' unprepared or over her head ' in a campaign run by a friend . " " The book also says that Frank worked on the vetting of Senator Joe Lieberman . The report was widely criticized ; GQ has cited the report as " the most infamous document in <unk> @-@ vetting history . " In Mark Halperin and John <unk> 's book Race of a Lifetime : How Obama Won the White House ( 2011 ) , they describe the vetting at length . Frank has defended the report as " exhaustive " and covering " almost everything that would eventually dog her on the campaign trail . " In the HBO film Game Change , Frank was played by Brian d 'Arcy James . 
 = = Center for Class Action Fairness = = 
 In 2009 , Frank founded the non @-@ profit Center for Class Action Fairness ( CCAF ) to represent consumers dissatisfied with their counsel in class actions and class action settlements . According to The American Lawyer , as of March 2013 , the CCAF had successfully challenged two dozen settlements . 
 Frank founded CCAF after his successful objection to the proposed class action settlement in the Grand Theft Auto consumer fraud case . Under the settlement , class members who had bought a Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas video game with a hidden , sexually explicit easter egg would have received less than $ 30 @,@ 000 , while the plaintiffs ' attorneys would receive $ 1 million in legal fees . The court rejected the settlement on other grounds , but the case spurred Frank to devote himself to objecting to class action settlements , and he left AEI . 
 CCAF has objected to settlements throughout the United States , in cases where class action lawyers receive cash payments but the plaintiff class receives only discount coupons for further products and services from the defendant company . CCAF argues in those cases that few of the coupons are ever used , so the actual payment to plaintiffs is much lower than the stated amounts . In 2010 , CCAF successfully objected to a coupon settlement in a Central District of California class action alleging consumer fraud in the sale of Honda Civic Hybrids ; the settlement would have provided $ 2 @.@ 95 million in attorneys ' fees , but only coupons to the class . Frank was reported to have said , " coupons are nearly worthless because so few of the intended beneficiaries will find it worthwhile to fill in all the necessary paperwork . " The CCAF has also been involved in the case surrounding the allegations of email spamming by Ameritrade in 2009 . The case brought Frank before Northern District of California Chief Judge Vaughn Walker , where he challenged the fairness of a TD Ameritrade settlement , which consists of coupons for antivirus software . Frank " argued that the court should not award , or should at least limit , the requested $ 1 @.@ 87 million in attorney fees . " Judge Walker rejected the Ameritrade settlement in October 2009 . 
 = = Gay rights activism = = 
 In response to the Chick @-@ fil @-@ A same @-@ sex marriage controversy , Frank created the " Chicken Offset " website to permit gay @-@ rights supporters to offset their purchases of Chick @-@ fil @-@ A with donations to charities that supported gays . Frank also co @-@ hosted a benefit to protect same @-@ sex marriage in Maryland . 
 = The Slave Community = 
 The Slave Community : Plantation Life in the Antebellum South is a book written by American historian John W. Blassingame . Published in 1972 , it is one of the first historical studies of slavery in the United States to be presented from the perspective of the enslaved . The Slave Community contradicted those historians who had interpreted history to suggest that African American slaves were docile and submissive " Sambos " who enjoyed the benefits of a paternalistic master @-@ slave relationship on southern plantations . Using psychology , Blassingame analyzes fugitive slave narratives published in the 19th century to conclude that an independent culture developed among the enslaved and that there were a variety of personality types exhibited by slaves . 
 Although the importance of The Slave Community was recognized by scholars of American slavery , Blassingame 's conclusions , methodology , and sources were heavily criticized . Historians criticized the use of slave narratives that were seen as unreliable and biased . They questioned Blassingame 's decision to exclude the more than 2 @,@ 000 interviews with former slaves conducted by the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) in the 1930s . Historians argued that Blassingame 's use of psychological theory proved unhelpful in his interpretation . Blassingame defended his conclusions at a 1976 meeting of the Association for the Study of Afro @-@ American Life and History and in 1979 published a revised and enlarged edition of The Slave Community . Despite criticisms , The Slave Community is a foundational text in the study of the life and culture of slaves in the antebellum South . 
 = = <unk> background = = 
 Ulrich Bonnell Phillips wrote the first major historical study of the 20th century dealing with slavery . In American Negro Slavery ( 1918 ) , Phillips refers to slaves as " negroes , who for the most part were by racial quality submissive rather than defiant , light @-@ hearted instead of gloomy , amiable and ingratiating instead of sullen , and whose very defects invited paternalism rather than repression . " American Negro Slavery is infused with racial rhetoric and upholds perceptions about the inferiority of black people common in the southern United States at the time . Although African American academics such as W. E. B. Du Bois criticized Phillips 's depiction of slaves , the book was considered the authoritative text on slavery in America until the 1950s . 
 Phillips 's interpretation of slavery was challenged by Kenneth M. Stampp in The Peculiar Institution : Slavery in the Ante @-@ Bellum South ( 1956 ) and Stanley M. Elkins in Slavery : A Problem in American Institutional and Intellectual Life ( 1958 ) . Stampp 's study lacks the racist interpretation found in American Negro Slavery and approaches the issue from the position that there is no innate difference between blacks and whites . He questions the reality of plantation paternalism described by Phillips : " the reality of ante @-@ bellum paternalism ... needs to be separated from its fanciful surroundings and critically analyzed . " Elkins also dismisses Phillips 's claim that African American slaves were innately submissive " Sambos " . He argues that slaves had instead been <unk> , or " made " into Sambos , by the brutal treatment received at the hands of slaveowners and overseers . Elkins compares the process to the infantilization of Jews in Nazi concentration camps . 
 Like Phillips , Stampp and Elkins relied on plantation records and the writings of slaveowners as their main primary sources . Stampp admits that " few ask what the slaves themselves thought of bondage . " Historians dismissed the written works of slaves such as the 19th century fugitive slave narratives as unreliable and biased because of their editing by abolitionists . Scholars also ignored the 2 @,@ 300 interviews conducted with former slaves in the late 1930s by the WPA Federal Writers ' Project . As historian George P. Rawick points out , more weight was often given to white sources : the " masters not only ruled the past in fact " but also " rule its written history . " 
 The 1970s , however , witnessed the publication of revisionist studies that departed from the traditional historiography of slavery . Focusing on the perspective of the slave , new studies incorporated the slave narratives and WPA interviews : George Rawick 's From <unk> to Sundown : The Making of the Black Community ( 1972 ) , Eugene D. Genovese 's Roll , Jordan , Roll : The World the Slaves Made ( 1974 ) , Peter H. Wood , Black Majority : Negroes in Colonial South Carolina from 1670 Through the Stono Rebellion ( 1974 ) , Leslie Howard Owens 's This Species of Property : Slave Life and Culture in the Old South ( 1976 ) , Herbert G. Gutman 's The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom , 1750 – 1925 ( 1976 ) , and Lawrence W. Levine 's Black Culture and Black Consciousness : Afro @-@ American Folk Thought from Slavery to Freedom ( 1977 ) . One of the more controversial of these studies was John W. Blassingame 's The Slave Community . 
 = = Blassingame 's argument = = 
 In The Slave Community , Blassingame argues that " historians have never systematically explored the life experiences of American slaves . " He asserts that by concentrating on the slaveowner , historians have presented a distorted view of plantation life that " strips the slave of any meaningful and distinctive culture , family life , religion , or manhood . " Blassingame outlines that the reliance on planter sources led historians like Elkins to mimic planter stereotypes of slaves such as the " submissive half @-@ man , half child " Sambo . Noting the agency slaves possessed over their lives , he contends , " Rather than identifying with and submitting totally to his master , the slave held onto many remnants of his African culture , gained a sense of worth in the quarters , spent most of his time free from surveillance by whites , controlled important aspects of his life , and did some personally meaningful things on his own volition . " 
 = = = African cultural retention and slave culture = = = 
 According to Blassingame , African culture was not entirely removed from slave culture through the process of enslavement and " was much more resistant to the bludgeons that was slavery than historians have hitherto suspected . " " African survivals " persisted in the form of folk tales , religion and spirituality , music and dance , and language . He asserts that the retention of African culture acted as a form of resistance to enslavement : " All things considered , the few Africans enslaved in <unk> and eighteenth @-@ century America appear to have survived their traumatic experiences without becoming abjectly docile , infantile , or submissive " and " since an overwhelming percentage of nineteenth @-@ century Southern slaves were native Americans , they never underwent this kind of shock [ the Middle Passage ] and were in a position to construct psychological defenses against total dependency on their masters . " 
 Blassingame asserts that historians have discussed " what could be generally described as slave ' culture , ' but give little solid information on life in the quarters . " He argues that culture developed within the slave community independent of the slaveowners ' influence . Blassingame notes , " Antebellum black slaves created several unique cultural forms which lightened their burden of oppression , promoted group solidarity , provided ways for verbalizing aggression , sustaining hope , building self @-@ esteem , and often represented areas of life largely free from the control of whites . " 
 Blassingame notes that many of the folk tales told by slaves have been traced by African scholars to Ghana , Senegal , and Mauritania to peoples such as the Ewe , Wolof , Hausa , <unk> , Ashanti , and Igbo . He remarks , " While many of these tales were brought over to the South , the African element appears most clearly in the animal tales . " One prominent example discussed by Blassingame is the Ewe story of " Why the Hare Runs Away " , which is a trickster and tar @-@ baby tale told by southern slaves and later recorded by writer Joel Chandler Harris in his Uncle Remus stories . Southern slaves often included African animals like elephants , lions , and monkeys as characters in their folk tales . 
 As Christian missionaries and slaveowners attempted to erase African religious and spiritual beliefs , Blassingame argues that " in the United States , many African religious rites were fused into one — voodoo . " Voodoo priests and conjurers promised slaves that they could make masters kind , harm enemies , ensure love , and heal sickness . Other religious survivals noted by Blassingame include funeral rites , grave decorating , and ritualistic dancing and singing . 
 <unk> and state governments tried to prevent slaves from making or playing musical instruments because of the use of drums to signal the Stono Rebellion in 1739 . Blassingame , however , points out that in spite of restrictions , slaves were able to build a strong musical tradition drawing on their African heritage . Music , songs , and dances were similar to those performed or played in Africa . Instruments reproduced by slaves include drums , three @-@ stringed banjos , gourd rattles , and mandolins . 
 Still , Blassingame concludes that cross @-@ cultural exchanges occurred on southern plantations , arguing that " acculturation in the United States involved the mutual interaction between two cultures , with Europeans and Africans borrowing from each other . " Blassingame asserts that the most significant instance revolved around Protestant Christianity ( primarily Baptist and Methodist churches ) : " The number of blacks who received religious instruction in antebellum white churches is significant because the church was the only institution other than the plantation which played a major role in <unk> the slave . " Christianity and enslaved black ministers slowly replaced African religious survivals and represented another aspect of slave culture which the slaves used to create their own communities . While ministers preached obedience in the presence of the slaveowners and other whites , slaves often met in secret , " invisible " services unsupervised by whites . In these " invisible churches " , slaves could discuss freedom , liberty , and the judgment of God against slaveowners . 
 = = = Slave families = = = 
 Slave marriages were illegal in southern states , and slave couples were frequently separated by slaveowners through sale . Blassingame grants that slaveowners did have control over slave marriages . They encouraged monogamous relationships to " make it easier to discipline their slaves . ... A black man , they reasoned , who loved his wife and his children was less likely to be rebellious or to run away than would a ' single ' slave . " Blassingame notes that when a slave couple resided on the same plantation , the husband witnessed the whipping and raping of his wife and the sale of his children . He remarks , " Nothing demonstrated his powerlessness as much as the slave 's inability to prevent the forcible sale of his wife and children . " 
 Nevertheless , Blassingame argues that " however frequently the family was broken it was primarily responsible for the slave 's ability to survive on the plantation without becoming totally dependent on and submissive to his master . " He contends : 
 While the form of family life in the quarters differed radically from that among free Negroes and whites , this does not mean it failed to perform many of the traditional functions of the family — the rearing of children being one of the most important of these functions . Since slave parents were primarily responsible for training their children , they could cushion the shock of bondage for them , help them to understand their situation , teach them values different from those their masters tried to instill in them , and give them a referent for self @-@ esteem other than the master . 
 Blassingame asserts that slave parents attempted to shield infants and young children from the brutality of the plantation . When children understood that they were enslaved ( usually after their first whipping ) , parents dissuaded angry urges to run away or seek revenge . 
 Children observed fathers demonstrating two behavioral types . In the quarters , he " acted like a man " , castigating whites for the mistreatment of himself and his family ; in the field working for the master , he appeared obedient and submissive . According to Blassingame , " Sometimes children internalized both the true personality traits and the contradictory behavioral patterns of their parents . " He believes that children recognized submissiveness as a convenient method to avoid punishment and the behavior in the quarters as the true behavioral model . Blassingame concludes , " In [ the slave father 's ] family , the slave not only learned how to avoid the blows of the master , but also drew on the love and sympathy of its members to raise his spirits . The family was , in short , an important survival mechanism . " 
 = = = Personality types = = = 
 Blassingame identifies three stereotypes in the literature of the antebellum south : 
 Sambo was a combination of the Uncle Remus , Jim Crow , and Uncle Tom figures who represented the faithful , submissive , and superstitious slave . 
 Jack worked faithfully until he was mistreated , then he became uncooperative and occasionally rebellious . <unk> analyzing the white man 's overwhelming physical power , Jack either avoided contact with him or was deferential in his presence . 
 Nat was the perpetual runaway and rebellious slave feared by slaveowners . Named after Nat Turner , the Nat character retaliated against slaveowners and was subdued and punished only when overcome by greater numbers . 
 Directly challenging Elkins 's infantilization thesis , Blassingame argues that historians have focused too much on the Sambo personality type and the role of paternalism . " The Sambo stereotype was so pervasive in antebellum Southern literature that many historians , without further research , argue that it was an accurate description of the dominant slave personality . " 
 According to Blassingame , the Sambo figure evolved from white Americans ' attitudes toward Africans and African Americans as innately barbaric , passive , superstitious , and childlike . Southern writers felt a need to defend slavery from allegations of abuse and brutality leveled by northern abolitionists , so Sambo became a common portrayal to justify and explain the need for plantation paternalism . Finally , slaveowners used the Sambo stereotype to alleviate their own fears and anxieties about the potential rebelliousness of their slaves . Blassingame remarks , " In this regard , Nat , the actual and potential rebel , stands at the core of white perceptions of the slave . With Nat perennially in the wings , the creation of Sambo was almost mandatory for the Southerner 's emotional security . Like a man whistling in the dark to bolster his courage , the white man had to portray the slave as Sambo . " 
 Despite slaveowner paternalism and charges of submissiveness , Blassingame contends , " There is overwhelming evidence , in the primary sources , of the Negro 's resistance to his bondage and of his undying love for freedom . " Blassingame outlines efforts of slaves to run away and rebel , particularly the Stono Rebellion of 1739 , Charles <unk> 's revolt in 1811 , Nat Turner 's revolt of 1831 , and the participation of fugitive slaves in Florida fighting with Seminoles during the Seminole Wars . Blassingame concludes that the Sambo and Nat stereotypes " were real . " He explains , " The more fear whites had of Nat , the more firmly tried to believe in Sambo in order to escape paranoia . " 
 Blassingame concludes that there were a variety of personality types exhibited by slaves positioned on a scale between the two extremes of Sambo and Nat . He argues that variations present in plantations , overseers , and masters gave the slave " much more freedom from restraint and more independence and autonomy than his institutionally defined role allowed . Consequently , the slave did not have to be infantile or abjectly docile in order to remain alive . " Blassingame compares slavery on southern plantations to the treatment of prisoners in Nazi concentration camps in an effort to demonstrate that " the most important factor in causing infantilism , total dependency , and docility in the camps was the real threat of death which left few , if any , alternatives for the inmates . " He remarks , " Placed on a continuum of total institutions , the concentration camp is far removed from the Southern plantation . " According to Blassingame , the goal of the irrationally organized and understaffed plantation was not the systematic torture and extermination of its laborers , who were " worth more than a bullet " . 
 = = Methodology and sources = = 
 In The Slave Community , Blassingame uses psychologist Harry Stack Sullivan 's interpersonal theory to interpret the behavior of slaves on antebellum plantations . Sullivan claims that " significant others " , persons with the most power to reward and punish individual behavior , were primarily responsible for determining behavior . Interpersonal theorists argue that " behavioral patterns are determined by the characteristics of the situation , how the person perceives them , and his behavioral dispositions at the time . " The most important component of personality is self @-@ esteem . Blassingame explains , " Our sense of self @-@ esteem is heightened or lowered by our perception of the images others have of us . " Interpersonal behavior revolves around the dominant @-@ submissive axes : " One form of behavior tends to elicit its complement : dominance leads to submission and vice versa . The extent of submissiveness often depends on the structure of the group to which the person belongs . " 
 Another psychological theory used by Blassingame is role theory . According to this theory , " a person 's behavior is generally determined by the socially defined roles or the behavioral patterns expected of him in certain situations . " Blassingame asserts that through applying interpersonal and role theory to the fugitive slave narratives , historians can determine " the extent to which slaves acted the way their masters expected them to behave " and how the Sambo , Jack , and Nat personality types can be misleading . 
 Blassingame contends that historians have " deliberately ignored " autobiographies of ex @-@ slaves , particularly the fugitive slave narratives . " Consequently " , argues Blassingame , " a great deal of emphasis has been placed on non @-@ traditional sources in this study in an effort to delineate more clearly the slave 's view of bondage and to discover some new insights into the workings of the system . " He relies heavily on narratives by Henry Bibb , Henry Clay Bruce , Elizabeth <unk> , Samuel Hall , Solomon Northup , Charles Ball , Jermain Wesley <unk> , William Wells Brown , John Brown , Robert Anderson , William Grimes , Austin Steward , and Frederick Douglass . Blassingame 's discussion of the African slave trade , Middle Passage , and African culture is based on Olaudah Equiano 's The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano , or Gustavus <unk> , the African ( 1794 ) . 
 Rather than accepting the fugitive slave narratives without question , Blassingame admits to scrutinizing his reading of the texts . He notes that arguments against the use of these autobiographies used by historians revolve around reliability : " Many historians refuse to use these accounts because they have felt the fugitive , as the primary sufferer in the institution , was unable to give an objective account of bondage . " Still , Blassingame defends his reliance on autobiographies , noting , " The portrait of the institution of slavery which emerges from the narratives is not the simple picture of hell on earth that most historians have led us to believe they contain . Instead , the fugitives ' plantations are peopled with the same range of heroes and villains , black and white , which one generally finds in the human race . " Therefore , Blassingame concludes : 
 Like most personal documents , the autobiography provides a window to the larger world . In this sense , the slave writers present a participant observers ' comments on the larger slave society . As an eyewitness , the autobiographer brings the historian into contact with almost all kinds of slaves . When the autobiographies are accepted both as records of the unique experiences of each individual author and as eyewitness accounts of several slave communities , they are clearly " representative " . 
 Besides fugitive slave narratives , Blassingame uses abolitionist periodicals such as The Liberator , National Anti @-@ Slavery Standard , Pennsylvania Freeman , Anti @-@ Slavery Bugle , and Genius of Universal Emancipation . According to Blassingame , these periodicals printed slave interviews , letters , and autobiographies , but " gave even more coverage to white Southerners than to slaves and frequently reprinted articles , letters , and proceedings from a large number of Southern newspapers " . 
 A primary source that Blassingame did not consult in his study was the WPA slave interviews . While he admits that " slave interviews rival autobiographies in their revelations about the internal dynamics of bondage , ... the heavy editing of the WPA interviews makes them far more difficult to utilize than black autobiographies . " He elaborates on his criticism of the interviews in a 1975 article in the Journal of Southern History . He describes how white interviewers often deleted material contrary to the paternalistic image of the antebellum South which they wanted to present . Blassingame concludes , " <unk> use of the interviews will lead almost inevitably to a simplistic and distorted view of the plantation as a paternalistic institution where the chief feature of life was mutual love and respect between masters and slaves . " 
 Blassingame builds on the historiography of Phillips , Stampp , and Elkins , but he acknowledges the influence of Charles S. Sydnor 's Slavery in Mississippi ( 1933 ) , Orville W. Taylor 's Negro Slavery in Arkansas ( 1958 ) , Eugene D. Genovese 's The Political Economy of Slavery ( 1961 ) , and Ann J. Lane 's anthology of essays The Debate Over Slavery : Stanley Elkins and His Critics ( 1971 ) . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 The importance of The Slave Community as one of the first studies of slavery from the perspective of the slave was recognized by historians . The book nonetheless received heavy criticism by academics who disagreed with Blassingame 's conclusions , methodology , and sources . Historian George P. Rawick noted in 1976 , however , that the criticism " should not obscure the fact that [ Blassingame 's ] book was of such merit as to warrant spending our time criticizing it four years after its publication . Yet , like many good books , it should have been better . " 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 In The History Teacher , Keith <unk> comments that " only with the publication of Blassingame 's work do we obtain for the first time a detailed examination of the daily lives of the slaves on large plantations , with some intelligent speculation about the forces to which they were subjected . David Goldfield writes in Agricultural History that the book was the most impressive and balanced attempt to understand the slave 's responses to plantation life to date . Carl N. <unk> writes in the Washington Post that Blassingame 's study comes " closer than any previous study to answering the question ' what was it like to be a slave ? ' " 
 Still , Blassingame 's conclusions , methodology , and sources received substantial criticism from historians . Marian <unk> . <unk> 's review in the American Historical Review described Blassingame 's aims as " imperfectly realized " because he " lacks a clear analytical perspective " . She found his discussion of slave personality types " fascinating " and " his methodological aims ... important " but " not systematically pursued " . <unk> believes that Blassingame ultimately failed in his analysis because " his intellectual integration of social and psychological orientations has yet to be fully achieved . " Orville W. Taylor contends in the Journal of Negro History that Blassingame had a tendency to <unk> and make " <unk> claims to originality and uniqueness " . 
 In the Journal of Political Economy , economic historian Stanley L. Engerman complains that the book is not " written by or for economists " and makes " limited use of economic analysis " . He continues , " Given the concern with the ' personal autonomy ' and culture of the slave , much of the book is devoted to the African heritage ; to slave music , religion , and folklore ; and to the discussion of the slave family and other personal relationships . " Engerman concedes that The Slave Community " is a book written at a time of transition in the interpretation of slavery and black culture " , but " the author at times seems unsure of the direction in which he is pointing . " He concludes that Blassingame 's " analysis is incomplete in its presentation of a different and more complex scene " even though he " effectively shows the difficulties of the concentration @-@ camp image and the Sambo myth " . 
 Historians criticized Blassingame for dismissing the WPA slave interviews and relying solely on fugitive slave narratives . In the Journal of American History , Willie Lee Rose writes that Blassingame 's use of the fugitive slave narratives is marred by his neglect of the WPA interviews . Kenneth Wiggins Porter regards Blassingame 's dependence on printed sources as a " major weakness " and believes he does not use enough white sources like plantation records and travel narratives , particularly Frederick Law Olmsted 's account of life in the antebellum South . According to George Rawick , " We desperately need work that depicts and analyzes the lives of black women under slavery . We have had very largely a male @-@ dominated literature about slavery . " He notes , " Blassingame , unfortunately , does not help us at all in this task . " Rawick surmises that if Blassingame had consulted the WPA slave interviews , he would have developed a picture of the " heroic struggles of black women on behalf of themselves and of the whole black community " . 
 Historians exhibited varying responses to Blassingame 's use of psychological theory . In a review in the William and Mary Quarterly , George Mullin is especially critical of Blassingame 's use of psychology , stating that Blassingame " <unk> [ es ] slave behavior and culture to a question of roles and psychological characteristics " . He concludes that an " E. P. Thompson for the American Black community during slavery is still off @-@ stage " , and that the topic needs exploration by a social or economic historian . Rawick states that Blassingame 's " first major error lies in adopting the very questionable deterministic social psychological role theories associated with ... Irving Goffman and Henry Stack Sullivan . " He complains that it " parodies the basic complexity of the ' psychology ' of the oppressed who simultaneously view themselves in socially negative terms while struggling against the view of themselves and their behavior " . Rawick is convinced that Blassingame would have reached the same conclusions from the sources without the use of psychology " because the historical evidence as seen through an unadulterated commitment to the struggles of the slaves and an equally uncompromising hostility to the masters would have led him there . " On the other hand , Eugene D. Genovese and Earl E. Thorpe praised Blassingame for his use of psychological theory , but admit they prefer Freudian and Marxist interpretations over <unk> theory . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 In 1976 , the Association for the Study of Afro @-@ American Life and History met in Chicago and held a session on The Slave Community . Panelists included Mary Frances Berry , Herbert Gutman , Leslie Howard Owens , George Rawick , Earl Thorpe , and Eugene Genovese . Blassingame responded to questions and critiques from the panel . The discussion led to the publication of an anthology edited by Al @-@ Tony Gilmore called Revisiting Blassingame 's The Slave Community : The Scholars <unk> ( 1978 ) . The book includes essays by the panelists as well as James D. Anderson , Ralph D. Carter , John Henrik Clarke , and Stanley Engerman . Blassingame 's essay , " Redefining The Slave Community : A Response to Critics " appears in the volume . 
 Since its publication in 1972 and revision in 1979 , The Slave Community has influenced subsequent historiographical works on slavery in the United States . In a 1976 edition of Roll , Jordan , Roll , Eugene Genovese explains that Blassingame 's book " demonstrates that the published accounts of runaway slaves can be illuminating " . The authors of Reckoning with Slavery ( 1976 ) use Blassingame 's findings to challenge the assertions of Robert William Fogel and Stanley Engerman in Time on the Cross : The Economics of American Negro Slavery ( 1974 ) . In Slave Religion : The " Invisible Institution " in the Antebellum South ( 1978 ) , Albert J. <unk> comments , " We should speak of the ' invisibility ' of slave religion with irony : it is the neglect of slave sources by historians which has been the main cause of this invisibility . " <unk> credits Blassingame and others for demonstrating the value of slave sources . Historian Charles Joyner 's influential study Down by the Riverside : A South Carolina Slave Community ( 1984 ) is reinforced by the findings of The Slave Community and relies on similar evidence . 
 Historian Deborah Gray White builds on Blassingame 's research of the family life of the slaves in Ar 'n't I a Woman ? : Female Slaves in the Plantation South ( 1985 ) . Her argument is similar to Blassingame 's : " This present study takes a look at slave women in America and argues that they were not submissive , subordinate , or prudish and that they were not expected to be so . " White discusses the Mammy and Jezebel stereotypes often applied to African American women by white Americans . She calls The Slave Community " a classic " but remarks that " Blassingame stressed the fact that many masters recognized the male as the head of the family . He observed that during courtship men flattered women and exaggerated their prowess . There was , however , little discussion of the reciprocal activities of slave women . " She concludes that Blassingame " described how slave men gained status in the family , but he did not do the same for women . " 
 Elizabeth Fox @-@ Genovese makes similar observations in Within the Plantation Household : Black and White Women of the Old South ( 1988 ) . She notes that The Slave Community , like other historiography produced in the 1960s and 70s , " did not directly address women 's history , even though many of the historians were sensitive to women 's experience . Most of the male authors had done a large part of their work before the development of women 's history as a discipline , and even the most sensitive were hampered by a paucity of sources and by unfamiliarity with the questions feminists would soon raise . " 
 = = Revised edition = = 
 After the 1976 Association for the Study of Afro @-@ American Life and History meeting and the publication of Revisiting Blassingame 's The Slave Community in 1978 , Blassingame produced a revised and enlarged edition of The Slave Community in 1979 . In the new preface , Blassingame asserted that the book had to be revised because of George Bentley , an enslaved , pro @-@ slavery Primitive Baptist minister from Tennessee who pastored a white church in the 1850s . Blassingame wanted to " solve the myriad dilemmas posed by George Bentley " , but he also wanted to answer the questions , challenges , and critiques raised by scholars since the publication of The Slave Community . 
 Blassingame explains that he incorporated the suggestions published in Revisiting Blassingame 's The Slave Community " without long protestation or argument " . The most significant changes made to the text involve further discussion of African cultural survivals , slave family life , slave culture , and acculturation . Blassingame added a chapter titled " The Americanization of the Slave and the Africanization of the South " where he draws parallels between the acculturation of African American slaves in the American South , African slaves in Latin America , and European slaves in North Africa and the Ottoman Empire . He compares the conversion of slaves in the southern states to Protestant Christianity , European slaves in North Africa to Islam , and African slaves in Latin America to Catholicism . 
 Blassingame addresses the historiography of slavery published between 1972 and 1978 in the revised edition . For instance , he challenges Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman 's economic and statistical study of slavery in Time on the Cross . Blassingame writes : 
 Contemporaries often have a greater appreciation of the strengths and weaknesses of statistics than do the scholars who utilize them decades after they are compiled . ' Numbers ' and ' accuracy ' are not two interchangeable words : Statistical truths are no more self @-@ evident than literary ones . In fact , statistical analyses rely so heavily on inferences that one must carefully examine the data bases to evaluate the conclusions based on them . Whether compiled by planters , doctors , clergymen , army officers , or census takers , statistics on slavery mean little until combined with literary material . The dry bones of historical analysis , statistics acquire life when filtered through the accounts left by eyewitnesses . 
 Reviewing the revised edition in the Journal of Southern History , Gary B. Mills suggests , " All controversy and revision aside , The Slave Community remains a significant book , and the author 's position that the bulk of both slaves and slaveowners lay between the stereotyped extremes proves durable . Their exact location on a scale of one to ten will always remain a matter of opinion . " 
 = Hurricane Helene ( 1958 ) = 
 Hurricane Helene was the most intense tropical cyclone of the 1958 Atlantic hurricane season , as measured by minimum barometric pressure . The eighth tropical storm and fourth hurricane of the year , Helene was formed from a tropical wave east of the Lesser Antilles on September 21 , 1958 . Moving steadily westward , the storm slowly intensified , attaining hurricane strength on September 24 . As conditions became increasingly favorable for tropical cyclone development , Helene began to rapidly intensify . Nearing the United States East Coast , the hurricane quickly attained Category 4 intensity on September 26 , before it subsequently reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 934 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 84 inHg ) . The intense hurricane came within 10 mi ( 15 km ) of Cape Fear , North Carolina before recurving out to sea . Accelerating northward , Helene gradually weakened , and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone as it passed over Newfoundland on September 29 . Helene 's extratropical remnants traversed eastwards across the Atlantic Ocean before dissipating near Great Britain on October 4 . 
 Despite not making landfall on North Carolina , its close proximity to land caused extensive damage across the US East Coast . Strong winds resulted in widespread power outages , cutting telecommunications along the coast . A weather station in Wilmington , North Carolina reported a wind gust of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) , setting a new record for fastest wind gust reported there . Though mostly concentrated in North Carolina , rainfall was widespread , reaching as far north as Maine . In the United States , damages reached $ 11 @.@ 2 million and there was one indirect death . After impacting the US , Helene produced strong winds and heavy rain across much of Atlantic Canada . In Cape Breton Island on Nova Scotia , the storm was considered the worst in at least 21 years . Power outages cut most communications from the island to the mainland , and property damage in Sydney , Nova Scotia totaled to C $ 100 @,@ 000 . At Helene 's landfall in Newfoundland , strong gusts peaking at 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) in Naval Station Argentia were reported , and loss of power severed communications . Damage across there totaled to at least C $ 100 @,@ 000 . Total damages associated with Helene in the United States and Canada amounted to $ 11 @.@ 4 million , making Helene the costliest storm of the season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Helene can be traced back to an easterly wave that formed near Cape Verde on September 16 . Moving towards the west due to trade winds associated with the Hadley cell , the disturbance gradually intensified . On September 20 , ships in the system 's vicinity reported widespread shower activity and generally low barometric pressures . Early the following day , a reconnaissance flight reported evidence of a weak circulation , with gusts of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) in heavy squalls surrounding the circulation center . At 0200 UTC later that day , the United States Weather Bureau office in San Juan , Puerto Rico began issuing bulletins on the system for public interests . In HURDAT , the tropical wave was first classified as a tropical depression at 0600 UTC on September 21 , well east of the Leeward Antilles . At the time , the depression had maximum sustained winds of 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) . 
 Moving on a west @-@ northwest track at roughly 20 mph ( 30 km / h ) early on September 22 , the storm initially changed little in intensity . However , a large upper tropospheric anticyclone developed over the southern Atlantic coast , producing the favorable wind shear needed for tropical cyclone development . A second reconnaissance flight reported an <unk> tropical cyclone , indicating that the storm system had reached tropical storm strength . At 0000 UTC on September 23 , the depression attained tropical storm strength , with maximum winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a central minimum pressure of 1013 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 92 inHg ) . The US Weather Bureau issued their first advisory on the newly developed tropical storm at 1600 UTC later that day , giving the storm the name Helene . Despite the storm 's poor organization , Helene gradually intensified in favorable conditions generated by the large anticyclone . Throughout the day , a second anticyclone moved eastward until it was situated off of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , while a mean trough in the lower levels of the atmosphere became situated over the United States East Coast . This would set up a path for Helene to pass very close to the United States . The tropical storm attained hurricane intensity by 2200 UTC on 2200 UTC on September 24 , while located 425 mi ( 685 km ) east of Fort Pierce , Florida . However , in post @-@ season analysis , it was found that Helene reached hurricane intensity earlier that day , by 1200 UTC . At the time , gale @-@ force winds extended up to 220 mi ( 355 km ) out from the storm 's center of circulation . 
 The hurricane steadily strengthened as it moved towards the northwest around the western periphery of the Azores High on September 25 . Encountering the anticyclone situated off of the Mid @-@ Atlantic states , Helene began to curve slightly towards the west . The lack of strong steering currents in the storm 's vicinity caused the hurricane to move very slowly throughout the day , giving the hurricane time to significantly intensify . By 0000 UTC on September 26 , Helene strengthened to the equivalent of a modern @-@ day Category 2 hurricane , with a minimum pressure of 980 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) . Moving slowly towards The Carolinas , the hurricane rapidly intensified . A recon flight reported a minimum pressure of 948 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 00 inHg ) , a drop of 40 mbar ( hPa ; 1 @.@ 18 inHg ) from the previous day . As the hurricane neared the coast , its eye became apparent on coastal long @-@ range WSR @-@ 57 weather radar images . By 1800 UTC on September 26 , Helene strengthened to a Category 3 hurricane and then to a Category 4 hurricane the following day . The major hurricane continued to strengthen before reaching its peak intensity on September 27 with winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) . However , Helene 's lowest barometric pressure of 934 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 84 inHg ) was recorded earlier during the day . Still moving northwestward due to the influence of the Azores High , the hurricane came within 10 mi ( 15 km ) of the US East Coast before recurving towards the northeast out to sea . 
 As Helene recurved and accelerated towards more northerly latitudes , it steadily weakened . By 1200 UTC on September 28 , Helene was no longer a major hurricane . The hurricane 's wind field also expanded from the storm 's center as it weakened . By midday on September 29 , Helene had weakened to minimal hurricane strength , and later transitioned into an extratropical cyclone by 1800 UTC that day , though it still maintained hurricane @-@ force winds . At roughly the same time , Helene passed over Newfoundland , with gale force winds having expanded 500 mi ( 800 km ) from the system 's center , coinciding with the US Weather Bureau 's final advisory on the system . Helene 's extratropical remnants continued eastward across the Atlantic , becoming a dominant synoptic feature , before entirely dissipating by 0600 UTC on October 4 just west of Great Britain . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Upon the storm 's formation , the Weather Bureau cautioned ships in Helene 's path of the impending conditions , and did so throughout the storm 's duration . As the storm moved west on September 23 , advisories specified for small craft in northern islands of The Bahamas to remain in " protected places . " After Helene was forecast to remain north of the archipelago , notifications were lifted except for small craft along the coast of the South Atlantic States . Nearing the US East Coast , the Weather Bureau began to issue special bulletins for press radio and television stations early on September 24 . At the same time , small craft were warned of the storm from The Carolinas southward . The following day , the weather forecast office ( <unk> ) in Charleston , South Carolina began to issue local statements regarding the hurricane , while small craft alerts were shifted northward to coastal regions between Cape Hatteras , North Carolina and Daytona Beach , Florida . The first hurricane watch was issued on 1000 UTC on September 26 for the entirety of the Georgian coast to Charleston , South Carolina . A gale warning was posted at the same time for coastal areas from Daytona Beach , Florida to Wilmington , North Carolina . Small craft alerts continued to shift northwards along with Helene . 
 As the storm began to quickly intensify on September 26 , areas of the watch from Savannah , Georgia to Cape Fear , North Carolina were upgraded to a hurricane emergency area at 1600 UTC . Affected communities were advised to begin precautionary measures immediately and evacuate . Shipping and small craft were told to exercise " extreme caution . " Gale warnings were changed to warn areas between Fernandina , Florida to Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The heightened warnings caused <unk> to issue local bulletins regarding the impending hurricane . At the time , the Weather Bureau projected Helene to make landfall in South Carolina . These landfall forecasts shifted further north along the coast over time , before they were stopped after Helene recurved away from the coast entirely . At 0400 UTC on September 27 , hurricane warnings were extended to include areas between Cape Fear and Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Gale warning issuance reflected the changes and were too shifted northwards to the Virginia Capes area , while hurricane watches covered both warning areas . At 1600 UTC later that day , hurricane emergency and gale warnings were extended north to Manteo , North Carolina , while hurricane watches were continued for coastal regions from Savannah , Georgia to Myrtle Beach , South Carolina . After Helene began recurving away from the coast , all warnings south of Wilmington , North Carolina were discontinued at 2200 UTC on September 27 . As Helene passed certain areas , warnings were discontinued upon the storm 's passage . At 1000 UTC the next day , all onshore hurricane warnings were either downgraded to gale warnings or discontinued . However , offshore gale warnings were still issued for oceanic regions from the Virginia Capes to Cape Cod , Massachusetts . Shortly after , all warnings , with the exception of the offshore gale warnings , were discontinued . Remaining warnings lasted until 2200 UTC on September 28 . Despite not issuing any warnings , the Weather Bureau cautioned interests in Newfoundland , and forecasted hurricane @-@ force winds to effect the island . 
 Due to the potential impacts from Helene , the Weather Bureau began to advise prompt emergency evacuation in their advisories . Areas between Beaufort , South Carolina and Cape Fear , North Carolina were urged to begin evacuation procedures immediately . The Southeastern American Red Cross sent ten field staff warnings to locations in Georgia and South Carolina in order to assist in setting up emergency shelters . The Red Cross held 27 hurricane preparation conferences to plan preparation procedures . Other civil defense organizations also mobilized hurricane preparation staff and equipment . The Weather Bureau sent a mobile weather station to Charleston , South Carolina in order to monitor weather conditions and alert surrounding populations with short @-@ range radio equipment . Beaches on North Carolina 's coast , including Wrightsville Beach and Carolina Beach , were completely evacuated during the night of September 27 . In Wilmington , North Carolina , 100 members of the United States National Guard were dispatched to monitor waterfront property , while 60 others were kept on standby . Civilian vehicles attempting to enter Myrtle Beach , South Carolina were sent back by highway patrol 15 mi ( 25 km ) outside the city borders , following an order issued by Governor of South Carolina George Bell Timmerman , Jr . The order was issued to minimize casualties and prevent looting . Approximately 100 members of the National Guard and local police were kept to patrol the beach . Despite repeated orders for mandatory evacuation , a few people remained in Myrtle Beach . Civil Defense authorities forcibly evacuated stragglers , but others were permitted to remain . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = United States East Coast = = = 
 Despite not making landfall , Helene 's close proximity to the United States resulted in impacts along the East Coast . Impacts were most severe in North Carolina , where the hurricane made its closest approach . Wind impacts were felt primarily from South Carolina to Virginia , though a frontal zone aided in bringing precipitation as far north as Maine . In the United States , Helene caused $ 11 @.@ 2 million in damages and one indirect fatality . 
 = = = = North Carolina = = = = 
 Roughly paralleling the North Carolina coast beginning on September 26 , Helene 's slow movement and strong intensity resulted in moderate to heavy impacts in coastal areas of the state . Despite the hurricane 's Category 4 hurricane intensity , due to its closest approach to land remaining offshore , its storm surge remained less than initially forecast . The hurricane 's track also placed its strongest storm surge in the eastern hemisphere of the storm , away from any landmasses . Surge heights peaked at 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) near Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point . In Wilmington , Helene produced ocean swells at the coast 2 @.@ 5 – 3 times per minute , indicative of a strong hurricane . There , the cumulative sea level was roughly 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) above normal . However , as a result of the storm striking at low tide , damage caused by storm surge was mostly mitigated . Despite this , sand dunes in southern areas of Fort Fisher , were mostly destroyed by waves . On Cedar Island , strong winds produced by the hurricane pushed waves inland , inundating homes . Elsewhere , minor beach erosion occurred . 
 Further inland , several weather stations reported hurricane @-@ force winds . The Weather Bureau office in Wilmington , North Carolina , reported maximum sustained winds of 88 mph ( 142 km / h ) and a peak gust of 135 mph ( 220 km / h ) , exceeding the previous record for fastest measured wind speed of 98 mph ( 158 km / h ) set during Hurricane Hazel in 1954 . Beach resorts there were heavily damaged . In Wrightsville Beach , located 10 mi ( 15 km ) of Wilmington , 12 houses were flattened by the hurricane . Damage to homes there were estimated by police to cost $ 300 @,@ 000 , and extensive damage to the water system was reported . In Long Beach , damage was less severe , with only minor property damage . Waves pushing past sand dunes caused cracks in seaside roads . Though surveys made no damage estimates , damage in Holden Beach was reported to have been worse than in Long Beach . A 300 ft ( 90 m ) pier and a pavilion in Ocean Isle Beach were destroyed . In Topsail Beach and Kure Beach , several homes and businesses were either unroofed or destroyed . <unk> Beach and <unk> also had similar reports of unroofed homes . Two homes on Topsail Island were demolished , and extensive property damage was reported in Atlantic Beach . At Cape Fear , winds were estimated at 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) , with gusts as high as 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , well into Category 3 intensity . The powerful winds forced power to be cut off in Wilmington as a precautionary measure . As a result , 7 @,@ 000 telephones were knocked out of service . Damage to the Southern Bell Telephone Company 's offices cost $ 150 @,@ 000 . Total damages in the city was estimated to cost nearly $ 2 million . In Morehead City , a roof was blown from a yacht shed and multiple structures . Long @-@ distance telephone services were also cut off . Off the coast on Ocracoke Island , power and communications failed during the storm after the island was battered by winds of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Power outages were commonplace in other areas as well . In Southport , metal debris was scattered across city streets , and the damage there was described as worse than Hurricane Hazel . Half of its pier was swept away by the rough seas , and other buildings collapsed or sustained heavy damage . Numerous trees , including live oak , were uprooted by the winds . The United States Army provided the port with a temporary electrical generator , which provided power for water pumps and light . In Cape Hatteras , Helene caused an estimated $ 1 million in damages . Although damage to infrastructure tapered off 10 mi ( 15 km ) from the coast , crop damage was observed 40 mi ( 65 km ) inland . Corn was the crop most affected by Helene . 
 Rainfall associated with Helene was primarily concentrated in coastal regions North Carolina , peaking at 8 @.@ 29 in ( 211 mm ) in Wilmington International Airport . In Hatteras , 4 @.@ 85 in ( 123 @.@ 2 mm ) of rain was measured . Rainfall totals of at least 3 in ( 76 mm ) were commonplace elsewhere along the North Carolina coast . An indirect death occurred when a car skidded off a flooded highway , killing the driver . In the state , damages from Helene amounted to $ 11 million . 
 = = = = South Carolina = = = = 
 Effects from Helene in South Carolina were less severe than in North Carolina . Helene made its closest approach to the state on September 27 , 85 mi ( 135 km ) . In Charleston , sustained winds reached 63 mph ( 101 km / h ) and there was minor damage reported Trees and street signs were blown down , and beach houses suffered shingle damage . Sporadic and small power outages occurred throughout the city . Damage became progressively worse from Georgetown to Little River , with automobile accidents , torn roofs , and damaged piers . On Harbor Island , 50 percent of structure were reported to have roof damage , causing and estimated $ 125 @,@ 000 in damages . Elsewhere along the South Carolina coast , beach erosion occurred due to the strong waves , and sections of pier were swept into sea . In Windy Hill and Cherry Grove Beach , three fishing piers were damaged . Damage was minor in Myrtle Beach , and was limited to roof and window damage . Further inland , in Columbia , damage was minimal , with no rainfall reported . Light damage to crops was reported inland , particularly in Marion County . Across the state , damages were estimated at $ 200 @,@ 000 from the hurricane , though this did not include beach erosion or damage to sand dunes . 
 = = = = Elsewhere in the United States = = = = 
 As a result of Helene recurving away from the United States East Coast , damage in the United States outside of the Carolinas was less severe . In Virginia , damage was relatively minor . A peak gust of 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) was reported in Norfolk . In Hampton Roads , damage was minor , and was confined to downed utility wires and marginal infrastructural damage . Although rainfall was primarily concentrated in the Carolinas , 1 @,@ 434 official rain gauges measured precipitation in coastal areas from South Carolina to Maine . Precipitation was further increased by a frontal zone to the hurricane 's north . In the Mid @-@ Atlantic States , rainfall peaked at 5 @.@ 29 in ( 134 @.@ 4 mm ) in <unk> , Pennsylvania . Outside of Pennsylvania or the Carolinas , no weather station reported rainfall exceeding 5 in ( 125 mm ) . In the New England region , rainfall peaked at 4 @.@ 11 in ( 104 @.@ 4 mm ) in Hyannis , Massachusetts . Elsewhere in Massachusetts , rainfall totals ranging from 1 – 4 in ( 25 – 100 mm ) caused minor flooding and road washouts . The minor floods led to several automotive accidents . Other states in New England reported rainfall peaks of at least 1 in ( 25 mm ) , with the lowest peak occurring at a weather station in Machias , Maine , which reported 1 @.@ 16 in ( 29 @.@ 5 mm ) of rainfall . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 As Helene approached Atlantic Canada in the process of transitioning into an extratropical storm , it produced heavy rainfall and strong winds along the islands . Passing just east of Nova Scotia on September 29 , Helene dropped at least 1 in ( 25 mm ) across the entire province , peaking at 3 @.@ 48 in ( 88 @.@ 5 mm ) in Cape Breton Island . Gusts peaked at 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) across Cabot Strait , 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) at CFB Shearwater and 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) at <unk> , Prince Edward Island . The storm damaged power lines on the island but they were quickly repaired . The strong winds uprooted trees in the Halifax and Dartmouth , Nova Scotia area . In Nova Scotia , Helene 's worst effects were felt in Cape Breton Island , where the storm was considered the worst in at least 21 years . Only one communication line from the island to the mainland was effective after the storm passed . Numerous downed power lines resulted in minor fires , and schools were closed throughout the island . In Sydney , Nova Scotia , there was considerable property damage , and as many as 700 people lost power . The lack of sufficient electricity forced the suspension of publications of the Cape Breton Post and disrupted normal restaurant cooking procedures . Damages in the community amounted to C $ 100 @,@ 000 . Offshore , the Royal Canadian Mounted Police cutter Fort Walsh , measuring 115 ft ( 35 m ) in length , was washed ashore on the coast of <unk> Island . The fishing wharf in Caribou , Nova Scotia was destroyed by rough seas generated by Helene , and at least 1 @,@ 000 lobster traps were carried into the Northumberland Strait as a result . In New Brunswick , the hurricane 's impacts were relatively minor , and rainfall peaked at 1 @.@ 56 in ( 39 @.@ 5 mm ) . 
 Quickly accelerating northwards , Helene made landfall on Newfoundland late on September 29 . Rainfall peaked at 3 @.@ 05 in ( 77 @.@ 5 mm ) in northern parts of the island , while rainfall amounts were generally minimal across the Avalon Peninsula . A weather station in Naval Station Argentia reported maximum sustained winds of 60 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a gust of 82 mph ( 132 km / h ) . The winds severed communications in southwestern Newfoundland and cut communications in St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador from the mainland . Bell Island was cut off from the rest of Newfoundland due to rough seas generated by Helene , which resulted in the destruction of piers and lack of boat service . Damage caused by the hurricane on the island were estimated to be in excess of C $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm , Governor of North Carolina Luther H. Hodges and United States Senator from North Carolina B. Everett Jordan requested a disaster declaration for the state . President of the United States Dwight D. Eisenhower designated portions of North Carolina impacted by the storm as a disaster area . According to the American Red Cross , at least 5 @,@ 000 people were kept in shelters after Helene . Following the large @-@ scale evacuation procedures and resulting low loss of life after the storm , the Weather Bureau recommended that certain organizations be awarded the Outstanding Service to the Public certificate due to their cooperation with the Weather Bureau during the hurricane 's duration . The recommended recipients were the radio stations <unk> and WRAL , and the North Carolina State Highway Patrol . 
 = Sonnet 18 = 
 Sonnet 18 , often alternatively titled Shall I compare thee to a summer 's day ? , is one of the best @-@ known of 154 sonnets written by the English playwright and poet William Shakespeare . Part of the Fair Youth sequence ( which comprises sonnets 1 – 126 in the accepted numbering stemming from the first edition in 1609 ) , it is the first of the cycle after the opening sequence now described as the procreation sonnets . 
 In the sonnet , the speaker compares his beloved to the summer season , and argues that his beloved is better . He also states that his beloved will live on forever through the words of the poem . Scholars have found parallels within the poem to Ovid 's <unk> and Amores , both of which have love themes . Sonnet 18 is written in the typical Shakespearean sonnet form , having 14 lines of iambic pentameter ending in a rhymed couplet . Detailed <unk> have revealed several double meanings within the poem , giving it a greater depth of interpretation . 
 = = Paraphrase = = 
 The poem starts with a flattering question to the beloved — " Shall I compare thee to a summer 's day ? " The beloved is both " more lovely and more temperate " than a summer 's day . The speaker lists some negative things about summer : it is short — " summer 's lease hath all too short a date " — and sometimes the sun is too hot — " Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines . " However , the beloved has beauty that will last forever , unlike the fleeting beauty of a summer 's day . By putting his love 's beauty into the form of poetry , the poet is preserving it forever . " So long as men can breathe , or eyes can see , So long lives this , and this gives life to thee . " The lover 's beauty will live on , through the poem which will last as long as it can be read . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Sonnet 18 is a typical English or Shakespearean sonnet . It consists of three quatrains followed by a couplet , and has the characteristic rhyme scheme : abab cdcd efef gg . The poem reflects the rhetorical tradition of an Italian or Petrarchan Sonnet . Petrarchan sonnets typically discussed the love and beauty of a beloved , often an unattainable love , but not always . It also contains a volta , or shift in the poem 's subject matter , beginning with the third quatrain . 
 The couplet 's first line exemplifies a regular iambic pentameter rhythm : 
 × / × / × / × / × / 
 So long as men can breathe or eyes can see , ( 18 @.@ 13 ) 
 / 
 = ictus , a metrically strong syllabic position . × = 
 nonictus . 
 = = Context = = 
 The poem is part of the Fair Youth sequence ( which comprises sonnets 1 – 126 in the accepted numbering stemming from the first edition in 1609 ) . It is also the first of the cycle after the opening sequence now described as the procreation sonnets . Some scholars , however , contend that it is part of the procreation sonnets , as it addresses the idea of reaching eternal life through the written word , a theme they find in sonnets 15 – 17 . In this view , it can be seen as part of a transition to sonnet 20 's time theme . 
 There are many , varying theories about the identity of the 1609 Quarto 's enigmatic dedicatee , Mr. W.H. Some scholars have suggested that this poem may be expressing a hope that they interpret the procreation sonnets as having despaired of : the hope of metaphorical procreation in a homosexual relationship . Professor Michael <unk> of the University of Michigan , characterizes the Fair Youth sequence sonnets as " the articulation of a fervent same @-@ sex love , " and some scholars , noting the romantic language used in the sequence , refer to it as a " daring representation of homoerotic ... passions , " of " passionate , erotic love , " suggesting that the relationship between the speaker and the Fair Youth is sexual . The true character of this love remains unclear , however , and others interpret the relationship as one of purely platonic love , while yet others see it as describing a woman . Scholars have pointed out that the order in which the sonnets are placed may have been the decision of the publishers , and not of Shakespeare , which would further support the interpretation that Sonnet 18 was addressed to a woman . 
 = = Exegesis = = 
 Line one is paradoxical , because the implied answer to the poet 's question , " Shall I compare thee to a summer 's day " , is in the negative , even though the point is illustrated by comparisons . 
 The third line “ Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May , ” is enigmatic and deeper than it seems at a cursory glance . Apparently containing the Anglo @-@ Saxon original adjective ‘ darling ’ as a term of endearment , it also refers to the verb ‘ to <unk> ’ , a condition in which a green flower bud begins to show its eventual colour . The gerund , ‘ darling ’ describes this process of change . It was subsequently used to describe a nubile , pubescent girl ; a darling girl is one entering womanhood , with all the internal and external changes which that brings . A darling girl is showing the promise of her eventual appearance . 
 " Complexion " in line six , can have two meanings : 1 ) The outward appearance of the face as compared with the sun ( " the eye of heaven " ) in the previous line , or 2 ) the older sense of the word in relation to The four humours . In Shakespeare 's time , " complexion " carried both outward and inward meanings , as did the word " temperate " ( externally , a weather condition ; internally , a balance of humours ) . The second meaning of " complexion " would communicate that the beloved 's inner , cheerful , and temperate disposition is sometimes blotted out like the sun on a cloudy day . The first meaning is more obvious , meaning of a negative change in his outward appearance . 
 The word , " untrimmed " in line eight , can be taken two ways : First , in the sense of loss of decoration and frills , and second , in the sense of untrimmed sails on a ship . In the first interpretation , the poem reads that beautiful things naturally lose their <unk> over time . In the second , it reads that nature is a ship with sails not adjusted to wind changes in order to correct course . This , in combination with the words " nature 's changing course " , creates an oxymoron : the unchanging change of nature , or the fact that the only thing that does not change is change . This line in the poem creates a shift from the mutability of the first eight lines , into the eternity of the last six . Both change and eternity are then acknowledged and challenged by the final line . 
 " Ow 'st " in line ten can also carry two meanings equally common at the time : " <unk> " and " <unk> " . Many readers interpret it as " <unk> " , as do many Shakespearean glosses ( " owe " in Shakespeare 's day , was sometimes used as a synonym for " own " ) . However , " <unk> " delivers an interesting view on the text . It conveys the idea that beauty is something borrowed from nature — that it must be paid back as time progresses . In this interpretation , " fair " can be a pun on " fare " , or the fare required by nature for life 's journey . Other scholars have pointed out that this borrowing and lending theme within the poem is true of both nature and humanity . Summer , for example , is said to have a " lease " with " all too short a date . " This monetary theme is common in many of Shakespeare 's sonnets , as it was an everyday theme in his budding capitalistic society . 
 = = In music = = 
 Cleo Laine and John Dankworth recorded a jazz version of Shakespeare 's Sonnet 18 on their album Shakespeare & All That Jazz ( 1964 ) . 
 Roxy Music 's Bryan Ferry recorded Sonnet 18 for the his 1997 CD Diana , Princess of Wales : Tribute ( disc 1 - 2 : 53 ) . 
 In 2001 Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour recorded Sonnet 18 as a song for his wife , with the music written by and played on piano by Michael Kamen . A video of him recording the piece was released as an extra on his 2002 DVD , " David Gilmour in Concert " , but the recording was never released on an album ; it is , however , currently available on YouTube . The song 's credits are given as " Shakespeare / Gilmour " . 
 <unk> recorded a pop ballad version of this poem on their album " When in Disgrace " ( 2014 ) . 
 It was also set to music by the Swedish composer Nils Lindberg as a choral piece . 
 Moreover , the singer and songwriter Dan Smith , head of the band " Bastille " , admitted to have been inspired by this sonnet when writing the song " Poet " . 
 = The Staff of Karnath = 
 The Staff of Karnath is an action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game for the Commodore 64 originally in 1984 and in the United States in 1985 . The game is the first instalment of the Pendragon series and is the first to feature the aristocrat adventurer Sir Arthur Pendragon . In the game , Sir Pendragon is tasked with searching a castle for the ancient Staff of Karnath , which he must destroy prior to midnight , before it wipes out the human race . 
 The game was created and designed by brothers Dave and Bob Thomas and was the first game to be released by Ultimate without founders Tim and Chris Stamper 's direct involvement . The Staff of Karnath 's setting and visuals were heavily inspired from the 1962 film Jack the Giant Killer . The game was met with mixed reviews upon release . Critics were divided over its graphics and presentation , and criticised the sound . It was followed by a sequel , Entombed , which was released in 1985 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is presented in an oblique , isometric format and is set inside a haunted castle . As Sir Arthur Pendragon , the player 's main objective is to collect sixteen pieces of a key before midnight , which when all connected will form the shape of a pentacle . The pieces of the pentacle are guarded by various magical creatures , some of which can be defeated by casting spells , others requiring accurately timed attacks and nimble dodging . Once a piece is obtained , the player must take it to a specific chamber within the castle . Once all <unk> have been placed in their chambers , the player can establish the whereabouts of the Staff of Karnath , which must be destroyed before midnight . 
 Pendragon 's only form of defence in the game is his ability to utilise various magical spells , in which the correct spell is required in order to defeat certain enemies . If the player is hit by an attack of any enemy in the castle , Pendragon will lose energy , or in some cases , time will be deducted from the countdown timer . If the player completely runs out of energy or fails to destroy the Staff of Karnath before midnight , the game will end . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Millions of years ago , creatures known as Sarnathians ruled the Earth , centring their values on torture of other creatures that were opposed to their rule . Their aim was to rule the universe using a mysterious orb that granted them great power . Thousands of years later , the orb became too powerful and eventually caused a tear in the inter @-@ dimensional fabric of the Realm of Reality and the Realm of Unreality , thus rendering the Sarnathians extinct . 
 The orb itself was buried deep in the ground for millions of years , until it was discovered by Karnath , an evil sorcerer . Upon finding the orb , Karnath fused it into his own magical staff , and on doing so learned the history of the Sarnathians . He became obsessed with the orb and the task of releasing these beings from the Realm of Unreality . After years of isolation in his castle , as his own death was drawing near , Karnath was finally able to cast a powerful spell over his staff . This spell was designed such that upon contact with the orb , it would unleash its most powerful state and tear the fabric of reality once more . 
 The staff was then hidden deep below the castle and inscribed with powerful magical symbols to protect it . Before he died , Karnath broke the key into sixteen pieces and hid them throughout his castle . Centuries later , an aristocrat adventurer , Sir Arthur Pendragon , ventures inside the castle in order to defuse the orb before midnight . Should he fail , its power would be unleashed , and the resulting inter @-@ dimensional rip would wipe out the human race . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing multiple video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . The company was known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " : one team would work on graphics while the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or programming . 
 The Pendragon series and The Staff of Karnath were materialised by brothers Dave and Robert " Bob " Thomas , rather than Ultimate founders Tim and Chris Stamper . Dave Thomas began his career in 1983 when he began producing games for the Atari 400 , including moderate @-@ sellers such as Warlok , which later won him GB £ 5 @,@ 000 in a competition from Calisto Software . Although he later began working for the company in producing video games , he quit due to the strain of his daily 68 miles ( 109 km ) commute . Shortly after quitting Calisto Software , Dave Thomas started work on The Staff of Karnath . Bob Thomas was a trained technical illustrator for the Ministry of Defence and had experience with designing interiors for the Royal Navy , which later aided to the military @-@ themed visuals of the Pendragon series . 
 The game was programmed by Dave Thomas , whereas the graphics were designed by Bob Thomas . According to Dave Thomas , the visuals and setting of the castle in The Staff of Karnath were inspired by the 1962 film Jack the Giant Killer . The plot of the game was also loosely based on the storyline from one of H.P. Lovecraft 's short novels . Dave Thomas admitted in a retrospective interview that the name of the series protagonist , " Sir Arthur Pendragon " , was copied from the character of the Black Prince Pendragon from the Jack the Giant Killer stories . 
 The Thomas brothers decided to show their progress on the game to Tim and Chris Stamper for evaluation , despite feeling embarrassed due to their workspace being inside their parents ' attic . Impressed by the game , the Stamper brothers commissioned an entire series to be released for the Commodore 64 . Dave Thomas recalled that every game they produced was met with little interference from Ultimate : once a game was complete , it would be sent to quality assessment and subsequently published for release . The Staff of Karnath sold 40 @,@ 000 units upon initial release , and work on the sequel , Entombed , began " almost immediately " according to Dave Thomas . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received mostly positive reviews from critics upon release . Computer and Video Games was divided over the graphics , stating that they were " expecting more " from an Ultimate game . Chris Anderson of Personal Computer Games felt " disappointment " to the overall game , stating that what he saw on the screen was an " anti @-@ climax " , given how Anderson had been " waiting so long " for an Ultimate release on the Commodore 64 . Commodore User praised the graphics , heralding the detail as " impressive " , however they criticised the moving characters of the game , calling them " not quite as impressive " as the detail of the background , and did not live up to the instruction manual 's promise of " cartoon quality " animation . 
 Anderson of Personal Computer Games praised the overall presentation , asserting that the rooms were of " extremely realistic " quality . In the same review , Richard Patey similarly praised the graphics , stating that they were " beautiful " throughout and " [ lived ] up to " every expectation . Commodore User criticised the sound effects , finding them " disappointing " . Patey was also sceptical regarding the sound effects , regarding them as " average " . Anderson summarised that the game " isn 't not going to hook everyone " . The Staff of Karnath was declared as the seventh best Commodore 64 game in the first issue of Zzap ! 64 in May 1985 . 
 = Woodes Rogers = 
 Woodes Rogers ( ca . 1679 – 15 July 1732 ) was an English sea captain and privateer and , later , the first Royal Governor of the Bahamas . He is known as the captain of the vessel that rescued marooned Alexander Selkirk , whose plight is generally believed to have inspired Daniel Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe . 
 Rogers came from an affluent seafaring family , grew up in Poole and Bristol , and served a marine apprenticeship to a Bristol sea captain . His father held shares in many ships , but he died when Rogers was in his mid @-@ twenties , leaving Rogers in control of the family shipping business . In 1707 , Rogers was approached by Captain William Dampier , who sought support for a privateering voyage against the Spanish , with whom the British were at war . Rogers led the expedition , which consisted of two well @-@ armed ships , Duke and Duchess , and was the captain of Duke . In three years , Rogers and his men went around the world , capturing several ships in the Pacific Ocean . En route , the expedition rescued Selkirk , finding him on Juan Fernandez Island on 1 February 1709 . When the expedition returned to England in October 1711 , Rogers had circumnavigated the globe , while retaining his original ships and most of his men , and the investors in the expedition doubled their money . 
 The expedition made Rogers a national hero , but his brother was killed and Rogers was badly wounded in fights in the Pacific . On his return , he was successfully sued by his crew on the grounds that they had not received their fair share of the expedition profits , and Rogers was forced into bankruptcy . He wrote of his maritime experiences in the book A Cruising Voyage Round the World , which sold well , in part due to public fascination at Selkirk 's rescue . 
 Rogers was twice appointed Governor of the Bahamas , where he succeeded in warding off threats from the Spanish , and in ridding the colony of pirates . However , his first term as governor was financially ruinous , and on his return to England , he was imprisoned for debt . During his second term as governor , Rogers died in Nassau at the age of about 53 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Woodes Rogers was the eldest son and heir of Woods Rogers , a successful merchant captain . Woodes Rogers spent part of his childhood in Poole , England , where he likely attended the local school ; his father , who owned shares in many ships , was often away nine months of the year with the Newfoundland fishing fleet . Sometime between 1690 and 1696 , Captain Rogers moved his family to Bristol . In November 1697 , Woodes Rogers was apprenticed to Bristol mariner John Yeamans , to learn the profession of a sailor . At 18 , Rogers was somewhat old to be starting a seven @-@ year apprenticeship . 
 His biographer , Brian Little , suggests that this might have been a way for the newcomers to become part of Bristol maritime society , as well as making it possible for Woodes Rogers to become a freeman , or voting citizen , of the city . Little also suggests that it is likely that Rogers gained his maritime experience with Yeamans ' ship on the Newfoundland fleet . Rogers completed his apprenticeship in November 1704 . 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 The following January Rogers married Sarah Whetstone , daughter of Rear Admiral Sir William Whetstone , who was a neighbour and close family friend . Rogers became a freeman of Bristol because of his marriage into the prominent Whetstone family . In 1706 , Captain Rogers died at sea , leaving his ships and business to his son Woodes . Between 1706 and the end of 1708 , Woodes and Sarah Rogers had a son and two daughters . 
 = = <unk> expedition = = 
 = = = Preparation and the early voyage = = = 
 The War of the Spanish Succession started in 1702 , during which England 's main maritime foes were France and Spain , and a number of Bristol ships were given letters of marque , allowing them to strike against enemy shipping . At least four vessels in which Rogers had an ownership interest were granted the letters . One , Whetstone Galley , named for Rogers ' father in law , received the letters before being sent to Africa to begin a voyage in the slave trade . It did not reach Africa , but was captured by the French . Rogers suffered other losses against the French , although he does not record their extent in his book . He turned to privateering as a means of recouping these losses . 
 In late 1707 , Rogers was approached by William Dampier , a navigator and friend of Rogers ' father , who proposed a privateering expedition against the Spanish . This was a desperate move on the part of Captain Dampier to save his career . Dampier had recently returned from leading a two @-@ ship privateering expedition into the Pacific , which culminated in a series of mutinies before both ships finally sank due to Dampier 's error in not having the hulls properly protected against worms before leaving port . Unaware of this , Rogers agreed . Financing was provided by many in the Bristol community , including Thomas Goldney II of the Quaker Goldney family and Thomas Dover , who would become president of the voyage council and Rogers ' father in law . Commanding two frigates , Duke and Duchess , and captaining the first , Rogers spent three years circumnavigating the globe . The ships departed Bristol on 1 August 1708 . Dampier was aboard as Rogers ' sailing master . 
 Rogers encountered various problems along the way . Forty of the Bristol crew deserted or were dismissed , and he spent a month in Ireland recruiting replacements and having the vessels prepared for sea . Many crew members were Dutch , Danish , or other foreigners . Some of the crew mutinied after Rogers refused to let them plunder a neutral Swedish vessel . When the mutiny was put down , he had the leader flogged , put in irons , and sent to England aboard another ship . The less culpable mutineers were given lighter punishments , such as reduced rations . The ships intended to force the chilly Drake Passage off the tip of South America , but expedition leaders soon realised that they were short of warm clothing and alcohol , which was then believed to warm those exposed to cold . Considering the latter the more important problem , the expedition made a stop at Tenerife to stock up on the local wine , and later sewed the ships ' blankets into cold weather gear . The ships experienced a difficult inter @-@ oceanic passage ; they were forced to almost 62 ° South latitude , which , according to Rogers , " for ought we know is the furthest that any one has yet been to the southward " . At their furthest south , they were closer to as @-@ yet @-@ undiscovered Antarctica than to South America . 
 = = = Rescue of Selkirk and raids on the Spanish = = = 
 Rogers stocked his ships with limes to fend off scurvy , a practice not universally accepted at that time . After reaching the Pacific Ocean , the ships ' provisions of limes were exhausted and seven men died of the vitamin deficiency disease . Dampier was able to guide the ships to little @-@ known Juan Fernandez Island to replenish supplies of fresh produce . On 1 February 1709 , as they neared the island , the sailors spotted a fire ashore and feared that it might be a shore party from a Spanish vessel . The next morning Rogers sent a party ashore and discovered that the fire was from Scottish sailor Alexander Selkirk , who had been stranded there four years previously . Selkirk was to become an inspiration for the classic novel Robinson Crusoe , written by Rogers ' friend , Daniel Defoe . Rogers found Selkirk to be " wild @-@ looking " and " wearing <unk> " , noting in his journal , " He had with him his clothes and bedding , with a <unk> , some powder , bullets and tobacco , a hatchet , a knife , a kettle , a Bible and books . " Selkirk , who had been part of the ship 's crew that abandoned Dampier after losing confidence in his leadership , was now more than willing to join a flotilla that included his old commodore as ship 's pilot . Selkirk served as a mate aboard the Duke , and was later given command of one of the prize ships taken by the expedition . 
 After leaving Juan Fernandez on 14 February 1709 , the expedition captured and looted a number of small vessels , and launched an attack on the town of Guayaquil , today located in Ecuador . When Rogers attempted to negotiate with the governor , the townsfolk secreted their valuables . Rogers was able to get a modest ransom for the town , but some crew members were so dissatisfied that they dug up the recently dead hoping to find items of value . This led to sickness on board ship , of which six men died . The expedition lost contact with one of the captured ships , which was under the command of Simon Hatley . The other vessels searched for Hatley 's ship , but to no avail — Hatley and his men were captured by the Spanish . On a subsequent voyage to the Pacific , Hatley would emulate Selkirk by becoming the centre of an event which would be immortalised in literature . His ship beset by storms , Hatley shot an albatross in the hope of better winds , an episode memorialised by Samuel Taylor Coleridge . 
 The crew of the vessels became increasingly discontented , and Rogers and his officers feared another mutiny . This tension was dispelled by the expedition 's capture of a rich prize off the coast of Mexico : the Spanish vessel Nuestra Señora de la Encarnación y <unk> . Rogers sustained a wound to the face in the battle . While Duke and Duchess were successful in capturing that vessel , they failed to capture Encarnación 's companion , a well @-@ armed galleon , Nuestra Señora de <unk> , which made its escape after damaging both vessels . Rogers only reluctantly agreed to giving the inexperienced Captain Dover command of Encarnación , a decision that may have been eased by naming Selkirk as its sailing master . The privateers , accompanied by their two prizes , limped across the Pacific Ocean . The expedition was able to resupply at Guam , which , though governed by the Spanish , extended a cordial welcome to the privateers . 
 = = = Homeward voyage = = = 
 The ships then went to the Dutch port of Batavia in what is now Indonesia , where Rogers underwent surgery to remove a musket ball from the roof of his mouth , and the expedition disposed of the less seaworthy of the two Spanish prizes . Dealing with the Dutch there constituted a violation of the British East India Company 's monopoly . When the ships finally dropped anchor in the Thames River on 14 October 1711 , a legal battle ensued , with the investors paying the East India Company £ 6 @,@ 000 ( about £ 806 @,@ 000 at today 's values ) as settlement for their claim for breach of monopoly , about four percent of what Rogers brought back . The investors approximately doubled their money , while Rogers gained £ 1 @,@ 600 ( now worth perhaps £ 214 @,@ 900 ) from a voyage which disfigured him and cost him his brother , who was killed in a battle in the Pacific . The money was probably less than he could have made at home , and was entirely absorbed by the debts his family had incurred in his absence . However , the long voyage and the capture of the Spanish ship made Rogers a national hero . Rogers was the first Englishman , in circumnavigating the globe , to have his original ships and most of his crew survive . 
 After his voyage , he wrote an account of it , titled A Cruising Voyage Round the World . While Edward Cooke , an officer aboard Duchess , also wrote a book , and beat Rogers to print by several months , Rogers ' book was much more successful , with many readers fascinated by the account of Selkirk 's rescue , which Cooke had slighted . Among those interested in Selkirk 's adventure was Daniel Defoe , who appears to have read about it , and fictionalised the story as Robinson Crusoe . 
 While Rogers ' book enjoyed financial success , it had a practical purpose — to aid British navigators and possible colonists . Much of Rogers ' introduction is devoted to advocacy for the South Seas trade . Rogers notes that had there been a British colony in the South Seas , he would not have had to worry about food supplies for his crew . A third of Rogers ' book is devoted to detailed descriptions of the places that he explored , with special emphasis on " such [ places ] as may be of most use for enlarging our trade " . He describes the area of the River Plate in detail because it lay " within the limits of the South Sea Company " , whose schemes had not yet burst into financial scandal . Rogers ' book was carried by such South Pacific navigators as Admiral George Anson and privateering captains John Clipperton and George <unk> . 
 = = Governor and later life = = 
 = = = Financial difficulties and the Bahamas proposal = = = 
 Rogers encountered financial problems on his return . Sir William Whetstone had died , and Rogers , having failed to recoup his business losses through privateering , was forced to sell his Bristol home to support his family . He was successfully sued by a group of over 200 of his crew , who stated that they had not received their fair share of the expedition profits . The profits from his book were not enough to overcome these setbacks , and he was forced into bankruptcy . His wife gave birth to their fourth child a year after his return — a boy who died in infancy — and Woodes and Sarah Rogers soon permanently separated . 
 Rogers decided the way out of his financial difficulty was to lead another expedition , this time against pirates . In 1713 , Rogers led what was ostensibly an expedition to purchase slaves in Madagascar and take them to the Dutch East Indies , this time with the permission of the British East India Company . However , Rogers ' secondary purpose was to gather details on the pirates of Madagascar , hoping to destroy or reform them , and colonise Madagascar on a future trip . Rogers collected information regarding pirates and their vessels near the island . Finding that a large number of the pirates had gone native , he persuaded many of them to sign a petition to Queen Anne asking her for clemency . While Rogers ' expedition was profitable , when it returned to London in 1715 , the British East India Company vetoed the idea of a colonial expedition to Madagascar , believing a colony was a greater threat to its monopoly than a few pirates . Accordingly , Rogers turned his sights from Madagascar to the West Indies . His connections included several of the advisers to the new king , George I , who had succeeded Queen Anne in 1714 , and Rogers was able to forge an agreement for a company to manage the Bahamas , which were infested with pirates , in exchange for a share of the colony 's profits . 
 At the time , according to the Governor of Bermuda , the Bahamas were " without any face or form of Government " and the colony was a " sink or nest of infamous rascals " . Until Rogers obtained his commission , the islands had been nominally governed by absentee Lords Proprietor , who did little except appoint a new , powerless governor when the position fell vacant . Under the agreement that underlaid Rogers ' commission , the Lords Proprietor leased their rights for a token sum to Rogers ' company for twenty @-@ one years . 
 On 5 January 1718 , a proclamation was issued announcing clemency for all piratical offences , provided that those seeking what became known as the " King 's Pardon " surrendered not later than 5 September 1718 . Colonial governors and deputy governors were authorised to grant the pardon . Rogers was officially appointed " Captain General and Governor in Chief " by George I on 6 January 1718 . He did not leave immediately for his new bailiwick , but spent several months preparing the expedition , which included seven ships , 100 soldiers , 130 colonists , and supplies ranging from food for the expedition members and ships ' crews to religious pamphlets to give to the pirates , whom Rogers believed would respond to spiritual teachings . On 22 April 1718 , the expedition , accompanied by three Royal Navy vessels , sailed out of the Thames . 
 = = = First term = = = 
 The expedition arrived on 22 July 1718 , surprising and trapping a ship commanded by pirate Charles Vane . After negotiations failed , Vane used a captured French vessel as a fireship in an attempt to ram the naval vessels . The attempt failed , but the naval vessels were forced out of the west end of Nassau harbour , giving Vane 's crew an opportunity to raid the town and secure the best local pilot . Vane and his men then escaped in a small sloop via the harbour 's narrow east entrance . The pirates had evaded the trap , but Nassau and New Providence Island were in Rogers ' hands . 
 At the time , the island 's population consisted of about two hundred former pirates and several hundred fugitives who had escaped from nearby Spanish colonies . Rogers organised a government , granted the King 's Pardon to those former pirates on the island who had not yet accepted it , and started to rebuild the island 's fortifications , which had fallen into <unk> under pirate domination . However , less than a month into his residence on New Providence , Rogers was faced with a double threat : Vane wrote , threatening to join with Edward Teach ( better known as Blackbeard ) to retake the island , and Rogers learned that the Spanish also planned to drive the British out of the Bahamas . 
 Rogers ' expedition suffered further setbacks . An unidentified disease killed almost a hundred of his expedition members , while leaving the long @-@ term residents nearly untouched . Two of the three navy vessels , having no orders to remain , left for New York . Ships sent to Havana to conciliate the Spanish governor there never arrived , their crew revolting and becoming pirates mid @-@ voyage . Finally , the third naval vessel left in mid @-@ September , its commander promising to return in three weeks — a promise he had no intention of keeping . Work on rebuilding the island 's fortifications proceeded slowly , with the locals showing a disinclination to work . 
 On 14 September 1718 , Rogers received word that Vane was at Green Turtle Cay near Abaco , about 120 miles ( 190 km ) north of Nassau . Some of the pardoned pirates on New Providence took boats to join Vane , and Rogers decided to send two ex @-@ pirate captains , Benjamin Hornigold and John <unk> , with a crew to gather intelligence , and , if possible , to bring Vane to battle . As the weeks passed , and hopes of their return dimmed , Rogers declared martial law and set all inhabitants to work on rebuilding the island 's fortifications . Finally , the former pirates returned . They had failed to find an opportunity to kill Vane or bring him to battle , but had captured one ship and a number of pirate captives . Captain Hornigold was then sent to recapture the ships and crews who had gone pirate en route to Havana . He returned with ten prisoners and three corpses . On 9 December 1718 , Rogers brought the ten men captured by Hornigold to trial . Nine were convicted , and Rogers had eight hanged three days later , <unk> the ninth on hearing he was of good family . One of the condemned , Thomas Morris , quipped as he climbed the gallows , " We have a good governor , but a harsh one . " The executions so cowed the populace that when , shortly after Christmas , several residents plotted to overthrow Rogers and restore the island to piracy , the conspirators attracted little support . Rogers had them flogged , then released as harmless . 
 On 16 March 1719 Rogers learned that Spain and Britain were at war again . He redoubled his efforts to repair the island 's fortifications , buying vital supplies on credit in the hope of later being reimbursed by the expedition 's investors . The Spanish sent an invasion fleet against Nassau in May , but when the fleet 's commodore learned that the French ( now Britain 's ally ) had captured Pensacola , he directed the fleet there instead . This gave Rogers time to continue to fortify and supply New Providence , and it was not until 24 February 1720 that a Spanish fleet arrived . Wary of Rogers ' defences , the Spanish landed troops on Paradise Island ( then known as Hog Island ) , which shelters Nassau 's harbour . They were driven off by Rogers ' troops . 
 The year 1720 brought an end to external threats to Rogers ' rule . With Spain and Britain at peace again , the Spanish made no further move against the Bahamas . Vane never returned , having been shipwrecked and captured in the Bay Islands — a year later , he was hanged in Jamaica . This did not end Rogers ' problems as governor . Overextended from financing New Providence 's defences , he received no assistance from Britain , and merchants refused to give him further credit . His health suffered , and he spent six weeks in Charleston , South Carolina , hoping to recuperate . Instead , he was wounded in a duel with Captain John <unk> of HMS Flamborough ( 1707 ) , a duel caused by disputes between the two on New Providence . Troubled by the lack of support and communication from London , Rogers set sail for Britain in March 1721 . He arrived three months later to find that a new governor had been appointed , and his company had been liquidated . Personally liable for the obligations he had contracted at Nassau , he was imprisoned for debt . 
 = = = Activities in England , second term and death = = = 
 With both the government and his former partners refusing to honour his debts , Rogers was released from debtor 's prison only when his creditors took pity on him and absolved him of his debts . Even so , Rogers wrote that he was " perplexed with the melancholy prospect of [ his ] affairs " . In 1722 or 1723 , Rogers was approached by a man writing a history of piracy , and supplied him with information . The resulting work , A General History of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious Pyrates , published under the pseudonym Captain Charles Johnson , was an enormous hit on both sides of the Atlantic , and catapulted Rogers for the second time to the status of a national hero . With public attention focused on him again , Rogers was successful in 1726 in petitioning the king for financial redress . Not only did King George I grant him a pension , retroactive to 1721 , but the king 's son and successor , George II , reappointed him as governor on 22 October 1728 . 
 The Bahamas did not come under external threat during Rogers ' second term , but the reappointed governor had difficulties . Still seeking to bolster the island 's defences , Rogers sought imposition of a local tax . The assembly , which had been instituted in Rogers ' absence , objected , and Rogers responded by dissolving it . The governmental battle exhausted Rogers , who again went to Charleston in early 1731 in an attempt to recover his health . Though he returned in July 1731 , he never truly regained his health , and died in Nassau on 15 July 1732 . 
 A harbour @-@ side street in Nassau is named for Rogers . " Piracy expelled , commerce restored " remained the motto of the Bahamas until the islands gained independence in 1973 . 
 = Quadrophenia = 
 Quadrophenia is the sixth studio album by English rock band The Who , released on 26 October 1973 by Track Records . It is a double album and the group 's second rock opera . The story follows a young mod named Jimmy and his search for self @-@ worth and importance , set in London and Brighton in 1965 . It is the only Who album to be entirely composed by group leader Pete Townshend . 
 The group started work on the album in 1972 , trying to follow up Tommy and Who 's Next , which had both achieved substantial critical and commercial success . Recording was delayed while bassist John Entwistle and singer Roger Daltrey recorded solo albums and drummer Keith Moon worked on films . Because a new studio was not finished in time , the group had to use Ronnie Lane 's Mobile Studio . As well as the group 's typical playing styles , especially from Moon , the album makes significant use of Townshend 's multi @-@ tracked synthesizers and sound effects , and Entwistle 's layered horn parts . Relationships between the group and manager Kit Lambert broke down irretrievably during recording and he had left the band 's services by the time the album was released . 
 Quadrophenia was released to a positive reception in both the UK and the US , but the resulting tour was marred with problems with backing tapes replacing the additional instruments on the album , and the stage piece was retired in early 1974 . It was revived in 1996 with a larger ensemble , and a further tour occurred in 2012 . The album made a positive impact on the mod revival movement of the late 1970s , and the resulting film adaptation , released in 1979 , was successful . The album has been reissued on compact disc several times , and seen a number of remixes that corrected some perceived flaws in the original . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The original release of Quadrophenia came with a set of recording notes for reviewers and journalists that explained the basic plotline . 
 The narrative centres around a young working @-@ class mod named Jimmy . He likes drugs , beach fights and romance , and becomes a fan of the Who after a concert in Brighton , but is disillusioned by his parents ' attitude towards him , dead @-@ end jobs and an unsuccessful trip to see a psychiatrist . He clashes with his parents over his usage of amphetamines . He has difficulty finding regular work and doubts his own self @-@ worth , and quits a job as a dustman after only two days . Though he is happy to be " one " of the mods , he struggles to keep up with his peers , and his girlfriend leaves him for his best friend . 
 After destroying his scooter and contemplating suicide , he decides to take a train to Brighton , where he had enjoyed earlier experiences with fellow mods . However , he discovers the " Ace Face " who led the gang now has a menial job as a bellboy in a hotel . He feels everything in his life has rejected him , steals a boat , and uses it to sail out to a rock overlooking the sea . On the rock and stuck in the rain , he contemplates his life . The ending is left ambiguous as to what happens to Jimmy on the rock . 
 = = Background = = 
 1972 was the least active year for the Who since they had formed . The group had achieved great commercial and critical success with the albums Tommy and Who 's Next , but were struggling to come up with a suitable follow up . The group recorded new material with Who 's Next collaborator Glyn Johns in May 1972 , including " Is It In My Head " and " Love Reign O 'er Me " which were eventually released on Quadrophenia , and a mini @-@ opera called " Long Live Rock – Rock Is Dead " , but the material was considered too derivative of Who 's Next and sessions were abandoned . In an interview for Melody Maker , guitarist and bandleader Pete Townshend said " I 've got to get a new act together … People don 't really want to sit and listen to all our past " . He had become frustrated that the group had been unable to produce a film of Tommy or Lifehouse ( the abortive project that resulted in Who 's Next ) , and decided to follow Frank Zappa 's idea of producing a musical soundtrack that could produce a narrative in the same way as a film . Unlike Tommy , the new work would be grounded in reality and tell a story of youth and adolescence that the audience could relate to . 
 Townshend became inspired by " Long Live Rock – Rock Is Dead " ' s theme and in autumn 1972 began writing material , while the group put out unreleased recordings including " Join Together " and " Relay " to keep themselves in the public eye . In the meantime , bassist John Entwistle released his second solo album , Whistle <unk> , singer Roger Daltrey worked on solo material , and Keith Moon featured as a drummer in the film That 'll Be The Day . Townshend had met up with " Irish " Jack Lyons , one of the original Who fans , which gave him the idea of writing a piece that would look back on the group 's history and its audience . He created the character of Jimmy from an amalgamation of six early fans of the group , including Lyons , and gave the character a four @-@ way split personality , which led to the album 's title ( a play on schizophrenia ) . 
 Work was interrupted for most of 1972 in order to work on Lou Reizner 's orchestral version of Tommy . Daltrey finished his first solo album , which included the hit single " Giving It All Away " , fueling rumours of a split in the press . Things were not helped by Daltrey discovering that managers Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp had large sums of money unaccounted for , and suggested they should be fired , which Townshend resisted . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In order to do justice to the recording of Quadrophenia , the group decided to build their own studio , <unk> Studios in Battersea . Work started on building <unk> in November 1972 , but five months later still lacked an adequate mixing desk that could handle recording Quadrophenia . Instead , Townshend 's friend Ronnie Lane loaned his mobile studio for the sessions . Lambert ostensibly began producing the album in May , but missed recording sessions and generally lacked discipline . By mid 1973 , Daltrey demanded that Lambert leave the Who 's services . The band recruited engineer Ron Nevison , who had worked with Townshend 's associate John Alcock , to assist with engineering . 
 To illustrate the four @-@ way split personality of Jimmy , Townshend wrote four themes , reflecting the four members of the Who . These were " Bell Boy " ( Moon ) , " Is It Me ? " ( Entwistle ) , " Helpless Dancer " ( Daltrey ) and " Love Reign O 'er Me " ( Townshend ) . Two lengthy instrumentals on the album , the title track and " The Rock " contain the four themes , separately and together . The instrumentals were not demoed but built up in the studio . Who author John Atkins described the instrumental tracks as " the most ambitious and intricate music the group ever undertook . " 
 Most tracks involved each of the group recording their parts separately ; unlike earlier albums , Townshend had left space in his demos for other band members to contribute , though most of the synthesizers on the finished album came from his ARP 2500 synthesizer and were recorded at home . The only song arranged by the band in the studio was " 5 @.@ 15 " . According to Nevison , the ARP 2500 was impossible to record in the studio , and changing sounds was cumbersome due to a lack of patches , which required Townshend to work on these parts at home , working late into the night . To obtain a good string section sound on the album , Townshend bought a cello and over two weeks learned how to play it well enough to be recorded . 
 Entwistle recorded his bass part to " The Real Me " in one take on a Gibson Thunderbird and spent several weeks during the summer arranging and recording numerous multi @-@ tracked horn parts . Having been forced to play more straightforwardly by Johns on Who 's Next , Moon returned to his established drumming style on Quadrophenia . He contributed lead vocals to " Bell Boy " , where he deliberately showcased an exaggerated narrative style . For the finale of " Love , Reign O 'er Me " , Townshend and Nevison set up a large group of percussion instruments , which Moon played before kicking over a set of tubular bells , which can be heard on the final mix . 
 During the album production , Townshend made many field recordings with a portable reel @-@ to @-@ reel recorder . These included waves washing on a Cornish beach and the doppler whistle of a diesel train recorded near Townshend 's house at Goring @-@ on @-@ Thames . The ending of " The Dirty Jobs " includes a musical excerpt from a brass band performance of The Thunderer by John Philip Sousa , which Nevison recorded in Regent 's Park . Assembling the field recordings in the studio was problematic ; at one point , during " I Am the Sea " , nine different tape machines were running sound effects . According to Nevison , Townshend produced the album single @-@ handedly , adding that " everything started when Pete got there , and everything finished when Pete left " . Townshend began mixing the album in August at his home studio in Goring along with Nevison . 
 = = Release = = 
 The album was preceded by the single " 5 : 15 " in the UK , which benefited from a live appearance on Top of the Pops on 4 October 1973 and was released the next day . It reached No. 20 in the charts . Quadrophenia was originally released in the UK on 26 October , but fans found it difficult to find a copy due to a shortage of vinyl caused by the OPEC oil embargo . In the UK , Quadrophenia reached No. 2 , being held off the top spot by David Bowie 's Pin Ups . In the US , the album reached No. 2 on the US Billboard album chart ( kept from # 1 by Elton John 's Goodbye Yellow Brick Road album ) , the highest position of any Who album in the US . In the US , " Love Reign O 'er Me " was chosen as the lead single , released on 27 October . 
 The album was originally released as a two @-@ LP set with a gatefold jacket and a booklet containing lyrics , a text version of the story , and photographs taken by Ethan Russell illustrating it . MCA Records re @-@ released the album as a two @-@ CD set in 1985 with the lyrics and text story line on a thin fold @-@ up sheet but none of the photographs . The album was reissued as a remastered CD in 1996 , featuring a reproduction of the original album artwork . The original mix had been criticised in particular for Daltrey 's vocals being buried , so the 1996 CD was completely remixed by Jon Astley and Andy Macpherson . 
 In 2011 , Townshend and longtime Who engineer Bob Pridden remixed the album , resulting in a deluxe 5 @-@ disc box set . Unlike earlier reissues , this set contains two discs of demos , including some songs that were dropped from the final running order of the album , and a selection of songs in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound . The box set came with a 100 @-@ page book including an essay by Townshend about the album sessions , with photos . In 2014 , the album was released on Blu @-@ ray Audio featuring a brand @-@ new remix of the entire album by Townshend and Pridden in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound as well the 2011 Deluxe Edition stereo remix and the original 1973 stereo LP mix . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reaction to Quadrophenia was positive . Melody Maker 's Chris Welch wrote " rarely have a group succeeded in distilling their essence and embracing a motif as convincingly " , while Charles Shaar Murray described the album in New Musical Express as the " most rewarding musical experience of the year " . Reaction in the US was generally positive , though Dave Marsh , writing in Creem gave a more critical response . Lenny Kaye , writing in Rolling Stone wrote " the Who as a whole have never sounded better " but added " on its own terms , Quadrophenia falls short of the mark " . 
 Retrospective reviews have been positive . Chris Jones , writing for BBC Music said " everything great about the Who is contained herein . " In 2013 , Billboard , reviewing the album for its 40th anniversary , said : " Filled with performances packed with life and depth and personality , Quadrophenia is 90 minutes of the Who at its very best . " The album has sold 1 million copies and has been certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America . In 2000 Q magazine placed Quadrophenia at # 56 in its list of the 100 Greatest British Albums Ever . The album has been ranked # 267 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 Townshend now considers Quadrophenia to be the last great album that the Who recorded . In 2011 , he said the group " never recorded anything that was so ambitious or audacious again " , drawing particular praise for Moon 's playing . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 = = = 1973 – 74 tour = = = 
 The band viewed the tour in support of the album as disastrous . To achieve the rich overdubbed sound of the album on stage , Townshend wanted Chris Stainton ( who had played piano on some tracks ) to join as a touring member . Daltrey objected to this and believed the Who 's performances should only have the four core members . To obtain the required instrumentation without additional musicians , the group elected to employ taped backing tracks for live performance , as they had already done for " Baba O 'Riley " and " Won 't Get Fooled Again " . Initial performances were plagued by malfunctioning tapes . Once the tapes started , the band had to play to them , which constrained their styles . Moon , in particular , found playing Quadrophenia difficult as he was forced to stick to a click track instead of watching the rest of the band . The group only allowed two days of rehearsals with the tapes before touring , one of which was abandoned after Daltrey punched Townshend following an argument . 
 The tour started on 28 October 1973 . The original plan had been to play most of the album , but after the first gig at Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , the band dropped " The Dirty Jobs " , " Is It In My Head " and " I 've Had Enough " from the set . Both Daltrey and Townshend felt they had to describe the plot in detail to the audience , which took up valuable time on stage . A few shows later in Newcastle upon Tyne , the backing tapes to " 5 : 15 " came in late . Townshend stopped the show , grabbed Pridden , who was controlling the mixing desk , and dragged him onstage , shouting obscenities at him . Townshend subsequently grabbed some of the tapes and threw them over the stage , kicked his amplifier over , and walked off . The band returned 20 minutes later , playing older material . Townshend and Moon appeared on local television the following day and attempted to brush things off . The Who played two other shows in Newcastle without incident . 
 The US tour started on 20 November at the Cow Palace in San Francisco . The group were nervous about playing Quadrophenia after the British tour , especially Moon . Before the show , he was offered some tranquillisers from a fan . Just after the show started , the fan collapsed and was hospitalised . Moon 's playing , meanwhile , became incredibly erratic , particularly during Quadrophenia where he did not seem to be able to keep time with the backing tapes . Towards the end of the show , during " Won 't Get Fooled Again " , he passed out over his drumkit . After a 20 @-@ minute wait , Moon reappeared onstage , but after a few bars of " Magic Bus " , collapsed again , and was immediately taken to hospital . Scot Halpin , an audience member , convinced promoter Bill Graham to let him play drums , and the group closed the show with him . Moon had a day to recover , and by the next show at the Los Angeles Forum , was playing to his usual strength . The group began to get used to the backing tapes , and the remainder of gigs for the US tour were successful . 
 The tour continued in February 1974 , with a short series of gigs in France . The final show at the Palais de Sports in Lyon on the 24th was the last time Quadrophenia was played as a stage piece with Moon , who died in 1978 . Townshend later said that Daltrey " ended up hating Quadrophenia – probably because it had bitten back " . However , a small selection of songs remained in the set list ; live performances of " Drowned " and " Bell Boy " filmed at Charlton Athletic football ground on 18 May were later released on the 30 Years of Maximum R & B box set . 
 = = = 1996 – 97 tour = = = 
 In June 1996 , Daltrey , Townshend and Entwistle revived Quadrophenia as a live concert . They performed at Hyde Park , London as part of the Prince 's Trust " Masters of Music " benefit concert , playing most of the album for the first time since 1974 . The concert was not billed as the Who , but credited to the three members individually . The performance also included Gary Glitter as the Godfather , Phil Daniels as the Narrator and Jimmy , Trevor MacDonald as the newsreader , Adrian Edmondson as the Bell Boy and Stephen Fry as the hotel manager . The musical lineup included Townshend 's brother Simon , Zak Starkey on drums ( his first appearance with the Who ) , guitarists David Gilmour ( who played the bus driver ) and Geoff Whitehorn , keyboardists John " Rabbit " Bundrick and Jon Carin , percussionist Jody Linscott , Billy Nicholls leading a two @-@ man / two @-@ woman backing vocal section , and five brass players . During rehearsals , Daltrey was struck in the face by Glitter 's microphone stand , and performed the concert wearing an eyepatch . 
 A subsequent tour of the US and UK followed , employing most of the same players but with Billy Idol replacing Edmondson , Simon Townshend replacing Gilmour and P. J. Proby replacing Glitter . 85 @,@ 000 fans saw the ensemble perform Quadrophenia at Madison Square Garden . A recording from the tour was subsequently released in 2005 as part of Tommy and Quadrophenia Live . 
 = = = 2010s tours = = = 
 The Who performed Quadrophenia at the Royal Albert Hall on 30 March 2010 as part of the Teenage Cancer Trust series of ten gigs . This one @-@ off performance of the rock opera featured guest appearances from Pearl Jam 's Eddie Vedder and Kasabian 's Tom Meighan . 
 In November 2012 , the Who started a U.S. tour of Quadrophenia , dubbed " Quadrophenia and More " . The group played the entire album without any guest singers or announcements with the then regular Who line @-@ up ( including Starkey and bassist Pino Paladino , who replaced Entwistle following his death in 2002 ) along with five additional musicians . The tour included additional video performances , including Moon singing " Bell Boy " from 1974 and Entwistle 's bass solo in " 5 : 15 " from 2000 . The tour progressed to the UK in 2013 , ending in a performance at Wembley Arena in July . 
 = = Other productions = = 
 Quadrophenia was revived for a film version in 1979 , directed by Franc Roddam . The film attempted to portray an accurate visual interpretation of Townshend 's vision of Jimmy and his surroundings , and included Phil Daniels as Jimmy and Sting as the Ace Face . Unlike the Tommy film , the music was largely relegated to the background , and was not performed by the cast as in a rock opera . The film soundtrack included three additional songs written by Townshend , which were Kenney Jones ' first recordings as an official member of the Who . The film was a commercial and critical success , as it conveniently coincided with the mod revival movement of the late 1970s . 
 There have been several amateur productions of a Quadrophenia musical . In 2007 , the Royal Welsh College of Music & Drama performed a musical based on the original album at the Sherman Theatre , Cardiff , featuring a cast of 12 backed by an 11 @-@ piece band . 
 In October 1995 , the rock group Phish , with an additional four @-@ man horn section , performed Quadrophenia in its entirety as their second Halloween musical costume at the Rosemont Horizon in the Chicago suburb of Rosemont , Illinois . The recording was later released as a part of Live Phish Volume 14 . The band also covered the tracks " Drowned " and " Sea and Sand " on their live album New Year 's Eve 1995 – Live at Madison Square Garden . 
 In June 2015 , Townshend released an orchestral version of the album entitled Classic Quadrophenia . The original album was orchestrated by his partner Rachel Fuller and conducted by Robert Ziegler , with music provided by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . Tenor Alfie Boe sang the lead role , supported by the London Oriana Choir , Billy Idol , Daniels and Townshend . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original LP track listing = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Pete Townshend . 
 = = = Quadrophenia : The Director 's Cut track listing = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Who 
 John Entwistle – bass , horns , vocals 
 Roger Daltrey – lead vocals 
 Keith Moon – percussion , vocals 
 Pete Townshend – remainder 
 Additional musicians 
 Jon Curle – newsreader voice 
 Chris Stainton – piano on " The Dirty Jobs " , " 5 : 15 " , and " Drowned " 
 Production 
 The Who – production 
 Kit Lambert , Pete Townshend – pre @-@ production 
 Chris Stamp , Pete Kameron , Kit Lambert – executive producer 
 Ron Nevison – engineer 
 Ron <unk> – mixing continuity , engineering assistance 
 Bob Pridden – studio earphone 
 Rod Houison , Ron Nevison , Pete Townshend – special effects 
 Graham Hughes – front cover design and photography 
 Ethan Russell – art direction , insert photography 
 Jon Astley – remixing ( 1996 reissue ) 
 Bob Ludwig – remastering ( 1996 reissue ) 
 Richard Evans – design and art direction ( 1996 reissue ) 
 = = Sales chart performance = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = = Sales certifications = = 
 = Abbey Mills Mosque = 
 The Abbey Mills Mosque , also known as the London Markaz or Masjid @-@ e @-@ Ilyas , is a mosque located in Stratford , east London , accommodating up to 2 @,@ 500 people . It had been proposed to expand it to a larger Islamic centre on a 70000 m ² site . It was originally reported that the structure , had it been built , would have been the largest religious building in Britain – three times the size of St Paul 's Cathedral – and one of the largest mosques in western Europe . For this reason the proposed building is often informally referred to in the press as the " mega @-@ mosque " . 
 The mosque extension would have been built by Tablighi Jamaat , near the site of the London 2012 Olympic Park . Anjuman @-@ e @-@ Islahul Muslimeen is Tablighi Jamaat 's charitable trust and has been the owner of the site since 1996 . The Tablighi Jamaat website devoted to the mosque places the maximum capacity at 12 @,@ 000 worshipers . 
 The plan sparked controversy for various reasons , including its initially reported size , the possible chemical contamination risk associated with the site , the uncertainty as to the sources of funding that will be used by Tablighi Jamaat , and alleged links between Tablighi Jamaat and Islamic extremism and terrorism . Mosque officials are engaged in resolving the controversies , as well as countering the perception implied by the term " mega @-@ mosque " . 
 Public response to the mosque and associated controversies has included on @-@ line petitions , various public talks , debates , speeches and various demonstrations . 
 With the expiration of the permit to use the site , and neither a current plan permission nor application for a mosque , the building 's future appeared uncertain . In February 2010 , Newham Council tried to shut down the existing temporary facility by serving an enforcement notice on the owners . However , this was overturned on appeal and a two @-@ year extension granted for the use of the site . 
 = = Project = = 
 In 1996 Anjuman @-@ e @-@ Islahul Muslimeen purchased the Abbey Mills site ( the location of a former chemical works ) for £ 1 @.@ 6 million . In 2001 , the Tablighi Jamaat was issued a five @-@ year permit to use the site as a place of worship ; however , the permit expired before building commenced . In 2007 the site plan incorporated a mosque capable of accommodating 12 @,@ 000 people , a visitor and conference centre , substantial parking for cars and facilities for bicycles , a new entrance to the West Ham tube station , a residential school for 500 pupils , a reception centre for visiting VIPs — including about 20 guest suites , a plan for the retention of the natural habitat on the island location within the site , and extensive landscaping . The Tablighi Jamaat also stated that they plan to develop the mosque to make full use of natural resources , reducing the mosque 's energy consumption and increasing the mosque 's recycling . 
 In 2012 , Newham Council refused permission for the plans . Tablighi Jamaat appealed against this decision , but the appeal was dismissed by the UK Government in October 2015 . 
 = = Concerns = = 
 = = = Size = = = 
 Reports as to the size of the mosque have varied considerably . Ali Mangera of Mangera <unk> Architects , submitted a proposal for the design competition , stated that his design would accommodate up to 40 @,@ 000 visitors simultaneously , with the potential for expanding to contain 70 @,@ 000 people . These figures led to much consternation . London Borough of Newham Councillor Alan Craig , of the Christian Peoples Alliance , criticised the development plans on the grounds that they would change the character of the local area , making it predominantly Muslim , and has called for a public inquiry into the mosque 's development . The Daily Telegraph reported that the Newham planning department would refuse the mosque 's application , as a project of that size had the potential to cause damage to community relations in the area . 
 In response to the public concern about the mosque 's size , the mosque 's trustees did not choose Mangera 's design for the final plan , deciding instead on a scaled @-@ down structure . Abdul Sattar Shahid , speaking on behalf of the Tablighi Jamaat trustees , announced that the firm of Allies and Morrison was retained to design the mosque . In November 2011 , it was reported that Allies & Morrison had been replaced by <unk> Architects . An outline planning application was submitted in May 2012 . The scheme prepared by <unk> Architects included a prayer hall for over 9000 , a refectory for 2000 and an Islamic library set within a public garden . A needs analysis and viability assessment submitted with the planning application seek to demonstrate that the proposals represent a justifiable departure from planning policy . 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 In July 2007 , a report by Waterman Environmental was publicised by Councillor Craig , which revealed that the land upon which the Abbey Mills Mosque would be built is considered to have a medium @-@ to @-@ high contamination risk . The site was used as a chemical works for at least 100 years , and was decommissioned as such in the late 1980s . Craig was alleged to have obtained this information under the Freedom of Information Act 2000 , and he called for the Environment Agency to be brought in and for the site to be shut down until an independent report was undertaken . According to Craig , the Waterman Report revealed that the original pre @-@ remediation works had discovered soil and groundwater impact by mercury , lead , arsenic , oil , fuels , and asbestos fibres . There were methane and carbon dioxide land gas readings as well . Mosque officials have stated that allowing the development to proceed would benefit the community , as decontamination of the site is part of their building plan . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 In September 2006 , The Guardian reported on concerns regarding funding for the Tablighi Jamaat 's construction project . Documentation filed with the Charity Commission indicated that Anjuman @-@ E @-@ Islahul Muslimeen 's annual donations were in the order of only £ 500 @,@ 000 , suggesting the need for significant extra financial support to fund the building project . It was suggested that the project would be funded by Saudi Salafi groups . This was based on Tablighi Jamaat 's being a Deobandi Muslim organisation that has close links with the form of the religion practised by the Saudi royal family . 
 The Tablighi Jamaat website lists that it intends to raise the money predominantly via small donations from Muslims in the London area , that they have no links , nor made contact with , the Saudi royal family , and clearly states that the Tablighi Jamaat are neither actively seeking overseas money nor public money . 
 = = = Terrorism = = = 
 The New York Times quoted Michael J. Heimbach , a deputy chief of the Federal Bureau of Investigation 's international terrorism section , saying that the FBI has found that the Tablighi Jamaat was used for recruiting by Al @-@ Qaeda . The group has also been referred to as " a key influence on terrorists targeting Britain " and " a common link to a string of attacks and conspiracies " . 
 The Tablighi Jamaat website states that it refrains from political or controversial activities and stands for democracy and freedom . The group describes itself as a non @-@ political group and categorically rejects any links to terrorism or terrorists . Its website makes clear that it cannot take responsibility for the actions of every individual who has ever attended their mosques or services . 
 <unk> <unk> , who studied and wrote about the Tablighi Jamaat in South Asia , said that any fringe elements do not reflect the peacefulness of the movement . Although the group has a very loose organisational structure , <unk> says that it would be " simply wrong to describe Tablighi Jamaat as a terrorist recruiting organisation " . 
 = = Responses = = 
 = = = Petition = = = 
 An online petition was formed in response to the concerns raised about the planned mosque , calling on the Prime Minister to prevent the building of the mosque ; the petition closed with over 250 @,@ 000 signatures and was at the time the most signed petition on the site . Her Majesty 's Government responded that the local planning authorities are responsible for general control of development in their areas and are required to take into consideration the views of interested persons and particularly local communities . In regard to this specific proposal , the government was informed by the Newham London Borough Council that there is neither a current planning permission or application for a mosque , nor is one expected in the near future . In September 2012 , a planning application was submitted to Newham Council and is under consideration by them . 
 Ken Livingstone , the then Mayor of London , issued a statement protesting against what he called " the particularly vicious nature of the campaign against a possible Muslim place of worship in East London " , stating that it should be " condemned by all of those who support the long established right of freedom of religion in this country , and all the more so as it is based on information which has long been established to be factually untrue . " 
 = = = Public relations = = = 
 In 2007 the Tablighi Jamaat retained the public relations firm Indigo Public Affairs , which specialises in difficult major planning situations . The firm 's efforts to enhance the organisation 's image include setting up a website for the mosque and creating YouTube videos discussing the various concerns . 
 In September 2007 a public discussion between supporters and opponents of the mosque plan was held at Ithaca House in Stratford . Issues discussed included the legitimacy of the concerns about the mosque , the extent of the conservative view of Islam taught by Tablighi Jamaat , their unwillingness to engage in public discourse , the extent that racism plays a role in the mosque 's opposition , and the demand for larger facilities in the West Ham area to support the needs of the community . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 In apparent response to the opposition to the mosque , Alan Craig has been the subject of a video showing his purported obituary , together with that of his wife and two children . The video was posted by a 23 @-@ year @-@ old man from Stevenage named Muhammad , better known by his online moniker of " <unk> " . Nick Kilby , speaking on behalf of Tablighi Jamaat , said : " We found out about the video last night and it has been removed . We don 't take responsibility for other people 's sites that we don 't control . " He added that if <unk> was found to be a member of the organisation , it would be dealt with very seriously . 
 = = = Other opposition = = = 
 In March 2008 <unk> Siddiqui , co @-@ founder of the Muslim Parliament of Great Britain , publicly opposed the construction of the mosque , stating that " We have too many mosques . I think it should not be built . What we need first is more integration between the existing mosques and the wider community . " Siddiqui 's opposition joins that of Craig , together with that of Irfan Al @-@ Alawi , the director of the Center for Islamic Pluralism Europe , who expressed extreme concern about the spread of Tablighi Jamaat . Both Siddiqui and Al @-@ Alawi have different and opposed Islamic viewpoints to that of the Tablighi . 
 = Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir , BWV 131 = 
 Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir ( Out of the depths I call , Lord , to You ) , BWV 131 , is a church cantata by the German composer Johann Sebastian Bach . It was composed in either 1707 or 1708 , which makes it one of Bach 's earliest cantatas . Some sources suggest that it could be his earliest surviving work in this form , but current thinking is that there are one or two earlier examples . 
 The cantata was commissioned by the minister of one of the churches in Mühlhausen , the city where Bach worked at the time . It was possibly written for a special occasion . The text is based on Luther 's German version of Psalm 130 and also incorporates the words of a chorale . Bach 's music integrates melodies from the chorale into larger structures . Bach also shows his interest in counterpoint , something which was characteristic of him throughout his career . 
 = = History and words = = 
 A note on the autograph score of the cantata indicates that the work was commissioned by Georg Christian Eilmar , minister of the Marienkirche ( St Mary 's church ) in Mühlhausen . This allows the work to be dated to 1707 – 08 , which is the period when Bach was living in Mühlhausen . Bach was employed as organist at the city 's other main church , Divi Blasii , . He was also involved to some extent with performances at the Marienkirche , where civic ceremonies were held . One service there which Bach would have attended was that for the city council 's inauguration in 1708 during which his cantata Gott ist mein Konig , BWV 71 had its premiere . He may have had a closer personal relationship with Eilmar than with the minister of his own church . Eilmar was godfather to his daughter Catharina Dorothea ( born 1708 ) . 
 Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir has been described as possibly Bach 's first surviving cantata . For it to be the first , it has to be assumed not only that it predates other cantatas written in <unk> ( we know that he wrote at least one other there ) , but also that there is not a surviving cantata from his previous post at Arnstadt . It seems likely that Bach was composing choral music at Arnstadt . Although Bach was only 22 when he took up the appointment at Mühlhausen , the performance of a work of his own composition appears to have been part of the selection process . Recent scholarship suggests that another surviving cantata Nach dir , Herr , verlanget mich , BWV 150 could have been composed at Arnstadt . 
 The libretto is based on Psalm 130 , one of the penitential psalms . The incipit of the psalm , " Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir " , gives the cantata its name . Originally a Hebrew text , the incipit has variants in translation . While Psalms 130 : 1 – 6 is rendered " Out of the depths ... " in the English King James version , a closer translation of the German text used by Bach would be " deep " rather than " depths " . The anonymous librettist , possibly Eilmar , includes in two of the movements verses from Herr Jesu Christ , du <unk> Gut , a Lutheran chorale by Bartholomäus <unk> . 
 In his Bach Cantata Pilgrimage , Sir John Eliot Gardiner performed and recorded the work with cantatas for the Fifth Sunday after Trinity , but is not known for sure when in the liturgical year Bach performed it , and there has been speculation that it was written for a special occasion . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Bach 's ability as a composer was recognised by the city council of Muhlhausen who paid for the printing of the cantata Gott ist mein Konig , BWV 71 . They may also have arranged the publication of a later cantata now lost . None of the other cantatas was published in the composer 's lifetime . Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir was first published in 1881 as part of the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft @-@ Ausgabe , the first complete edition of Bach 's works . The editor was Wilhelm Rust , who edited many volumes for the Bach @-@ Gesellschaft . At the time of publication of this volume , he held the position of Thomaskantor in Leipzig . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 = = = Singers = = = 
 Bach scored the work for tenor and bass soloists and a four @-@ part choir . Bach gives his soloists an arioso and an aria . As in other early cantatas , there are no recitatives . ( Bach later came more under the influence of Italian music , combining recitatives and arias ) . 
 Bach did not give a direct indication of how many singers he envisaged in the choir . The cantata can be performed with only four singers , as in the recording by Joshua Rifkin , who is well known in the world of Bach performance for his " one voice to a part " approach . However , most recordings feature a choir with multiple voices to a part . Another choice to be made is whether to use women singers : Bach 's original singers were probably all male . Most recordings of the cantata , however , feature mixed choirs : an exception is the version conducted by Nikolaus Harnoncourt , which deploys boys ' voices as the top lines of the choir . 
 = = = Instruments = = = 
 The singers are accompanied by an instrumental group consisting of oboe , bassoon , violin , two violas and basso continuo . As in the case of the singers , the question arises as to whether Bach used one or more players per part . The oboe and the violin are given some important solos , suggesting that there may well have been only one of each . Ton Koopman , for example , uses one oboist and one violinist in his recording . The role of the violas is more to provide accompaniment , filling in harmonies and sometimes doubling vocal lines . The bassoon sometimes supports the continuo section , doubling its bass line , and sometimes plays an independent line . 
 = = = Musical forms = = = 
 Bach used some musical forms which reappear in later cantatas . For example , two of the choral movements have a fugue , a style of composition in which Bach excelled . Also , the two movements for soloists are developed as a type of chorale fantasia with the soloist singing the psalm text and an upper voice singing the chorale in long notes as a cantus firmus . Craig Smith called the chorale settings " a window on the future " . However , he criticised the structure of the cantata , saying that it offers evidence that at this stage in his career the composer had difficulty with large forms . On the other hand , the musicologist Julian Mincham regards the piece as being different from later cantatas rather than inferior to them . 
 = = = Structure and scoring = = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements , three choral movements interspersed by an arioso and an aria . In both solo movements , a chorale stanza sung simultaneously by the soprano intensifies the Psalm text . He scored it for two soloist ( tenor and bass ) , a four @-@ part choir , and a small Baroque instrumental ensemble of oboe ( Ob ) , bassoon ( Fg ) , violin ( Vl ) , two violas ( Va ) , and basso continuo . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the New Bach Edition ( Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe ) . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The following entries are taken from the listing by Aryeh Oron on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs are roughly marked as large ( by red background ) or one voice per part ( OVPP ) ( by green background ) ; instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr . , also vocal ensembles with one voice per part ( OVPP ) . 
 = A Change Is Gonna Come ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " A Change Is Gonna Come " is the fourth season premiere of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the 62nd episode of the overall series . The premiere focused on the aftermath of the main characters ' promotion to residency , following the conclusion of their internship . The episode was the first not to feature Isaiah Washington , portraying Preston Burke , due to his being fired from the series at the conclusion of the third season . The installment marked Chyler Leigh 's promotion to series regular status , following her guest appearances in the last two episodes of the previous season . Also featured were one @-@ time guest actors Mark Pellegrino , <unk> Childers , Sandra Thigpen , and Steven Porter . 
 The story arcs which provided a particular focus on individual characters include Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) dealing with the aftermath of Burke 's ( Washington ) departure , and the dissolution of their engagement , Izzie Stevens , ( Katherine Heigl ) struggling with her romantic feelings towards the married George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) , and Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) learning to deal with her new position of Chief Resident . Also dealt with was Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) coping with Rebecca Pope 's ( Elizabeth Reaser ) departure , and Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) facing the conclusion of her relationship with Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , while dealing with the arrival of her half @-@ sister , Lexie Grey ( Leigh ) , who enrolls in the surgical program at the hospital . 
 The script for the premiere was written by series creator Shonda Rhimes , while Rob Corn served as the director . The episode aired on September 27 , 2007 in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) , with an approximated 20 @.@ 93 million viewers tuning in . Ranking second in the time @-@ slot and third for the week , the episode garnered a 7 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , seeing a decrease from the previous episode , which received an 8 @.@ 0 rating . Critical response of the episode ranged from mixed to negative , with Yang 's storyline being a particular source of critical acclaim from television reviewers . Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle , Washington , filming occurred in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " A Change Is Gonna Come " opens to a voice @-@ over narrative from Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) about change , the episode 's main theme . Following the conclusion of their internship , Meredith , along with her colleagues , Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , and Alex Karev ( Justin Chambers ) commence their residency in the department of surgery , and start dealing with new responsibilities , including the new generation of interns , to whom they have been assigned as mentors . After failing his post @-@ internship exam in the season three finale , George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) must repeat his internship , in order to avoid being forced to leave the medical field . It is revealed that among the new interns is Lexie Grey ( Chyler Leigh ) , Meredith 's half @-@ sister , who previously had an encounter with Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , despite his unawareness of her identity . Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , whom Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) chose for Miranda Bailey 's ( Chandra Wilson ) righteous position of Chief Resident , finds difficulty in exposing an authoritative behavior , getting no respect from her subordinates . 
 It is explained that , in the aftermath of her being left by Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) at the altar , Yang spent her honeymoon travelling with Meredith . Having just returned , she is shocked to learn that Burke has resigned from Seattle Grace , and relocated to an unknown location . Stevens has to deal with her romantic feelings for O 'Malley , whose marriage to Torres is being threatened by his yet to be exposed affair . O 'Malley , who finds himself in the unpleasant situation of repeating his internship , quickly gains support in Lexie , who decides not to tell the fellow interns about his failed exam . Karev is revealed to have visited Rebecca Pope ( Elizabeth Reaser ) , following her departure . In the absence of Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , who relocated to Los Angeles , California , Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) seeks reconciliation with Shepherd , formerly his closest friend and confidant . Initially unwilling to resume his friendship with Sloan , Shepherd ultimately gives him a second chance . Bailey manifests a cold attitude towards Webber , in order to express her disappointment in not being considered for the position of Chief Resident , in spite of her enviable reputation among the hospital staff . Lexie meets Meredith for the first time , but is demoralized when she becomes aware of her apparent discomfort . Meredith and Shepherd encounter difficulty in being broken up , realizing that their mutual romantic feelings are an impediment in their attempt at having separate lives . 
 The emergency room is filled with victims from a chain car accident , one of whom is admitted in the department of neurosurgery , under the care of Shepherd and Yang . As the physicians soon discover that he has been internally decapitated , they come to the conclusion that even a minor move would result in irreparable damage . A pregnant woman is admitted in plastic surgery , after having her arm severed . Meredith is assigned to work for Sloan during the day , and is immediately told to find the arm , much to the fascination of her interns . Despite trying to deal with her trainees in a strict manner , Stevens is looked upon as unprofessional by the interns she was assigned to . Her image is further deteriorated when she decides to abandon her hospital duties , in order to perform surgery on a deer , once again letting her emotional involvement interfere with her career . Meredith and Shepherd discuss the repercussions of their breakup , and realize that they cannot reconcile . However , the two engage in sexual intercourse , as a manner to express their mutual feelings for the last time . O 'Malley comes to the realization of his love for Stevens , and quickly discloses to her that he shares her romantic feelings . 
 = = Production = = 
 " A Change Is Gonna Come " was written by series creator and executive producer Shonda Rhimes , whereas filmmaker and series veteran Rob Corn served as the director . The soundtrack used in the episode included Mat Kearney 's " Breathe In , Breathe Out " , I 'm from Barcelona 's " <unk> " , Meiko 's " Reasons to Love You " and Cinematic Orchestra 's " To Build A Home " . Also featured in the episode was " Knock ' Em Out " , the second track from British pop singer @-@ songwriter Lily Allen 's debut album , Alright , Still . Several one @-@ time guest stars appeared in the episode , including Mark Pellegrino , who played Chris , <unk> Childers , portraying Nancy Walters , Sandra Thigpen in the role of Clara , and Steven Porter , who acted as Joey . Although fictionally set in Seattle , Washington , filming primarily occurred in Los Angeles , California . Scenes in the operating room were filmed at the Prospect Studios in Los Feliz , Los Angeles . 
 The fourth season premiere saw Leigh 's first appearance as a main cast member . Leigh first appeared on the show during the last two episodes of the third season as Meredith 's half @-@ sister , Lexie . Following Washington 's departure , it was reported that show 's executives were planning on adding new cast members , such as Lexie . She was officially upgraded to a series ' regular on July 11 , 2007 , for the fourth season . On casting Leigh as Lexie , Grey 's Anatomy creator Shonda Rhimes stated , " We met with a lot of young actresses , but Chyler stood out . She had a quality that felt right and real to me . It felt like she could be Meredith 's sister , but she had a depth that was very interesting . " Leigh offered her insight on her first days working with the main cast of the series , " It was like coming into somebody else 's group or circle . It was a little daunting in the beginning . But I have had such a great time . " " A Change Is Gonna Come " was the first episode in two years not to feature the character of Montgomery , due to her portrayer , Walsh , leaving the series in order to launch the Grey 's Anatomy spin @-@ off , medical drama Private Practice . However , the character continued to be prominent throughout the run of the series , appearing sporadically as a guest star in the following seasons . Also introduced in " A Change Is Gonna Come " is the new generation of interns , all of whom were portrayed in co @-@ star capacity , with the exception of Lexie . 
 " A Change Is Gonna Come " was the first episode not to feature Washington 's character , Burke . Washington was officially fired from the series , following an on @-@ set incident with Knight and Dempsey , which had been in the media attention since the commencement of the production for the third season . News reports surfaced that Washington had insulted co @-@ star Knight with a homophobic slur . Following the exposure of the argument , Knight publicly disclosed his homosexuality , which led to Washington 's issuing an apology statement , regarding his inappropriate use of words during the incident . The controversy later resurfaced when the cast appeared at the 65th Golden Globe Awards ceremony , which saw Washington ridiculing homosexuality during an interview , following the statement that denied the occurrence of an on @-@ set incident . After being rebuked by his studio , Touchstone Television , Washington publicly apologized at length for using the epithet in reference to Knight . An issue of People disclosed Washington 's presence at executive counseling , which led to an undetermined hiatus of his contract . After " Didn 't We Almost Have It All ? " , the last episode Washington appeared in , was filmed , the network decided not to give Washington the possibility of a renewal . In a statement released by his publicist , Washington <unk> , " I 'm mad as hell and I 'm not going to take it anymore " . In another report , Washington stated he was planning to spend the summer pursuing charity work in Sierra Leone , while working on an independent film . In a subsequent interview , Washington highlighted the unfairness in his being let go from the series , considering filing a lawsuit as a result . He also accused Knight of using the controversy to bolster his own career and increase his salary on the series . Following his firing , Washington began asserting that racism within the broadcasting media was a primary factor in his dismissal from the series , which drew a critical perspective from Rhimes . During his appearance on Larry King Live , Washington once again denied using a homophobic epithet in reference to Knight . 
 While writing the episode , Rhimes put an emphasis on the character of O 'Malley , detailing his relationships with both Stevens and Torres . On the topic , Rhimes <unk> , " The interns are residents now , with interns of their own . Except for George , poor George , who is stuck repeating his intern year . It 's not easy being a repeater . He 's the only who hasn 't gone through any change when we begin the episode . But by the end , he has . He tells Izzie that he loves her too . Which takes guts . Because he knows what he is getting into . He 's a married man with a great wife , and he never intended to be a married man who loved another woman . " Regarding Meredith 's story arc , Rhimes felt that she cannot deal with all that is expected of her in her relationship with Shepherd , choosing their genuine love as the greatest obstacle in their decision to break up . Writing for Yang 's storyline , Rhimes focused on her unsuccessful attempts at moving on , exposing her devastation at the realization of Burke 's departure , which would be the main seasonal storyline for the character . The episode also deals with Sloan and Shepherd 's path to reconciliation . Rhimes disclosed that the concept for the plot point was to have the two characters go back to being friends , as a result of Montgomery 's departure . Rhimes offered her insight on Lexie 's arrival , " Lexie Grey is here now . And she 's here to stay . I love that she 's a bit of a dork . Being a dork myself , I am fond of the girls with verbal diarrhea . Because it 's not easy to keep all your words in , believe me . " Regarding Webber and Bailey 's storyline , Rhimes noted that the latter 's intentions are not to let the former " off the hook " for choosing Torres over her for the position of Chief Resident , which was righteously hers . Rhimes highlighted the unfairness in Webber 's choice , noting his unusual manner of comprehending the situation . " She 's Bailey . She 's worked hard , she 's been the best . And isn 't it just like the Chief to decide what is best for her ? It 's his flaw , the Chief . He 's an old school man and like an old school man , he 's taking care of his women . Whether they like it or not . This isn 't gonna be an easy pill for Bailey to swallow . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " A Change Is Gonna Come " was originally broadcast in the United States on September 27 , 2007 , airing on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in its regular 9 : 00 Eastern time @-@ slot . Viewed by a total of 20 @.@ 93 million viewers , the episode is the series ' second most @-@ watched season premiere , just behind the third season opener , which had been watched live by 25 @.@ 41 million American viewers . In comparison to the previous episode , which was watched by 22 @.@ 57 million viewers , " A Change Is Gonna Come " made a 21 % decrease in terms of viewership . However , the viewership of the episode ranked second in both its time @-@ slot and the entire night , being beaten out by its airtime rival , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation on CBS , which was watched by 25 @.@ 22 million viewers . In the entire week , the episode ranked third , being beaten out by both CSI and fellow ABC show Dancing With the Stars . In addition to being a success in viewership , the episode also did well in ratings . " A Change Is Gonna Come " garnered a 7 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating in household viewership , ranking second in its time @-@ slot , and third for the week . 
 The premiere generally received mixed to negative feedback from television critics . Debbie Chang on BuddyTV deemed the episode " <unk> and ridiculous " , being particularly critical of the story arc involving Stevens , whom she described as not being worthy of being promoted to the residency level . Chang expressed disagreement with the manner Bailey and Shepherd 's characters were dealt with by the writers , feeling that the former 's anger should have been targeted at herself , and criticizing the exaggerated exposure of the latter 's " first grader emotional maturity " . However , Yang 's character was praised , with Chang choosing her manner of repressing her feelings as a highlight . Chang expressed a general disappointment in the episode , disapproving the choice for the episode as a season opener , a topic in regard to which she elaborated , " I can see already that this season will continue to bring us medical cases that are so blatantly about the doctors ' pathetic lives . " In September 2009 , the inclusion of the deer ranked twelfth in Entertainment Weekly 's " Most Memorable Cases of Grey 's Anatomy " . 
 Eileen Lulevitch , entertainment reviewer for TV Guide , was generally favorable of the episode , writing , " Watching the season premiere tonight was like welcoming an old friend back into your home . It was so easy to slip back into Grey 's world and get caught up in all of the amazing moments that make this show so much fun to watch . And while I expected the night to start off on a somber note , by addressing Cristina and Burke 's fallout , I was pleasantly surprised by the way the attendees paid tribute to Bailey , by giving their new interns the same exact first @-@ day speech Bailey had given them . " <unk> praised Meredith 's story arc , noting the surprising turn her character evolution has taken , as she praised Lexie 's introduction . While expressing a negative perspective on the writers ' decision to have Torres be the Chief Resident , instead of Bailey , Lulevitch described Torres ' adjustment to her new position as one of the episode 's focal points . Despite praising Yang 's storyline in the personal background , the concept of her interaction with the patient she was assigned to was regarded as predictable and obvious , " When the man 's family came to see him , and Cristina told them it could be for the very last time . It was that moment that really got Cristina thinking about how much she did in fact miss Burke , as we later learned in the episode . " Writing for IGN , Laura Burrows was favorable of the episode . Regarding the storylines developed in " A Change Is Gonna Come " , Burrows elaborated , " The season opener was promising in that it had the interns in a new role and introduced a new side of George . As all of his friends progressed from interns to residents , George was forced to re @-@ sit his internship . This created new drama and also opened up the hospital to a whole new set of interns rife with their own set of emotional baggage and drama . There were a series of interesting and new plots . " 
 Heigl , who portrayed Stevens , was particularly critical of her character 's relationship with O 'Malley , deeming it " a ratings ploy " . Heigl further explained her outlook on the progression of her character , " They really hurt somebody , and they didn 't seem to be taking a lot of responsibility for it . I have a really hard time with that kind of thing . I 'm maybe a little too black and white about it . I don 't really know Izzie very well right now . " Former The Star @-@ Ledger columnist Alan Sepinwall expressed a negative perspective on the episode , deeming it childish and ridiculous . He disliked Rhimes ' conception of the story arc involving Stevens , elaborating , " If there 's a doctor on this show who should be forced to repeat their intern year , if only to prevent them from being allowed to influence younger doctors , it 's Izzie , not George . She proves her unfitness for this role with her first patient of the day , the deer . Not cute , not character @-@ illuminating , just dumb . " Also criticized was Torres , whose regression from a " cool , rocking , outgoing , <unk> and full of life " role was highlighted , receiving negative feedback from Sepinwall , who wrote " Now the character exists entirely so the writers can dump on her , in a devolution far worse than anything . I just don 't get it , and it pains me to watch any scene with Callie in it . Despite expressing a negative outlook on Meredith 's story arc which dealt with Shepherd , noting that the " constant break @-@ ups and reunions are as silly as if Shonda Rhimes had just kept them apart for three seasons before letting them kiss " , Sepinwall was favorable of Lexie 's arrival at Seattle Grace , feeling that " she 's still being written as Meredith circa season one in an attempt to make us like her , but I didn 't mind the manipulation , if only because there are so few characters left on this show to like . " The <unk> television reviewer was mainly critical of the episode , describing it as a departure from " the old show " . However , Lexie 's introduction was praised in the <unk> review . 
 = Tiny Thompson = 
 Cecil Ralph " Tiny " Thompson ( May 31 , 1903 – February 9 , 1981 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . He played 12 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) , first for the Boston Bruins , and later for the Detroit Red Wings . A four @-@ time Vezina Trophy winner , Thompson was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1959 . He was a member of one Stanley Cup @-@ winning team , as a rookie in the 1928 – 29 season with the Boston Bruins . At the start of the 1938 – 39 season , after ten full seasons with Boston , he was traded to the Detroit Red Wings , where he completed the season , and played another full one before retiring . During his NHL career , he recorded 81 shutouts , the sixth highest of any goaltender . After retiring from playing , he coached lower @-@ league teams before becoming a noted professional scout . Thompson helped popularize the technique of catching the puck as a method of making a save . A competent puckhandler , he was the first goaltender in the NHL to record an assist by passing the puck with his stick to a fellow player . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thompson was born in the mining community of Sandon , BC . He grew up in Calgary , Alberta , where his brother , Paul — who also became a professional ice hockey player — was born in 1906 . As a child , he enjoyed playing baseball and ice hockey . Initially , Thompson was not a goaltender , though he agreed to play the position to get into games . As a teenager playing competitive ice hockey , he acquired the nickname " Tiny " as a joke , as he was the tallest player on the team , standing 5 ft 10 in ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) ; the nickname stuck with him for the rest of his career . 
 Thompson began his junior career playing for the Calgary Monarchs in 1919 at the age of 16 . He competed for the Memorial Cup , awarded to the Canadian junior hockey champions that year , playing in two games and surrendering 11 goals , a respectable amount in that era . After spending the 1920 – 21 season playing for Calgary Alberta Grain , Thompson played three seasons in Bellevue , Alberta . In the 1924 – 25 season , he joined the Duluth Hornets , playing 40 games , recording a shutout in 11 of them . The following season , Thompson joined the Minneapolis Millers of the American Hockey Association ( AHA ) . In his three seasons with the Millers , he appeared in 118 games , recording 33 shutouts with a 1 @.@ 37 goals against average ( average of goals surrendered in a span of sixty minutes ) . 
 = = NHL career = = 
 = = = Boston Bruins = = = 
 Thompson began his National Hockey League ( NHL ) career with the Boston Bruins in the 1928 – 29 season after his contract was purchased by Boston manager Art Ross . Despite having never seen Thompson play , Ross had heard about Thompson 's good reputation in Minnesota . In his first game he posted a shutout , becoming the only Hockey Hall of Fame goaltender to accomplish this feat . In his first season , he appeared in all 44 of the Bruins ' games , posting 12 shutouts and a 1 @.@ 15 goals @-@ against average , the second lowest goals @-@ against average in NHL history to date , second to George Hainsworth 's 0 @.@ 98 GAA . Hainsworth had set his record that same season . Placing first in the American Division , the Bruins had a perfect record in the playoffs en route to their first Stanley Cup victory , defeating the Montreal Canadiens and the New York Rangers . Thompson recorded three shutouts in the five playoff games , and allowed only three goals . 
 The following season , Thompson again appeared in all of the Bruins ' 44 games , posting three shutouts and a 2 @.@ 19 goals @-@ against average . The league changed its rules on forward passing , which resulted in a sharp increase in goalscoring . Boston won all but six games , finishing with a 38 – 5 – 1 record , the best winning percentage for any team in a season . Surrendering only 98 goals , Thompson bested Chicago goaltender Charlie Gardiner to win the first of his four Vezina Trophies . The Vezina Trophy is awarded to the league 's top goaltender , which was determined prior to the 1981 – 82 season by number of goals surrendered by goaltenders who had played a minimum number of games . In the playoffs , however , they suffered their first two @-@ game losing streak , as they were swept 2 – 0 by the Canadiens in the Stanley Cup finals . Earlier in the playoffs , Thompson 's winning streak of seven playoff games was snapped ; it remains , as of 2014 , the longest playoff winning streak to start a career . 
 In the 1930 – 31 season , he played all 44 games again , and was named to the Second All @-@ Star team . In the playoffs , Boston lost the semifinals to the Montreal Canadiens ; during game two of the series Thompson became the first goaltender to be pulled for a sixth attacker at the end of a game to give his team a higher chance to score a goal . Even though Boston still lost , coach Art Ross ' maneuver was described as " amazing " the following day , and this technique , known as " open net " , caught on with the rest of the league . 
 The Bruins missed the playoffs for the first time in Thompson 's career in the 1931 – 32 season . He won only 13 games while appearing in 43 out of Boston 's 48 games , which was the only time he missed games as a member of the Bruins . The next season , Boston made the playoffs once more , losing to the Toronto Maple Leafs . The final game of the playoff series was described as Thompson 's most memorable . During that game , Toronto and Boston were tied after regulation time and over 100 minutes of overtime proceeded , with Thompson dueling Toronto 's goaltender Lorne Chabot . After the end of the fifth overtime period , managers Conn Smythe of the Maple Leafs and Art Ross of the Bruins asked league president Frank Calder to suspend the game , but Calder refused . Early in the sixth overtime period , a pass from Boston defenseman Eddie Shore was intercepted , and Ken <unk> skated in on a breakaway , cleanly beating Thompson at 4 : 46 of the period . The losing goaltender in the second @-@ longest NHL game , Thompson received a standing ovation from fans at the Maple Leaf Gardens . Thompson finished the playoff series with 1 @.@ 23 goals @-@ against average , despite a losing record . 
 Thompson became the second goaltender to win his second Vezina Trophy in 1932 – 33 since its inception in the 1926 – 27 season , as he recorded 11 shutouts and a 1 @.@ 76 goals @-@ against average . After missing the playoffs in the 1933 – 34 season , they rebounded to first place in the American Division the following season , as Thompson was named to the Second All @-@ Star team for the second time . In the playoffs , the Bruins won only one of their four games ; their only win was on the strength of Thompson 's shutout , who finished the playoffs with a 1 @.@ 53 goals @-@ against average . 
 In the 1935 – 36 NHL season , Thompson recorded 10 shutouts , but Boston managed to win only 22 out of their 48 games . During the season , he recorded an assist , a rarity for goaltenders . At the end of the season , he was named to the First All @-@ Star team for the first time , and won the Vezina Trophy for the third time , tying George Hainsworth 's all @-@ time mark with three victories . The ensuing two @-@ game , total @-@ goal playoff series against the Toronto Maple Leafs was a series of contrasts , as the Bruins lost 8 – 6 . In one game , the Bruins shut out Toronto 6 – 0 , while they lost the other game 8 – 0 . In 1937 – 38 , his final full season with the Bruins , he won 30 out of the 48 games , but Boston lost to the Maple Leafs once again in the playoffs . Thompson set a new record by winning his fourth and final Vezina Trophy . He was also named to the First All @-@ Star team for the second time . 
 = = = Detroit Red Wings = = = 
 Thompson appeared in only five games for the Bruins in the 1938 – 39 season , as Boston decided to replace the aging goaltender with the substantially younger Frank Brimsek . Brimsek would go on to lead the Bruins to a Stanley Cup victory that season , earning the nickname " Mister Zero " while picking up 10 regular season shutouts , the Vezina Trophy , First All @-@ Star Team honours , and the Calder Memorial Trophy , which is given " to the player selected as the most proficient in his first year of competition " . To make space for Brimsek , Thompson was traded to the Detroit Red Wings for <unk> Smith and $ 15 @,@ 000 ; Thompson also received a $ 1 @,@ 000 bonus from Boston . 
 Boston manager Art Ross predicted that Thompson , now 35 , would play for the Red Wings for at least another five seasons ; however , Thompson remained with the team for only two seasons before retiring from playing . The Red Wings posted a losing record in both of these seasons , although they made the playoffs both times . Overall , Thompson appeared in 85 regular season games for Detroit , recording a 32 – 41 – 12 record , seven shutouts , and a 2 @.@ 54 goals @-@ against average , and in 11 playoff games , posting a 5 – 6 , with one shutout and a 2 @.@ 41 goal @-@ against average . 
 = = Post @-@ NHL career = = 
 After retiring from professional play , Thompson became the head coach of the Buffalo Bisons of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) in the 1940 – 41 season . He coached 56 games in two seasons . The Bisons missed the playoffs both times . He appeared in one game as goaltender in the 1940 – 41 season . During World War II , Thompson served in the Royal Canadian Air Force and doubled as the coach of the Calgary RCAF Mustangs of the Alberta Senior Hockey League . He led the Mustangs to the league championship series in 1942 – 43 against the Calgary Currie Army team where injuries to the Mustangs ' goaltenders brought him back onto the ice in March 1943 . With Thompson in goal , the Mustangs defeated Currie Army 8 – 4 to tie the best @-@ of @-@ five series at two wins apiece . He played the deciding game , but his team fell short of winning the Alberta title with a 3 – 1 loss to Currie Army . After the war , Thompson became chief Western Canada scout for the Chicago Black Hawks . He was one of the few scouts at the time who sought to discover a player 's personality along with their playing ability . Thompson often conversed with players as part of an effort to learn about the players he was watching . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Thompson was a stand @-@ up goaltender , rarely falling on both knees to stop a puck . He was one of the first NHL goaltenders to catch the puck with his hand to make a save , and helped popularize the technique . Using gloves that were smaller than those of other players , he was among the best puck @-@ catchers of his era . He stood in the way of the puck with minimal padding , risking being struck when moving to catch it instead of simply deflecting it away from the net . His signature technique , very often featured in photographs of him , involved dropping to one knee with the paddle of his <unk> covering the five @-@ hole , and extending his glove to cover the left side of the net . Although he caught the puck with his glove , he did so without gloves resembling the modern blocker and trapper glove combination . Thompson was described by Johnny Bower , a former goaltender who was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame , as a good puckhandler , and one of the best of his time at forward passing . In the 1935 – 36 season , Thompson became the first goaltender to get an assist by intentionally passing the puck with his stick to a fellow player . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Thompson 's points percentage in a season of .875 , recorded in the 1929 – 30 season , still remains a record . His 38 wins during that season was a Boston record that was eclipsed only in the 1982 – 83 season , by Pete Peeters ( who won 40 of 62 games played ) ; since then , no Bruins goaltender has had more than 37 wins in a season . Thompson is the all @-@ time Bruins leader for games , wins , shutouts and goals @-@ against average . Throughout his entire NHL career , Thompson accrued 81 shutouts , which is sixth all @-@ time in NHL history , and was second to only George Hainsworth ( who had 94 ) when Thompson retired . He also posted seven shutouts in the playoffs . He is fifth all @-@ time in goals @-@ against average , allowing on average only 2 @.@ 08 per a 60 @-@ minute span . He led all goaltenders in regular season games played 10 times , and in regular season wins five times . 
 In 1959 , Thompson was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . He died in Calgary on February 9 , 1981 . He was survived by his wife , Edith , and his daughter , Sandra . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
