 Wally Campo as Detective Sergeant Joe Fink / Narrator 
 Jack <unk> as Detective Frank Stoolie 
 Meri Welles as Leonora Clyde ( credited as Merri Welles ) 
 John <unk> as Dr. Phoebus Farb 
 Jack Nicholson as Wilbur Force 
 Dodie Drake as Waitress 
 Charles B. Griffith as Voice of Audrey Junior , <unk> , drunk dental patient , screaming patient , flower shop robber 
 = = Development = = 
 The Little Shop of Horrors was developed when director Roger Corman was given temporary access to sets that had been left standing from a previous film . Corman decided to use the sets in a film made in the last two days before the sets were torn down . 
 Corman initially planned to develop a story involving a private investigator . In the initial version of the story , the character that eventually became Audrey would have been referred to as " Oriole <unk> " . Actress Nancy Kulp was a leading candidate for the part . The characters that eventually became Seymour and Winifred Krelboyne were named " Irish Eye " and " Iris Eye . " Actor Mel Welles was scheduled to play a character named " Draco <unk> " , Jonathan Haze was scheduled to play " Archie Aroma , " and Jack Nicholson would have played a character named " Jocko " . 
 Charles B. Griffith wanted to write a horror @-@ themed comedy film . According to Mel Welles , Corman was not impressed by the box office performance of A Bucket of Blood , and had to be persuaded to direct another comedy . 
 Corman later claimed he was interested because of A Bucket of Blood and said the development process was similar to that of the earlier film , when he and Griffith were inspired by visiting various coffee houses . Corman : 
 We tried a similar approach for The Little Shop of Horrors , dropping in and out of various downtown dives . We ended up at a place where Sally Kellerman ( before she became a star ) was working as a waitress , and as Chuck and I vied with each other , trying to top each other ’ s sardonic or subversive ideas , appealing to Sally as a referee , she sat down at the table with us , and the three of us worked out the rest of the story together . 
 The first screenplay Griffith wrote was <unk> , a Dracula @-@ themed story involving a vampire music critic . After Corman rejected the idea , Griffith says he wrote a screenplay titled Gluttony , in which the protagonist was " a salad chef in a restaurant who would wind up cooking customers and stuff like that , you know ? We couldn ’ t do that though because of the code at the time . So I said , “ How about a man @-@ eating plant ? ” , and Roger said , “ Okay . ” By that time , we were both drunk . " 
 Jackie Joseph later recalled " at first they told me it was a detective movie ; then , while I was flying back [ to make the movie ] , I think they wrote a whole new movie , more in the horror genre . I think over a weekend they rewrote it . " 
 The screenplay was written under the title The Passionate People Eater . Welles stated , " The reason that The Little Shop of Horrors worked is because it was a love project . It was our love project . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was partially cast with stock actors that Corman had used in previous films . Writer Charles B. Griffith portrays several small roles . Griffith 's father appeared as a dental patient , and his grandmother , Myrtle Vail appeared as Seymour 's hypochondriac mother . Dick Miller , who had starred as the protagonist of A Bucket of Blood was offered the role of Seymour , but turned it down , instead taking the smaller role of Burson Fouch . The cast rehearsed for three weeks before filming began . Principal photography of The Little Shop of Horrors was shot in two days and one night . 
 It had been rumored that the film 's shooting schedule was based on a bet that Corman could not complete a film within that time . However , this claim has been denied by Mel Welles . According to Joseph , Corman shot the film quickly in order to beat changing industry rules that would have prevented producers from " buying out " an actor 's performance in perpetuity . On January 1 , 1960 , new rules were to go into effect requiring producers to pay all actors residuals for all future releases of their work . This meant that Corman 's B @-@ movie business model would be permanently changed and he would not be able to produce low @-@ budget movies in the same way . Before these rules went into effect , Corman decided to shoot one last film and scheduled it to happen the last week in December 1959 . 
 Interiors were shot with three cameras in wide , lingering master shots in single takes . Welles states that Corman " had two camera crews on the set — that 's why the picture , from a cinematic standpoint , is really not very well done . The two camera crews were pointed in opposite directions so that we got both angles , and then other shots were ' picked up ' to use in between , to make it flow . It was a pretty fixed set and it was done sort of like a sitcom is done today , so it wasn 't very difficult . " 
 At the time of shooting , Jack Nicholson had appeared in two films , and had worked with Roger Corman as the lead in The Cry Baby Killer . According to Nicholson , " I went in to the shoot knowing I had to be very quirky because Roger originally hadn 't wanted me . In other words , I couldn 't play it straight . So I just did a lot of weird shit that I thought would make it funny . " According to Dick Miller , all of the dialogue between his character and Mel Welles was ad @-@ libbed . During a scene in which writer Charles B. Griffith played a robber , Griffith remembers that " When [ Welles ] and I forgot my lines , I improvised a little , but then I was the writer . I was allowed to . " However , Welles states that " Absolutely none of it was ad @-@ libbed [ ... ] every word in Little Shop was written by Chuck Griffith , and I did ninety @-@ eight pages of dialogue in two days . " 
 According to Nicholson , " we never did shoot the end of the scene . This movie was pre @-@ lit . You 'd go in , plug in the lights , roll the camera , and shoot . We did the take outside the office and went inside the office , plugged in , lit and rolled . Jonathan Haze was up on my chest pulling my teeth out . And in the take , he leaned back and hit the rented dental machinery with the back of his leg and it started to tip over . Roger didn 't even call cut . He leapt onto the set , grabbed the tilting machine , and said ' Next set , that 's a wrap . ' " By 9 am of the first day , Corman was informed by the production manager that he was behind schedule . 
 Exteriors were shot by Griffith and Welles over two successive weekends with $ 279 worth of rented equipment . Griffith and Welles paid a group of children five cents apiece to run out of a subway tunnel . They were also able to persuade winos to appear as extras for ten cents apiece . " The winos would get together , two or three of them , and buy pints of wine for themselves ! We also had a couple of the winos act as <unk> — sort of like production assistants — and put them in charge of the other wino extras . " Griffith and Welles also persuaded a funeral home to donate a hearse and coffin — with a real corpse inside — for the film shoot . Griffith and Welles were able to use the nearby Southern Pacific Transportation Company yard for an entire evening using two bottles of scotch as persuasion . The scene in which a character portrayed by Robert Coogan is run over by a train was accomplished by persuading the railroad crew to back the locomotive away from the actor . The shot was later printed in reverse . Griffith and Welles spent a total of $ 1 @,@ 100 on fifteen minutes worth of exteriors . 
 The film 's musical score , written by cellist Fred Katz , was originally written for A Bucket of Blood . According to Mark Thomas McGee , author of Roger Corman : The Best of the Cheap Acts , each time Katz was called upon to write music for Corman , Katz sold the same score as if it were new music . The score was used in a total of seven films , including The Wasp Woman and Creature from the Haunted Sea . Katz explained that his music for the film was created by a music editor piecing together selections from other soundtracks that he had produced for Corman . 
 Howard R. Cohen learned from Charles B. Griffith that when the film was being edited , " there was a point where two scenes would not cut together . It was just a visual jolt , and it didn 't work . And they needed something to bridge that moment . They found in the editing room a nice shot of the moon , and they cut it in , and it worked . Twenty years go by . I 'm at the studio one day . Chuck comes running up to me , says , ' You 've got to see this ! ' It was a magazine article — eight pages on the symbolism of the moon in Little Shop of Horrors . " According to Corman , the total budget for the production was $ 30 @,@ 000 . Other sources estimate the budget to be between $ 22 @,@ 000 and $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 Corman had initial trouble finding distribution for the film , as some distributors , including American International Pictures , felt that the film would be interpreted as anti @-@ Semitic , citing the characters of Gravis Mushnick and Siddie Shiva . Welles , who is Jewish , stated that he gave his character a Turkish Jewish accent and mannerisms , and that he saw the humor of the film as playful , and felt there was no intent to defame any ethnic group . The film was finally released by Corman 's own production company , The <unk> Inc . , nine months after it had been completed . 
 The film was screened out of competition at the 1960 Cannes Film Festival . Positive word @-@ of @-@ mouth for the film was spread when it was released as part of a double feature preceded by Mario Bava 's Black Sunday . Little Shop of Horrors was re @-@ released the following year in a double feature with The Last Woman on Earth . 
 Because Corman did not believe that The Little Shop of Horrors had much financial prospect after its initial theatrical run , he did not bother to copyright it , resulting in the film falling into the public domain . Because of this , the film is widely available in copies of varying quality . The film was originally screened theatrically in the widescreen aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 85 : 1 , but has largely only been seen in open matte at an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 33 : 1 since its original theatrical release . 
 = = = Critical and audience reception = = = 
 The film 's critical reception was largely favorable , with modern review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes giving the film a " <unk> " score of 91 % . Variety wrote , " The acting is pleasantly preposterous . [ ... ] <unk> and vegetarians will love it . " 
 Jack Nicholson , recounting the reaction to a screening of the film , states that the audience " laughed so hard I could barely hear the dialogue . I didn 't quite register it right . It was as if I had forgotten it was a comedy since the shoot . I got all embarrassed because I 'd never really had such a positive response before . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The film 's popularity slowly grew with local television broadcasts throughout the 1960s and 1970s . 
 Interest in the film was rekindled when a stage musical called Little Shop of Horrors was produced in 1982 . It was based on the original film and was itself adapted to cinema as Little Shop of Horrors , in 1986 . A short @-@ lived animated television series inspired by the musical film , Little Shop , premiered in 1991 . 
 The film was colorized twice , the first time in 1987 . This version was poorly received . The film was colorized again by Legend Films , who released their color version as well as a restored black @-@ and @-@ white version of the film on DVD in 2006 . Legend Films ' colorized version was well received , and was also given a theatrical premiere at the Coney Island Museum on May 27 , 2006 . The DVD included an audio commentary track by comedian Michael J. Nelson of Mystery Science Theater 3000 fame . A DivX file of Legend 's colorized version with the commentary embedded is also available as part of Nelson 's RiffTrax On Demand service . On January 28 , 2009 , a newly recorded commentary by Nelson , Kevin Murphy and Bill Corbett was released by RiffTrax in MP3 and DivX formats . Legend 's colorized version is also available from Amazon Video on Demand , without Nelson 's commentary . 
 In November 2006 , the film was issued by Buena Vista Home Entertainment in a double feature with The Cry Baby Killer ( billed as a Jack Nicholson double feature ) as part of the Roger Corman Classics series . However , the DVD contained only the 1987 colorized version of The Little Shop of Horrors , and not the original black @-@ and @-@ white version . 
 It was announced on April 15 , 2009 that Declan O 'Brien would helm a studio remake of the film . " It won 't be a musical " he told Bloody Disgusting in reference to the Frank Oz film from 1986 . " I don 't want to reveal too much , but it 's me . It 'll be dark . " When speaking with Shock ' Till You Drop , he revealed " I have a take on it you 're not going to expect . I 'm taking it in a different direction , let 's put it that way . " 
 = The Big Lebowski = 
 The Big Lebowski is a 1998 American crime comedy film written , produced , and directed by Joel and Ethan Coen . It stars Jeff Bridges as Jeffrey " The Dude " Lebowski , a Los Angeles slacker and avid bowler . He is assaulted as a result of mistaken identity , after which The Dude learns that a millionaire also named Jeffrey Lebowski was the intended victim . The millionaire Lebowski 's trophy wife is kidnapped , and he commissions The Dude to deliver the ransom to secure her release ; but the plan goes awry when the Dude 's friend Walter Sobchak ( John Goodman ) schemes to keep the ransom money . Julianne Moore and Steve Buscemi also star , with David Huddleston , John Turturro , Philip Seymour Hoffman , Sam Elliott , and Tara Reid appearing in supporting roles . 
 The film is loosely inspired by the work of Raymond Chandler . Joel Coen stated : " We wanted to do a Chandler kind of story – how it moves episodically , and deals with the characters trying to unravel a mystery , as well as having a hopelessly complex plot that 's ultimately unimportant . " The original score was composed by Carter Burwell , a longtime collaborator of the Coen Brothers . 
 The Big Lebowski was a disappointment at the U.S. box office and received mixed reviews at the time of its release . Over time , however , reviews have tended towards the positive , and the film has become a cult favorite , noted for its idiosyncratic characters , dream sequences , unconventional dialogue , and eclectic soundtrack . In 2014 , the Library of Congress added The Big Lebowski to the National Film Registry of films deemed to be of " cultural , historical , or aesthetic significance " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1991 Los Angeles , slacker Jeff " the Dude " Lebowski ( Jeff Bridges ) is assaulted in his home by two hired goons ( Mark Pellegrino and Philip Moon ) who demand money that the wife of a Jeffrey Lebowski owes to a man named Jackie Treehorn ( Ben Gazzara ) . The two soon realize they have attacked the wrong Jeffrey Lebowski and leave , but not before one of them urinates on the Dude 's rug . 
 The Dude meets his bowling friends , the timid Donny ( Steve Buscemi ) and the temperamental Vietnam veteran Walter Sobchak ( John Goodman ) . Encouraged by Walter , the Dude approaches the other Jeffrey Lebowski ( David Huddleston ) , the eponymous " Big Lebowski " , a cantankerous elderly wheelchair @-@ bound millionaire , to seek compensation for his ruined rug . Though his request is promptly refused , he craftily steals one of Lebowski 's rugs by telling Brandt ( Philip Seymour Hoffman ) , Lebowski 's sycophantic assistant , that his boss told him to take any rug in the house . The Dude subsequently meets Bunny ( Tara Reid ) , Lebowski 's young <unk> trophy wife . 
 Days later , Lebowski contacts the Dude stating that Bunny has been kidnapped . Lebowski wants the Dude to deliver a briefcase containing a million dollar ransom and see if he can recognize the culprits . Later , a different pair of thugs appear in the Dude 's apartment , knock him unconscious , and take Lebowski 's rug . When Bunny 's kidnappers call to arrange delivery of the ransom , Walter suggests they give the kidnappers a ringer instead , namely a briefcase filled with dirty underwear laundry . The kidnappers grab the ringer and leave . Later that night , the Dude 's car is stolen , with the real ransom briefcase still inside . 
 Jeffrey Lebowski 's daughter Maude ( Julianne Moore ) contacts the Dude and reveals she took the rug , explaining that Bunny is one of Jackie Treehorn 's porn stars . She reckons that Bunny " kidnapped " herself and asks the Dude to recover the ransom which Lebowski illegally withdrew from the family 's foundation . Lebowski is angry that the Dude failed to deliver the ransom and shows him a severed green @-@ painted toe , allegedly belonging to Bunny , delivered by the kidnappers . Later , a gang of German nihilists ( Peter Stormare , Torsten <unk> , and Flea ) invade the Dude 's apartment and threaten him , identifying themselves as the kidnappers . Maude says the German nihilists are actually Bunny 's friends . 
 The Dude is forcibly brought before Treehorn , who asks about the whereabouts of Bunny and says he wants the money she owes him . He drugs the Dude 's White Russian cocktail , leading to an unconscious dream sequence involving Maude and bowling . The Dude comes to in police custody , where he is verbally and physically assaulted by the Malibu police chief . During the cab ride home , the Dude gets thrown out after he asks the cab driver to simply change the radio station . A red sports car zooms past and the viewer sees that Bunny is driving , with all her toes intact . 
 The Dude finds his bungalow completely trashed and is greeted by Maude , who seduces him . He figures that Treehorn drugged him so that his goons could look for the ransom money at the Dude 's home . After Maude has sex with him , she says she hopes to conceive a child ; the Dude is about to protest the idea of being a father but Maude tells him that he doesn 't have to have a hand in the child 's upbringing . Maude also explains that her father has no money : her mother was the wealthy one and she left her money exclusively to the family charity . The Dude later tells Walter that he now understands the whole story : when Lebowski — who apparently hated his wife — heard that Bunny was kidnapped , he withdrew money from the foundation , kept it for himself , and gave the Dude a briefcase without any money in it , saying that it contained a million dollar ransom . The kidnapping was also a ruse : when Bunny took an unannounced trip , her friends — the nihilists — purported a kidnapping to be able to extort money from Lebowski . They confront the Big Lebowski , who refuses to admit responsibility , but is thrown out of his wheelchair by Walter , who believes that he 's faking his paralyses . 
 The affair apparently over , the Dude and his bowling teammates return to the bowling alley . When they leave , they are confronted in the parking lot by the nihilists who have set the Dude 's car on fire . They once again demand the ransom money . After hearing what the Dude and Walter know , the nihilists try to mug them anyway . Walter violently overcomes all three , biting the ear off one of them . However , in the excitement , Donny suffers a fatal heart attack . 
 Walter and the Dude go to the beach to scatter Donny 's ashes . Walter turns an informal eulogy into a tribute to the Vietnam War . After accidentally covering the Dude with Donny 's ashes , and after a brief argument , Walter hugs him and says , " Come on , Dude . Fuck it , man . Let 's go bowling . " At the bowling alley , the story 's narrator ( Sam Elliott ) tells the viewer that Maude is pregnant with a " little Lebowski " and expresses his hope that the Dude and Walter will win the bowling tournament . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jeff Bridges as Jeffrey " The Dude " Lebowski , a bachelor slacker living in Venice , a beach neighborhood of Los Angeles . The film 's protagonist , he enjoys his living room rug , marijuana , White Russians , and bowling . His favorite band is Creedence Clearwater Revival and he dislikes The Eagles . Bridges had heard or was told by the Coen brothers that they had written a screenplay for him . 
 John Goodman as Walter Sobchak , a Vietnam veteran , the Dude 's best friend , and bowling teammate . Walter places the rules of bowling second in reverence only to the rules of his adopted religion , Judaism , as evidenced by his strict stance against " rolling " on Shabbos . He has a violent temper , and is given to pulling out a handgun ( or crowbar ) in order to settle disputes . He is a conspiracy theorist , stating that the Gulf War was all about oil and claims to have " dabbled " in pacifism . He constantly references Vietnam in conversations , much to the annoyance of the Dude . Walter was based , in part , on screenwriter and director John Milius . 
 Steve Buscemi as Theodore Donald " Donny " <unk> , a member of Walter and the Dude 's bowling team . Naïve and good @-@ natured , Donny is an avid bowler and frequently interrupts Walter 's diatribes to inquire about the parts of the story he missed or did not understand , provoking Walter 's frequently repeated response , " Shut the fuck up , Donny ! " This line is also a reference to Fargo , the Coen brothers ' previous film , in which Buscemi 's character was constantly talking . 
 David Huddleston as Jeffrey Lebowski , the " Big " Lebowski of the movie 's title , is a wheelchair @-@ bound ( he lost the use of his legs in the Korean War ) apparent multi @-@ millionaire who is married to Bunny and is Maude 's father by his late wife . The film 's primary antagonist , he refers to the Dude dismissively as " a bum " and a " deadbeat " in the perspective of referencing the hippie lifestyle , and is obsessed with " achievement " . Although he characterizes himself as highly successful and accomplished , it is revealed by Maude that he is simply " allowed " to run some of the philanthropic efforts of her mother ’ s estate , and that he actually does not have money of his own . 
 Julianne Moore as Maude Lebowski , an avant @-@ garde artist and feminist , whose work " has been commended as being strongly vaginal " . Though fond of her mother — she took back the Dude 's replacement rug due to it being a maternal family heirloom — her pursuits and lifestyle lead to a falling out with her conservative father . She may have introduced Bunny to Uli Kunkel . She helps the Dude along with his quest of finding Big Lebowski 's missing money for the sake of her mother 's estate , and in the end , beds the Dude solely to conceive a child , and wants nothing else to do with him . She is straightforward in manner , and has a very precise style of speaking . 
 Tara Reid as Bunny Lebowski , the Big Lebowski 's young gold digging " trophy wife " . Born Fawn Knutson ( correctly pronounced " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ) , she started as an attractive high school cheerleader and ran away from the family farm outside Moorhead , Minnesota to find stardom and riches in Los Angeles . She soon found herself making pornographic videos under the name " Bunny La Joya " , and eventually led to her marriage with the Big Lebowski . According to Reid , Charlize Theron tried out for the role . 
 Philip Seymour Hoffman as Brandt , the Big Lebowski 's personal assistant , who plays mediator between the two <unk> . 
 Sam Elliott as The Stranger , an old @-@ time cowboy , who is also the narrator , and who sees the story unfold from a third @-@ party perspective . He has a thick , laid @-@ back Texas accent . Towards the end of the film he is seen in the bar of the bowling alley , enjoys " a good sarsaparilla , " and converses directly with the Dude on two occasions . He expresses disapproval of The Dude 's use of profanity and his laziness , and adds the qualifier " parts of it anyway " when speaking to the camera commenting that he enjoyed the story . 
 Ben Gazzara as Jackie Treehorn , a wealthy pornographer and loan shark , who lives in Malibu , and employs the two thugs who assault the Dude at the beginning of the film . Bunny owes him a large sum of money . He states his disappointment of how the nature of the porno enterprise market has fallen from erotic romantic buildups and " the brain " to purely raunchy sexual material . The Dude describes him as a man who treats objects like women . 
 Peter Stormare , Torsten <unk> , and Flea play a group of nihilists ( Uli Kunkel , Franz , and Kieffer , respectively ) . They are German musicians ( Kunkel , as " Karl <unk> " , appeared in a porn film with Bunny ) , who , along with Kunkel 's girlfriend ( Aimee Mann ) , pretend to be the ones who kidnapped Bunny . The character of Uli originated on the set of Fargo between Ethan Coen and Stormare , who often spoke in a mock German accent . 
 John Turturro as Jesus Quintana , an opponent of the Dude 's team in the bowling league semifinals . A Latin American North Hollywood resident who speaks with a thick Cuban American accent , and often refers to himself in the third person as " the Jesus " , using the English pronunciation of the name rather than the Spanish . According to Walter , he is a " pederast " who did six months in Chino for exposing himself to an 8 @-@ year @-@ old . Turturro originally thought he was going to have a bigger role in the film ; when he read the script , he realized the part was quite small . However , the Coen brothers let him come up with a lot of his own ideas for the character , like shining the bowling ball and the scene where he dances backwards , which he says was inspired by Muhammad Ali . 
 = = = Minor characters = = = 
 Jon Polito as Da Fino , a private investigator hired by Bunny 's parents , the <unk> , to entice their daughter back home . He mistakes the Dude for a " brother Shamus " . 
 David Thewlis as Knox Harrington , the video artist 
 Mark Pellegrino as Treehorn 's blond thug 
 Philip Moon as Woo , the rug @-@ peeing " Chinaman " 
 Jimmie Dale Gilmore as Smokey 
 Jack <unk> as Marty , the Dude 's landlord 
 Leon Russom as Kohl , Malibu police chief 
 Dom <unk> as Tony the chauffeur 
 Asia Carrera ( uncredited ) as the actress who co @-@ starred with Bunny in the pornographic film <unk> 
 Barry Asher ( uncredited ) as the bowler in the final scene . ( He was also the bowling consultant for the film . ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The Dude is mostly inspired by Jeff Dowd , a man the Coen brothers met while they were trying to find distribution for their first feature , Blood Simple . Dowd had been a member of the Seattle Seven , liked to drink White Russians , and was known as " The Dude " . The Dude was also partly based on a friend of the Coen brothers , Peter Exline ( now a member of the faculty at USC 's School of Cinematic Arts ) , a Vietnam War veteran who reportedly lived in a dump of an apartment and was proud of a little rug that " tied the room together " . Exline knew Barry Sonnenfeld from New York University and Sonnenfeld introduced Exline to the Coen brothers while they were trying to raise money for Blood Simple . Exline became friends with the Coens and in 1989 , told them all kinds of stories from his own life , including ones about his actor @-@ writer friend Lewis Abernathy ( one of the inspirations for Walter ) , a fellow Vietnam vet who later became a private investigator and helped him track down and confront a high school kid who stole his car . As in the film , Exline 's car was impounded by the Los Angeles Police Department and Abernathy found an 8th grader 's homework under the passenger seat . Exline also belonged to an amateur softball league but the Coens changed it to bowling in the film , because " it 's a very social sport where you can sit around and drink and smoke while engaging in inane conversation " . The Coens met filmmaker John Milius , when they were in Los Angeles making Barton Fink and incorporated his love of guns and the military into the character of Walter . John Milius introduced the Coen Brothers to one of his best friends , Jim <unk> , who would have been another source of inferences to create Jeff Bridges ' character . Also known as the Dude , <unk> and his gang , typical Malibu surfers , served as inspiration as well for Milius 's film The Big Wednesday . 
 According to Julianne Moore , the character of Maude was based on artist <unk> Schneemann " who worked naked from a swing " and on Yoko Ono . The character of Jesus Quintana was inspired , in part , by a performance the Coens had seen John Turturro give in 1988 , at the Public Theater in a play called Mi <unk> Vida in which he played a pederast @-@ type character , " so we thought , let 's make Turturro a pederast . It 'll be something he can really run with , " Joel said in an interview . 
 The film 's overall structure was influenced by the detective fiction of Raymond Chandler . Ethan said , " We wanted something that would generate a certain narrative feeling – like a modern Raymond Chandler story , and that 's why it had to be set in Los Angeles ... We wanted to have a narrative flow , a story that moves like a Chandler book through different parts of town and different social classes " . The use of the Stranger 's voice @-@ over also came from Chandler as Joel remarked , " He is a little bit of an audience substitute . In the movie adaptation of Chandler it 's the main character that speaks off @-@ screen , but we didn 't want to reproduce that though it obviously has echoes . It 's as if someone was commenting on the plot from an all @-@ seeing point of view . And at the same time rediscovering the old earthiness of a Mark Twain . " 
 The significance of the bowling culture was , according to Joel , " important in reflecting that period at the end of the fifties and the beginning of the sixties . That suited the retro side of the movie , slightly anachronistic , which sent us back to a not @-@ so @-@ far @-@ away era , but one that was well and truly gone nevertheless . " 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 The Big Lebowski was written around the same time as Barton Fink . When the Coen brothers wanted to make it , John Goodman was filming episodes for the Roseanne television program and Jeff Bridges was making the Walter Hill film Wild Bill . The Coens decided to make Fargo in the meantime . According to Ethan , " the movie was conceived as pivoting around that relationship between the Dude and Walter " , which sprang from the scenes between Barton Fink and Charlie Meadows in Barton Fink . They also came up with the idea of setting the film in contemporary L.A. , because the people who inspired the story lived in the area . When Pete Exline told them about the homework in a <unk> incident , the Coens thought that that was very Raymond Chandler and decided to integrate elements of the author 's fiction into their script . Joel Coen cites Robert Altman 's The Long Goodbye as a primary influence on their film , in the sense that The Big Lebowski " is just kind of informed by Chandler around the edges " . When they started writing the script , the Coens wrote only 40 pages and then let it sit for a while before finishing it . This is a normal writing process for them , because they often " encounter a problem at a certain stage , we pass to another project , then we come back to the first script . That way we 've already accumulated pieces for several future movies . " In order to liven up a scene that they thought was too heavy on exposition , they added an " effete art @-@ world hanger @-@ on " , known as Knox Harrington , late in the screenwriting process . In the original script , the Dude 's car was a Chrysler LeBaron , as Dowd had once owned , but that car was not big enough to fit John Goodman so the Coens changed it to a Ford Torino . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 PolyGram and Working Title Films , who had funded Fargo , backed The Big Lebowski with a budget of $ 15 million . In casting the film , Joel remarked , " we tend to write both for people we know and have worked with , and some parts without knowing who 's going to play the role . In The Big Lebowski we did write for John [ Goodman ] and Steve [ Buscemi ] , but we didn 't know who was getting the Jeff Bridges role . " In preparation for his role , Bridges met Dowd but actually " drew on myself a lot from back in the Sixties and Seventies . I lived in a little place like that and did drugs , although I think I was a little more creative than the Dude . " The actor went into his own closet with the film 's wardrobe person and picked out clothes that he had thought the Dude might wear . He wore his character 's clothes home because most of them were his own . The actor also adopted the same physicality as Dowd , including the slouching and his ample belly . Originally , Goodman wanted a different kind of beard for Walter but the Coen brothers insisted on the " Gladiator " or what they called the " Chin Strap " and he thought it would go well with his flattop haircut . 
 For the film 's look , the Coens wanted to avoid the usual retro 1960s clichés like lava lamps , Day @-@ Glo posters , and Grateful Dead music and for it to be " consistent with the whole bowling thing , we wanted to keep the movie pretty bright and poppy " , Joel said in an interview . For example , the star motif featured predominantly throughout the film , started with the film 's production designer Richard Heinrichs ' design for the bowling alley . According to Joel , he " came up with the idea of just laying free @-@ form neon stars on top of it and doing a similar free @-@ form star thing on the interior " . This carried over to the film 's dream sequences . " Both dream sequences involve star patterns and are about lines radiating to a point . In the first dream sequence , the Dude gets knocked out and you see stars and they all coalesce into the overhead <unk> of L.A. The second dream sequence is an astral environment with a backdrop of stars " , remembers Heinrichs . For Jackie Treehorn 's Malibu beach house , he was inspired by late 1950s and early 1960s bachelor pad furniture . The Coen brothers told Heinrichs that they wanted Treehorn 's beach party to be Inca @-@ themed , with a " very Hollywood @-@ looking party in which young , oiled @-@ down , fairly aggressive men walk around with appetizers and drinks . So there 's a very sacrificial quality to it . " 
 Cinematographer Roger Deakins discussed the look of the film with the Coens during pre @-@ production . They told him that they wanted some parts of the film to have a real and contemporary feeling and other parts , like the dream sequences , to have a very stylized look . Bill and Jacqui Landrum did all of the choreography for the film . For his dance sequence , Jack <unk> went through three three @-@ hour rehearsals . The Coen brothers offered him three to four choices of classical music for him to pick from and he chose Modest Mussorgsky 's Pictures at an Exhibition . At each rehearsal , he went through each phase of the piece . 
 = = = Principal photography = = = 
 Actual filming took place over an eleven @-@ week period with location shooting in and around Los Angeles , including all of the bowling sequences at the Hollywood Star Lanes ( for three weeks ) and the Dude 's Busby Berkeley dream sequences in a converted airplane hangar . According to Joel , the only time they ever directed Bridges " was when he would come over at the beginning of each scene and ask , ' Do you think the Dude burned one on the way over ? ' I 'd reply ' Yes ' usually , so Jeff would go over in the corner and start rubbing his eyes to get them bloodshot . " Julianne Moore was sent the script while working on The Lost World : Jurassic Park . She worked only two weeks on the film , early and late during the production that went from January to April 1997 while Sam Elliott was only on set for two days and did many takes of his final speech . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 The scenes in Jackie Treehorn 's house were shot in the <unk> Goldstein Residence , designed by John Lautner and built in 1963 in the Hollywood Hills . 
 Deakins described the look of the fantasy scenes as being very crisp , monochromatic , and highly lit in order to afford greater depth of focus . However , with the Dude 's apartment , Deakins said , " it 's kind of seedy and the light 's pretty nasty " with a grittier look . The visual bridge between these two different looks was how he photographed the night scenes . Instead of adopting the usual blue moonlight or blue street lamp look , he used an orange sodium @-@ light effect . The Coen brothers shot a lot of the film with wide @-@ angle lens because , according to Joel , it made it easier to hold focus for a greater depth and it made camera movements more dynamic . 
 To achieve the point @-@ of @-@ view of a rolling bowling ball the Coen brothers mounted a camera " on something like a barbecue spit " , according to Ethan , and then <unk> it along the lane . The challenge for them was figuring out the relative speeds of the forward motion and the rotating motion . CGI was used to create the vantage point of the thumb hole in the bowling ball . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The original score was composed by Carter Burwell , a veteran of all the Coen Brothers ' films . While the Coens were writing the screenplay they had Kenny Rogers ' " Just Dropped In ( to See What Condition My Condition Was in ) " , the Gipsy Kings ' cover of " Hotel California " , and several Creedence Clearwater Revival songs in mind . They asked T @-@ Bone Burnett ( who would later work with the Coens on O Brother , Where Art Thou ? and Inside Llewyn Davis ) to pick songs for the soundtrack of the film . They knew that they wanted different genres of music from different times but , as Joel remembers , " T @-@ Bone even came up with some far @-@ out Henry Mancini and Yma Sumac . " Burnett was able to secure the rights to the songs by Kenny Rogers and the Gipsy Kings and also added tracks by Captain Beefheart , Moondog and the rights to a relatively obscure Bob Dylan song called " The Man in Me " . However , he had a tough time securing the rights to Townes Van Zandt 's cover of the Rolling Stones ' " Dead Flowers " , which plays over the film 's closing credits . Former Stones manager Allen Klein owned the rights to the song and wanted $ 150 @,@ 000 for it . Burnett convinced Klein to watch an early cut of the film and remembers , " It got to the part where the Dude says , ' I hate the fuckin ' Eagles , man ! ' Klein stands up and says , ' That 's it , you can have the song ! ' That was beautiful . " Burnett was going to be credited on the film as " Music Supervisor " , but asked his credit to be " Music Archivist " because he " hated the notion of being a supervisor ; I wouldn 't want anyone to think of me as management " . 
 For Joel , " the original music , as with other elements of the movie , had to echo the retro sounds of the Sixties and early Seventies " . Music defines each character . For example , " Tumbling <unk> " by Bob Nolan was chosen for the Stranger at the time the Coens wrote the screenplay , as was " <unk> " by Henry Mancini for Jackie Treehorn . " The German nihilists are accompanied by techno @-@ pop and Jeff Bridges by Creedence . So there 's a musical signature for each of them " , remarked Ethan in an interview . The character Uli Kunkel was in the German electronic band Autobahn , a homage to the band Kraftwerk . The album cover of their record <unk> ( bed of nails ) is a parody of the Kraftwerk album cover for The Man @-@ Machine and the group name Autobahn shares the name of a Kraftwerk song and album . In the lyrics the phrase " We believe in nothing " is repeated with electronic distortion . This is a reference to Autobahn 's nihilism in the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Big Lebowski received its world premiere at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival on January 18 , 1998 at the 1 @,@ 300 @-@ capacity Eccles Theater . It was also screened at the 48th Berlin International Film Festival before opening in North America on March 6 , 1998 in 1 @,@ 207 theaters . It grossed USD $ 5 @.@ 5 million on its opening weekend , grossing US $ 17 million in the United States , just above its US $ 15 million budget . The film 's worldwide gross outside of the US was $ 28 million , bringing its worldwide gross to $ 46 @,@ 189 @,@ 568 . 
 Many critics and audiences have likened the film to a modern Western , while many others dispute this , or liken it to a crime novel that revolves around mistaken identity plot devices . Peter Howell , in his review for the Toronto Star , wrote : " It 's hard to believe that this is the work of a team that won an Oscar last year for the original screenplay of Fargo . There 's a large amount of profanity in the movie , which seems a weak attempt to paper over dialogue gaps . " Howell revised his opinion in a later review , and more recently stated that " it may just be my favourite Coen Bros. film . " 
 Todd McCarthy in Variety magazine wrote : " One of the film 's indisputable triumphs is its soundtrack , which mixes Carter Burwell 's original score with classic pop tunes and some fabulous covers . " USA Today gave the film three out of four stars and felt that the Dude was " too passive a hero to sustain interest " , but that there was " enough startling brilliance here to suggest that , just like the Dude , those <unk> @-@ pants Coens will abide " . 
 In his review for the Washington Post , Desson Howe praised the Coens and " their inspired , absurdist taste for weird , peculiar Americana – but a sort of neo @-@ Americana that is entirely invented – the Coens have defined and mastered their own bizarre subgenre . No one does it like them and , it almost goes without saying , no one does it better . " 
 Janet Maslin praised Bridges ' performance in her review for The New York Times : " Mr. Bridges finds a role so right for him that he seems never to have been anywhere else . Watch this performance to see shambling executed with nonchalant grace and a seemingly out @-@ to @-@ lunch character played with fine comic flair . " Andrew Sarris , in his review for the New York Observer , wrote : " The result is a lot of laughs and a feeling of awe toward the craftsmanship involved . I doubt that there 'll be anything else like it the rest of this year . " In a five star review for Empire Magazine , Ian Nathan wrote : " For those who delight in the Coens ' divinely abstract take on reality , this is pure nirvana " and " In a perfect world all movies would be made by the Coen brothers . " Roger Ebert gave the film three stars out of four , describing it as " weirdly engaging " . In a 2010 review , Ebert gave The Big Lebowski four stars out of four and added the film to his " Great Movies " list . 
 However , Jonathan Rosenbaum wrote in the Chicago Reader : " To be sure , The Big Lebowski is packed with show @-@ offy filmmaking and as a result is pretty entertaining . But insofar as it represents a moral position – and the Coens ' relative styling of their figures invariably does – it 's an elitist one , elevating salt @-@ of @-@ the @-@ earth types like Bridges and Goodman ... over everyone else in the movie . " Dave Kehr , in his review for the Daily News , criticized the film 's premise as a " tired idea , and it produces an episodic , unstrung film " . The Guardian criticized the film as " a bunch of ideas shoveled into a bag and allowed to spill out at random . The film is infuriating , and will win no prizes . But it does have some terrific jokes . " 
 The Big Lebowski currently holds an approval rating of 81 % on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 88 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Typically stunning visuals and sharp dialogue from the Coen Brothers , brought to life with strong performances from Goodman and Bridges . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its original release , The Big Lebowski has become a cult classic . Ardent fans of the film call themselves " achievers " . Steve <unk> wrote about the film 's emerging cult status in July 2002 . He first realized that the film had a cult following when he attended a midnight screening in 2000 at the New Beverly Cinema in Los Angeles and witnessed people quoting dialogue from the film to each other . Soon after the article appeared , the programmer for a local midnight film series in Santa Cruz decided to screen The Big Lebowski and on the first weekend they had to turn away several hundred people . The theater held the film over for six weeks , which had never happened before . 
 An annual festival , Lebowski Fest , began in Louisville , Kentucky , United States in 2002 with 150 fans showing up , and has since expanded to several other cities . The festival 's main event each year is a night of unlimited bowling with various contests including costume , trivia , <unk> and farthest @-@ traveled contests . Held over a weekend , events typically include a pre @-@ fest party with bands the night before the bowling event as well as a day @-@ long outdoor party with bands , vendor booths and games . Various celebrities from the film have even attended some of the events , including Jeff Bridges who attended the Los Angeles event . The British equivalent , inspired by Lebowski Fest , is known as The Dude Abides and is held in London . 
 <unk> , a religion devoted largely to spreading the philosophy and lifestyle of the film 's main character , was founded in 2005 . Also known as The Church of the Latter @-@ Day Dude , the organization has ordained over 220 @,@ 000 " <unk> Priests " all over the world via its website . 
 Two species of African spider are named after the film and main character : Anelosimus <unk> and Anelosimus dude , both described in 2006 . Additionally , an extinct Permian conifer genus is named after the film in honor of its creators . The first species described within this genus in 2007 is based on 270 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old plant fossils from Texas , and is called <unk> grandifolia . 
 Entertainment Weekly ranked it 8th on their Funniest Movies of the Past 25 Years list . The film was also ranked No. 34 on their list of " The Top 50 Cult Films " and ranked No. 15 on the magazine 's " The Cult 25 : The Essential Left @-@ Field Movie Hits Since ' 83 " list . In addition , the magazine also ranked The Dude No. 14 in their " The 100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years " poll . The film was also nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Film Critics Association . The Big Lebowski was voted as the 10th best film set in Los Angeles in the last 25 years by a group of Los Angeles Times writers and editors with two criteria : " The movie had to communicate some inherent truth about the L.A. experience , and only one film per director was allowed on the list . " Empire magazine ranked Walter Sobchak No. 49 and the Dude No. 7 in their " The 100 Greatest Movie Characters " poll . Roger Ebert added The Big Lebowski to his list of " Great Movies " in March 2010 . 
 John Turturro has suggested a number of times that he would be interested in doing a spin @-@ off film using his character Jesus Quintana . If the project got off the ground , the Coens would not direct it but may have a part in writing it . 
 = = = Use as social and political analysis = = = 
 The film has been used as a tool for analysis on a number of issues . In September 2008 , Slate published an article which interpreted The Big Lebowski as a political critique . The center piece of this viewpoint was that Walter Sobchak is " a <unk> " , citing the film 's references to then President George H. W. Bush and the first Gulf War . 
 A journal article by Brian Wall , published in the feminist journal Camera Obscura uses the film to explain Karl Marx 's commodity fetishism and the feminist consequences of sexual fetishism . 
 It has been used as a <unk> critique of society , as an analysis on war and ethics , as a narrative on mass communication and US militarism and other issues . 
 = = Home media = = 
 Universal Studios Home Entertainment released a " Collector 's Edition " DVD on October 18 , 2005 with extra features that included an " introduction by Mortimer Young " , " Jeff Bridges ' Photography " , " Making of The Big Lebowski " , and " Production Notes " . In addition , a limited @-@ edition " Achiever 's Edition Gift Set " also included The Big Lebowski Bowling <unk> Towel , four Collectible Coasters that included photographs and quotable lines from the film , and eight Exclusive Photo Cards from Jeff Bridges ' personal collection . 
 A " 10th Anniversary Edition " was released on September 9 , 2008 and features all of the extras from the " Collector 's Edition " and " The Dude 's Life : Strikes and <unk> ... Ups and Downs ... The Dude Abides " theatrical trailer ( from the first DVD release ) , " The Lebowski Fest : An Achiever 's Story " , " Flying Carpets and Bowling Pin Dreams : The Dream Sequences of the Dude " , " Interactive Map " , " Jeff Bridges Photo Book " , and a " Photo Gallery " . There are both a standard release and a Limited Edition which features " Bowling Ball Packaging " and is individually numbered . 
 A high @-@ definition version of The Big Lebowski was released by Universal on HD DVD format on June 26 , 2007 . The film was released in Blu @-@ ray format in Italy by <unk> Gori . 
 On August 16 , 2011 , Universal Pictures released The Big Lebowski on Blu @-@ ray . The limited @-@ edition package includes a Jeff Bridges photo book , a ten @-@ years @-@ on retrospective , and an in @-@ depth look at the annual Lebowski Fest . The film is also available in the Blu @-@ ray Coen Brothers box set released in the UK , however this version is region free and will work in any Blu @-@ ray player . 
 = Natchez revolt = 
 The Natchez revolt , or the Natchez Massacre , was an attack by the Natchez people on French colonists near present @-@ day Natchez , Mississippi , on November 29 , 1729 . The Natchez and French had lived alongside each other in the Louisiana colony for more than a decade prior to the incident , mostly conducting peaceful trade and occasionally intermarrying . After a period of deteriorating relations , however , Natchez leaders were provoked to revolt when the French colonial commandant , Sieur de Chépart , demanded land from a Natchez village for his own plantation near Fort Rosalie . They plotted their attack over several days and managed to conceal their plans from most of the French ; those who overheard and warned Chépart of an attack were considered untruthful and were punished . In a coordinated attack on the fort and the homesteads , the Natchez killed almost all of the Frenchmen , while sparing most of the women and African slaves . Approximately 230 colonists were killed overall , and the fort and homes were burned to the ground . 
 When the French in New Orleans , the colonial capital , heard the news of the massacre , they feared a general Indian uprising and were concerned that the Natchez might have conspired with other tribes . They first responded by ordering a massacre of the <unk> people , who had no relation to the Natchez revolt , wiping out their entire village . The French and their Choctaw allies then retaliated against the Natchez villages , capturing hundreds of Natchez and selling them into slavery , although many managed to escape to the north and take refuge among the Chickasaw people . The Natchez waged low @-@ intensity warfare against the French over the following years , but retaliatory expeditions against Natchez refugees among the Chickasaw in 1730 and 1731 forced them to move on and live as refugees among the Creek and Cherokee tribes . By 1736 the Natchez had ceased to exist as an independent people . 
 The attack on Fort Rosalie destroyed some of the Louisiana colony 's most productive farms and endangered shipments of food and trade goods on the Mississippi River . As a result , the French state returned control of Louisiana from the French West India Company to the crown in 1731 , as the company had been having trouble running the colony . Louisiana governor Étienne Périer was held responsible for the massacre and its aftermath , and he was recalled to France in 1732 . 
 = = Background = = 
 While descending the Mississippi River in 1682 , Robert de La Salle became the first Frenchman to encounter the Natchez and declared them an ally . The Natchez were sedentary and lived in nine semi @-@ autonomous villages ; the French considered them the most civilized tribe of the region . By 1700 the Natchez ' numbers had been reduced to about 3 @,@ 500 by the diseases that ravaged indigenous populations in the wake of contact with Europeans , and by 1720 further epidemics had halved that population . Their society was strictly divided into a noble class called " the Suns " ( Natchez : <unk> ) and a commoner class called in French " the <unk> " ( Natchez : <unk> ) . Between 1699 and 1702 , the Natchez received the explorer Pierre Le Moyne d 'Iberville in peace and allowed a French missionary to settle among them . At this time , the Natchez were at war with the Chickasaw people , who had received guns from their English allies , and the Natchez expected to benefit similarly from their relation with the French . Nonetheless , the British presence in the territory led the Natchez to split into pro @-@ British and pro @-@ French factions . The central village , called Natchez or the Grand Village , was led by the paramount chief Great Sun ( Natchez : <unk> <unk> ) and the war chief Tattooed Serpent ( Serpent Piqué in the French sources , Natchez <unk> ) , both of whom were interested in pursuing an alliance with the French . 
 = = = First , Second and Third Natchez Wars = = = 
 The first conflict between the French and the Natchez took place in 1716 , when the Governor of Louisiana , Antoine <unk> de La <unk> , sieur de Cadillac , passed through Natchez territory and neglected to renew the alliance with the Natchez by smoking the peace calumet . The Natchez reacted to this slight by killing four French traders . Cadillac sent his lieutenant Jean @-@ Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville to punish the Natchez . He deceived the Natchez leaders by inviting them to attend a parley , where he ambushed and captured them , and forced the Natchez to exchange their leaders for the culprits who had attacked the French . A number of random Natchez from the pro @-@ British villages were executed . This caused French – Natchez relations to further deteriorate . As part of the terms of the peace accord following this First Natchez War , the Natchez promised to supply labor and materials for the construction of a fort for the French . The fort was named Fort Rosalie , and it was aimed at protecting the French trade monopoly in the region from British incursions . 
 By 1717 , French colonists had established the fort and a trading post at Natchez , Mississippi . They also granted numerous concessions for large plantations , as well as smaller farms , on land acquired from the Natchez . Relations between Natchez and colonists were generally friendly — some Frenchmen even married and had children with Natchez women — but there were tensions . There were reports of colonists abusing Natchez , forcing them to provide labor or goods , and as more colonists arrived , their concessions gradually encroached on Natchez lands . 
 From 1722 to 1724 , brief armed conflicts between the Natchez and French were settled through negotiations between Louisiana governor Bienville and Natchez war chief Tattooed Serpent . In 1723 , Bienville had been informed that some Natchez had harassed villagers , and he razed the Natchez village of White Apple and enslaved several villagers , only to discover that the alleged harassment had been faked by the colonists to frame the Natchez . One of the later skirmishes in 1724 consisted of the murder of a Natchez chief 's son by a colonist , to which the Natchez responded by killing another Frenchman named <unk> . Bienville then sent French soldiers from New Orleans to attack the Natchez at their fields and settlements , and the Natchez surrendered . Their plea for peace was met following the execution of one of their chiefs by the French . 
 Chronicler Le Page du Pratz , who lived among the Natchez and was a close friend of Tattooed Serpent , records that he once asked his friend why the Natchez were resentful towards the French . Tattooed Serpent answered that the French seemed to have " two hearts , a good one today , and tomorrow a bad one " , and proceeded to tell how Natchez life had been better before the French arrived . He finished by saying , " Before the arrival of the French we lived like men who can be satisfied with what they have , whereas today we live like slaves , who are not suffered to do as they please . " The most faithful ally of the French , Tattooed Serpent died in 1725 , another blow to the relations between the Natchez and the colonists . 
 According to archaeologist Karl Lorenz , who excavated several Natchez settlements , another factor that complicated relations between the Natchez and the colonists was the fact that the French did not well understand the Natchez political structure . The French assumed that the Great Sun , the chief of the Grand Village , also held sway over all the other Natchez villages . In truth , each village was semi @-@ autonomous , and the Great Sun 's power only extended to the villages of Flour and <unk> ( with which the Grand Village was allied ) and not to the three pro @-@ British villages of White Apple , <unk> and <unk> . When the Great Sun died in 1728 and was succeeded by his inexperienced nephew , the pro @-@ British villages became more powerful than the pro @-@ French villages centered at Natchez . 
 = = = Commandant Chépart = = = 
 In 1728 , Sieur de Chépart ( also known as <unk> and <unk> ) , whom Governor Étienne Périer had recently appointed as commandant of Fort Rosalie , was brought to New Orleans and put on trial before the governor for abuse of power , specifically behavior toward the Natchez that was unpopular among the French . Chépart was saved from punishment , however , by " the interference of influential friends " , and upon returning to the fort , he continued to administer it as he had before . Chépart told the Natchez that November that he wished to seize land for a plantation in the center of White Apple , where the Natchez had a temple of their people 's graves . Governor Périer sided with Chépart and planted a cross on the land he sought . By this point , most of the colonists disapproved of Chépart 's actions , including Jean @-@ François @-@ Benjamin Dumont de Montigny , a French historian who wrote that Chépart 's demand marked the first time that a French colonial leader had simply claimed Natchez land as his own , without prior negotiations . 
 When the Natchez began to protest the seizure of their land for the plantation , Chépart said he would burn down the temple that contained their ancestors ' graves . In response to this threat , the Natchez seemed to promise to cede the land , wrote Dumont de Montigny , but only if they were given two months to relocate their temple and graves . Chépart agreed to give them the time in exchange for pelts , oil , poultry , and grain — a request the Natchez promised to fulfill later . 
 = = Attack = = 
 The Natchez then began to prepare for a strike on the French at Fort Rosalie , borrowing firearms from some French colonists with promises to go hunting and to share the game with the guns ' owners . Some French men and women overheard the Natchez planning such an attack . According to Le Page du Pratz , it was the Natchez female chief Tattooed Arm who attempted to alert the French of an upcoming attack led by her rivals at White Apple . When colonists told Chépart , he disregarded them and placed some in irons on the night before the massacre , when he was drunk . 
 On the morning of November 29 , 1729 , the Natchez came to Chépart with corn , poultry , and deerskins , also carrying with them a calumet — well known as a peace symbol . The commandant , still somewhat intoxicated from drinking the night before , was certain that the Natchez had no violent intentions , and he challenged those who had warned of an attack to prove that the rumors were accurate . 
 While Chépart was accepting the goods , the Natchez started firing , giving the signal for a coordinated attack on Fort Rosalie and on the outlying farms and concessions in the area now covered by the city of Natchez . Chépart ran to call his soldiers to arms , but they had already been killed . The details of the attack are mostly unknown , as chroniclers such as Le Page du Pratz , who talked with several eyewitnesses , stated that the events were " simply too horrific " to recount . 
 The Natchez had prepared by seizing the galley of the West India Company anchored on the river , so that no Frenchmen could board it and attempt to escape . They had also stationed warriors on the other side of the river to intercept those who might flee in that direction . The commandant at the Yazoo trading post of Fort St. Pierre , Monsieur du <unk> , was visiting Fort Rosalie with a Jesuit priest when they heard gunshots . They turned around to return to their ship , but warriors caught up with them , killing and scalping them . 
 The Natchez killed almost all of the 150 Frenchmen at Fort Rosalie , and only about 20 managed to escape . Most of the dead were unarmed . Women , children , and African slaves were mostly spared ; many were locked inside a house on the bluff , guarded by several warriors , from where they could see the events . According to Dumont de Montigny 's account of the attack , women seen defending their husbands from the violence , or trying to avenge them , were taken captive or killed . One woman 's unborn baby was reportedly torn from her before she herself was killed . A year after the event , the tally of dead was put at 138 men , 35 women and 56 children , or approximately 230 overall . Some scholars argue that the Natchez spared the African slaves due to a general sense of affinity between the Natchez and the Africans ; some slaves even joined the Natchez against their masters , while others took the chance to escape to freedom . A group of Yazoo people who were accompanying Commandant du <unk> remained neutral during the conflict but were inspired by the Natchez revolt . When they returned to Fort St. Pierre , they destroyed the fort , killing the Jesuit priest and 17 French soldiers . 
 The Natchez lost only about 12 warriors during the attack . Eight warriors died attacking the homestead of the La Loire des Ursins family , where the men had been able to prepare a defense against the intruding Natchez . 
 Chépart himself was taken captive by the Natchez , who were at first unsure what to do with him , but finally decided that he should be killed by a <unk> — a member of the lowest caste in the tribe 's hierarchy . The Natchez kept two Frenchmen alive , a carter named <unk> who was made to carry all the goods of the French to the Great Village , and a tailor named Le Beau who was employed by the Natchez to refit the colonists ' clothing to new owners . They set fire to the fort , the store , and all the homesteads , burning them to the ground . Just as Governor Bienville had done with the executed Indians in 1717 and 1723 , the Natchez beheaded the dead Frenchmen and brought the severed heads for the Great Sun to view . 
 = = French response = = 
 News of the Fort Rosalie attack reached New Orleans in early December , and the colonists there began to panic . The city depended upon grain and other supplies from the Illinois settlement , and shipments up and down the Mississippi River would be threatened by the loss of Fort Rosalie . Governor Périer reacted to the massacre by forbidding the entry of a delegation of Choctaw people into the city , for fear that they were using the pretext of a friendly visit to launch an attack . He then ordered slaves and French troops to march downstream and massacre a small village of <unk> people who had played no part in the uprising in Natchez . His superiors in Paris reprimanded the leader for this act , which may have been intended to prevent any alliance between slaves and Native Americans against the French colonists . Many Louisiana colonists — Dumont de Montigny in particular — blamed Chépart ( who was killed by the Natchez ) and Périer for the massacre ; Louis XV , the French king , ordered Périer back to France in 1732 . Périer 's replacement was his predecessor , Jean @-@ Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville , whom the French state thought to be more experienced at dealing with the Native Americans of the region . A year earlier , the French West India Company had given up control of the colony to Louis XV because it had been costly and difficult to manage even before the rebellion . 
 More serious retaliation against the Natchez began late in December and in January 1730 , with expeditions led by Jean @-@ Paul Le Sueur and Henri de Louboëy . The two commanders besieged the Natchez in forts built near the site of the Grand Village of the Natchez , a mile or so east of Fort Rosalie , which had been rebuilt . They killed about 80 men and captured 18 women , and released some French women who had been captured during the massacre of Fort Rosalie . The French relied on allied support from Tunica and Choctaw warriors . The Choctaw attacked the Natchez without the French , killing 100 and capturing women and children . This ruined the element of surprise for the French as the Natchez had already scattered . At first , the Natchez were well prepared for French retaliatory strikes , having stocked up several cannons as well as the firearms that they had used in the massacre two months earlier . The Natchez captured by the Choctaw and Tunica allies of the French were given over to the governor and sold into slavery , and some were publicly tortured to death in New Orleans . 
 In late February 1730 , with Louboëy seeking to catch the Natchez by surprise , the Natchez negotiated a peace treaty and freed French captives , but the French planned an attack on the Natchez fort the following day . The Natchez then brought gifts to Louboëy , but left their fort that night and escaped across the Mississippi River , taking African slaves with them . The next day , Louboëy and his men burned down the abandoned Grand Village fort as the Natchez hid in the bayous along the Black River . A subsequent expedition led by Périer in 1731 to dislodge the Natchez captured many of them and their leaders , including Saint Cosme , who was the new Great Sun , and his mother — the Female Sun , Tattooed Arm . The 387 captives , most of whom had belonged to the pro @-@ French faction of the Natchez , were sold into slavery in Saint @-@ Domingue . Many other Natchez escaped again , now taking refuge with the Chickasaw . Over the next decade the few hundred remaining Natchez lived a life on the run , waging a low @-@ intensity guerrilla campaign against the French . French historian Pierre François Xavier de Charlevoix wrote in his history , " We were not slow in perceiving that the Natchez could still render themselves formidable , and that the step of sending the Sun and all who had been taken with him to be sold as slaves in Saint @-@ Domingue , had rather exasperated than intimidated the remnant of that nation , in whom hatred and despair had transformed their natural pride and ferocity into a valor of which they were never deemed capable . " 
 The French continued to press for the destruction of the Natchez who now lived among the Chickasaw , traditional allies of the British — this sparked the Chickasaw Wars . The Chickasaw at first agreed to drive out the Natchez from among them , but they did not keep good on the promise . In the Chickasaw Campaign of 1736 , the French , under Governor Bienville , attacked the Chickasaw villages of <unk> and <unk> , and then retreated , suffering significant casualties , but inflicting few . In the Chickasaw Campaign of 1739 , Bienville summoned more than 1 @,@ 000 troops to be sent over from France . Bienville 's army ascended the Mississippi River to the site of present @-@ day Memphis , Tennessee , and attempted to build a military road westward toward Chickasaw villages . After waiting for months in the winter of 1739 – 40 , the French never mounted an attack and retreated back to New Orleans . After having suffered the attacks against the Chickasaw , the remaining Natchez moved on to live among the Cherokee and Creek people . By that time the Natchez , reduced to scattered refugees , had ceased to exist as a political entity . 
 = = Historical interpretations = = 
 The Natchez revolt figured as an event of monumental significance in French historiography and literature of the 18th and 19th centuries . In France , the massacre and its aftermath was described in numerous historical works and inspired several works of fiction . Eighteenth @-@ century historians generally attributed the Natchez uprising to oppression by Commandant Chépart . 
 In the French sources , one important discussion has centered on the question of whether the Natchez planned a simultaneous attack on the French with the other major tribes of the region . French colonial governor Étienne Périer , in a report to superiors in France written one week after the revolt , claimed that many of the Indian nations in the lower Mississippi Valley had plotted with the Natchez to attack the French on the same day and that even the Choctaw , who had been close allies of the French , were part of the plot . Périer then cancelled a meeting with the Choctaw planned for the first two days of December in New Orleans , contending that it was to be the occasion for an attack . Périer in this way defended his actions as governor by insinuating that the results of the massacre could have been worse if not for his prompt action . However , historians Gordon Sayre and Arnaud <unk> have pointed out that Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> , a militia commander in the French retaliations following the massacre , wrote in a 1730 unpublished narrative that Périer 's claims were groundless , and that the <unk> , Yazoo , and other nations were not complicit and had no foreknowledge of the attack . Another document in French , of anonymous authorship , asserted that the Natchez revolt was a British plan to destroy a new French tobacco business in Louisiana . 
 To describe the details of the attack and its background , Dumont de Montigny and Antoine @-@ Simon Le Page du Pratz , the leading 18th @-@ century historians of Louisiana , drew on information collected from French women taken captive during the massacre . They explained that the Natchez had conspired with other nations but had attacked a few days earlier than the date agreed upon and that they had used a system of bundles of sticks held by each of the conspiring tribes in order to count down the number of days remaining until the strike . The undetected destruction of a couple of the sticks in the Natchez Grand Village derailed the count , although the reason for the lost sticks differed in each historian 's account . The other nations called off their participation in the plot because of the Natchez ' premature attack , and therefore the very existence of the conspiracy remained conjectural . 
 François @-@ René de Chateaubriand depicted the massacre in his 1827 epic Les Natchez , incorporating his earlier best @-@ selling novellas Atala and René into a longer narrative that greatly embellished the history of the French and the Natchez in Louisiana . In Chateaubriand 's work , the grand conspiracy behind the massacre implausibly included native tribes from all across North America . Chateaubriand saw the Natchez Massacre as the defining moment in the history of the Louisiana colony , a position consistent with the views of other 18th @-@ century historians , such as Le Page du Pratz and Dumont de Montigny . 
 The 19th @-@ century Louisiana historian Charles <unk> also embellished the story of a conspiracy behind the Natchez revolt , composing in his book a lengthy speech by the Great Sun in which the leader exhorted his warriors to invite the Choctaw , Chickasaw , and Yazoo to join in the attack on the French . In his 2008 book on the Natchez revolt , Arnaud <unk> wrote that more likely than not , the conspiracy claim was false because of incoherence in primary sources . 
 In contrast to the French tradition , the Natchez and their conflicts with the French have been mostly forgotten in contemporary American historiography . Historian Gordon Sayre attributes this to the fact that both the French and the Natchez were defeated in colonial wars before the birth of the United States . 
 = Flag of Hong Kong = 
 The flag of Hong Kong features a white , stylised , five @-@ petal Hong Kong orchid tree ( Bauhinia blakeana ) flower in the centre of a red field . Its design was adopted on 4 April 1990 at the Third Session of the Seventh National People 's Congress . The precise use of the flag is regulated by laws passed by the 58th executive meeting of the State Council held in Beijing . The design of the flag is enshrined in Hong Kong 's Basic Law , the territory 's constitutional document , and regulations regarding the use , prohibition of use , desecration , and manufacture of the flag are stated in the Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance . The flag of Hong Kong was first officially hoisted on 1 July 1997 , in the handover ceremony marking the transfer of sovereignty . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Symbolism = = = 
 The design of the flag comes with cultural , political , and regional meanings . The colour itself is significant ; red is a festive colour for the Chinese people , used to convey a sense of celebration and nationalism . Moreover , the red colour is identical to that used in the national PRC flag , chosen to signify the link re @-@ established between post @-@ colonial Hong Kong and China . The position of red and white on the flag symbolises the " one country two systems " political principle applied to the region . The stylised rendering of the Bauhinia blakeana flower , a flower discovered in Hong Kong , is meant to serve as a harmonising symbol for this dichotomy . The five stars of the Chinese national flag , representing the Communist Party and Mao Zedong 's four classes ( proletarian workers , agricultural peasants , petty bourgeoisie and capitalists ) , are replicated on the petals of the flower . 
 Before the adoption of the flag , the Chairman of the Drafting Committee of the Basic Law explained the significance of the flag 's design to the National People 's Congress : 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Hong Kong government has specified sizes , colours , and manufacturing parameters in which the flag is to be made . The background of the rectangular flag is red , the same shade of red as that used for the national PRC flag . The ratio of its length to breadth is 1 @.@ 5 . In its centre is a five @-@ petal stylised rendering of a white Bauhinia blakeana flower . If a circle circumscribes the flower , it should have a diameter 0 @.@ 6 times the entire height of the flag . The petals are uniformly spread around the centre point of the flag , radiating outward and pointing in a clockwise direction . Each of the flower 's petals bears a five @-@ pointed red star , a communist and socialist symbolism , with a red trace , suggestive of a flower stamen . The red trace makes each petal look as if it is being divided in half . The heading that is used to allow a flag to be slid or raised onto a pole is white . 
 = = = Size specifications = = = 
 This table lists all the official sizes for the flag . Sizes deviating from this list are considered non @-@ standard . If a flag is not of official size , it must be a scaled @-@ down or scaled @-@ up version of one of the official sizes . 
 = = = Colour specifications = = = 
 The following are the approximate colours of the Hong Kong flag in different colour models . It is listed by web colours in hexadecimal notation , CMYK equivalents * , dye colours , HSL equivalents , and Pantone equivalents . 
 * CMYK equivalents based on official downloadable files from Hong Kong 's Protocol website ( see 2nd external link ) . 
 = = = Manufacture regulated = = = 
 The Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance stipulates that the Hong Kong flag must be manufactured according to specifications laid out in the ordinance . If flags are not produced in design according to the ordinance , the Secretary for Justice may petition the District Court for an injunction to prohibit the person or company from manufacturing the flags . If the District Court agrees that the flags are not in compliance , it may issue an injunction and order that the flags and the materials that were used to make the flags to be seized by the government . 
 = = Proper flag protocol = = 
 The Hong Kong flag is flown daily from the Chief Executive 's official residence , the Government House , the Hong Kong International Airport , and at all border crossings and points of entry into Hong Kong . At major government offices and buildings , such as the Office of the Chief Executive , the Executive Council , the Court of Final Appeal , the High Court , the Legislative Council , and the Hong Kong Economic and Trade Offices overseas , the flag is displayed during days when these offices are working . Other government offices and buildings , such as hospitals , schools , departmental headquarters , sports grounds , and cultural venues should fly the flag on occasions such as the National Day of the PRC ( 1 October ) , the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day ( 1 July ) , and New Year 's Day . The flag should be raised at 8 : 00 a.m. and lowered at 6 : 00 p.m. The raising and lowering of the flag should be done slowly ; it must reach the peak of the flag staff when it is raised , and it may not touch the ground when it is lowered . The flag may not be raised in severe weather conditions . A Hong Kong flag that is either damaged , defaced , faded or substandard must not be displayed or used . 
 = = = Displayed together with the national flag = = = 
 Whenever the PRC national flag is flown together with the regional Hong Kong flag , the national flag must be flown at the centre , above the regional flag , or otherwise in a more prominent position than that of the regional flag . The regional flag must be smaller in size than the national flag , and it must be displayed to the left of the national flag . When the flags are displayed inside a building , the left and right sides of a person looking at the flags , and with his or her back toward the wall , are used as reference points for the left and right sides of a flag . When the flags are displayed outside a building , the left and right sides of a person standing in front of the building and looking towards the front entrance are used as reference points for the left and right sides of a flag . The national flag should be raised before the regional flag is raised , and it should be lowered after the regional flag is lowered . 
 An exception to this rule occurs during medal presentation ceremonies at multi @-@ sport events such as the Olympics and Asian Games . As Hong Kong competes separately from mainland China , should an athlete from Hong Kong win the gold medal , and an athlete from mainland China win the silver and / or bronze medal ( s ) in the same event , the regional flag of Hong Kong would be raised in the centre above the national flag ( s ) during the medal presentation ceremony . 
 = = = Half @-@ mast = = = 
 The Hong Kong flag must be lowered to half @-@ mast as a token of mourning when any of the following people die : 
 President of the People 's Republic of China 
 Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress 
 Premier of the State Council 
 Chairman of the Central Military Commission 
 Chairman of the National Committee of the Chinese People 's Political Consultative Conference 
 Persons who have made outstanding contributions to the People 's Republic of China as the Central People 's Government advises the Chief Executive . 
 Persons who have made outstanding contributions to world peace or the cause of human progress as the Central People 's Government advises the Chief Executive . 
 Persons whom the Chief Executive considers to have made outstanding contributions to the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region or for whom he considers it appropriate to fly the flag at half @-@ mast . 
 The flag may also be flown at half @-@ mast when the Central People 's Government advises the Chief Executive to do so , or when the Chief Executive considers it appropriate to do so , on occurrences of unfortunate events causing especially serious casualties , or when serious natural calamities have caused heavy casualties . When raising a flag to be flown at half @-@ mast , it should first be raised to the top of the pole and then lowered to a point where the distance between the top of the flag and the top of the pole is one third of the length of the pole . When lowering the flag from half @-@ mast , it should first be raised to the peak of the pole before it is lowered . 
 = = = Prohibition of use and desecration = = = 
 The Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance states what manner of use of the Hong Kong flag is prohibited and that desecration of the flag is prohibited ; it also states that it is a punishable offence for a person to use the flag in a prohibited manner or desecrate the flag . According to the ordinance , a flag may not be used in advertisements or trademarks , and that " publicly and wilfully burning , mutilating , scrawling on , defiling or trampling " the flag is considered flag desecration . Similarly , the National Flag and National Emblem Ordinance extends the same prohibition toward the national PRC flag . The ordinances also allow for the Chief Executive to make stipulations regarding the use of the flag . In stipulations made in 1997 , the Chief Executive further specified that the use of the flag in " any trade , calling or profession , or the logo , seal or badge of any non @-@ governmental organisation " is also prohibited unless prior permission was obtained . 
 The first conviction of flag desecration occurred in 1999 . Protesters Ng Kung Siu and Lee Kin Yun wrote the word " Shame " on both the national PRC flag and the Hong Kong flag , and were convicted of violating the National Flag and National Emblem Ordinance and the Regional Flag and Regional Emblem Ordinance . The Court of Appeal overturned the verdict , ruling that the ordinances were unnecessary restrictions on the freedom of expression and in violation of both the Basic Law and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights . Upon further appeal , however , the Court of Final Appeal maintained the original guilty verdict , holding that this restriction on the freedom of expression was justifiable in that the protection of the flags played a role in national unity and territorial integrity and constituted a restriction on the mode of expressing one 's message but did not interfere with one 's freedom to express the same message in other ways . 
 Leung Kwok @-@ hung , a member of the Legislative Council and a political activist in Hong Kong , was penalised in February 2001 , before he became a member of the Legislative Council , for defiling the flag . He was convicted of three counts of desecrating the flag — for two incidents on 1 July 2000 during the third anniversary of Hong Kong 's handover to China and for one incident on 9 July of the same year during a protest against elections to choose the Election Committee , the electoral college which chooses the Chief Executive of Hong Kong . Leung was placed on a good @-@ behaviour bond for 12 months in the sum of HK $ 3 @,@ 000 . 
 Zhu <unk> , a mainland Chinese farmer has been jailed for three weeks after setting fire to a Chinese flag in Hong Kong . Zhu was charged for " publicly and wilfully " burning the Chinese flag at Golden Bauhinia Square in central Hong Kong . The 74 @-@ year @-@ old man is reportedly the third person charged for desecrating the Chinese national flag , but he is first to be jailed under the law . 
 In early 2013 , protestors went to the streets flying the old colonial flag demanding more democracy and resignation of Chief Executive Leung Chun Ying . The use of the flag has created concerns from Chinese authorities and request from Leung to stop flying the flag . Despite the calls from Leung the old flags are not subject to use restrictions beyond not being allowed to be placed on flagpoles and are freely sold and manufactured in the territory . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Historical flags = = = 
 Prior to Hong Kong 's transfer of sovereignty , the flag of Hong Kong was a colonial Blue Ensign flag . The flag of colonial Hong Kong underwent several changes in the last one and a half centuries . 
 In 1843 , a seal representing Hong Kong was instituted . The design was based on a local waterfront scene ; three local merchants with their commercial goods can be found on the foreground , a square @-@ rigged ship and a junk occupy the middle ground , while the background consists of conical hills and clouds . In 1868 , a Hong Kong flag was produced , a Blue Ensign flag with a badge based on this " local scene " , but the design was rejected by Hong Kong Governor Richard Graves MacDonnell . 
 In 1870 , a " white crown over HK " badge for the Blue Ensign flag was proposed by the Colonial Secretary . The letters " HK " were omitted and the crown became full @-@ colour three years later . It is unclear exactly what the badge looked like during that period of time , but it was unlikely to be the " local scene " . It should have been a crown of some sort , which may , or may not , have had the letters " HK " below it . In 1876 , the " local scene " badge ( Chinese : " Ar Kwan " Guiding the British soldier picture ) was re @-@ adopted to the Blue Ensign flag with the Admiralty 's approval . 
 A coat of arms for Hong Kong was granted on 21 January 1959 by the College of Arms in London . The Hong Kong flag was revised in the same year to feature the coat of arms in the Blue Ensign flag . This design was used officially from 1959 until Hong Kong 's transfer of sovereignty in 1997 . Since then , the colonial flag has been appropriated by protestors , such as on the annual 1 July marches for universal suffrage , as a " symbol of antagonism towards the mainland " , along with a blue flag featuring the coat of arms , used by those advocating independence . 
 = = = Current design = = = 
 Before Hong Kong 's transfer of sovereignty , between 20 May 1987 and 31 March 1988 , a contest was held amongst Hong Kong residents to help choose a flag for post @-@ colonial Hong Kong , with 7 @,@ 147 design submissions , in which 4 @,@ 489 submissions were about flag designs . Architect Tao Ho was chosen as one of the panel judges to pick Hong Kong 's new flag . He recalled that some of the designs had been rather funny and with political twists : " One had a hammer and sickle on one side and a dollar sign on the other . " Some designs were rejected because they contained copyrighted materials , for example , the emblem of Urban Council , Hong Kong Arts Festival and Hong Kong Tourism Board . Six designs were chosen as finalists by the judges , but were all later rejected by the PRC . Ho and two others were then asked by the PRC to submit new proposals . 
 Looking for inspiration , Ho wandered into a garden and picked up a Bauhinia blakeana flower . He observed the symmetry of the five petals , and how their winding pattern conveyed to him a dynamic feeling . This led him to incorporate the flower into the flag to represent Hong Kong . The design was adopted on 4 April 1990 at the Third Session of the Seventh National People 's Congress , and the flag was first officially hoisted seconds after midnight on 1 July 1997 in the handover ceremony marking the transfer of sovereignty . It was hoisted together with the national PRC flag , while the Chinese national anthem , " March of the Volunteers " was played . The Union Flag and the colonial Hong Kong flag were lowered seconds before midnight . 
 A selection of proposals during the 1987 – 1988 contest is shown below : 
 = Mike Heath ( swimmer ) = 
 Michael Steward Heath ( born April 9 , 1964 ) is an American former competition swimmer who specialized in freestyle events . He is a three @-@ time Olympic gold medalist , and a former world record @-@ holder in two relay swimming events . A native of Texas , he won two national collegiate championship competing for the University of Florida . During his elite swimming career , Heath won ten medals in major international championships , including seven golds , two silvers and a bronze , spanning the Olympic Games , FINA World Championships , and Pan Pacific Championships . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Heath was born in McAllen , Texas . He attended Highland Park High School in University Park , Texas ( a Dallas suburb ) , and competed for the Highland Park High School swim team . In 1980 , he set a new Texas state high school record in the boys ' 200 @-@ yard freestyle ( 1 : 37 @.@ 88 ) ; he set a second state record in the event in 1982 ( 1 : 37 @.@ 53 ) , breaking his own previous record in the process . 
 = = College swimming career = = 
 Heath accepted an athletic scholarship to attend the University of Florida in Gainesville , Florida , where he swam for coach Randy Reese 's Florida Gators swimming and diving team in National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) and Southeastern Conference ( SEC ) competition from 1983 to 1986 . He was a member of the Gators ' 1983 and 1984 NCAA men 's championship teams , as well as four consecutive SEC championships teams . As a Gator swimmer , he won NCAA national titles in the 400 @-@ yard freestyle relay ( 1983 ) , 800 @-@ yard freestyle relay ( 1983 , 1984 ) , and 200 @-@ yard freestyle ( 1984 ) , and received nineteen All @-@ American honors . His strong finish swimming the anchor leg for the Gators in the 4 × 100 @-@ yard freestyle relay provided the Gators ' winning points in their first NCAA national team championship in 1983 . He also won seven SEC titles , and was recognized as the SEC male swimmer of the year in 1983 and 1985 . Heath graduated from the University of Florida with a bachelor 's degree in exercise and sports science in 1988 , and was inducted into the University of Florida Athletic Hall of Fame as a " Gator Great " in 1996 . 
 = = International swimming career = = 
 Heath , who had not previously been a member of the U.S. national team , won the 100- and 200 @-@ meter freestyle events at the 1984 U.S. Olympic trials , and thereby qualified to compete in the two Olympic individual events and for the U.S. relay teams . As a newcomer to the U.S. trials , he made a dramatic statement by setting a new American record in the preliminary heats of the 200 @-@ meter freestyle . At the 1984 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles , he won three gold medals and a silver . 
 He won his first Olympic gold medal by swimming the lead @-@ off leg in the men 's 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , and Heath and his American teammates David Larson , Jeff Float and Bruce Hayes set a new world record of 7 : 15 @.@ 69 , edging the Michael Gross @-@ led West Germans by four one @-@ hundredths ( 0 @.@ 04 ) of a second . He won his second gold medal by helping set another world record of 3 : 19 @.@ 03 in the men 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , together with fellow Americans Chris Cavanaugh , Matt Biondi and Rowdy Gaines , finishing sixty @-@ five one @-@ hundredths ( 0 @.@ 65 ) of a second ahead of the second @-@ place Australians . He then earned a third gold medal by swimming for the winning U.S. team in the preliminary heats of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In a word play on the title of the popular 1984 movie Ghostbusters , American media dubbed Heath and his 4 × 200 @-@ meter relay teammates the " Gross Busters . " 
 In individual Olympic competition , Heath won a silver medal in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle ( 1 : 49 @.@ 10 ) behind Gross 's world record @-@ setting performance ( 1 : 47 @.@ 44 ) . He also placed fourth in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle event final ( 50 @.@ 41 ) ; the outcome was controversial , however , because of a premature starter gun and a quick start by Gaines , the winner . Gaines ' coach , Richard Quick , knew of starter Frank Silvestri 's propensity to fire the starter gun almost immediately when the swimmers mounted the blocks . Gaines gained about a meter 's head start on the competition ; video of the event later confirmed that one or more of the swimmers had not been set when the starter gun fired . 
 After the 1984 Olympics , Heath continued to swim for the U.S. national team , and remained a fixture on the freestyle relay teams . At the 1985 Pan Pacific Championships in Tokyo , gold medalists Scott <unk> , Heath , Paul Wallace and Biondi set a new world record of 3 : 17 @.@ 08 in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . Together with Biondi , Duffy Dillon and Craig <unk> , he won another gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay ( 7 : 17 @.@ 63 ) . Individually , Heath won a Pan Pacific Championships gold medal in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle ( 1 : 49 @.@ 29 ) by beating Biondi ( 1 : 50 @.@ 19 ) and Canadian Sandy Goss ( 1 : 50 @.@ 56 ) . He also won a Pan Pacific silver medal in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle ( 50 @.@ 78 ) , finishing a fraction of a second behind Biondi ( 50 @.@ 44 ) . Heath again swam for the U.S. relay teams at the 1986 World Aquatics Championships in Madrid ; Tom Jager , Heath , Paul Wallace and Biondi won the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle ( 3 : 19 @.@ 89 ) ; and Eric Boyer , Heath , Dan Jorgensen and Biondi placed third in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle ( 7 : 18 @.@ 29 ) . 
 = = Life after competition swimming = = 
 Heath was an assistant coach for the Florida Gators swim team from 1988 to 1989 . After graduating from the University of Florida , Heath first worked as a salesman , before he coached swimming at Fletcher High School in Neptune Beach , Florida , for six years , and thereafter at Episcopal High School in Jacksonville , Florida . He is married to Sherri @-@ Lee <unk> , who was a member of the Florida Gators swim team at the University of Florida from 1984 to 1987 , and they have two children . Their son Grady will swim for the Florida Gators beginning in 2015 – 16 . 
 = = World records = = 
 Men 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay 
 Men 's 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay 
 = Not Afraid = 
 " Not Afraid " is a song by American rapper Eminem from his seventh studio album Recovery ( 2010 ) . It was released as the album 's lead single on April 29 , 2010 , by Interscope Records . " Not Afraid " was first revealed as a single by Eminem via Twitter , after which the song debuted on radio . To promote the single 's release , a freestyle rap , " Despicable " , was released on the Internet and received attention for its tone and lyrical content . " Not Afraid " was written and produced by Eminem , Boi @-@ 1da , Jordan Evans and Matthew Burnett ; keyboardist Luis Resto was also attributed with songwriting credit . According to Eminem 's manager Paul Rosenberg and music critics , " Not Afraid " carries a positive message and depicts Eminem 's change in direction from drugs and violence . The hip hop song features a choir that assists Eminem in a heavily layered chorus and vocals are sung over a guitar , synthesizer and piano ; no Auto @-@ Tune was used on the sung vocals , but many reverberation tools were . 
 " Not Afraid " received mixed to positive reviews from music critics , who praised the song for being anthemic in nature and carrying a positive message . The song did , however , face criticism for its sudden change in theme from previous singles , and was considered to be less affecting than some of his other songs . Despite mixed reception , " Not Afraid " became the 16th song in Billboard history to debut on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number one ; it also debuted as a chart @-@ topper in Canada . In June 2014 the song was certified 10 × Platinum by RIAA , making Eminem the first artist with digital diamond awards for two songs . " Not Afraid " has earned Eminem MTV Video Music Awards , MTV Video Music Awards Japan , Grammy Awards , Billboard Music Awards and Detroit Music Awards . 
 The song was accompanied by a music video , which Rich Lee directed in May 2010 . New York City and Newark , New Jersey were chosen as settings to shoot the video . Reviewers praised the video as it followed the lyrics and praised the video for such depictions . However , the product placement in the video by Nike shoes and Beats by Dr. Dre headphones was criticized . In 2010 , Eminem performed " Not Afraid " at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 ( E3 2010 ) , Oxegen 2010 , T in the Park 2010 and the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . He has also performed the song at the Bonnaroo Music Festival , Lollapalooza and the V Festival . Rolling Stone ranked it the 24th best song of 2010 . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 In 2009 , Eminem planned to release a sequel of his sixth studio album Relapse titled Relapse 2 , but cancelled the project and released a completely different studio release titled Recovery . He said , " as I kept recording and working with new producers , the idea of a sequel to Relapse started to make less and less sense to me , and I wanted to make a completely new album . " " Not Afraid " was primarily produced by the Canadian hip hop musician Boi @-@ 1da . According to Mike Strange , who recorded " Not Afraid " , he wanted to work with Boi @-@ 1da after listening to his " Forever " , which he had produced for the rapper Drake . Boi @-@ 1da sent Strange many tracks , to some of which Eminem wrote lyrics . These tracks were opened in Pro Tools , as Strange proceeded to record Eminem 's vocals . Recording sessions took place at Effigy Studios , in Ferndale , Michigan but Boi @-@ 1da was absent during the sessions . 
 The original tracks sent to Strange included mostly drums and keyboard pads ; they were placed under an inactive track titled " Orig <unk> " . The instrumentation included a Roland TR @-@ 808 kick , a regular live kick , a hi @-@ hat , a ride cymbal and a snare drum . Underneath the track , there were horn , orchestra hit and pads , including a Mellotron sound that plays the chord progression . Strange told Sound on Sound magazine , " I like to have the vocal tracks at the top of the Session , because in hip @-@ hop they are the most important element . " Two of Eminem 's were placed underneath his main vocal track , as one of them featured his introductory words . Each play of the chorus was an overdub and not copies of a sample ; the only exception was the intro . The vocals for the bridge were overdubbed six times ; Auto @-@ Tune was not used at all in the song . The Detroit musician Luis Resto provided keyboard tracks on the bridge , including piano and guitar sound effects . Resto also added orchestration in the chorus and bridge of the song . 
 Strange arranged the Pro Tools session in a more traditional manner by laying out the drums , bass instruments , guitars , keyboards , main vocals and overdubs from left to right . While mixing , he began with drums , then the main vocals . He added the chorus and bridge , followed by other instrumentation . Strange mixed the track to satisfy Eminem , who , after entering the studio , made his own adjustments , providing additional production ; by then , Resto 's tracks were added . Strange made adjustments to Boi @-@ 1da 's tracks , using SSL equalization ( EQ ) and some compression . To keep the track in tune from pitch fluctuation , Strange used Trim and Auto @-@ Tune on Resto 's TR @-@ 808 kick . Strange arranged reverberation tools , including the <unk> , Eventide 2016 , the Lexicon 480 , Lexicon <unk> , and the Yamaha <unk> . 
 The two rap tracks in the session used the Massenburg EQ plug @-@ in , " the ' 9' send goes to the eighth @-@ note delay track immediately above the two rap tracks " and Digidesign Extra Long Delay . Strange also used compressors , including the Alta Moda <unk> , which he felt works well on vocals , as well as the kick and snare drums . Boi @-@ 1da 's track mostly used SSL and compression , but the bass used an API <unk> . A Digidesign compressor limiter was set up on one of the horn sounds while the Massenburg EQ was used on an <unk> sound . Answering Eminem 's request , string overdubs were arranged and recorded by Jordan Evans and Matthew Burnett — providing additional production — and Robert Reyes recorded the choir 's vocals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Not Afraid " is a hip hop song written and produced by Boi @-@ 1da , Eminem , Evans and Burnett ; Resto did additional writing . Boi @-@ 1da provided drums ; Evans and Burnett provided string sounds . The lyrics focus on a positive change from Eminem 's past experiences , including an end to drug abuse , feuds and violence . The Los Angeles Times noted that a person hearing this song for the first time may identify it as Christian hip hop . MTV News writer Shaheem Reid noted that " There are no jabs at pop @-@ culture icons , no jovial <unk> . " Led by a guitar , synthesizer and piano , " Not Afraid " is published in the key of C minor and has a moderate tempo of 86 beats per minute , according to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing . A writer for MuchMusic website noted that Eminem chose to use his Marshall Mathers ego for the song , rather than Slim Shady . He follows a chord progression of Cm – A ♭ ( maj7 ) – E ♭ – B ♭ in the chorus . 
 The song begins with a brief introduction in which Eminem says while the chorus plays underneath , " Yeh , it 's been a ride . I guess I had to go to that place to get to this one . " When he begins the first verse , his lyrics threaten people who have looked down on him : " You can try to read my lyrics off of this paper before I lay ' em / But you won 't take the sting out these words before I say ' em . " On the second verse , Eminem says that he has indeed made mistakes , commenting on his Relapse album : " That last Relapse CD was <unk> / Perhaps I ran them accents into the ground / Relax , I ain 't going to do that now . " When he says " All I 'm trying to say is get back , click <unk> , pow " , a gunshot is heard . Approaching the end of the second verse , Eminem raps about his personal experiences : " But I think I 'm still trying to figure this crap out / Thought I had it mapped out , but I guess I didn 't / It 's time to exorcise these demons / These motherfuckers are doing jumping jacks now . " After the chorus , Eminem sings a bridge and focuses on a positive change , as he says " I just can 't keep living this way , so starting today I 'm breaking out of this cage . " Before the final chorus , he says that he " shoots for the moon " . The song features a choir composed of Kip <unk> , <unk> Garrick II , Terry Dexter , Rich King , Kristen Ashley Cole and Sly Jordan . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 On April 26 , 2010 , Eminem posted a message through his Twitter account that read , " I 'm ' Not Afraid ' " , without any elaboration . Fans and news organizations were able to interpret the message and announced that Eminem 's first single from his seventh studio album , Recovery would be titled " Not Afraid " . Radio personality Angela Yee , from radio station <unk> @-@ FM , confirmed that the new single would debut on Eminem 's uncensored radio station , Shade 45 . The singer 's manager , Paul Rosenberg , told Billboard that " It 's not a dark song , it 's an uplifting song . " 
 The new single was initially slated to impact radio on April 30 , 2010 ; however , the date was changed to one day earlier and the song eventually aired at 10 am ET , on Shade 45 's show The Morning After with Angela Yee . On May 5 , 2010 , the single was made available for digital download at online retailers through Aftermath Entertainment and Interscope Records . In the song , Eminem makes a reference to Relapse and spoke at Friday Night with Jonathan Ross about it : " ... looking back on it now in retrospect , I feel like there was a lot of stuff on there that was humorous and shock value and I had to go back and listen to my older material and figure out why ... Relapse didn 't make me feel like [ what ] used to and kind of put the feeling back into what I do . " 
 The song was featured in a trailer for the war film Act of Valor and is played during the ending credits to the film . 
 = = = Pre @-@ release promotion = = = 
 Two days before " Not Afraid " ' s slated release , Eminem released a freestyle rap video to promote the release of the album 's lead single . Titled " Despicable " , the vocals in the video are played over the instrumental versions of " Over " by Canadian rapper Drake and " Beamer , Benz or Bentley " by G @-@ Unit member Lloyd Banks ; the verse switches to the latter well into the two @-@ minute song . Lyrics make a reference to football quarterback Ben Roethlisberger in the line " I ’ d rather turn this club into a bar room brawl / Get as rowdy as Roethlisberger in a bathroom stall . " These lyrics refers to sexual assault allegations in March 2011 at a nightclub in Milledgeville , Georgia , causing controversy . Other references include those to fictional comic book character Superman : " I give as much of a flying fuck as that Superman dude " and to general popular culture : " Like a leaf suck in a vacuum , y ’ all / there ain ’ t nothing but a whole lotta sucking going on in rap . " Eminem 's final lyric makes a reference to Looney Tunes character Daffy Duck . 
 Music critics commented on the freestyle rap . Ray Roa of music website Consequence of Sound noted Eminem 's obvious frustration in the song , saying that he " sounds pissed off as ever on a new freestyle " . He also added , " The first minute and a half of the track is mellow by his standards , but when the beat switches to Banks ’ track , Eminem goes <unk> . " Melinda Newman of HitFix gave a positive review and wrote that the freestyle sounds like a " blast that sucks all the air out of room . It 's better than anything on Relapse , and the sheer dexterity of his rhyming skills is awe @-@ inspiring . " <unk> News 's Madhuri Dey felt that " Eminem takes his usual route of taking a hit at some personality " . Adam Downer of Sputnikmusic wrote positively : " Eminem spits with the crazed desperation we remember from the albums . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Not Afraid is considered his most critically acclaimed song after Lose Yourself and Stan . Reception of " Not Afraid " was mixed to positive . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone praised the song 's tone : " Over a dark , operatic beat . Eminem delivers rhymes that are typically acrobatic — and typically heavy @-@ handed . But the anger has a gathering quality . " Dolan also praised the song 's inspirational theme . Henry Adaso of About.com gave a positive review on the song , noting " Boi @-@ 1da 's bouncy charm " and " <unk> lyrics from a master poet " as good aspects of the song and noted no negative aspects . In Adaso 's guide review , he praised Boi @-@ 1da 's production and Eminem 's affecting lyrics ; he considered the former 's work " shimmering " and Eminem 's " sensitive lyrics entwine on this knocker " ; overall , he gave the song four and a half stars out of a possible five . After the song 's release , AllHipHop called it " an anthem in nature and rebellious to the core . " In her review of the Recovery , Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone noted that even if Eminem — reaching his late 30s — is becoming " a grumpy middle @-@ aged man , at least he 's owning it " . Winston Robbins of music website Consequence of Sound called " Not Afraid " one of the songs on Recovery " with catchy hooks , choruses , and beats multiplied by the endless pool of wit and anger that Eminem possesses " . In his album review , Thomas Nassiff wrote on behalf of AbsolutePunk ; he noted the song for being radio @-@ friendly and that it " doesn 't sacrifice anything to be friendly to the masses . " Andy Gill of The Independent said that this is where " the only completely commendable sentiment on the entire album comes " and called it a " proud rehab anthem " . In his review for Recovery , Benjamin Meadows @-@ Ingram of Spin magazine called " Not Afraid " a " stadium @-@ ready lead single " ; he went on to say , " Finally , Eminem addresses his personal and professional failings head @-@ on , rather than hiding behind a joke or inside a nightmare . It 's a necessary first step in moving on . " 
 The song also faced mixed and negative reviews . After " Not Afraid " leaked onto the Internet on April 29 , 2010 , Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly magazine commented on the song , noting both positive and negative characteristics ; he first complimented Eminem 's change of lyrical theme , calling it anthemic in nature and noting its inspirational and powerful message . He compared the song 's theme to Eminem 's 2002 single " Sing for the Moment " and his 2009 single , " Beautiful " . Vozick @-@ Levinson called Eminem 's rapping " wild " but was dismissive of the production , saying , " The track behind ' Not Afraid ' has the same tinny , repetitive , wannabe @-@ epic quality that 's annoyed me on Boi @-@ 1da productions like ' Forever . ' " Mayer <unk> of British site Digital Spy gave the song three stars out of a possible five , and wrote a mixed review ; the reviewer first commented , " Thank heavens ! – Marshall Mathers III has opted against his usual trick of cobbling together a hook and some ' satire ' via two @-@ year @-@ old back issues of the Inquirer to trail it . " However , <unk> criticized other aspects of the song , saying that Eminem 's " decision to chronicle ... feels a little worthy and more than a touch dull . " He felt that Eminem 's previous songs never bored the listener , unlike " Not Afraid " . Jeff Weiss of the Los Angeles Times commented that " Not Afraid " was an improvement from the lead singles of Encore ( 2004 ) and Relapse , " Just Lose It " and " We Made You " , respectively , giving for a more serious and inspirational theme . However , Weiss misses the comic nature of Eminem 's classic singles , such as " My Name Is " ; instead , he felt that the song was composed of " vague self @-@ help bromides and a bombastic but nondescript beat from ... Boi @-@ 1da . " When discussing the chorus , Weiss commented that it " doesn ’ t make for very engaging listening . " Finally , he discussed possible influences by American rapper T.I. , but overall , he named it a disappointing lead single . 
 John Ulmer of website One Thirty BPM gave the song seven points out of a possible ten , and published a mixed review ; he praised it for being a more serious track compared to previous lead singles " Just Lose It " ( 2004 ) and " We Made You " ( 2009 ) but criticized it for being less powerful compared to his 2002 hit single , " Lose Yourself " , and " Beautiful " . According to Ulmer , " Upon first listen it 's a bit corny , but it 's appropriately anthemic , and not bad enough to deter from the strength of the overall track . " He noted that although Eminem does not have as much of a frustrated voice as he does in " Despicable " , he admits that Relapse was a silly album . Pitchfork Media 's Jayson Greene wrote a rather negative review on Recovery and was very dismissive on the song : " Eminem spends nearly half of Recovery insisting he 's the best rapper alive , but for the first time in his career , he actually sounds clumsy . " Kitty Empire of newspaper The Guardian also wrote negatively on the song in her album review , criticizing the song 's lyrics : " Rhyming ' through a storm ' with ' whatever weather / cold or warm ' in the chorus is unforgivable for a master <unk> . " As part of his album review , Greg Kot of daily newspaper Chicago Tribune criticized Eminem 's lyrics and rhymes in " Not Afraid " , comparing them to his rhyming skills back when his 2002 hip hop drama film , 8 Mile , premiered : " Doesn 't he realize that 's the kind of cheese that the battle @-@ rhyming Eminem of 8 Mile would 've mercilessly mocked ? " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 According to Nielsen SoundScan , " Not Afraid " sold 380 @,@ 000 digital copies in its first week , giving Eminem the biggest sales week for a digital single between the beginning of 2010 and the date of the song 's release . Three songs received higher sales during their first week : Flo Rida 's " Right Round " , The Black Eyed Peas ' " Boom Boom Pow " and Eminem 's " Crack a Bottle " , which were all 2009 singles . " Not Afraid " proved to be successful when it debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number one , a feat only 15 songs had accomplished previously . The song was Eminem 's third number @-@ one single on the Hot 100 , coming after " Lose Yourself " and " Crack a Bottle " . " Not Afraid " was also the first to debut at number one since October 17 , 2009 , when American recording artist Britney Spears 's " 3 " debuted atop the chart . It is the first hip hop single by a male to debut at number one since American rapper Sean Combs ( known then as " Puff Daddy " ) topped the chart in 1997 , with " I 'll Be Missing You " , which features Faith Evans and band 112 . 
 After entering the Digital Songs chart at number one , the song fell down to number four the next week , and to number six on the Hot 100 , with sales of 202 @,@ 000 digital copies . On June 14 , 2010 , " Not Afraid " rose to number five again with sales of 157 @,@ 000 copies . On July 14 , 2010 , it rose from 22 to 24 on the Hot 100 ; by then , the song was downloaded a total of 1 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 times . On July 25 , 2010 , the song crossed the two million mark , based on total sales . As of August 2013 , the song has sold 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital copies . In June 2014 the song was certified 10 × Platinum by RIAA . 
 " Not Afraid " debuted at number one on the Canadian Hot 100 , remaining on the chart for 20 weeks . On the UK Singles Chart , the song debuted on June 5 , 2010 at number five , its highest position . It dropped to number six the following week , to number ten on July 10 , 2010 , and to number 14 the week after . On August 7 , 2010 , the song dropped to number 23 and its last UK Singles Chart appearance would be on September 4 , giving the song a total of 14 weeks on the chart . " Not Afraid " entered New Zealand 's Top 40 Singles chart on May 10 , 2010 at number eight , its peak position . Lasting on the chart for a total of 23 weeks , the song would not make its last chart appearance in New Zealand until September 9 , 2010 , at number 34 . On the ARIA Top 50 Singles , the song entered at number 16 in its first week and reached its peak at number four , the following week ; its lowest and final chart position occurred during the song 's 27th week on the chart , at number 48 . 
 On the Ö3 Austria Top 40 , Austria 's official singles chart , May 21 , 2010 marked the song 's chart debut , at number 22 . It reached its peak on August 13 , at number five and would stay at that position for another week . Before re @-@ entering on January 14 , 2011 at number 72 , the song made a last consecutive chart appearance on November 19 , 2011 at number 52 . The song dropped to the bottom of the chart ( number 75 ) on January 21 , 2011 , before exiting it . In Italy , the song only charted for one week , at number three ; the same occurred in France , on February 19 , 2011 , at number 97 . " Not Afraid " lasted 19 weeks on the Irish Singles Chart and made a final chart appearance on September 30 , 2010 , at number 36 . Flanders ' chart , Ultratop 50 , gave the song a debut position at number 13 on May 15 , 2010 ; the song would not reach a higher position and would drop to number 49 in its 16th and final week . On Wallonia 's chart , Ultratop 50 , the song debuted at number 14 and would not chart again until July 3 , 2010 , at number 40 . Longer than on any other chart , " Not Afraid " charted in Sweden for 43 consecutive weeks , debuting at number five and charting at number 49 in its final week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Before filming began , Eminem spoke to Paul Rosenberg on the telephone about his ideas for a music video of " Not Afraid " ; the two shared thoughts and started collaborating in May 2010 . American director Richard " Rich " Lee was hired to direct the video , which was shot on Market Street , in Newark , New Jersey as well as New York City . On the first day , Eminem filmed the opening scene on the rooftop of the Manhattan Municipal Building . Lee called the moment " sort of like a very internal feeling kind of video " . In an interview , while the video was being shot , Eminem spoke about working with Lee " as pretty anti @-@ climactic , for the most part , you know what I mean ... It 's good working with him , you know , he 's about his business " . The scene in which Eminem jumps from a cliff and dives , was done at Greenpoint Warehouse , in Brooklyn with Lee and video producer Justin Diener . Also working with Eminem on the video included Dennis Dennehy and Chris Clancy for marketing . The final scene filmed on the first day was where Eminem would try to escape from a dark basement ; shooting in Newark also continued . 
 The second day of shooting focused on Eminem as he walked through Market Street in Newark . Eminem 's final shoot before wrapping up was a mirror scene , which included many glass mirrors , and a fake one among them , through which he would have to break through . On May 30 , 2010 , Eminem confirmed the video 's release date in a Twitter message : " For those ' patiently waiting , ' the NOT <unk> video will premier Saturday 6 / 5 . Details later ... " The day before the video 's premiere , a teaser trailer was uploaded onto video sharing site YouTube , which combines many clips from the full video . The music video was uploaded on video website VEVO on June 5 , 2010 at 11 : 30 am ET . VEVO stylized their logo with the E reversed , similar to Eminem 's logo . On June 7 , the television premiere took place on MTV and VH1 , and the former featured a primetime encore the day after . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video opens with a scene in which Eminem stands on the rooftop of the Manhattan Municipal Building in New York , saying the introductory lyrics . The video cuts between scenes where he raps on the rooftop and another scene where Eminem is trapped inside a dark basement . Eminem moves closer towards the edge of the building until he leaves to go downstairs as the chorus begins . He starts walking down Market Street in Newark and <unk> across the street , avoiding vehicles that pass by . Eminem sees distorted reflections of himself on the window of a car ; he continues on , only to be surrounded by a series of mirrors . Confused , Eminem tries to escape , and towards the end of the second chorus , he breaks through a mirror to find himself in the middle of the street . <unk> scenes show Eminem as he tries to break out of the basement . As the camera zooms out , the viewers see him on the edge of a destroyed street while a subway tunnel can be seen below the road . 
 Eminem then jumps off the edge and makes a steep dive , but flies straight up again ; his speedy flight down Market Street causes sonic booms on vehicles nearby . Eventually , Eminem flies up , back to the rooftop of the Manhattan Municipal Building , in New York City , where the video began . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video was received with generally positive reviews . Following the video 's VEVO release , Monica Herrera of Billboard named Eminem 's jumping sequence " a moment of triumph " and compared his flying scene to Superman . She also noted similarities of the video 's events and the song 's lyrics , deeming them a powerful word to Eminem 's haters , where Eminem raps about destroying one 's balcony . Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone felt that Eminem " similarly puts his redemption in the spotlight " and notices courage . Kreps went on to compare Eminem 's flying scene to Canadian actor Keanu Reeves from the 1999 science fiction film The Matrix . In his review for Entertainment Weekly , Vozick @-@ Levinson wrote : " We are to understand that he is once again at wit 's end with the world , full of barely contained energy that he 's not yet sure how to direct . " Although he didn 't feel that the video was Eminem 's best , Vozick @-@ Levinson praised the video for its message in relation to the song 's vibe ; he also made a comparison to Eminem 's music video for " The Way I Am " , as both videos involve Eminem as he jumps from a great height . Patrick D 'Arcy of Spin thought that Eminem is " an <unk> unlikely motivational speaker , but an effective one . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On June 5 , 2010 , Eminem performed " Not Afraid " on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross . In celebration of the then @-@ upcoming release of Treyarch @-@ developed shooter game Call of Duty : Black Ops , video game publisher Activision organized many artists to perform at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 ( E3 2010 ) — which took place at the Staples Center in Los Angeles — including Eminem . Joined by Blink @-@ 182 drummer Travis Barker , Eminem performed songs from his album , including " Not Afraid " , " Love the Way You Lie " and " Won 't Back Down " . At E3 2011 , a choir , as well as hypeman Mr. Porter sung with Eminem during the chorus of " Not Afraid " , while his band played with an orchestra . The audience presumed the performance was over ; however , Eminem shortly returned to the stage to end with " Lose Yourself " . News distributor PR Newswire wrote , " Eminem ignited the crowd as he closed the all @-@ star event " . Matt Elias of MTV News also praised the show , and said that " Eminem performed an electrifying set ... , crushing any doubts that he is truly back in the game " . Antony Bruno of Billboard called the performance " a literal bang " while Seve Appleford of Rolling Stone wrote , " The rapper marched along the catwalk with his usual intensity , previewing new songs from next week 's release Recovery . " Activision reportedly spent six million dollars on party costs . 
 " Not Afraid " was included on Eminem 's set list as the final song before Eminem 's " Lose Yourself " encore in his performance at the T in the Park festival , which took place on July 10 , 2010 . This would be his first European concert in five years . Eminem wore black shorts and a hoodie . He commented on the weather , saying , " I know it 's muddy and sloppy and shit but this is fun " , and also thanked the crowd for supporting him . " Everybody who 's an Eminem fan , I just wanna say thank you so much for the support you 've shown over the years , for not giving up on me , " he said , " I hope you enjoyed the show as much as we did tonight . Peace . " At the end of the performance , Eminem said , " Edin @-@ borg , did you enjoy yourself tonight ? " That evening , members of the audience accused Eminem of lip syncing , but others defended him of such accusations . The T in the Park performance of " Not Afraid " is included as the second track on the " Love the Way You Lie " CD single . Eminem performed " Not Afraid " for a small audience in a small room at the beginning of the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards ; he performed the song once again at the Los Angeles Nokia Theatre , the main site of the ceremony , and performed " Love the Way You Lie " with Barbadian singer Rihanna . The audience voted his performance the best with 34 percent of all votes . 
 Eminem performed " Not Afraid " alongside Porter at the 2011 Bonnaroo Music Festival . He arrived in a Bad Meets Evil T @-@ shirt , camouflage shorts , a black hoodie and a black hat . His set list included other hits from previous years , including " <unk> ' Out My Closet " , " The Real Slim Shady " , " Without Me " and " Like Toy Soldiers " ; he also performed with Bad Meets Evil partner Royce da 5 ' 9 " for " Fast Lane " and " Lighters " . Almost 80 @,@ 000 members of the audience chanted " Shady ! " for five minutes until Eminem returned to perform an encore with " Lose Yourself " . Before performing " Not Afraid " , Eminem told the audience , " All jokes aside ... Thank you for sticking by me and not giving up on me . " At one point during the show , he told them , " Everybody here tonight , I just wanna say thank you for sticking by me and not giving up on me . " News sources praised the performance ; James Montgomery of MTV News wrote , " what stood out the most about Em 's performance was the sheer tenacity with which he attacked it . " News agency Associated Press said that " Bonnaroo 's crowd may be a hippie enclave , but you wouldn 't have known it Saturday night " . HitFix blog 's Katie Hasty considered the " Not Afraid " performance " triumphant , perhaps due to crowd buzz " . Patrick Doyle of Rolling Stone wrote , " Eminem 's hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half set was a triumph , with the rapper constantly bouncing across the stage , performing hit after hit with the energy of a prizefighter . " 
 Eminem performed the song as part of a set list on the second day of Chicago 's Lollapalooza festival with Porter , in front of an audience of 90 @,@ 000 people . The Hollywood Reporter 's Steve Baltin wrote , " given the infrequency with which he tours , it 's sometimes easy to forget just how dynamic a performer he is , but after a spectacular 90 @-@ minute show , there was no denying the rapper 's power . " Adam Graham of The Detroit News said that " Eminem delivered the goods to the huge throng of people " . Gil Kaufman of MTV News felt that " Eminem came , saw and conquered his Lollapalooza debut . " Eminem performed a 28 @-@ song set list at Virgin Group 's V Festival ( <unk> ) on August 20 , 2011 and the following day , which included " Not Afraid " as the final song before the encore of " Lose Yourself " . The first day took place in Chelmsford , Essex and the second day took place in Staffordshire . Eminem reportedly earned a total of £ 2 million for his two performances . Chris Salmon of The Guardian called Eminem 's performance of " Not Afraid " " majestic " ; he went on to writing that " It 's a set fit to close any festival , pop @-@ centred or otherwise . " BBC 's Chi Chi <unk> noted that Eminem 's performance was " fast @-@ paced " . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 Digital download 
 " Not Afraid " – 4 : 10 
 CD single 
 " Not Afraid " – 4 : 10 
 " Not Afraid " ( Instrumental ) – 4 : 10 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits for " Not Afraid " are adapted from the liner notes of Recovery . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Effigy Studios in Ferndale , Michigan , Encore Studios in Burbank , California and Ajax , Ontario . 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release and radio add history = = 
 = Kalimpong = 
 Kalimpong ( Bengali : <unk> ্ <unk> , Nepali : <unk> ) is a hill station in the Indian state of West Bengal . It is located at an average elevation of 1 @,@ 250 metres ( 4 @,@ 101 ft ) . The town is set to be the headquarters of the announced district of Kalimpong . The Indian Army 's 27 Mountain Division is located on the outskirts of the town . 
 The Kalimpong is known for its educational institutions , many of which were established during the British colonial period . It used to be a gateway in the trade between Tibet and India before China 's annexation of Tibet and the Sino @-@ Indian War . Kalimpong and neighbouring Darjeeling were major centres calling for a separate Gorkhaland state in the 1980s , and more recently in 2010 . 
 The municipality sits on a ridge overlooking the Teesta River and is a tourist destination owing to its temperate climate , magnificent Himalayan beauty and proximity to popular tourist locations in the region . Horticulture is important to Kalimpong : It has a flower market notable for its wide array of orchids ; nurseries , which export Himalayan grown flower bulbs , tubers and rhizomes , contribute to the economy of Kalimpong . Home to ethnic Nepalis , indigenous Lepchas , other ethnic groups and non @-@ native migrants from other parts of India , the town is a religious centre of Buddhism . The Buddhist monastery Zang Dhok Palri Phodang holds a number of rare Tibetan Buddhist scriptures . 
 The Kalimpong Science Centre , established under the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council ( DGHC ) in 2008 is a recent addition to its many tourist attractions . The Science Centre , which provides for scientific awareness among the students of the town and the locals sits atop the Deolo Hill . 
 = = Name origin = = 
 The precise etymology of the name Kalimpong remains unclear . There are many theories on the origin of the name . One widely accepted theory claims that the name " Kalimpong " means " Assembly ( or Stockade ) of the King 's Ministers " in Tibetan , derived from <unk> ( " King 's ministers " ) and pong ( " stockade " ) . It may be derived from the translation " ridge where we play " from Lepcha , as it was known to be the place for traditional tribal gatherings for summer sporting events . People from the hills call the area <unk> ( " the black spurs " ) . 
 According to K.P. <unk> , author of The Untold and Unknown Reality about the Lepchas , the term Kalimpong is deduced from the name <unk> , which in Lepcha means " Hillock of Assemblage " ; in time , the name was distorted to <unk> , and later further contorted to Kalimpong . Another possible derivation points to <unk> , a fibrous plant found in abundance in the region . 
 = = History = = 
 Until the mid @-@ 19th century , the area around Kalimpong was ruled in succession by the Sikkimese and Bhutanese kingdoms . Under Sikkimese rule , the area was known as <unk> . In 1706 , the king of Bhutan won this territory from the Sikkimese monarch and renamed it Kalimpong . Overlooking the Teesta Valley , Kalimpong is believed to have once been the forward position of the Bhutanese in the 18th century . The area was sparsely populated by the indigenous Lepcha community and migrant Bhutia and Limbu tribes . Later in 1780 , the Gurkhas invaded and conquered Kalimpong . After the Anglo @-@ Bhutan War in 1864 , the Treaty of <unk> ( 1865 ) was signed , in which Bhutanese held territory east of the Teesta River was ceded to the British East India Company . At that time , Kalimpong was a hamlet , with only two or three families known to reside there . The first recorded mention of the town was a fleeting reference made that year by Ashley Eden , a government official with the Bengal Civil Service . Kalimpong was added to district of Darjeeling in 1866 . In 1866 – 1867 an Anglo @-@ Bhutanese commission demarcated the common boundaries between the two , thereby giving shape to the Kalimpong subdivision and the Darjeeling district . 
 After the war , the region became a subdivision of the Western <unk> district , and the following year it was merged with the district of Darjeeling . The temperate climate prompted the British to develop the town as an alternative hill station to Darjeeling , to escape the scorching summer heat in the plains . Kalimpong 's proximity to the Nathu La and Jelep La passes ( La means " pass " ) , offshoots of the ancient Silk Road , was an added advantage . It soon became an important trading outpost in the trade of furs , wools and food grains between India and Tibet . The increase in commerce attracted large numbers of migrants from Nepal , leading to an increase in population and economic prosperity . Britain assigned a plot within Kalimpong to the influential Bhutanese Dorji family , through which trade and relations with Bhutan flowed . This later became Bhutan House , a Bhutanese administrative and cultural center . 
 The arrival of Scottish missionaries saw the construction of schools and welfare centres for the British . Rev. W. Macfarlane in the early 1870s established the first schools in the area . The Scottish University Mission Institution was opened in 1886 , followed by the Kalimpong Girls High School . In 1900 , Reverend J.A. Graham founded the Dr. Graham 's Homes for destitute Anglo @-@ Indian students . By 1907 , most schools in Kalimpong started offering education to Indian students . By 1911 , the population had swollen to 7 @,@ 880 . 
 Following Indian independence in 1947 , Kalimpong became part of the state of West Bengal , after Bengal was partitioned between India and Pakistan . With China 's annexation of Tibet in 1959 , many Buddhist monks fled Tibet and established monasteries in Kalimpong . These monks brought many rare Buddhist scriptures with them . In 1962 , the permanent closure of the Jelep Pass after the Sino @-@ Indian War disrupted trade between Tibet and India , and led to a slowdown in Kalimpong 's economy . In 1976 , the visiting Dalai Lama consecrated the Zang Dhok Palri Phodang monastery , which houses many of the scriptures . 
 Between 1986 and 1988 , the demand for a separate state of Gorkhaland and Kamtapur based on ethnic lines grew strong . Riots between the Gorkha National Liberation Front ( <unk> ) and the West Bengal government reached a stand @-@ off after a forty @-@ day strike . The town was virtually under siege , and the state government called in the Indian army to maintain law and order . This led to the formation of the Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council , a body that was given semi @-@ autonomous powers to govern the Darjeeling district , except the area under the Siliguri subdivision . Since 2007 , the demand for a separate Gorkhaland state has been revived by the Gorkha Janmukti Morcha and its supporters in the Darjeeling hills . The Kamtapur People 's Party and its supporters ' movement for a separate Kamtapur state covering North Bengal have gained momentum . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The town centre is on a ridge connecting two hills , Deolo Hill and <unk> Hill , at an elevation of 1 @,@ 247 m ( 4 @,@ 091 ft ) . Deolo , the highest point in Kalimpong , has an altitude of 1 @,@ 704 m ( 5 @,@ 591 ft ) and <unk> Hill is at an elevation of 1 @,@ 372 m ( 4 @,@ 501 ft ) . The River Teesta flows in the valley below and separates Kalimpong from the state of Sikkim . The soil in the Kalimpong area is typically reddish in color . Occasional dark soils are found due to extensive existence of phyllite and schists . The Shiwalik Hills , like most of the Himalayan foothills , have steep slopes and soft , loose topsoil , leading to frequent landslides in the monsoon season . The hills are nestled within higher peaks and the snow @-@ clad Himalayan ranges tower over the town in the distance . Mount Kanchenjunga at 8 @,@ 586 m ( 28 @,@ 169 ft ) the world 's third tallest peak , is clearly visible from Kalimpong . 
 Kalimpong has five distinct seasons : spring , summer , autumn , winter and the monsoons . The annual temperature ranges from a high of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) to a low of 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) . Summers are mild , with an average maximum temperature of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) in August . Summers are followed by the monsoon rains which lash the town between June and September . The monsoons are severe , often causing landslides which sequester the town from the rest of India . Winter lasts from December to February , with the maximum temperature being around 15 ° C ( 59 ° F ) . During the monsoon and winter seasons , Kalimpong is often enveloped by fog . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Tourism is the most significant contributor to Kalimpong 's economy . The summer and spring seasons are the most popular with tourists , keeping many of town 's residents employed directly and indirectly . The town — earlier an important trade post between India and Tibet — hopes to boost its economy after the reopening of the Nathu La ( pass ) in April 2006 . Though this has resumed Indo – China border trades , it is expected that Kalimpong will have a better chance of revival as a hub for Indo – China trades if the demand of local leaders for reopening of Jelep La pass also is met . 
 Kalimpong is a major ginger growing area of India . Kalimpong and the state of Sikkim together contribute 15 percent of ginger produced in India . The Darjeeling Himalayan hill region is internationally famous for its tea industry . However , most of the tea gardens are on the western side of Teesta river ( towards the town of Darjeeling ) and so tea gardens near Kalimpong contribute only 4 percent of total tea production of the region . In Kalimpong division , 90 percent of land is cultivable but only 10 percent is used for tea production . Kalimpong is well known for its flower export industry — especially for its wide array of indigenous orchids and gladioli . 
 A significant contributor to the town 's economy is education sector . The schools of Kalimpong , besides imparting education to the locals , attract a significant number of students from the plains , the neighbouring state of Sikkim and countries such as Bhutan , Bangladesh , Nepal and Thailand . 
 Many establishments cater to the Indian army bases near the town , providing it with essential supplies . Small contributions to the economy come by the way of the sale of traditional arts and crafts of Sikkim and Tibet . Government efforts related to sericulture , seismology , and fisheries provide a steady source of employment to many of its residents . 
 Kalimpong is well renowned for its cheese , noodles and lollipops . Kalimpong exports a wide range of traditional handicrafts , wood @-@ carvings , embroidered items , bags and purses with tapestry work , copper ware , scrolls , Tibetan jewellery and artifacts . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Kalimpong is located off the National Highway 31A ( <unk> ) , which links Sevok to Gangtok . The <unk> is an offshoot of the NH 31 , which connects Sevok to Siliguri . These two National Highways together , via Sevok , links Kalimpong to the plains . Regular bus services and hired vehicles connect Kalimpong with Siliguri and the neighbouring towns of Kurseong , Darjeeling and Gangtok . Four wheel drives are popular means of transport , as they can easily navigate the steep slopes in the region . However , road communication often get disrupted in the monsoons due to landslides . In the town , people usually travel by foot . Residents also use bicycle , two @-@ wheelers and hired taxis for short distances . 
 The nearest airport is in Bagdogra near Siliguri , about 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) from Kalimpong . Air India , Jet Airways and Druk Air ( Bhutan ) are the four major carriers that connect the airport to Delhi , Calcutta , Paro ( Bhutan ) , Guwahati and Bangkok ( Thailand ) . The closest major railway station is New Jalpaiguri , on the outskirts of Siliguri , which is connected with almost all major cities of the country . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 At the 2011 India census , Kalimpong town area had a population of 42 @,@ 988 , of which 52 % were male and 48 % female . 
 At the 2001 census , Kalimpong had an average literacy rate of 79 % , higher than the national average of 59 @.@ 5 % : male literacy was 84 % , and female literacy was 73 % . In Kalimpong , 8 % of the population was under 6 years of age . The Scheduled castes and scheduled tribes population for Kalimpong was 5 @,@ 100 and 5 @,@ 121 respectively . 
 = = Civic administration = = 
 Kalimpong is the headquarters of the Kalimpong subdivision of the Darjeeling district . The semi @-@ autonomous Darjeeling Gorkha Hill Council ( DGHC ) , set up by the West Bengal government in 1988 , administers this subdivision as well as the Darjeeling Sadar and Kurseong subdivisions . Kalimpong elects eight councillors to the DGHC , who manages the departments of Public Health , Education , Public Works , Transport , Tourism , Market , Small scale industries , Agriculture , Agricultural waterways , Forest ( except reserved forests ) , Water , Livestock , Vocational Training and Sports and Youth services . The district administration of Darjeeling , which is the authoritative body for the departments of election , panchayat , law and order , revenue etc . , also acts as an interface of communication between the Council and the State Government . The rural area in the subdivision covers three community development blocks Kalimpong I , Kalimpong II and <unk> consisting of forty @-@ two gram panchayats . A Sub @-@ Divisional Officer ( SDO ) presides over the Kalimpong subdivision . Kalimpong has a police station that serves the municipality and 18 gram panchayats of Kalimpong – I CD block . 
 The Kalimpong municipality , which was established in 1945 , is in charge of the infrastructure of the town such as potable water and roads . The municipal area is divided into twenty @-@ three wards . Kalimpong municipality is constructing additional water storage tanks to meet the requirement of potable water , and it needs an increase of water supply from the ' Neora <unk> Water Supply Scheme ' for this purpose . Often , landslides occurring in monsoon season cause havoc to the roads in and around Kalimpong . The West Bengal State Electricity Distribution Corporation Limited ( <unk> ) that provides electricity here , needs to resolve issues like voltage fluctuations , unstable electrical supply and faulty electrical meters etc. faced by people of Kalimpong . Renewable Energy Development Agency of the state has plans to promote usage of solar street lights in Kalimpong and proposed an energy park here to sell renewable energy gadgets . The Public Works Department is responsible for the road connecting the town to the National Highway – NH @-@ 31A . The Kalimpong municipality has a total of 10 health care units , with a total of 433 bed capacity . 
 The Kalimpong assembly constituency , which is an assembly segment of the Darjeeling parliamentary constituency , elects one member of the Vidhan Sabha of West Bengal . 
 = = People , culture , and cuisine = = 
 The original settlers of Kalimpong are the Lepchas although the majority of the populace are ethnic Nepali , having migrated from Nepal to Kalimpong in search of jobs while it was under British rule . 
 Indigenous ethnic groups include the <unk> , Bhutia , Sherpas , Limbus , Rais , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Gurungs , Tamangs , Yolmos , <unk> , <unk> , Sarkis , <unk> and the <unk> . The other non @-@ native communities are the Bengalis , Marwaris , Anglo @-@ Indian , Chinese , Biharis and Tibetans who escaped to Kalimpong after fleeing the Communist Chinese invasion of Tibet . Kalimpong is home to <unk> <unk> Dorje — one of the 17th Karmapa incarnations . Kalimpong is the closest Indian town to Bhutan 's western border , and has a small number of Bhutanese nationals residing here . Hinduism is the largest religion followed by Buddhism and Christianity . Islam has a minuscule presence in this region , mostly Tibetan Muslims who fled in 1959 after Chinese invasion of Tibet . The Buddhist monastery Zang Dhok Palri Phodang holds a number of rare Tibetan Buddhist scriptures . There is a mosque in the bazaar area of Kalimpong . 
 Popular Hindu festivals include Dashain , Tihar and the Buddhist festival of Losar . Languages spoken in Kalimpong include Nepali , which is the predominant language ; Lepcha , Limbu , Tamang , Kirat , Hindi , English and Bengali . Though there is a growing interest in cricket as a winter sport in Darjeeling Hills , football still remains the most popular sport in Kalimpong . Every year since 1947 , the Independence Shield Football Tournament is organized here as part of the two @-@ day @-@ long Independence Day celebrations . Former captain of India national football team , <unk> <unk> hails from Kalimpong . A popular snack in Kalimpong is the momo , steamed dumplings made up of pork , beef or vegetable cooked in a wrapping of flour and served with watery soup . Wai @-@ Wai is a packaged Nepalese snack made of noodles which are eaten either dry or in soup form . <unk> , a kind of hard cheese made from yak 's or <unk> 's ( a hybrid of yak and cattle ) milk , is sometimes chewed . A form of noodle called <unk> , served in soup form is popular in Kalimpong . There are a large number of restaurants which offer a wide variety of cuisines , ranging from Indian to continental , to cater to the tourists . Tea is the most popular beverage in Kalimpong , procured from the famed Darjeeling tea gardens . Kalimpong has a golf course besides Kalimpong Circuit House . 
 The cultural centres in Kalimpong include , the Lepcha Museum and the Zang Dhok Palri Phodang monastery . The Lepcha Museum , a kilometre away from the town centre , showcases the culture of the Lepcha community , the indigenous peoples of Sikkim . The Zang Dhok Palri <unk> monastery has 108 volumes of the Kangyur , and belongs to the Gelug of Buddhism . 
 = = Media = = 
 Kalimpong has access to most of the television channels aired in the rest of India . Cable Television still provides service to many homes in the town and it 's outskirts , while DTH connections are now practically mandatory throughout the country . Besides mainstream Indian channels , many Nepali @-@ language channels such as <unk> DD , Kalimpong Television <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( an association of the Hill Channel Network ) , Jan <unk> , Himalayan People 's Channel ( HPC ) , and Kalimpong Times are broadcast in Kalimpong . These channels , which mainly broadcast locally relevant news , are produced by regional media houses and news networks , and are broadcast through the local cable network , which is now slowly becoming defunct due to the Indian government 's ruling on mandatory digitization of TV channels . 
 Newspapers in Kalimpong include English language dailies The Statesman and The Telegraph , which are printed in Siliguri , and The Economic Times and the Hindustan Times , which are printed in Kolkata ( Calcutta ) . 
 Among other languages , Nepali , Hindi and Bengali are prominent vernacular languages used in this region . Newspapers in all these four languages are available in the Darjeeling Hills region . Of the largely circulated Nepali newspapers Himalay Darpan , <unk> and some Sikkim @-@ based Nepali newspapers like <unk> <unk> and <unk> Dainik are read most . The Tibet Mirror was the first Tibetan @-@ language newspaper published in Kalimpong in 1925 @.@ while Himalayan Times was the first English to have come out from Kalimpong in the year 1947 , it was closed down in the year 1962 after the Chinese aggression but was started once again and is now in regular print . It is known for its bold and aggressive stand on all local issues . Internet service and Internet cafés are well established ; these are mostly served through broadband , data card of different mobile services , WLL , <unk> lines , Kalimpong News ( http : / / <unk> ) , Kalimpong Online News ( http : / / <unk> ) , Kalimpong Times ( http : / / <unk> / ) and <unk> ( http : / / <unk> / ) are the main online news sites that collect and present local and North Bengal & Sikkim news from its own agencies like <unk> and other newspapers . Besides this there are others like <unk> , <unk> and several others . All India Radio and several other National and Private Channels including FM Radio are received in Kalimpong . 
 The area is serviced by major telecommunication companies of India with most types of cellular services in most areas . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are fifteen major schools in Kalimpong , the most notable ones being Scottish Universities Mission Institution , Dr. Graham 's Homes , St Joseph 's Convent , St. Augustine 's School , <unk> Academy , <unk> <unk> , Springdale Academy , St. <unk> School , Kalimpong Girls ' High School , <unk> Homes and Gandhi Ashram School . The Scottish Universities Mission Institution was the first school that was opened in 1886 . Schools offer education up to class high secondary , following which students may choose to join a Junior College or carry on with an additional two years of schooling . 
 Kalimpong College , Cluny Women 's College and <unk> Management College are the main colleges in the town . Former two are affiliated to the North Bengal University and the later affiliated to West Bengal University of Technology apart from these Good Shepherd <unk> ( Hotel management Institution ) offer courses on hospitality sectors . Most students however , choose to further their studies in Siliguri , Calcutta , and other colleges in the Indian metropolis . The <unk> <unk> Monastery , at <unk> Hill near Kalimpong , is managed by Yellow Hat sect and has a library of Tibetan manuscripts and <unk> . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 The area around Kalimpong lies in the Eastern Himalayas , which is classified as an ecological hotspot , one of only three among the ecoregions of India . Neora Valley National Park that lies within the Kalimpong subdivision and is home to tigers . Acacia is the most commonly found species at lower altitudes , while cinnamon , ficus , bamboo , cacti and cardamom , are found in the hillsides around Kalimpong . The forests found at higher altitudes are made up of pine trees and other evergreen alpine vegetation . Seven species of rhododendrons are found in the region east of Kalimpong . The temperate deciduous forests include oak , birch , maple and alder . Three hundred species of orchid are found around Kalimpong , and Poinsettia and sunflower are some of the wild species that line the roads of Kalimpong . 
 The Red panda , Clouded leopard , Siberian weasel , Asiatic black bear , barking deer , Himalayan tahr , goral , gaur and pangolin are some of the fauna found near Kalimpong . Avifauna of the region include the pheasants , cuckoos , <unk> , flycatchers , bulbuls , orioles , owls , partridges , sunbirds , warblers , swallows , swifts and woodpeckers . 
 Kalimpong is a major production centre of gladioli in India , and orchids , which are exported to many parts of the world . The Rishi Bankim Chandra Park is an ecological museums within Kalimpong . Citrus <unk> Research Station at Kalimpong works towards control of diseases , plant protection and production of disease free orange seedlings . 
 Kalimpong is also famous for their rich practice of cactus cultivation . Its nurseries attract people from far and wide for the absolutely stunning collection of cacti which they host . The strains of cacti , though not indigenous to the locale , has been carefully cultivated over the years , and now town boasts one of the most fascinating and exhaustive collection of the Cactaceae family . The plants have adapted well to the altitude and environment , and now proves to be one of the chief proponents of tourism to the township . 
 = Air @-@ tractor sledge = 
 Sir Douglas Mawson 's air @-@ tractor sledge was a converted fixed @-@ wing aircraft taken on the 1911 – 14 Australasian Antarctic Expedition , the first plane to be taken to the Antarctic . Expedition leader Douglas Mawson had planned to use the Vickers R.E.P. Type <unk> as a reconnaissance and search and rescue tool , and to assist in publicity , but the aircraft crashed heavily during a test flight in Adelaide , Australia , only two months before Mawson 's scheduled departure date . The plane was nevertheless sent south with the expedition , after having been stripped of its wings and metal sheathing from the fuselage . Engineer Frank Bickerton spent most of the 1912 winter working to convert it to a sledge , fashioning brakes from a pair of geological drills and a steering system from the plane 's landing gear . It was first tested on 15 November 1912 and subsequently assisted in laying depots for the summer sledging parties , but its use during the expedition was minimal . 
 Towing a train of four sledges , the air @-@ tractor accompanied a party led by Bickerton to explore the area to the west of the expedition 's base at Cape Denison . The freezing conditions resulted in the jamming of the engine 's pistons after just 10 miles ( 16 km ) , and the air @-@ tractor was left behind . Some time later it was dragged back to Cape Denison , and its frame was left on the ice when the expedition returned home in 1913 . In 2008 a team from the Mawson 's Huts Foundation began searching for the remains of the air @-@ tractor sledge ; a seat was found in 2009 , and fragments of the tail assembly a year later . 
 The Mawson 's Huts Foundation has undertaken extensive investigation using sophisticated equipment in 2009 and 2010 . Results indicate that the air tractor , or parts of it , is still buried under 3m of ice where it was abandoned at Cape Denison . 
 = = Background = = 
 Douglas Mawson had accompanied Ernest Shackleton 's 1907 – 09 British Antarctic Expedition . Along with Edgeworth David and Alistair Mackay , he had been part of a man @-@ hauled sledging expedition , the first to reach the area of the South Magnetic Pole . Upon his return from Antarctica , he recommenced to his post as geology lecturer at the University of Adelaide . Despite an offer from Robert Falcon Scott to join his Terra Nova Expedition to reach the Geographic South Pole , Mawson began planning his own Antarctic expedition . Mawson 's plan , which led to the Australasian Antarctic Expedition , envisaged three bases on the Antarctic continent , collectively surveying much of the coast directly south of Australia . He approached Shackleton , who not only approved of his plan but was prepared to lead the expedition himself . Although Shackleton withdrew from the expedition in December 1910 , he continued to assist Mawson with publicity and fund @-@ raising . 
 = = = Purchase = = = 
 Mawson travelled to Britain in early 1911 to raise funds , hire crew , and purchase equipment . He considered taking a plane to the Antarctic , which could work as a reconnaissance tool , transport cargo , and assist with search and rescue . Crucially , as no plane had yet been taken to the continent , it could also be used to generate publicity . Unsure of the type of plane he should take , but considering a Blériot , Mawson mentioned his plans to Scott 's wife Kathleen Scott , an aircraft enthusiast . She recommended he take a monoplane , and conveyed his interest to Lieutenant Hugh Evelyn Watkins of the Essex Regiment . Watkins had connections with the ship and aircraft manufacturer Vickers Limited , which had recently entered into a licence agreement to build and sell aircraft in Britain designed by the Frenchman Robert <unk> @-@ <unk> . In a letter to Mawson on 18 May , Kathleen wrote : 
 I believe I can help you about aeroplanes . I think you can do far better than a Bleriot ... There is a machine that the Vickers people have bought which is infinitely more stable , heavier and more solid and will carry more weight . Its cost is £ 1000 , but I think it could be worked to get it for £ 700 or even less ... A man I know who had only before driven biplanes , drove it and it stayed up half an hour , which speaks very well for its stability ... If you think it 's worth considering , I can let you meet the man concerned early next week and he can show you the machine and take you up in it . 
 On Kathleen Scott 's advice , Mawson purchased a Vickers R.E.P. Type <unk> , one of only eight built . It was fitted with a five @-@ cylinder R.E.P. engine developing 60 horsepower ( 45 kW ) , and had a maximum range of 300 miles ( 480 km ) at a cruising speed of 48 knots ( 89 km / h ; 55 mph ) . Its wingspan was 47 feet ( 14 m ) , and its length 36 feet ( 11 m ) . The pilot used a joystick for pitch and roll , with lateral control by wing warping . Mawson opted for a two @-@ seater version , in a tandem arrangement , with a spare ski undercarriage . The total bill , dated 17 August 1911 , came to £ 955 4s 8d . Mawson hired Watkins to fly the plane , and Frank Bickerton to accompany as engineer . After Vickers tested the aircraft at Dartford and Brooklands , P & O shipped the plane to Adelaide aboard the steamship Macedonia , at half the usual rate of freight . 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 A series of public demonstrations were planned in Australia to assist in fund @-@ raising , the first of which was scheduled for 5 October 1911 at the Cheltenham Racecourse in Adelaide . During a test flight the day before , excessive pressure in the fuel tank caused it to rupture , almost blinding Watkins . That problem resolved , Watkins took Frank Wild , whom Mawson had hired to command a support base during the expedition , on another test flight the morning of the demonstration . In Watkins ' account , which he addressed to Vickers ' Aviation Department , he wrote : " [ we were ] about 200 ft. up . I got into a fierce tremor , and then into an air pocket , and was brought down about 100 ft . , got straight , and dropped into another , almost a vacuum . That finished it . We hit the ground with an awful crash , both wings damaged , one cylinder broken , and the Nose bent up , the tail in half , etc . " 
 Although the two men were only slightly injured , the plane was damaged beyond repair . Mawson decided to salvage the plane by converting it into a motorised sledge . He fitted the skis , and removed the wings and most of the sheathing to save weight . In his official account of the expedition , The Home of the Blizzard , Mawson wrote that the advantages of this " air @-@ tractor sledge " were expected to be " speed , steering control , and comparative safety from crevasses owing to the great length of the runners " . No longer needing a pilot , and believing him to be responsible for the crash , Mawson dismissed Watkins . 
 The air @-@ tractor sledge was taken to Hobart , where the expedition ship SY Aurora was being loaded . It was secured on board in a crate lined with tin , which weighed far more than the sledge itself , on top of the ship 's forecastle and two boat @-@ skids . To fuel the sledge , along with the motor launch and the wireless equipment , the Aurora also carried 4 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 18 @,@ 000 L ) of benzine and 1 @,@ 300 imperial gallons ( 5 @,@ 900 L ) of kerosene . Fully loaded , the ship left Hobart on 2 December 1911 . 
 = = In Antarctica = = 
 The Aurora reached the Antarctic mainland on 8 January 1912 , after a two @-@ week stop on Macquarie Island to establish a wireless relay station and research base . The expedition 's main base was established in Adélie Land , at Cape Denison in Commonwealth Bay . While the Aurora was unloading , a violent whirlwind lifted the 300 @-@ pound ( 140 kg ) lid off the air @-@ tractor 's crate , throwing it 50 yards ( 46 m ) . The main hut was erected immediately , but the strong winds meant that work on the air @-@ tractor 's hangar was delayed until March . When the winds abated , a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) by 35 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) hangar was constructed next to the main hut , from empty packing cases . 
 Bickerton began work on the air @-@ tractor sledge on 14 April 1912 . His first job was to repair the sledge , which had been damaged in transit when a violent storm hit the Aurora . A giant wave had slammed into the crate containing the sledge , driving the fuselage 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) through its side . With the repair completed , Bickerton began the serious work of converting the plane into a sledge . He constructed brakes from a pair of geological drills , and a steering system from the landing gear . Bickerton painted the engine and fuel tank black to absorb heat better and protect them from freezing . By June he had the engine running properly , and during a lull in the winds in early September he fitted the skis . Finally , he raised the fuselage 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) off the ground to allow the propeller free movement . 
 On 27 October 1912 , Mawson outlined the summer sledging program . Seven sledging parties would depart from Cape Denison , surveying the coast and interior of Adélie Land and neighbouring King George V Land . They were required to return to the base by 15 January , when the Aurora was due to depart ; any later , it was feared , and she would be trapped by ice . Bickerton was to lead one of the parties , which would use the air @-@ tractor to haul four sledges and explore the coast to the west of the hut . Most of the parties left in early November , but Bickerton 's Western party delayed until December , in the hope of avoiding the ferocious winter winds . Work on the air @-@ tractor sledge was delayed by the fierce winds , and the first trial took place on 15 November , between the main base and Aladdin 's Cave — a depot which had been established on the plateau above Cape Denison . The air @-@ tractor reached a speed of 20 miles per hour ( 32 km / h ) , covering the 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , expedition member Charles <unk> recorded , " in great style " . Soon , the sledge began hauling cargo up the slope , laying depots for the summer sledging parties . 
 = = = Broken = = = 
 The Western party left Cape Denison on 3 December 1912 . Accompanying Bickerton and the air @-@ tractor were cartographer Alfred <unk> and surgeon Leslie <unk> . The air @-@ tractor made slow progress hauling its train of sledges , and about 10 miles ( 16 km ) out from the base its engine began experiencing difficulty . Bickerton shut it down and the three set up camp . At 4 am the next morning the party set off again , but the engine continued to struggle ; oil ejected from an idle cylinder and the cylinder 's lack of compression led Bickerton to suspect broken piston rings to be the root of the problem . This would take only a matter of hours to fix . As he later recorded , " These thoughts were brought to a sudden close by the engine , without any warning , pulling up with such a jerk that the propeller was smashed . On moving the latter , something fell into the oil in the crank @-@ case and fizzled , while the propeller could only be swung through an angle of about 30 [ degrees ] . " 
 The party continued without the air @-@ tractor , man @-@ hauling the sledges to a point 158 miles ( 254 km ) west of Cape Denison , and returned to base on 18 January 1913 . Mawson 's Far Eastern Party failed to return , and six men , including Bickerton , remained for an extra winter . On 8 February , just hours after Aurora left Commonwealth Bay after waiting for three weeks , Mawson staggered alone into base , his colleagues Belgrave Edward Sutton Ninnis and Xavier Mertz dead . As Mawson was being nursed back to health , Bickerton dragged the air @-@ tractor sledge back to base to diagnose the reason for its failure . He found that the freezing conditions had caused the engine oil to congeal , jamming the pistons . He abandoned the sledge at Boat Harbour , next to the base . When Aurora returned to Cape Denison for the final time on 13 December 1913 , only the engine and propeller were taken back to Australia . 
 = = Recovery efforts = = 
 The bill for the plane remained unpaid . In 1914 Vickers reminded Mawson , who had apparently forgotten the outstanding debt . Mawson wrote to Vickers director Sir Trevor Dawson in November 1916 , requesting the company write off the bill as a donation . His company buoyed by armaments contracts , Dawson agreed . The next expedition to take a plane to the Antarctic was Shackleton 's 1921 – 22 Quest Expedition , but the Avro Baby remained grounded owing to missing parts . Not until 16 November 1928 — when Hubert Wilkins and Carl Ben Eielson flew for 20 minutes around Deception Island , just over a year before Admiral Richard Evelyn Byrd 's first flight over the South Pole — was a plane airborne in the Antarctic . 
 The frame of the air @-@ tractor sledge remained on the ice at Boat Harbour where Bickerton had left it . The last expedition to Cape Denison to see the frame was in 1976 ; the next expedition , in 1981 , could find no trace of it . The ice in that location does not move , and the implication is that the frame sank through the ice . It is therefore possible the frame is still there . 
 In 2007 @-@ 8 a team from the Mawson 's Huts Foundation began to search for the remnants of the plane . Using photographs from 1913 , 1931 and 1976 it was possible to derive transits between the frame and distant objects which located the frame to a small area of ice about 50 m from the hut . Comparison with a 1931 photograph by Frank Hurley confirmed this location . 
 The following summer ( 2008 – 9 ) , the team extensively surveyed the area where they believed the air @-@ tractor to be , using ground @-@ penetrating radar . A 3 metre deep trench was dug in a promising area , but nothing was found except fragments of seaweed indicating the overlying ice must have melted sometime in the past . Temperature records from the nearby Dumont d 'Urville Station showed that there had been extended periods ( each of about six weeks ) of above average temperatures in 1976 and 1981 , suggesting the ice around the harbour could have melted . Dr Chris Henderson , the leader of the team , believes " the frame sank in situ to the rock surface , three metres below the present ice surface " . 
 Next year ( the 2009 – 10 season ) further search was undertaken using differential GPS , bathymetry equipment , ice augers , a magnetometer and a metal detector ( whose sensor was placed down the ice auger holes after drilling ) . The ice showed signs of having extensively melted in the past , was about 3 metres thick and covering smooth rock which extended Northwards to become the harbour bottom . Visual examination of the harbour bottom during the bathymetry survey did not reveal any fragments of the frame in the first 30 metres of the harbour . 
 The most significant findings from the ice survey were a positive reading from the metal detector , coupled with a significant echo from the Ground Penetrating Radar , both from the small area where the frame is assumed to have sunk . 
 Parts of the Air Tractor are already known to exist : The Australian Antarctic Division has one wheel from the frame , and its ice @-@ rudder – both of which were found in the harbour . In January 2009 the remains of a seat from the air @-@ tractor were found in rocks near the hut , about 200 metres ( 660 ft ) from where the team believes the frame to be buried . On 1 January 2010 , a day of unusually low tide , 4 small capping pieces from the end section of the tail were found by the edge of the harbour . The tail and a section of fuselage had been removed from the rest of the air @-@ tractor before it was abandoned in 1913 , therefore this discovery did not shed much light on the location of the rest of the frame , but it suggests that " the frame , or parts of it , can survive for nearly 100 years in this environment " . 
 The team returned to Cape Denison over the 2010 – 11 summer , but the crash of a French helicopter near Dumont d 'Urville Station in October 2010 forced deployment of a much reduced team with no resources to continue the search . 
 The findings to date ( 2011 ) suggest that metal object ( s ) exist at a depth of 3 metres , on rock , in the location where the frame was last known to have been seen in 1976 . This is likely to be the remains of Mawson 's Air Tractor , but confirmation awaits a future opportunity . 
 = X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine = 
 X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine is a 2009 American superhero film based on the Marvel Comics fictional character Wolverine , distributed by 20th Century Fox . It is the fourth installment and the first spinoff in the X @-@ Men film series . The film was directed by Gavin Hood , written by David Benioff and Skip Woods , and produced by and starring Hugh Jackman . It co @-@ stars Liev Schreiber , Danny Huston , Dominic Monaghan and Ryan Reynolds . The film is a prequel / spin @-@ off focusing on the violent past of the mutant Wolverine and his relationship with his half @-@ brother Victor Creed . The plot details Wolverine 's childhood as James Howlett ( Troye Sivan ) , his early encounters with Major William Stryker , his time with Team X , and the bonding of Wolverine 's skeleton with the indestructible metal adamantium during the Weapon X program . 
 The film was mostly shot in Australia and New Zealand , with Canada also serving as a location . Production and post @-@ production were troubled , with delays due to the weather and Jackman 's other commitments , an incomplete screenplay that was still being written in Los Angeles while principal photography rolled in Australia , conflicts arising between director Hood and Fox 's executives , and an unfinished workprint being leaked on the Internet one month before the film 's debut . 
 X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine was released worldwide on May 1 , 2009 , the film was a financial success , opening at the top of the box office and grossing $ 179 million in the United States and Canada and over $ 373 million worldwide . The movie received mixed to negative reviews , with critics considering the film uninspired , criticizing its screenplay and poorly @-@ produced CGI , though praising Jackman 's performance . Jackman himself was unhappy with the film . Another Wolverine film titled The Wolverine was released in 2013 to positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1845 , James Howlett , a boy living in Canada , witnesses his father being killed by groundskeeper Thomas Logan . The trauma activates the boy 's mutation : bone claws protrude from his knuckles , and he kills Thomas , who reveals that he is James 's real father . James flees along with Thomas 's son Victor Creed , who is thus James 's half @-@ brother . They spend the next century as soldiers , fighting in the American Civil War , both World Wars , and the Vietnam War . In Vietnam , Victor attempts to rape a Vietnamese woman , and kills a senior officer who tries to stop him . James defends Victor and the two are sentenced to execution by firing squad , which they survive . Major William Stryker approaches them in military custody , and offers them membership in Team X , a group of mutants including Agent Zero , Wade Wilson , John Wraith , Fred Dukes , and Chris Bradley . They join the team for a few years , with James now using the alias Logan , but the group 's ( especially Victor 's ) disregard for human life causes James to leave . 
 Six years later , James ( now using the name Logan ) is working as a lumberjack in Canada , where he lives with his girlfriend Kayla Silverfox . Stryker and Zero approach Logan at work . Stryker reports that Wade and Bradley have been killed , and he thinks someone is targeting the team 's members . Logan refuses to rejoin Stryker , but after finding Kayla 's bloodied body in the woods , Logan realizes Victor is responsible . He finds him at a local bar , but Logan loses the subsequent fight . Afterward , Stryker explains that Victor has gone rogue , and offers Logan a way to become strong enough to get his revenge . Logan undergoes a painful operation to reinforce his skeleton with adamantium , a virtually indestructible metal . Once the procedure is complete , Stryker attempts to betray Logan by ordering that his memory be erased , but Logan overhears this and escapes to a nearby farm , where an elderly couple take him in . Zero kills them the following morning and tries to kill Logan . Logan takes down Zero 's helicopter , killing him , and swears to kill both Stryker and Victor . 
 Logan locates John and Fred at a boxing club . Fred explains that Victor is still working for Stryker , hunting down mutants for Stryker to experiment on at his new laboratory , located at a place called " The Island " . Fred mentions Remy " Gambit " LeBeau , is the only one who escaped from the island and therefore knows its location . John and Logan find LeBeau in New Orleans , then both fight Victor , who kills John and extracts his DNA . Agreeing to help release mutants that Stryker has captured , Gambit takes Logan to Stryker 's facility on Three Mile Island . Logan learns that Kayla is alive , having been coerced by Stryker into keeping tabs on him in exchange for her sister 's safety . However , Stryker refuses to release her sister and denies Victor the adamantium bonding promised for his service , claiming that test results revealed Victor would not survive the operation . Stryker activates Wade , now known as Weapon XI , a " mutant killer " with the powers of multiple mutants , who he refers to as the " Deadpool " . 
 While Logan and Victor join forces to fight Weapon XI , Kayla is mortally wounded leading the Island 's captive mutants – including a teenager named Scott Summers – to safety . The mutants are subsequently rescued by Professor Charles Xavier . Logan decapitates Weapon XI , destroying one of the cooling towers in the process . Stryker arrives and shoots Logan in the head with adamantium bullets , rendering him unconscious . Before Stryker can shoot Kayla , she grabs him and uses her mutant power to persuade him to turn around and walk away until his feet bleed . Logan regains consciousness but has lost his memory . He sees Kayla 's body , but does not recognize her , and leaves the island . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Stryker is detained for questioning by some MPs in connection with the death of his superior , General Munson , whom Stryker did in fact kill after Munson declared his intention to shut down Stryker 's project . In a post @-@ credits scene , Logan tells a Japanese barmaid he 's " drinking to remember " . In another , Deadpool is shown to still be alive . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hugh Jackman as James " Logan " Howlett / Wolverine : 
 A Canadian mutant and future X @-@ Men member and often referred as Jimmy by Victor Creed . Jackman , who played Wolverine in the previous films , has also become producer of the film via his company Seed Productions , and earned $ 25 million for the film . Jackman underwent a high intensity weight training regimen to improve his physique for the role . He altered the program to shock his body into change and also performed cardiovascular workouts . Jackman noted no digital touches were applied to his physique in a shot of him rising from the tank within which Wolverine has his bones infused with <unk> Sivan as young James Howlett : 
 Casting directors cast Sivan as the young Wolverine after seeing him sing at the Channel Seven Perth Telethon , and he was accepted after sending in an audition tape . Kodi Smit @-@ McPhee was originally cast in the role , when filming was originally beginning in December 2007 , but he opted out to film The Road . Smit @-@ McPhee was later cast as Kurt Wagner / Nightcrawler in the 2016 film X @-@ Men : Apocalypse . 
 Liev Schreiber as Victor Creed : 
 Logan 's mutant half @-@ brother and fellow soldier , who would later become his nemesis Sabretooth . Jackman and Hood compared Wolverine and Sabretooth 's relationship to the Borg – McEnroe rivalry in the world of tennis : they are enemies but they can 't live without each other . Sabretooth represents the pure animal and embodies the darker side of Wolverine 's character , the aspect Wolverine hates about himself . These characters are two sides to the same coin . Tyler Mane , who played him in X @-@ Men , had hoped to reprise the role . Jackman worked with Schreiber before , in the 2001 romantic comedy Kate & Leopold and described him as having a competitive streak necessary to portray Sabretooth . They egged each other on on set to perform more and more stunts . Schreiber put on 40 lb ( 18 kg ) of muscle for the part , and described Sabretooth as the most monstrous role he ever played . As a child , he loved the Wolverine comics because of their unique " urban sensibility " . Schreiber had studied to be a fight choreographer and wanted to be a dancer like Jackman , so he enjoyed working out their fight <unk> James Olsen as young Victor Creed 
 Danny Huston as Major William Stryker : 
 Huston was originally in negotiations for the part , while Brian Cox , who played the character in X2 , wanted to reprise the role . He believed computer @-@ generated imagery , similar to the program applied to Patrick Stewart and Ian McKellen in the opening flashback of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , would allow him to appear as the younger Stryker . Huston liked the complex Stryker , who " both loves and hates mutants because his son was a mutant and drove his wife to suicide . So he understands what they 're going through , but despises their destructive force . " He compared the character to a racehorse breeder , who rears his mutant experiments like children but abandons them when something goes wrong . His son is shown to be frozen at the Weapon X facility and the reason Stryker starts the Weapon XI program . 
 will.i.am as John Wraith : 
 A teleporting mutant . It is will.i.am 's major live @-@ action film debut . Although he initially did not get on with the casting director , he got the role because he wanted to play a mutant with the same power as Nightcrawler . He enrolled in boot camp to get into shape for the part . When filming a fight , he scarred his knuckles after accidentally punching and breaking the camera . 
 Lynn Collins as Kayla Silverfox : 
 Wolverine 's native @-@ American ( Blackfoot / <unk> ) mutant love interest and pawn of Stryker . She has the powers of tactile telepathy and hypnosis , and has the ability to control or convince others to do the things she wants them to . However , Victor is immune to telepathy . Describing her role , Collins said " I had to play off all the guys and their testosterone @-@ heavy abilities . But I learned that the female powers of persuasion easily trump fangs and knives and guns . " Michelle Monaghan turned down the role because of scheduling conflicts , despite her enthusiasm to work with Jackman . 
 Kevin Durand as Fred J. Dukes / The Blob : 
 A mutant with a nearly indestructible layer of skin . In the film 's early sequences , he is a formidable fighting man , but years later , due to a poor diet , has gained an enormous amount of weight . A fan of the X @-@ Men movies , Durand contacted the producers for a role as soon as news of a new film came out . The suit went through six months of modifications , and had a tubing system inside to cool Durand down with ice water . 
 Dominic Monaghan as Chris Bradley : 
 A mutant who can manipulate electricity and electronic objects . It was originally reported that Monaghan was going to play <unk> <unk> / Beak . 
 Taylor Kitsch as Remy LeBeau / Gambit : 
 A Cajun mutant thief who has the ability to convert the potential energy of any object he touches into kinetic energy , forcing it to explode . The size of the object determines the magnitude of the resulting explosion . He is also skilled in the use of a staff , and happens to be very agile . Due to the nature of his power , he displays supernatural durability , being able to take Wolverine 's elbow to his face and return to fight moments later . When asked about his thoughts on the character , Kitsch had said , " I knew of him , but I didn 't know the following he had . I 'm sure I 'm still going to be exposed to that . I love the character , I love the powers , and I love what they did with him . I didn 't know that much , but in my experience , it was a blessing to go in and create my take on him . I 'm excited for it , to say the least . " 
 Daniel Henney as Agent Zero : 
 A mutant member of the Weapon X program and a superhumanly accurate mercenary with expert tracking abilities and lethal sniper skills . An X @-@ Men fan , Henney liked the role of a villain because " there are no restrictions playing it , allowing you freely to express it , so you can act how you want to " . He described the film as more realistic and cruder than the X @-@ Men trilogy . 
 Ryan Reynolds as Wade Wilson : 
 A wisecracking mercenary with lethal swordsmanship skill and athleticism , who later becomes Deadpool . Reynolds had been interested in playing the character in his own film since 2003 . Originally , Reynolds was only going to cameo as Wilson but the role grew after he was cast . Reynolds did sword @-@ training for the character , and also worked out to get his physique comparable to Jackman <unk> Adkins as Weapon XI / Deadpool : 
 Weapon XI is a genetically altered mutant killer . He has powers taken from other mutants killed or kidnapped in the film , as well as retractable blades in his arms . He is referred to by Stryker as " the Deadpool " because the compatible powers of the other mutants have been ' pooled ' together into one being . Ryan Reynolds portrays Weapon XI for close @-@ ups , standing shots , and simple stunts while Scott Adkins is used for the more complicated and dangerous stunt work . 
 Additionally , Tim Pocock portrays a young Scott Summers / Cyclops . Max Cullen and Julia Blake portrayed Travis and Heather Hudson , an elderly couple who take care of Wolverine after his adamantium bonding . The Hudsons are heavily adapted from the comics ' James MacDonald and Heather Hudson . <unk> Tozzi portrays Emma , a mutant with the power to turn her skin into diamond , who in the film is Silverfox 's sister . The film depiction of Emma was originally assumed to be Emma Frost . However it was noted that she does not exhibit the character 's traditional telepathic abilities . It is later revealed by Bryan Singer that is character is actually not Emma Frost , but instead a mutant with similar abilities . Wolverine 's parents also appeared in the film ; Aaron Jeffery portrayed Thomas Logan while Alice Parkinson portrayed Elizabeth Howlett . Peter O 'Brien appeared as John Howlett , James ' alleged father . The film includes numerous cameo appearances of younger versions of characters from the previous films , including Jason Stryker ( William Stryker 's lobotomized telepathic son whom he keeps in cryogenic suspension ) . There was a cameo for a young Storm , which can be seen in the trailer , but it was removed from the released film . A digitally rejuvenated Patrick Stewart also makes an uncredited cameo as a younger Charles Xavier who appeared to not yet lose the use of his legs . However , with timeline and story inconsistencies within the film series , Singer developed an idea to tie all the films together and fix the continuity . In X @-@ Men : First Class Xavier loses the use of his legs at a much younger age , than he appears in Origins . As an explanation , Xavier can be seen walking in X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past ( which chronologically takes place prior to the events of this film ) , by creating the illusion that he is standing in various scenes , when in reality the character is only present by telepathic projection . Asher Keddie played Dr. Carol Frost . Poker player Daniel Negreanu has a cameo . Phil Hellmuth wanted to join him but was unable because he committed to an event in Toronto . X @-@ Men co @-@ creator Stan Lee said he would cameo , but Lee ended up not appearing in the film as he could not attend filming in Australia . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 David Benioff , a comic book fan , pursued the project for almost three years before he was hired to write the script in October 2004 . In preparing to write the script , he reread Barry Windsor @-@ Smith 's " Weapon X " story , as well as Chris Claremont and Frank Miller 's 1982 limited series on the character ( his favorite storyline ) . Also serving as inspiration was the 2001 limited series Origin , which reveals Wolverine 's life before Weapon X. Jackman collaborated on the script , which he wanted to be more of a character piece compared with the previous X @-@ Men films . Skip Woods , who had written Hitman for Fox , was later hired to revise and rewrite Benioff 's script . Benioff had aimed for a " darker and a bit more brutal " story , writing it with an R rating in mind , although he acknowledged the film 's final tone would rest with the producers and director . 
 Deadpool had been developed for his own film by Reynolds and David S. Goyer at New Line Cinema in 2003 , but the project fell apart as they focused on Blade : Trinity and an aborted spin @-@ off . Benioff wrote the character into the script in a manner Jackman described as fun , but would also deviate from some of his traits . Similarly , Gambit was a character who the filmmakers had tried to put in the previous X @-@ Men films . Jackman liked Gambit because he is a " loose cannon " like Wolverine , stating their relationship echoes that of Wolverine and Pyro in the original trilogy . David Ayer contributed to the script . Benioff finished his draft in October 2006 , and Jackman stated there would be a year before shooting , as he was scheduled to start filming Australia during 2007 . Before the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike began , James Vanderbilt and Scott Silver were hired for a last @-@ minute rewrite . 
 Gavin Hood was announced as director of the project in July 2007 for a 2008 release . Previously , X @-@ Men and X2 director Bryan Singer and X @-@ Men : The Last Stand director Brett Ratner were interested in returning to the franchise , while Alexandre Aja and Len Wiseman also wanted the job . Zack Snyder , who was approached for The Last Stand , turned down this film because he was directing Watchmen . Jackman saw parallels between Logan and the main character in Hood 's previous film <unk> . Hood explained that while he was not a comic book fan , he " realized that the character of Wolverine , I think his great appeal lies in the fact that he 's someone who in some ways , is filled with a great deal of self @-@ loathing by his own nature and he 's constantly at war with his own nature " . The director described the film 's themes as focusing on Wolverine 's inner struggle between his animalistic savagery and noble human qualities . Hood enjoyed the previous films , but set out to give the spin @-@ off a different feel . Hood also suggested to make the implied blood relation of Wolverine and Sabretooth into them explicitly being half brothers , as it would help " build up the emotional power of the film " . In October , Fox announced a May 1 , 2009 , release date and the X @-@ Men Origins prefix . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Preliminary shooting took place at the Fox Studios Australia in Sydney , during late 2007 . Principal photography began on January 2008 in New Zealand . One of the filming locations that was selected was Dunedin . Controversy arose as the Queenstown Lakes District Council disputed the Department of Labour 's decision to allow Fox to store explosives in the local ice skating rink . Fox moved some of the explosives to another area . The explosives were used for a shot of the exploding Hudson Farm , a scene which required thirteen cameras . Jackman and Palermo 's <unk> Productions reached an agreement with the council to allow recycling specialists on set to advise the production on being environmentally friendly . According to Hood , the screenplay was still incomplete as filming begun , with the production in Australia receiving regularly new script pages from Los Angeles , at times in the night before shooting . 
 Filming continued at Fox ( where most of the shooting was done ) and New Orleans , Louisiana . Cockatoo Island was used for Stryker 's facility ; the enormous buildings there saved money on digitally expanding a set . Production of the film was predicted to generate A $ 60 million for Sydney 's economy . Principal photography ended by May 23 . The second unit continued filming in New Zealand until March 23 , and were scheduled to continue filming for two weeks following the first unit 's wrap . This included a flashback to Logan during the Normandy Landings , which was shot at Blacksmiths , New South Wales . 
 Hood and Fox were in dispute on the film 's direction . One of the disputes involved the depiction of Wolverine as an Army veteran with post @-@ traumatic stress disorder , with the executives arguing that audiences would not be interested in such heavy themes . The studio had two replacements lined up before Richard Donner , husband of producer Lauren Shuler Donner , flew to Australia to ease on @-@ set tensions . Hood remarked , " Out of healthy and sometimes very rigorous debate , things get better . [ ... ] I hope the film 's better because of the debates . If nobody were talking about us , we 'd be in trouble ! " Hood added he and Thomas Rothman were both " forceful " personalities in creative meetings but they had never had a " stand @-@ up " argument . In January 2009 , after delays due to weather and scheduling conflicts , such as Hugh Jackman 's publicity commitments for Australia , production moved to Vancouver , mostly at Lord Byng Secondary School and in University of British Columbia . Work there included finishing scenes with Ryan Reynolds , who had been working on two other films during principal photography . 
 Gavin Hood has announced that multiple " secret endings " exist for the film and that the endings will differ from print to print of the film . One version shows Wolverine drinking in a Japanese bar . The bartender asked if he is drinking to forget , Logan replies that he is drinking to remember . The other shows Weapon XI on the rubble of the destroyed tower , trying to touch his severed head . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 More than 1 @,@ 000 shots of Wolverine have visual effects in them , which required three effects supervisors and seventeen different companies to work on the film . The most prominent was Hydraulx , who had also worked in the X @-@ Men trilogy and was responsible for the battle in Three Mile Island and Gambit 's powers . Many elements were totally generated through computer @-@ generated imagery , such as the adamantium injection machine , the scene with Gambit 's plane and Wolverine tearing through a door with his newly enhanced claws . CG bone claws were also created for some scenes because the props did not look good in close @-@ ups . Extensive usage of matte paintings was also made , with Matte World Digital creating five different mattes for the final scene of the film — a pullback depicting the destroyed Three Mile Island — and Gavin Hood handing company Hatch Productions pictures of favelas as reference for the Africa scenes . 
 = = Music = = 
 Composed by Harry Gregson @-@ Williams , the score for X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine was mixed by Malcolm Luker , engineered by Costa <unk> , and featured Martin Tillman on the electric cello . 
 In a 2008 interview with Christopher Coleman of Tracksounds.com , Gregson @-@ Williams said that Hood attracted him to the project , adding : " I happened to meet him at the Golden Globes dinner about three years ago . That night we were both nominees , but both losers . He had been nominated for <unk> and during the dinner I had spoken to him and he seemed like a really smart and creative guy ... and into music . So I was really delighted when I got a call to meet him and discuss the possibilities for Wolverine . " 
 In late March 2009 , Jon Burlingame of Variety was at the Newman Scoring Stage at 20th century @-@ Fox to listen and report on the recording of the score . Gregson @-@ Williams conducted " a 78 @-@ piece orchestra and a 40 @-@ voice choir ( 20 male , 20 female ) " to achieve the sound . At the time of his visit , Burlingame noted that the choir was singing " stanzas from an ancient Norse poem in Old Icelandic " to underscore what would be first track , " Logan Through Time . " Director Gavin Hood commented on Gregson @-@ Williams ' style , saying : " Harry 's challenge is to give us operatic scale , but also keep it intimate and human . Harry 's music has a kind of muscular confidence and strength that is very useful for the action , but he also has tremendous soul . " Hood also called the recording performance " <unk> brilliant ! " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Leaked workprint = = = 
 On March 31 , 2009 , a full @-@ length DVD @-@ quality workprint of the film without a timecode or watermark , with some unfinished effects shots , a different typeface for titles and casting , and alternate sound effects was leaked online . The studio said it would be able to determine the source of the leak using forensic marks in the workprint . The FBI and MPAA began investigating the illegal posting . Fox estimated the workprint was downloaded roughly 4 @.@ 5 million times by the time Wolverine was released in theaters . As of 2014 , Fox estimates that a minimum of 15 million people downloaded it . 
 The print contained a reference to Rising Sun Pictures , an Australian visual effects company working on the film . The company denied that they ever had a full copy of the film . Executive producer Thomas Rothman noted the leaked version lacked the ten minutes added during pick @-@ ups in January 2009 . However , the theatrical version of the film has no extra scenes that were not included in the leaked workprint . Both versions run exactly 107 minutes , but director Gavin Hood said " another ending exists that features the film 's villain . " The leak was traced down to a Bronx man named Gilberto Sanchez , who had bought an unlicensed DVD copy from a Korean man and later uploaded it under the name " <unk> " . 
 Roger Friedman , a gossip reporter for Fox News — a channel also owned by Fox 's parent company News Corporation — was fired for writing a review of the film using the leaked copy he downloaded from the Internet . He described how easy it was to find and download the film even if the original source of the leak was no longer available on the web . The article he wrote for his column on the Fox News website was immediately removed . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Among the companies which provided tie @-@ in merchandising were 7 @-@ Eleven , Papa John 's Pizza , and Schick . Hugh Jackman also posed as Wolverine for the Got Milk ? campaign . In February 2009 , Hasbro released a film @-@ related toyline , featuring action figures and a glove with retractable claws . In April , Marvel debuted a new comic series , Wolverine : Weapon X , which writer Jason Aaron said that while not directly influenced by the film , was written considering people who would get interested in Wolverine comics after watching the film . 
 In December 2009 , Hot Toys released the 12 inch highly detailed figure of Wolverine based on the movie with Hugh Jackman 's likeness . 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 Raven Software developed a video game based on the film with the same name , which Activision Blizzard published . Marc Guggenheim wrote the script , while Hugh Jackman , Liev Schreiber , and will.i.am voiced their characters from the film . The storyline goes beyond the one from the film , including other villains from the comics such as the Sentinels and the Wendigo , as well as the appearance of Mystique , who was in the other three X @-@ Men films . 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine was released on April 29 , 2009 , in the UK , Denmark , South Africa , and Australia ; April 30 , 2009 in the Philippines and in the Dominican Republic ; and May 1 , 2009 in the United States and Canada . A contest was held on the official website to determine the location of the world premiere on April 27 . In the end , the Harkins at the Tempe Marketplace in Tempe , Arizona won the premiere . The release in Mexico was delayed until the end of May due to an outbreak of H1N1 flu in the country . On April 22 , nine days before the release of the film , it was reported that X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine was outselling Iron Man " 3 @-@ to @-@ 1 at the same point in the sales cycle ( nine days prior to the film ’ s release ) . " 
 During its first day of wide release , Wolverine took in an estimated $ 35 million , with almost $ 5 million of that from midnight showings . The earnings placed the film as the 16th highest @-@ grossing opening day ever ( 22nd with ticket @-@ price inflation ) . It went on to be number one film at the box office with a total of $ 85 million . Among summer kick @-@ offs , it ranked fifth behind Spider @-@ Man , X2 , Spider @-@ Man 3 , and Iron Man and it was in the top ten of comic book adaptations . The opening was lower than the last film in the franchise , X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , as well as X2 , but higher than X @-@ Men , the first film in the series . 
 The worldwide opening was over $ 158 @.@ 1 million , but Fox stated that some markets underperformed , mostly due to the leaked workprint in countries with illegal downloading problems . However , in an article for the " piracy issue " of Screen International magazine , film critic John Hazelton was doubtful of this explanation , writing that the film 's initial performance was " uncertain " as the outbreak of swine flu in territories with the worst copyright infringement problems means that other territories did not compare at all . 
 While it has received mixed reviews from critics , the film has been a financial success at the box office . According to Box Office Mojo Wolverine has grossed approximately $ 179 @,@ 883 @,@ 157 in the United States and Canada . It took in another $ 193 @,@ 179 @,@ 707 in other territories , giving it a worldwide total of $ 373 @,@ 062 @,@ 864 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 On September 15 , 2009 , Fox Home Entertainment released X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine on DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc . The two @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray includes commentary by Hood , another commentary by producers Lauren Shuler Donner and Ralph Winter , the featurette " The Roots of Wolverine : A Conversation with X @-@ Men creators Stan Lee and Len Wein " , the featurette " Wolverine Unleashed : The Complete Origins " , 10 character chronicles , two more featurettes , a trivia track , deleted scenes with commentary from Hood , two alternate sequences , a Fox Movie Channel premiere featurette and <unk> BD Live technology . Disc two of the set includes a digital copy . In addition , a Wal @-@ Mart exclusive 3 @-@ disc set , which includes a standard DVD copy of the film was also released . The two @-@ DVD special edition includes the two commentaries , the featurette with Stan Lee and Len Wein , an origins featurette , deleted and alternate scenes , and an anti @-@ smoking PSA on disc one ; disc two has a digital copy of the film . The single @-@ disc DVD release has the origins featurette and anti @-@ smoking PSA . 
 Wolverine was the highest selling and most rented DVD release of the week , selling over three million copies , 850 @,@ 000 of them on Blu @-@ ray . Through its first six weeks the DVD has sold 3 @.@ 79 million copies , generating $ 64 @.@ 27 million in sales . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The review @-@ aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes reported 38 % positive reviews based on 252 reviews , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 1 / 10 . The site 's consensus is , " Though Hugh Jackman gives his all , he can 't help X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine overcome a cliche @-@ ridden script and familiar narrative . " 
 Richard Corliss of TIME commented on the film 's standing among other Marvel films , saying that it is " an O.K. , not great , Marvel movie that tells the early story of the prime X @-@ Man , and attempts to make it climax in a perfect coupling with the start of the known trilogy . " He also said that " superhero mythologies can be so complicated , only a lonely comic @-@ book @-@ reading kid could make sense of it all . " James <unk> of GQ also commented on the structure of the story in saying that the " film clumsily tries to explain the origins of James [ Howlett ] , AKA Wolverine , which had wisely only ever been briefly referred to in the original X @-@ Men saga . In doing so , it creates a fairly bland plot which is full of holes . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post was generally more favorable towards Origins , stating " Fortunately , Jackman is well @-@ matched with Schreiber , who can sneer with the best of them and wears fangs well . The two have three spectacular battles together before squaring off against a formidable enemy atop a nuclear reactor . " Peter Rainer of The Christian Science Monitor also praised Jackman 's performance , saying that " Hugh Jackman demonstrates that you can segue effortlessly from a <unk> song @-@ and @-@ dance man at the Oscars to a feral gent with adamantium claws and berserker rage . " Claudia Puig of USA Today considered the movie " well @-@ acted , with spectacular action and witty one @-@ liners " . 
 Roger Ebert gave the film two stars out of four and expressed his views on the title character : " Why should I care about this guy ? He feels no pain and nothing can kill him , so therefore he 's essentially a story device for action sequences . " James Berardinelli gave Wolverine two and a half stars out of four , calling the action scenes competently executed but not memorable , and considering that when dealing with Wolverine 's past " there 's little creativity evident in the way those blanks are filled in " , and that the revelations made Wolverine " less compelling " . Comparatively , Bill Gibron of AMC 's Filmcritic.com website gave the film a positive " 4 @.@ 0 out of 5 stars , " saying that although Hugh Jackman is " capable of carrying even the most mediocre effort , he singlehandedly makes X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine an excellent start to the summer 2009 season . " He predicted " there will be purists who balk at how Hood and his screenwriters mangle and manipulate the mythology ; " and further said that " any ending which leaves several characters unexplained and unaccounted for can 't really seal the full entertainment deal . " 
 Regarding Wolverine within the context of the X @-@ Men film series , Tom Charity of CNN commented : " <unk> but inescapably redundant , this Wolverine movie does just enough to keep the X @-@ Men franchise on life support , but the filmmakers will have to come up with some evolutionary changes soon if it 's going to escape X @-@ <unk> . " Similarly , A. O. Scott of The New York Times expressed that " X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine will most likely manage to cash in on the popularity of the earlier episodes , but it is the latest evidence that the superhero movie is suffering from serious imaginative fatigue . " On a more negative note , Philip French of The Observer said that the film 's " dull , bone @-@ crushing , special @-@ effects stuff " is " of interest only to hardcore fans who 've probably read it all in Marvel comics . " 
 Sukhdev Sandhu of The Daily Telegraph stated that " Wolverine is an artificial stimulus package of the most unsatisfying kind . Aggressively advertised and hyped to the hills , it will no doubt attract full houses at first ; after that though , when word @-@ of @-@ mouth buzz @-@ kill goes into overdrive , there ’ s bound to be widespread deflation and a palpable feeling of being conned . " Similarly , Orlando Parfitt of IGN ( UK ) praised the performances of the actors and the action scenes , but stated that the film felt underdeveloped : " There 's an enjoyable time to be had with Wolverine , but it 's also somewhat unsatisfying . " Furthermore , Scott Mendelson of The Huffington Post gave the film a grade of " D " , noting that " Wolverine was the lead character of [ the X @-@ Men ] films , and we 've already learned everything we need to know from the films in said franchise , " adding that " the extra information given here actually serves to make the character of Logan / Wolverine less interesting . " Steven Rea also felt that the film injured the character by proving that " how the hero acquired his special powers turns out to be a whole lot less interesting than what he does with them " , while also being " a mash @-@ up of meaningless combat sequences ( meaningless because Logan / Wolverine is just about unstoppable ) , sub @-@ par visual effects , template backstory , and some goofy Liev Schreiber @-@ as @-@ a @-@ villain <unk> " . 
 Hugh Jackman later confessed being unhappy with the final result of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine . The actor wanted primarily a film that would deepen the Wolverine character , but “ somehow the first Wolverine movie ended up looking like the fourth X @-@ Men — just with different characters . ” He tried to avert the same results while doing the next solo film for the character , 2013 's The Wolverine . 
 = = Follow @-@ ups = = 
 Wolverine was set to be the first of a series of X @-@ Men Origins prequels , with the other being focused on Magneto . However , X @-@ Men Origins : Magneto entered development hell and wound up cancelled by the eventual fifth X @-@ Men movie . X @-@ Men : First Class , released in 2011 , was another prequel to the series . Set in 1962 , the film features a young Professor X and Magneto and the foundation of the X @-@ Men . In 2013 , a second Wolverine film was released titled The Wolverine , set years after the events of X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , but mostly serving as a stand @-@ alone sequel . The follow @-@ up to First Class , 2014 's X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , was confirmed to erase the events of X @-@ Men Origins : Wolverine through retroactive continuity , save for the opening sequence . 
 A third untitled Wolverine film is planned to release on March 3 , 2017 . It is set to be Hugh Jackman 's last time portraying the character . The 2016 spin @-@ off film Deadpool features Ryan Reynolds reprising his role as the title character . Several jokes are aimed at the expense of Reynolds ' version of Deadpool in X @-@ Men Origins due to the negative reaction of the character 's portrayal . 
 = Mycena clariviolacea = 
 Mycena clariviolacea is a mushroom in the Mycenaceae family . First reported as a new species in 2007 , it is known only from Kanagawa , Japan , where it fruits on dead fallen twigs in forests dominated by oak and chinquapin trees . Distinctive features of this species are found in its medium @-@ sized , dark violet fruit bodies , with caps up to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) in diameter and slender stems that are about 30 to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) long . Microscopic characteristics include the amyloid spores ( staining when treated with Melzer 's reagent ) , the club @-@ shaped cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) that are covered with one or more , knob @-@ like , apical protuberances , the absence of pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) , and the cylindrical , diverticulate caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) . 
 = = Taxonomy , naming , and classification = = 
 The mushroom was first collected by Japanese mycologist Haruki Takahashi in 2000 , and , along with seven other Mycena species , was reported as a new species in a 2007 publication . The specific epithet is derived from the Latin words <unk> ( meaning " clear " ) and violacea ( " violaceous " ) . The Japanese name is <unk> @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 According to Takahashi , the amyloid spores , the cheilocystidia covered with one or more , knob @-@ like , apical excrescences , the diverticulate elements in the cortical layer of cap and stem , and the diverticulate caulocystidia suggest that the species is best classified in the section Fragilipedes , as defined by the Dutch Mycena specialist Maas Geesteranus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Depending on the age of the mushroom , the cap can range in shape from conic to convex to bell @-@ shaped to somewhat flattened in age ; it reaches 10 to 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) in diameter . It is sometimes shallowly <unk> ( with a small depression like a navel ) , radially grooved almost to the center , and somewhat hygrophanous ( changing color as it loses or absorbs water ) . The cap surface is dry , and pruinose ( covered with what appears to be a fine white powder ) , but this soon sloughs off , leaving the surface smooth . Initially , the cap color is dark violet , but it later fades to grayish @-@ violet around the edges . The whitish flesh is up to 0 @.@ 5 mm thick , and lacks any distinctive taste or odor . The slender stem is 30 to 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) long by 1 to 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 to 0 @.@ 12 in ) thick , cylindrical , centrally attached to the stem , and hollow . Its surface is dry , pruinose over the entire length , and grayish @-@ violet to dark violet in color . The base is covered with a white mycelial tomentum ( a hairy covering of short , closely matted hairs ) . The gills are adnate ( fused to the stem ) , and distantly spaced , with about 15 – 19 gills reaching the stem . The gills are up to 2 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) broad , thin , and the same color as the cap or paler . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are broadly ellipsoid , smooth , colorless , amyloid ( staining bluish to blue @-@ black when treated with Melzer 's reagent ) , thin @-@ walled , and measure 8 – 9 by 5 – 6 µm . The basidia are 40 – 60 by 10 – 12 µm , club @-@ shaped , and four @-@ spored . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are abundant , club @-@ shaped , and measure 30 – 45 by 10 – 17 µm . Their tips are covered with one or more , knob @-@ like short excrescences that are colorless and thin @-@ walled . Pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are absent . The hymenophoral tissue ( tissue of the hymenium @-@ bearing structure ) is made of thin @-@ walled hyphae that are 12 – 21 µm wide , cylindrical ( but often somewhat inflated ) , smooth , and contain cytoplasmic brownish pigment . These hyphae are dextrinoid , meaning that they stain reddish to reddish @-@ brown in Melzer 's reagent . The cap cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae that are 2 – 7 µm wide , and cylindrical . These hyphae are smooth , or can be covered with scattered , warty or finger @-@ like thin @-@ walled diverticulae that are colorless or pale brownish , and dextrinoid . The layer of hyphae underlying the cap cuticle is parallel , cylindrical , hyaline or brownish , and dextrinoid ; it has short and inflated cells that are up to 48 µm wide . The stem cuticle is made of parallel , bent @-@ over hyphae that are 3 – 8 µm wide , and similar to the hyphae of the cap cuticle . The caulocystidia ( cystidia on the stem ) are 45 – 88 by 5 – 8 µm , cylindrical , diverticulate , colorless or brownish , and thin @-@ walled . The flesh of the stem is composed of longitudinally running , cylindrical hyphae that are 8 – 25 µm wide , smooth , colorless , and dextrinoid . Clamp connections are present in the cap cuticle , the stem cuticle , the gill flesh , and at the basal septa of the basidia . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena clariviolacea is similar to the Brazilian species M. <unk> and the European M. <unk> . Mycena <unk> , which belongs in the section <unk> of the genus Mycena , differs in having a grayish @-@ purple cap and stem , and forming somewhat utriform ( wineskin @-@ shaped ) to lageniform ( flask @-@ shaped ) , smooth cheilocystidia . Mycena <unk> , classified in the section Calodontes , subsection <unk> , may be distinguished microscopically from M. clariviolacea by its smooth , spindle @-@ shaped cheilocystidia and pleurocystidia , and <unk> hyphae in the cortical layer of cap and stem . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Mycena clariviolacea is known only from Kanagawa , Japan . Fruit bodies are found growing solitary or scattered , on dead fallen twigs in forests that are dominated by oak and chinquapin trees . The mushroom fruits from June to September . 
 = Bionicle : Mask of Light = 
 Bionicle : Mask of Light , stylized as <unk> : Mask of Light — The Movie , is a 2003 direct @-@ to @-@ video science fantasy action film based on the Bionicle toy series created by Lego . Set in a universe filled with bio @-@ mechanical beings allied with classical element @-@ themed tribes , the story follows two friends from the fire @-@ based village of Ta @-@ Koro on a quest to find the owner of the Mask of Light , a mystical artifact that can potentially defeat Makuta , an evil entity threatening the island . The story is based on the latter half of the toyline 's 2002 – 2003 narrative . 
 The project was first proposed in 2001 , during the original run of the Bionicle toyline . Lego contacted multiple writers for the project , including original Bionicle contributors Bob Thompson and Alastair Swinnerton , and Hollywood writers Henry Gilroy and Greg Weisman . Production began in 2002 , taking approximately a year to complete . A major part of the graphical design was adjusting the characters so they could work in human @-@ like ways while still resembling the original toys . The music was composed by Nathan Furst , who used orchestral and tribal elements to create the score . Voice casting was handled by Kris Zimmerman , and the voicework was done with the setting and mythos of Bionicle in mind . 
 Multiple studios were involved in the development and distribution of Mask of Light : it was co @-@ produced by Lego and Create TV & Film , developed by Creative Capers Entertainment and CGCG , and post @-@ production was handled 310 Studios and Hacienda Post . It was released in September 2003 on home video and DVD , distributed by Miramax Films and Buena Vista Home Entertainment . Upon release , the film reached high positions in VHS and DVD charts , and received generally positive reviews from journalists . Following Mask of Light , further films based on Bionicle have been released . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Mask of Light takes place on a tropical island in the Bionicle universe . According to legend , the Great Spirit Mata Nui created the island 's masked Matoran inhabitants . Mata Nui was sent into a coma by his envious spirit brother <unk> , who began a reign of terror on the island until six guardians known as Toa freed the island from his regime . The Matoran , alongside the Toa and Turaga leaders , live in Element @-@ themed regions of the island . The events of The Mask of Light takes place during the latter half of the toyline 's 2002 – 2003 narrative . 
 The film starts when two Matoran from the fire village of Ta @-@ Koro called Jaller and Takua discover a Great <unk> , a Toa mask imbued with Elemental power . The two Matoran then participate in a multi @-@ tribal game of Kohlii , the island 's national sport : the match reveals developing tensions between the Fire Toa Tahu and the Water Toa Gali . At the end of the match , the Mask is accidentally revealed and the Turaga recognize its powers . They announce that it heralds the arrival of a seventh Toa destined to defeat Makuta and awaken Mata Nui . Jaller and Takua are sent on a quest to find the Seventh Toa , guided by the Mask . In the meantime , Makuta sends three of his Rahkshi " sons " to retrieve the Mask . During an attack on Ta @-@ Koro which destroys the village , Tahu is poisoned , causing him to become increasingly erratic and worsening his already @-@ strained relationship with Gali . 
 During their journey together , Jaller and Takua receive aid from the Air Toa Lewa , and the Ice Toa Kopaka , the latter of whom temporarily immobilizes the Rakhshi by trapping them in a frozen lake . After this , Takua is threatened by Makuta , and abandons Jaller in an attempt to shield him . Makuta then releases three more <unk> , who attack the Earth village of <unk> @-@ Koro as Takua arrives . Tahu , Kopaka , Lewa and Gali arrive to help the Earth Toa <unk> and the Stone Toa <unk> : during the battle , Tahu is further corrupted and goes insane , forcing the Toa to capture him and flee . Takua decides to rejoin Jaller , while Gali and the other Toa purge the Rakhshi poison from Tahu , resulting in his reconciliation with Gali . 
 Arriving at <unk> Nui , a great temple at the island 's centre , Jaller and Takua are confronted by all six Rahkshi . The six Toa mount a united offensive and defeat five of them , but a surviving Rahkshi attacks Takua . Jaller sacrifices himself to protect Takua , and Jaller 's final words prompt Takua to don the Mask of Light : the Mask transforms him into Takanuva , the Toa of Light . Defeating the final Rakhshi , he constructs a craft powered by the worm @-@ like creatures inside the Rahkshi to guide him to Makuta . Traveling to his lair beneath Mata Nui , the two hold a Kohlii contest for the island 's fate . At Takanuva 's bidding , the Toa , Turaga and Matoran gather together in the chamber , and witness Takanuva merging with Makuta to form a single powerful being . With Takanuva 's willpower dominant , the being raises a gate leading deeper beneath the island , through which the gathered people flee . The being also revives Jaller before the gate collapses on top of it . The Turaga proceed to awaken Mata Nui using the Mask of Light , which in turn revives Takanuva . The film ends with Takanuva discovering the long @-@ dormant city of <unk> Nui , the Matoran 's original home . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Jason Michas as Takua / Takanuva . Portrayed as an inquisitive Ta @-@ Matoran , he is a disguised Av @-@ Matoran ( Matoran of Light ) destined to become the Toa of Light . 
 Andrew Francis as Jaller , the Captain of Ta @-@ Koro 's Guard , who is designated as the Herald of the Seventh Toa . 
 Scott McNeil as Tahu , the headstrong Toa of Fire ; <unk> , the wise Toa of Earth ; and <unk> the Ash Bear , a beast from Lewa 's domain . 
 Dale Wilson as Lewa Nuva , the Toa of Air ; and Turaga <unk> , leader of the Po @-@ Matoran . 
 Kathleen Barr as Gali Nuva , the Toa of Water . 
 Lee Tockar as the Makuta , the main antagonist ; <unk> , a being created from the merging of Takanuva and Makuta ; and <unk> , Takua 's pet racing crab . 
 Christopher Gaze as Turaga <unk> , the leader of the Ta @-@ Matoran . 
 Lesley Ewen as Turaga <unk> , the leader of the Ga @-@ Matoran . 
 Michael Dobson as Kopaka Nuva , the Toa of Ice ; <unk> , a Po @-@ Matoran Kohlii player . 
 Trevor Devall as <unk> Nuva , the friendly Toa of Stone . 
 Chiara Zanni as <unk> , a Ga @-@ Matoran and close friend of Jaller . 
 Julian B. Wilson as the Ta @-@ Matoran Guard , and the Rahkshi ( vocal effects ) , mechanical " sons " of Makuta driven by fragments of his being . 
 Doc Harris as <unk> announcer . 
 = = Production = = 
 The concept for a movie based on the Bionicle toyline was proposed as early as 2001 , when Bionicle became an unexpected commercial success for Lego : this idea was originally inspired by the fact that Lego advertised Bionicle as if it were a movie , and they had received inquiry emails and licensing requests from multiple film studios . Deciding to make the movie while retaining full creative control , Lego began discussing with potential partners , knowing that the film needed to come out while Bionicle was still looming large in the public consciousness . Lego 's eventual partner was production entity Create TV & Film . With the initial partnership set up , Lego created some development assets and went round various animation studios to find one that would develop the film . They narrowed it down to two studios , one of which was Creative Capers Entertainment . Creative Capers convinced Lego to employ them after producing a well @-@ received short animated segment featuring Lewa . Creative Caper 's three principles , directors Terry Shakespeare and David Molina , and producer Sue Shakespear , all took up their respective roles for the film 's production . The deal was reportedly worth $ 5 million . In a later interview , Shakespeare referred to the film 's aesthetic as " primary colors that were coded to the areas " , saying it had a " younger feel " when compared to its sequel . He also referred to the film as " very intimate , very organic " . 
 The film began full production in 2002 . While most projects of its type took 18 – 24 months to complete , the development team completed the film in 13 months . The project 's budget was later estimated as being between $ 3 @.@ 5 to $ 5 million . In addition to Creative Capers , Taiwanese studio CGCG created most of the animation : at the time , overseas outsourcing was a rarity for CGI movies . By the end of production , the film ran to 77 minutes of raw footage . At this stage , 310 Studios was brought in to handle post production , which mostly entailed cutting the film 's length down by 7 minutes . According to 310 Studios president Billy Jones , the hardest part of this was deciding which pieces needed to be cut , as they were impressed with everything that had been produced . 310 Studios also created the opening title and ending credit sequences . Lego also partnered with Miramax to distribute the film , along with developing a future full feature @-@ length theatrical film . 
 Five different people were involved in the creation of the film 's story and script : executive producer Bob Thompson , original Bionicle co @-@ creators and writers Alastair Swinnerton and Martin <unk> Andersen , and Hollywood writers Henry Gilroy and Greg Weisman . The script @-@ writing process began in 2002 . Gilroy became involved after a meeting with Thompson , and enjoyed working on the script as he greatly admired the Bionicle mythos . Two draft scripts were originally created to see who would write the better script : one by Swinnerton , and one from Gilroy . Due to time constraints , the Gilroy script was accepted with some of Swinnerton 's ideas included . Gilroy 's most difficult task was creating the dialogue for the Toa : he needed to take into account Thompson 's own interpretations , and what the majority of fans thought they should sounds like . In the end , he attempted to stay true to original portrayals while giving the voice actors something unique to work with . He also needed to balance their portrayals and screentime , as each of the six needed a chance to shine . The script when through eight different drafts before the final version , although this was far less than Gilroy was used to seeing on other projects . During planning stages , a lot of time was devoted to how characters interacted with each other : cited example were Lewa 's style of speaking , and Kopaka 's stoic behaviour . These traits were accentuated for the film to give the characters more distinction and depth . He also needed to avoid putting in out @-@ of @-@ context pop culture references , which would not fit into the setting of Bionicle . As part of the world and character development , expressions and exclamations unique to the world were created : a cited example is Jaller saying " You could have been Lava @-@ Bones " when Takua narrowly escapes being killed by a flood of lava . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The characters of Bionicle had been portrayed in various ways across multiple media , including the official comics , Flash animations used for online videos , and CGI commercials for the sets . The team decided to use the models from the CGI commercials as their working base for the film models . Before commencing with designing the characters , the team went to Lego 's Denmark headquarters and received lessons in the Bionicle design process . The team were originally not going to alter the characters that much , but they needed them to be emotive , which necessitated a redesign . The first step in creating the character models was redrawing the skeleton , then adding muscle pods that would interweave with the skeleton : the muscle gave the characters a more textured appearance , and were added to the shoulders , calves , abdomen and chest cavity . Each character was given a " heart light " , a pulsating light in their chest which would fluctuate even when the character was stationary in @-@ shot . They also adjusted the eyes , making the sockets shallower than on the sets and giving them a glow . While redesigning the Toa , the team consulted with the original Lego staff to determine what materials the characters were made of : the muscles were compared to rubber , the bones described as a mesh of titanium alloy and carbon fibre , while the armour was made of Kevlar . In general , the outer shells remained mostly unchanged from the sets , although the visible gears were removed and armour was fitted to their backs . The Toa were also bulked up a little when compared to their sets so their feats would be believable for viewers . 
 Several external features were redesigned for the movie , including the introduction of a movable mouth to allow for a more human character , and a four @-@ pronged mechanical tongue to make them look less like dolls . Other characters used lights behind their masks to form mouth movement . Particular emphasis was placed on the eyebrows and lips of characters . The main change from the original models was the inclusion of hands , which was a necessity if the character performances were to be made realistic . Each character also had Custom texture maps were created for each character so they would appear unique . In addition to reinventing old characters , the team created original character designs with Lego staff . Makuta , who had only been briefly glimpsed in the comics and web animations , was created through a " Frankenstein principle " , taking parts and pieces from multiple Bionicle sets to create the ultimate Bionicle villain . Other original creations included Takua 's pet crab <unk> , and a <unk> Bird designed to transport two Matoran . The Rahkshi are described by Bob Thompson as " like hounds hunting down the [ Mask of Light ] " . They were created by Swinnerton , and comic writer Alan Grant helped develop their characters . They were designed to appear more machine @-@ like than the rest of the cast , and their design were strongly inspired by the bio @-@ mechanical artworks of H. R. Giger . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The music was composed by Nathan Furst , whose preferred composition style of grand orchestra and electronica was what the film 's producers were looking for . Initially ignorant of the Bionicle universe , he explored the official website after getting the job as composer to get better context for his music . This and discussions he had with staff helped in the creation of eight or nine specific themes . The overall style is grand orchestral , but includes elements of electronic and tribal music . Furst used elements of African , Polynesian , and Eastern European music to communicate the fact that Mata Nui was an island , and when he could he incorporated his music into the action rather than leaving it as a standalone element within scenes . 
 Voice casting was managed by Kris Zimmerman , who chose voice actors that seemed to suit certain roles : the Matoran were voiced by young adults , while the Turaga were voiced by older actors . The voice actors and their performances were chosen so they would not sound like they came from a specific area of the world , instead sound like they came from and belonged in the Bionicle universe . A notable event during recording was a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes incident between Michas and Francis : originally cast in the respective roles of Jaller and Takua , Michas came into a recording session in a muddled state and began reading Takua 's lines by mistake . When Francis came in , he read Jaller 's lines : when the staff heard them and were favourably impressed , the actors permanently switched roles . Voice acting for the project was mostly done in 2002 , but dialogue was re @-@ recorded during Additional Dialogue Recording ( ADR ) into 2003 : approximately 30 % of the final film 's dialogue was done during ADR . Audio and music post @-@ production was handled by Hacienda Post . The company 's president Tim <unk> served as sound supervisor . Mask of Light was the first time in any media that Bionicle characters spoke . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mask of Light was first announced in April 2002 for release in September the following year . It was Lego Media 's ( later becoming Create TV & Film in early 2003 ) first project based on original characters and storylines , and their first direct @-@ to @-@ video production . It initially released on 16 September 2003 for home video and DVD . It went on to release in 27 different countries over the next eight weeks . It was released under the Miramax Home Entertainment label through Buena Vista Home Entertainment . Prior to its release , the film received a world premiere at Legoland in Carlsbad , California on 13 September : the premiere featured a huge mosaic built of Lego and a special effects show , in addition to special guests and costumed characters . The following year , the film received its television premiere on Cartoon Network 's Toonami program block . 
 At release , the film ranked high in multiple sales charts . In the " Top Kid Video " complied by Billboard , it came close to the top of the charts upon release . Upon release , the film ranked at # 2 on Amazon.com 's VHS best seller list , coming in behind the VHS release of Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers . According to Lego 's 2003 financial report , the game was top @-@ selling VHS release in the United States in its first week , and ranked at # 4 in a similar list compiled by The Hollywood Reporter . It was also among the top premiere DVDs of the year . The game 's rental sales were also high , being placed at # 8 in the animated direct @-@ to @-@ video charts and totalling $ 4 @.@ 24 million revenue by October 2004 . According to Animation Magazine , the film is considered to be a commercial success . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Entertainment Weekly gave the film a favourable ranking of " B + " , calling it a " well @-@ constructed CGI adventure " and saying that those who did not understand the story would enjoy the effects and action sequences . DVDTalk 's Don Houston was generally positive about both the film and its additional content : he called the visuals " exceptionally crisp and clear " when compared to other films of its type , and gave high praise to the voice acting and noting darker themes within the film . His main criticism was that it relied heavily on foreknowledge of earlier Bionicle storylines . Sci <unk> praised the film 's design and visuals , but felt that the film was too short , echoed Houston 's criticism of a need for foreknowledge , and said that it was " too politically correct " when compared to other films like Transformers : The Movie . Jules Faber of Digital Views Daily said the story had been designed with children in mind , and again praised the visuals despite seeing some stilted animations and poorly @-@ done environmental effects . He was generally positive about the DVD 's audio and visual quality . Both Houston and Faber noted homages to other well @-@ known films , including The Lord of the Rings , Raiders of the Lost Ark , and the works of Ray Harryhausen . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mask of Light won a Golden Reel Award for Best Visual Effects in a DVD Premiere Movie in December 2003 . In addition , it won the Best DVD release award at the 2004 Saturn Awards . In 2014 , Vulture.com made mention of the movie in a 2014 retrospective on Lego 's history in the movie industry . That same year , Radio Times ranked it as among the best movies based on toys , say that the developers " did a better @-@ than @-@ average job of translating the appeal of the toys to screen " . 
 Mask of Light was promoted by Lego with new toys based on the film 's characters , a video game based on its story that released in 2003 , and a novelisation of the film . Two further Bionicle movies were confirmed prior to the release of Mask of Light , with the second being another direct @-@ to @-@ video feature and a third for theatrical release . The second movie , Bionicle 2 : Legends of <unk> Nui , released in 2004 . The third movie , Bionicle 3 : Web of Shadows , was released as a direct @-@ to @-@ DVD feature in 2005 . Both films were produced by the same creative team behind Mask of Light . A fourth film by a different studio , Bionicle : The Legend Reborn , was released in 2009 through Universal Pictures Home Entertainment . A four @-@ episode television series based on the rebooted Bionicle toyline is set to begin airing in the first quarter of 2016 on Netflix . 
 = Luigi 's Mansion = 
 Luigi 's Mansion ( <unk> , Ruīji <unk> , " Luigi Mansion " ) is an action @-@ adventure game published by Nintendo for the GameCube . It was the first game in the Mario franchise to be released for GameCube . It was released in Japan on September 14 , 2001 , in North America on November 18 , 2001 , and in Europe on May 3 , 2002 . The game was a launch title for the GameCube , and the second title in the Mario franchise where Luigi is the main character , instead of Mario , the first , third , fourth and fifth being Mario is Missing ! , Luigi 's Mansion : Dark Moon , New Super Luigi U and Dr. Luigi , respectively . 
 The game takes place in a haunted mansion when Luigi wins a contest that he never entered . Mario , who investigates the mansion earlier , goes missing , and it is up to Luigi to find him . To help Luigi on his quest , an old scientist named Elvin Gadd ( or E. Gadd for short ) has equipped him with the " Poltergust 3000 " , a vacuum cleaner used for capturing ghosts , and a " Game Boy Horror " , a device used for communicating with E. Gadd . He also uses it as a map and to examine ghosts . 
 The ghosts have escaped from Professor E. Gadd 's paintings ( with the help of King Boo ) and it is up to the player to capture every one of them . Every ghost is different and is to be captured in different ways . 
 Luigi 's Mansion was relatively well received by reviewers , despite being criticized for its short length . The game has sold over 2 @.@ 5 million copies , and is the fifth best @-@ selling Nintendo GameCube game in the United States . It was one of the first games to be re @-@ released as a Player 's Choice title on the system . The game was later followed by a sequel entitled Luigi 's Mansion : Dark Moon , released for the Nintendo 3DS in 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Luigi 's Mansion is set in a haunted mansion next to a laboratory outside . The mansion consists of five floors , including a basement and a roof . Luigi starts out in a foyer , the hub area of the mansion . 
 In Luigi 's Mansion , Professor E. Gadd arms Luigi with two of his inventions : the Poltergust 3000 and the Game Boy Horror , which resembles another Nintendo product , the Atomic Purple model of the Game Boy Color . The Poltergust 3000 is a high @-@ powered vacuum cleaner designed for capturing ghosts and gathering treasure . To capture ghosts , Luigi must first shine his flashlight on them to stun them . This reveals the ghost 's heart , giving Luigi a chance to suck it into the Poltergust 3000 , steadily reducing the ghost 's hit points to zero , at which point they can be captured . The ghosts remain in the Poltergust 3000 , although certain more advanced ghosts named Portrait Ghosts are extracted and put back into their portraits after a process at the end of the game 's four areas . When these paintings are made , they are stored in the gallery in Professor Elvin Gadd 's laboratory . Luigi must also locate three medallions , which allow him to expel fire , water , or ice from the Poltergust 3000 . These elements are needed to capture certain ghosts . 
 The Game Boy Horror allows Luigi to examine items in the mansion , detect a Boo 's presence in the room , and indicates its proximity to Luigi . It also contains a map of the mansion and lets Luigi and Professor E. Gadd communicate . Spread throughout the mansion are dark rooms containing ghosts , and when Luigi clears a room of all its ghosts , the lights come on and a chest usually appears . The blue chests contain a key or the water element , red chests contain three of the five items that Mario dropped and the fire element , green chests contain treasure , the only white chest ( in the tea room ) contains the ice element , and the gold chests ( appearing upon the defeat of the area boss ) contain special keys that unlock the door to the next area and King Boo 's crown . Whenever Luigi finds a key , his Game Boy Horror automatically indicates which door it unlocks . 
 Once King Boo , the final boss of Luigi 's Mansion , is defeated , the player is given a rating ( A to H ) based on the amount of treasure Luigi has found . A second version of the mansion also becomes playable , called the " Hidden Mansion " . In the European version , the entire mansion appears as a reflection of the previous version , bosses are different and possibly move faster , ghosts and Portrait Ghosts may be captured faster , and there are sometimes more ghosts in a room . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game begins with Luigi having won a mansion in a contest . Despite not having entered any contest , he promptly told Mario about the mansion , and the two agreed to meet up outside it that evening . Luigi takes a flashlight with him and he follows the map to the mansion . Upon finally arriving at his new mansion , which looks much more sinister than the supplied photo , Mario is nowhere to be found . Luigi proceeds inside the mansion , entering the Parlor after he gains the key from a strange ghost @-@ like shape . Upon entry , he is soon assaulted by a Gold Ghost , only to be saved by a little old man wielding a vacuum cleaner . The old man , however , is unable to reel the ghost in , and is soon overpowered . After being helped to his feet by Luigi , the old man introduces himself as Professor Elvin Gadd . The two retreat from the mansion when more of the Gold Ghosts appear . 
 In E. Gadd 's laboratory , he explains how Luigi 's newly won mansion is obviously the work of something not of this world , as it only appeared a few nights ago . As Luigi further explores the mansion , he discovers that it was built by King Boo to shelter the now @-@ freed portrait ghosts , ghosts whom E. Gadd had previously captured and contained in paintings . They sent Luigi the supplied photo to lure him into a trap . Gadd also tells Luigi that he saw someone wearing a red cap go into the mansion some time ago , but has not seen him since . Upon learning that the red capped man ( Mario ) was Luigi 's brother , E. Gadd allows Luigi to take over his duties of ghost @-@ catching and entrusts him with his vacuum cleaner , the " Poltergust 3000 , " and another invention called the <unk> Horror that allows him to communicate with Luigi . 
 After numerous confrontations and challenges with many ghosts , portrait ghosts , boss ghosts , Boos , puzzles , and locked doors , Luigi confronts King Boo , who has trapped Mario inside a painting like the portrait ghosts . King Boo pulls Luigi into a painting for their final battle , puppeteering a Bowser suit from the inside to aid him . Eventually , King Boo is beaten down and sucked into the Poltergust 3000 while " Bowser " collapses . Luigi returns to E. Gadd with Mario 's painting and successfully extracts him from within it using the Ghost <unk> in reverse . King Boo is turned into a painting along with the other portrait ghosts . The ending also sees the haunted mansion disappear , after which Luigi builds a normal house on the site using the treasure he accumulated . The size of the house depends on how much treasure the player was able to obtain before the end of the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was first revealed at Nintendo Space World 2000 as a technological demo designed to show off the graphical capabilities of the GameCube . The full motion video footage had scenes seen in later trailers and commercials for the game , but were never used in the final release . This footage includes Luigi running from an unknown ghost in the Foyer , ghosts playing cards in the Parlor , and ghosts circling around Luigi . Soon after its creation , Nintendo decided to make the demo into a full @-@ fledged video game . A year later , Luigi 's Mansion was later shown at the Electronic Entertainment Expo alongside the GameCube console . A newer version of the game , more closely related to the final version , was later revealed at Nintendo Space World 2001 . 
 The original plan for Luigi 's Mansion involved a game where the levels revolved around a large mansion or complex . Tests were later done with Mario characters in <unk> and such . Once it was transitioned into a GameCube project , Luigi was selected as the main character in order to keep the game original and new . The other gameplay ideas , such as ghosts and the ghost @-@ sucking vacuum cleaner , were added later . Older concepts , such as a role @-@ playing game @-@ like system which made real @-@ time changes to rooms , as well as an underground cave area located under the mansion , were also scrapped due to the inclusion of the new ideas . 
 Luigi 's Mansion 's music was composed by Shinobu Tanaka and Kazumi Totaka , and as such contains " Totaka 's Song " , a song featured in almost every game that Totaka has composed . It is found by waiting on the controller configuration screen at the Training Room for about three and a half minutes . The main theme of Luigi 's Mansion is orchestrated and arranged by Shogo Sakai for Super Smash Bros. Brawl . The game featured voice actors Charles Martinet as the voice of Mario and Luigi , and Jen Taylor as the voice of Toad . Luigi 's Mansion received an award for its audio by BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Awards in 2002 . 
 All GameCube systems support the display of stereoscopic 3D , and Luigi 's Mansion was developed to utilize this feature . However , 3D televisions were not widespread at the time , and it was deemed that compatible displays would be too cost @-@ prohibitive for the consumer . As a result , the feature was never enabled outside of development . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Commercially , Luigi 's Mansion is the most successful GameCube launch title and the best @-@ selling game of November 2001 . Despite meager sales in Japan at around 348 @,@ 000 units in total , it became the fifth best @-@ selling Nintendo GameCube game in the United States , with sales of roughly 2 @.@ 19 million units . It was also one of the first Player 's Choice titles on the console , along with Super Smash Bros. Melee and Pikmin . 
 Critically , Luigi 's Mansion received generally positive reviews , and reviewers praised the game 's graphics , design , and gameplay . GameSpot stated that Luigi 's Mansion " features some refreshing ideas " and " flashes of brilliance . " The gaming magazine Nintendo Power praised the game for being " very enjoyable while it lasts , with its clever puzzles and innovative game play . " GameSpy said that the game features " great visuals , imaginative game design and some classic Nintendo magic . " The game was referred to as " a masterful example of game design " by GamePro . Game Revolution stated that " the graphics are quite beautiful and the interesting game mechanics are enjoyable . " The American @-@ based publication Game Informer praised the gameplay , and referred to it as " brilliant and up to par with Miyamoto 's best . " The audio was praised by IGN , who considered Luigi 's voice acting as " cute , humorous and satisfying " , and GameSpy , who declared that the soundtrack remains " subtle , amusing and totally suitable throughout the game " . The Japanese video game publication Famitsu awarded the game with a gold rating , and noted that the control system , while tricky at first , works well . 
 The game has also received criticism , mainly because of its length . GameSpot said that Luigi 's Mansion " fails to match the classic status of Mario 's adventures " and that the " short amount of time it takes to complete it makes it a hard recommendation . " The review , however , also considered that the short length prevents the gameplay and audio from getting tiresome . GameSpy also criticized the game 's length , saying that it could be beaten in about six hours . Allgame declared that Luigi 's Mansion " ultimately fails to deliver a cohesive gameplay experience over the long @-@ term . " Fran Mirabella III of IGN felt that the game was sub @-@ par , due to its " predictable , formulaic gameplay . " G4 's TV show X @-@ Play criticized Luigi 's Mansion in their special on Mario games and media , calling the game a letdown for players waiting for the first Mario game on the GameCube . Luigi 's Mansion was awarded the 2002 BAFTA Interactive Entertainment Award for audio . The game placed 99th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Luigi 's Mansion introduced two new characters , Professor Elvin Gadd ( or simply E. Gadd for short ) and King Boo . E. Gadd has reappeared in other Mario games , such as Mario Party 6 and Mario & Luigi : Partners in Time . E. Gadd is referenced in Super Mario Sunshine as the creator of Mario 's <unk> device and Bowser Jr . ' s paintbrush . He also appears as a playable character skin in Super Mario Maker . King Boo has also reappeared in other games , either as a boss ( including Super Mario 64 DS and Super Princess Peach ) or a playable character ( including Mario Kart : Double Dash ! ! and Mario Super Sluggers ) . Although King Boo does not appear in Super Mario Sunshine , his name is used in the Western version of the game for a noticeably different Boo , who appears as a boss . The ghosts in Luigi 's Mansion have made appearances in other Nintendo games , such as Mario Party 8 and Wii Party . 
 The mansion in the game has reappeared in other Mario games , usually acting as Luigi 's home stage . It appeared in Mario Kart : Double Dash ! ! , Mario Kart 7 , Mario Power Tennis , Mario Kart DS , Mario Hoops 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 , Mario Super Sluggers and Mario Sports Mix . In Super Smash Bros. Brawl , a Luigi 's Mansion stage is unlockable . It can be destroyed when characters hit a set of pillars , but it can rebuild itself later on . There are also some stickers and trophies based on the game . The stage reappears in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U. 
 A sequel was revealed at E3 2011 for the Nintendo 3DS , and demonstrated as Luigi 's Mansion : Dark Moon at E3 2012 . After a delay , the sequel was released in March 2013 to celebrate the Year of Luigi . 
 At E3 2012 , Nintendo introduced the Wii U launch title Nintendo Land , which hosts Luigi 's Ghost Mansion , a multiplayer minigame based on Luigi 's Mansion . In this minigame , four players controlling Miis dressed up as Mario , Luigi , Wario and Waluigi have to drain the energy of a ghost , while the GamePad player , controlling the ghost , must make all the other players faint before time runs out . 
 = The Lord of the Rings ( film series ) = 
 The Lord of the Rings ( also promoted as The Lord of the Rings : The Motion Picture Trilogy ) is a film series consisting of three high fantasy adventure films directed by Peter Jackson . They are based on the novel The Lord of the Rings by J. R. R. Tolkien . The films are subtitled The Fellowship of the Ring ( 2001 ) , The Two Towers ( 2002 ) and The Return of the King ( 2003 ) . They were distributed by New Line Cinema . 
 Considered to be one of the biggest and most ambitious film projects ever undertaken , with an overall budget of $ 281 million ( some sources say $ <unk> $ 330 million ) , the entire project took eight years , with the filming for all three films done simultaneously and entirely in New Zealand , Jackson 's native country . Each film in the series also had special extended editions released on DVD a year after their respective theatrical releases . While the films follow the book 's general storyline , they do omit some of the novel 's plot elements and include some additions to and deviations from the source material . 
 Set in the fictional world of Middle @-@ earth , the films follow the hobbit Frodo Baggins ( Elijah Wood ) as he and a Fellowship embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring , and thus ensure the destruction of its maker , the Dark Lord Sauron ( Sala Baker ) . The Fellowship becomes divided and Frodo continues the quest together with his loyal companion Sam ( Sean Astin ) and the treacherous Gollum ( Andy Serkis ) . Meanwhile , Aragorn ( Viggo Mortensen ) , heir in exile to the throne of Gondor , and the wizard Gandalf ( Ian McKellen ) unite and rally the Free Peoples of Middle @-@ earth in the War of the Ring . 
 The series was a major financial success , with the films collectively being among the highest @-@ grossing film series of all time . The films were critically acclaimed and heavily awarded , winning 17 out of 30 total Academy Award nominations . The final film in the series , The Return of the King , won all of its 11 Academy Award nominations including Best Picture , which also tied it with Ben @-@ Hur and Titanic for most Academy Awards received for a film . The series received wide praise for its innovative special and visual effects . 
 = = Development = = 
 Director Peter Jackson first came into contact with The Lord of the Rings when he saw Ralph Bakshi 's 1978 animated film The Lord of the Rings . Jackson " enjoyed the film and wanted to know more . " Afterwards , he read a tie @-@ in edition of the book during a twelve @-@ hour train journey from Wellington to Auckland when he was seventeen . 
 In 1995 , Jackson was finishing The Frighteners and considered The Lord of the Rings as a new project , wondering " why nobody else seemed to be doing anything about it " . With the new developments in computer @-@ generated imagery following Jurassic Park , Jackson set about planning a fantasy film that would be relatively serious and feel real . By October , he and his partner Fran Walsh teamed up with Miramax Films boss Harvey Weinstein to negotiate with Saul Zaentz who had held the rights to the book since the early 1970s , pitching an adaptation of The Hobbit and two films based on The Lord of the Rings . Negotiations then stalled when Universal Studios offered Jackson a remake of King Kong . Weinstein was furious , and further problems arose when it turned out Zaentz did not have distribution rights to The Hobbit ; United Artists , which was in the market , did . By April 1996 , the rights question was still not resolved . 
 Jackson decided to move ahead with King Kong before filming The Lord of the Rings , prompting Universal to enter a deal with Miramax to receive foreign earnings from The Lord of the Rings while Miramax received foreign earnings from King Kong . It was also revealed that Jackson originally wanted to finish King Kong before The Lord of the Rings began . But due to location problems , he decided to start with The Lord of the Rings franchise instead . 
 When Universal cancelled King Kong in 1997 , Jackson and Walsh immediately received support from Weinstein and began a six @-@ week process of sorting out the rights . Jackson and Walsh asked Costa <unk> to write a synopsis of the book and they began to re @-@ read the book . Two to three months later , they had written their treatment . The first film would have dealt with what would become The Fellowship of the Ring , The Two Towers , and the beginning of The Return of the King , ending with Saruman 's death , and Gandalf and Pippin going to Minas Tirith . In this treatment , <unk> and Gandalf visit <unk> after escaping Saruman , Gollum attacks Frodo when the Fellowship is still united , and Farmer Maggot , Glorfindel , Radagast , <unk> and <unk> are present . Bilbo attends the Council of Elrond , Sam looks into Galadriel 's mirror , Saruman is redeemed before he dies and the Nazgûl just make it into Mount Doom before they fall . They presented their treatment to Harvey and Bob Weinstein , the latter of whom they focused on impressing with their screenwriting as he had not read the book . They agreed upon two films and a total budget of $ 75 million . 
 During mid @-@ 1997 , Jackson and Walsh began writing with Stephen Sinclair . Sinclair 's partner , Philippa Boyens , was a major fan of the book and joined the writing team after reading their treatment . It took 13 – 14 months to write the two film scripts , which were 147 and 144 pages respectively . Sinclair left the project due to theatrical obligations . Amongst their revisions , Sam is caught eavesdropping and forced to go along with Frodo , instead of Sam , Merry , and Pippin figuring out about the One Ring themselves and voluntarily going along after confronting Frodo about it , as occurs in the original novel . Gandalf 's account of his time at Orthanc was pulled out of flashback and Lothlórien was cut , with Galadriel doing what she does in the story at Rivendell . Denethor attends the Council with his son . Other changes included having Arwen rescue Frodo , and the action sequence involving the cave troll . The writers also considered having Arwen absorb Éowyn 's role entirely by having her kill the Witch @-@ king . 
 Trouble struck when Marty Katz was sent to New Zealand . Spending four months there , he told Miramax that the films were more likely to cost $ 150 million , and with Miramax unable to finance this , and with $ 15 million already spent , they decided to merge the two films into one . On 17 June 1998 , Bob Weinstein presented a treatment of a single two @-@ hour film version of the book . He suggested cutting Bree and the Battle of Helm 's Deep , " losing or using " Saruman , merging Rohan and Gondor with Éowyn as Boromir 's sister , shortening Rivendell and Moria as well as having Ents prevent the Uruk @-@ hai from kidnapping Merry and Pippin . Upset by the idea of " cutting out half the good stuff " Jackson balked , and Miramax declared that any script or work completed by Weta Workshop was theirs . Jackson went around Hollywood for four weeks , showing a thirty @-@ five @-@ minute video of their work , before meeting with New Line Cinema 's Mark Ordesky . At New Line Cinema , Robert Shaye viewed the video , and then asked why they were making two films when the book was published as three volumes ( this was later corrected : New Line only made this choice out of economical reasons ) ; he wanted to make a film trilogy . Now Jackson , Walsh , and Boyens had to write three new scripts . 
 The expansion to three films allowed much more creative freedom , although Jackson , Walsh , and Boyens had to restructure their script accordingly . The three films do not correspond exactly to the trilogy 's three volumes , but rather represent a three @-@ part adaptation . Jackson takes a more chronological approach to the story than did Tolkien . Frodo 's quest is the main focus , and Aragorn is the main sub @-@ plot , and many sequences ( such as Tom Bombadil ) that do not contribute directly to those two plots were left out . Much effort was put into creating satisfactory conclusions and making sure exposition did not bog down the pacing . Amongst new sequences , there are also expansions on elements Tolkien kept ambiguous , such as the battles and the creatures . During shooting , the screenplays continued to evolve , in part due to contributions from cast members looking to further explore their characters . Most notable amongst these rewrites was the character Arwen , who was originally planned as a warrior princess , but reverted to her book counterpart , who remains physically inactive in the story ( though she sends moral and military support ) . 
 To develop fight and sword choreography for the series , the filmmakers employed Hollywood sword @-@ master Bob Anderson . Anderson worked directly with the talent including Viggo Mortensen and Karl Urban to develop the film 's many sword fights and stunts . Bob Anderson 's role in The Lord of the Rings series was highlighted in the film Reclaiming the Blade . This documentary on sword martial arts also featured Weta Workshop and Richard Taylor , The Lord of the Rings illustrator John Howe and actors Viggo Mortensen and Karl Urban . All discussed their roles and work on the series as related to the sword . 
 = = Production design = = 
 Jackson began storyboarding the series with Christian Rivers in August 1997 and assigned his crew to begin designing Middle @-@ earth at the same time . Jackson hired long @-@ time collaborator Richard Taylor to lead Weta Workshop on five major design elements : armour , weapons , prosthetics / make @-@ up , creatures , and miniatures . In November 1997 , famed Tolkien illustrators Alan Lee and John Howe joined the project . Most of the imagery in the films is based on their various illustrations . Production designer Grant Major was charged with the task of converting Lee and Howe 's designs into architecture , creating models of the sets , while Dan <unk> worked as art director , scouting locations and organising the building of sets . 
 Jackson 's vision of Middle @-@ earth was described as being " Ray Harryhausen meets David Lean " by Randy Cook . Jackson wanted a gritty realism and historical regard for the fantasy , and attempted to make the world rational and believable . For example , the New Zealand Army helped build Hobbiton months before filming began so the plants could really grow . Creatures were designed to be biologically believable , such as the enormous wings of the fell beast to help it fly . In total , 48 @,@ 000 pieces of armour , 500 bows , and 10 @,@ 000 arrows were created by Weta Workshop . They also created many prosthetics , such as 1 @,@ 800 pairs of Hobbit feet for the lead actors , as well as many ears , noses , and heads for the cast , and around 19 @,@ 000 costumes were woven and aged . Every prop was specially designed by the Art Department , taking the different scales into account . 
 = = Filming = = 
 Principal photography for all three films was conducted concurrently in many locations within New Zealand 's conservation areas and national parks between 11 October 1999 , and 22 December 2000 , a period of 438 days . Pick @-@ up shoots were conducted annually from 2001 to 2004 . The series was shot at over 150 different locations , with seven different units shooting , as well as soundstages around Wellington and Queenstown . Along with Jackson directing the whole production , other unit directors included John <unk> , Geoff Murphy , Fran Walsh , Barrie Osbourne , Rick <unk> , and any other assistant director , producer , or writer available . Jackson monitored these units with live satellite feeds , and with the added pressure of constant script re @-@ writes and the multiple units interpreting his envisioned result , he only got around four hours of sleep a night . Due to the remoteness of some of the locations , the crew would also bring survival kits in case helicopters could not reach the location to bring them home in time . The New Zealand Department of Conservation was criticised for approving the filming within national parks without adequate consideration of the adverse environmental effects and without public notification . The adverse effects of filming battle scenes in Tongariro National Park meant that the park later required restoration work . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The following is a list of cast members who voiced or portrayed characters appearing in the extended version of The Lord of the Rings film series . 
 = = Post @-@ production = = 
 Each film had the benefit of a full year of post @-@ production time before its respective December release , often finishing in October – November , with the crew immediately going to work on the next film . In this period 's later part , Jackson would move to London to supervise the scoring and continue editing , while having a computer feed for discussions to The Dorchester Hotel , and a " fat pipe " of Internet connections from Pinewood Studios to look at the special effects . He had a <unk> video link and 5 @.@ 1 surround sound to organise meetings , and listen to new music and sound effects generally wherever he was . The extended editions also had a tight schedule at the start of each year to complete special effects and music . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 To avoid pressure , Jackson hired a different editor for each film . John Gilbert worked on the first film , Mike Horton and Jabez <unk> on the second and longtime Jackson collaborator Jamie Selkirk and Annie Collins on the third . Daily rushes would often last up to four hours , with scenes being done throughout 1999 – 2002 for the rough ( 4 ½ hours ) assemblies of the films . In total , 1828 km ( six million feet ) of film was edited down to the 11 hours and 23 minutes ( 683 minutes ) of Extended running time . This was the final area of shaping of the films , when Jackson realised that sometimes the best scripting could be redundant on screen , as he picked apart scenes every day from multiple takes . 
 The first film 's editing was relatively easygoing , with Jackson coming up with the concept of an Extended Edition later on , although after a screening to New Line they had to re @-@ edit the beginning for a prologue . The Two Towers was always acknowledged by the crew as the most difficult film to make , as " it had no beginning or end " , and had the additional problem of inter @-@ cutting storylines appropriately . Jackson even continued editing the film when that part of the schedule officially ended , resulting in some scenes , including the reforging of <unk> , Gollum 's back @-@ story , and Saruman 's demise , being moved to The Return of the King . Later , Saruman 's demise was cut from the theatrical edition ( but included in the Extended edition ) when Jackson felt it was not starting the third film effectively enough . As with all parts of the third film 's post @-@ production , editing was very chaotic . The first time Jackson actually saw the completed film was at the Wellington premiere . 
 Many filmed scenes remain unused , even in the Extended Editions . Promotional material for The Fellowship of the Ring contained an attack by Orcs from Moria on Lothlórien after the Fellowship leaves Moria , replaced with a more suspenseful entrance for the Fellowship . Also cut were scenes from the book , including Frodo seeing more of Middle @-@ earth at <unk> Galen and an extended Council of Elrond , and new scenes with an attack upon Frodo and Sam at the river Anduin by an Uruk @-@ hai . The major cut to The Two Towers featured Arwen and Elrond visiting Galadriel at Lothlórien , with Arwen then leading the Elven reinforcements to Helm 's Deep . This scene , and a flashback to Arwen and Aragorn 's first meeting , was cut during a revision of the film 's plot ; the Elves ' appearance was explained with a telepathic communication between Elrond and Galadriel . 
 Éowyn was to have a greater role in defending the refugees in the Glittering Caves from Uruk @-@ hai intruders , while in Osgiliath , Faramir was to have a vision of Frodo becoming like Gollum , with Frodo and Sam having an extended fight sequence . Filmed for The Return of the King were two scenes present in the book ; Sam using the <unk> of Galadriel to pass the Watchers at Cirith Ungol , and further epilogue footage , with endings for Legolas and Gimli , Éowyn and Faramir 's wedding and Aragorn 's death and funeral . Sauron was to fight Aragorn at the Black Gate , but with Jackson deciding the scene was inappropriate , a computer @-@ generated Troll was used instead . To give context for Wormtongue killing Saruman , and Legolas in turn killing Wormtongue , it was to be revealed Wormtongue poisoned <unk> . The final scene cut was Aragorn having his armour fitted for the Battle of the Black Gate by the trilogy 's armourers , which was the final scene filmed during principal photography . Peter Jackson has stated that he would like to include some of these unused scenes in a future " Ultimate Edition " home video release , also including out @-@ takes . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Howard Shore composed , orchestrated , conducted , and produced the trilogy 's music . He was hired in August 2000 and visited the set , and watched the assembly cuts of The Fellowship of the Ring and The Return of the King . In the music , Shore included many leitmotifs to represent various characters , cultures , and places . For example , there are leitmotifs for the hobbits as well as the Shire . Although the first film had some of its score recorded in Wellington , virtually all of the trilogy 's score was recorded in Watford Town Hall and mixed at Abbey Road Studios . Jackson planned to advise the score for six weeks each year in London , though for The Two Towers he stayed for twelve . As a Beatles fan , Jackson had a photo tribute done there on the zebra crossing . 
 The score is primarily played by the London Philharmonic Orchestra , and many artists such as Ben Del Maestro , Enya , Renée Fleming , James Galway , Annie Lennox and Emilíana Torrini contributed . Even actors Billy Boyd , Viggo Mortensen , Liv Tyler , Miranda Otto ( extended cuts only for the latter two ) , and Peter Jackson ( for a single gong sound in the second film ) contributed to the score . Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens also wrote the lyrics to various music and songs , which David Salo translated into Tolkien 's languages . The third film 's end song , " Into the West " , was a tribute to a young filmmaker Jackson and Walsh befriended named Cameron Duncan , who died of cancer in 2003 . 
 Shore composed a main theme for The Fellowship rather than many different character themes , and its strength and weaknesses in volume are depicted at different points in the series . On top of that , individual themes were composed to represent different cultures . <unk> , the amount of music Shore had to write every day for the third film increased dramatically to around seven minutes . The music for the series turned out to be a success and has been voted best movie soundtrack of all time for the six years running , passing up Schindler 's list , Gladiator , Star Wars ( 1977 ) , and Out of Africa respectively . 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 Sound technicians spent the early part of the year trying to find the right sounds . Some , such as animal sounds like those of tigers and walruses , were bought . Human voices were also used . Fran Walsh contributed to the Nazgûl scream and David Farmer the Warg howls . Other sounds were unexpected : the fell beast 's screech is taken from that of a donkey , and the <unk> 's bellow comes from the beginning and end of a lion 's roar . In addition , ADR was used for most of the dialogue . 
 The technicians worked with New Zealand locals to get many of the sounds . They re @-@ recorded sounds in abandoned tunnels for an echo @-@ like effect in the Moria sequence . 20 @,@ 000 New Zealand cricket fans provided the sound of the Uruk @-@ hai army in The Two Towers , with Jackson acting as conductor during the innings break of a one @-@ day international cricket match between England and New Zealand at Westpac Stadium . They spent time recording sounds in a graveyard at night , and also had construction workers drop stone blocks for the sounds of boulders firing and landing in The Return of the King . Mixing took place between August and November at " The Film Mix " , before Jackson commissioned the building of a new studio in 2003 . The building , however , had not yet been fully completed when they started mixing for The Return of the King . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The first film has around 540 effect shots , the second 799 , and the third 1 @,@ 488 ( 2 @,@ 730 in total ) . The total increases to 3 @,@ 420 with the extended editions . 260 visual effect artists began work on the series , and the number doubled by The Two Towers . The crew , led by Jim Rygiel and Randy Cook , worked long hours , often overnight , to produce special effects within a short space of time . Jackson 's active imagination was a driving force . For example , several major shots of Helm 's Deep were produced within the last six weeks of post @-@ production of The Two Towers , and the same happened again within the last six weeks on The Return of the King . 
 = = Releases = = 
 = = = Theatrical = = = 
 The trilogy 's online promotional trailer was first released on 27 April 2000 , and set a new record for download hits , registering 1 @.@ 7 million hits in the first 24 hours of its release . The trailer used a selection from the soundtrack for Braveheart and The Shawshank Redemption among other cuts . In 2001 , 24 minutes of footage from the series , primarily the Moria sequence , was shown at the Cannes Film Festival , and was very well received . The showing also included an area designed to look like Middle @-@ earth . 
 The Fellowship of the Ring was released 19 December 2001 . It grossed $ 47 million in its U.S. opening weekend and made around $ 871 million worldwide . A preview of The Two Towers was inserted just before the end credits near the end of the film 's theatrical run . A promotional trailer was later released , containing music re @-@ scored from the film Requiem for a Dream . The Two Towers was released 18 December 2002 . It grossed $ 62 million in its first U.S. weekend and out @-@ grossed its predecessor with $ 926 million worldwide . The promotional trailer for The Return of the King was debuted exclusively before the New Line Cinema film Secondhand Lions on 23 September 2003 . Released 17 December 2003 , its first U.S. weekend gross was $ 72 million , and became the second film ( after Titanic ) to gross over $ 1 billion worldwide . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Each film was released on standard two @-@ disc edition DVDs containing previews of the next film . The success of the theatrical cuts brought about four @-@ disc Extended Editions , with new editing , added special effects and music . The extended cuts of the films and the included special features were spread over two discs , and a limited collector 's edition was also released . The Fellowship of the Ring was released on 12 November 2002 , containing 30 minutes more footage , an Alan Lee painting of the Fellowship entering Moria , and the Moria Gate on the back of the sleeve ; an <unk> @-@ styled bookend was included with the Collector 's Edition . The Two Towers , released on 18 November 2003 , contained 44 minutes extra footage and a Lee painting of Gandalf the White 's entrance ; the Collector 's Edition contained a Sméagol statue , with a crueller @-@ looking statue of his Gollum persona available by order for a limited time . 
 The Return of the King was released on 14 December 2004 , having 51 minutes more footage , a Lee painting of the Grey Havens and a model of Minas Tirith for the Collector 's Edition , with Minas Morgul available by order for a limited time . The Special Extended DVD Editions also had in @-@ sleeve maps of the Fellowship 's travels . They have also played at cinemas , most notably for a 16 December 2003 marathon screening ( dubbed " Trilogy Tuesday " ) culminating in a late afternoon screening of the third film . Attendees of " Trilogy Tuesday " were given a limited edition keepsake from Sideshow Collectibles containing one random frame of film from each of the three movies . Both versions were put together in a Limited Edition " branching " version , plus a new feature @-@ length documentary by Costa <unk> . The complete series was released in a six @-@ disc set on 14 November 2006 . 
 Warner Bros. released the trilogy 's theatrical versions on Blu @-@ ray Disc in a boxed set on 6 April 2010 . An extended edition Blu @-@ ray box set was made available for pre @-@ order from Amazon.com in March 2011 and was released on 28 June 2011 . Each film 's extended Blu @-@ ray version is identical to the extended DVD version ; the running time includes an added credit sequence listing the names of " Lord of the Rings fan @-@ club members " who contributed to the project . 
 In 2014 , brand new Blu @-@ ray steelbook editions of the five @-@ disc Extended Editions were released . The first , The Fellowship of the Ring , was released on 12 May 2014 . The discs are identical to those found in the previous five @-@ disc Blu @-@ ray set . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 = = = Public and critical response = = = 
 <unk> for inflation , The Lord of the Rings film series is the highest grossing film trilogy worldwide of all time , higher even than other film franchises such as the original Star Wars trilogy and The Godfather trilogy . The film series grossed a total of $ 2 @.@ 92 billion and also tied a record with Ben @-@ Hur and Titanic for the total number of Academy Awards won for a single film , with The Return of the King receiving eleven Oscars . 
 The majority of critics have also praised the series , with Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times writing that " the trilogy will not soon , if ever , find its equal " . Some were critical of the films ' pacing and length : " It 's a collection of spectacular set pieces without any sense of momentum driving them into one another " according to Philadelphia Weekly . 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the films received approval ratings of 91 % , 96 % , and 95 % respectively . Metacritic , based on its ratings for each film ( 92 , 88 , and 94 respectively ) , lists the series as one of the two most critically acclaimed trilogies of all time . Every film is placed in the top 100 of the ' Metacritic Best @-@ Reviewed Movies ' list . In CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend , cinema audiences gave the films an average grade of A- , A , and A + respectively on an A + to F scale . 
 The series appears in the Dallas @-@ Fort Worth Film Critics Association 's Top 10 Films , Time magazine 's All @-@ Time 100 Movies , and James Berardinelli 's Top 100 . In 2007 , USA Today named the series as the most important films of the past 25 years . Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , " best @-@ of " list , saying , " Bringing a cherished book to the big screen ? No sweat . Peter Jackson 's trilogy — or , as we like to call it , our <unk> — exerted its irresistible pull , on advanced Elvish speakers and neophytes alike . " Paste Magazine named it one of the 50 Best Movies of the Decade ( 2000 – 2009 ) , ranking it at No. 4 . In another Time magazine list , the series ranks second in " Best Movies of the Decade " . Empire magazine voted the films at # 1 on the ' 32 Greatest Film Trilogies ' . In addition , six characters and their respective actors made the list of ' The 100 Greatest Movie Characters ' , also compiled by Empire , with Viggo Mortensen 's portrayal of Aragorn ranking No. 15 , Ian McKellen 's portrayal of Gandalf ranking No. 30 , Ian Holm 's portrayal of Bilbo Baggins ( shared with Martin Freeman for his portrayal of the same character in The Hobbit films ) ranking No. 61 , Andy Serkis ' portrayal of Gollum ranking No. 66 , Sean Astin 's portrayal of Samwise Gamgee ranking No. 77 , and Orlando Bloom 's portrayal of Legolas ranking No. 94 . 
 = = = Academy Awards = = = 
 The three films together were nominated for a total of 30 Academy Awards , of which they won 17 , a record for any movie trilogy ( the three nominations for The Hobbit : An Unexpected Journey and The Hobbit : The Desolation of Smaug along with the single nomination for The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies brings the series ' total to 37 nominations ) . The Fellowship of the Ring earned thirteen nominations , the most of any film at the 74th Academy Awards , winning four . The Return of the King won in every category in which it was nominated , setting the current Oscar record for the highest clean sweep , and its 11 Academy Awards wins ties the record held by Ben @-@ Hur and Titanic ( though both of those films had additional nominations that they ultimately lost ) . The Return of the King became only the second sequel to win the Oscar for Best Picture ( after The Godfather Part II ) and the first and only fantasy film to receive this honor , though this has been widely perceived as an award by proxy for the entire series ( the first two films were also nominated for Best Picture ) . No actors in any of the three films won Oscars , and Ian McKellen was the only actor in the trilogy to receive a nomination , for his work in The Fellowship of the Ring . 
 The Fellowship of the Ring – Nominations : 13 , Wins : 4 
 The Two Towers — Nominations : 6 , Wins : 2 
 The Return of the King — Nominations : 11 , Wins : 11 
 As well as Academy Awards , each film in the series won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , the MTV Movie Award for Best Movie , and the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film . The first and third films also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film . The soundtrack for The Two Towers did not receive a nomination because of a rule prohibiting a soundtrack including music from a previous soundtrack to be eligible for nomination . This rule was changed in time for The Return of the King to receive the Oscar for Best Music Score . The New York Film Critics Circle awarded The Return of the King its Best Picture Award at the 2003 Awards Ceremony , hosted by Andrew Johnston , chair of the organization at that time , who called it " a masterful piece of filmmaking . " 
 = = = Reactions to changes in the films from the books = = = 
 The film series provoked both positive and negative reaction from fans and scholars of the novels , and was sometimes seen as changing parts Tolkien felt thematically necessary in terms of characters , themes , events and subtlety . Some fans of the book who disagreed with such changes have released fan edits of the films such as The Lord of the Rings : The Purist Edition , which removed many of the changes to bring them closer to the original . 
 Various changes to characters such as Gandalf , Aragorn , Arwen , Denethor , Faramir , Gimli , and Frodo , when considered together , were seen by some to alter the tone and themes found in the books . Several critics contend that the portrayal of women , especially Arwen , in the films is thematically faithful to ( or compatible with ) Tolkien 's writings despite some differences . Wayne G. Hammond , a Tolkien scholar , said of the first two films that he found them to be " travesties as adaptations ... faithful only on a basic level of plot " and that many characters had not been depicted faithfully to their appearance in the novel . Other critics have argued that Tolkien 's characters were weakened and misinterpreted by their portrayal in the films . 
 Changes to events ( such as the Elves participating at the Battle of Helm 's Deep , Faramir taking the hobbits to Osgiliath , and the deletion of the chapter " The Scouring of the Shire " ) are also seen as changing Tolkien 's themes . 
 Janet Brennan Croft criticized the films using Tolkien 's own terms " anticipation " and " flattening " , which she used in critiquing a proposed film script . She contrasts Tolkien 's subtlety with Jackson 's tendency to show " too much too soon " . 
 Supporters of the series assert that it is a worthy interpretation of the book and that most of the changes were necessary . Many who worked on the series are fans of the book , including Christopher Lee , who ( alone among the cast ) had actually met Tolkien in person , and Boyens once noted that no matter what , it is simply their interpretation of the book . Jackson once said that to simply summarize the story on screen would be a mess , and in his own words , " Sure , it 's not really The Lord of the Rings ... but it could still be a pretty damn cool movie . " Other fans also claim that , despite any changes , the films serve as a tribute to the book , appealing to those who have not yet read it , and even leading some to do so . The Movie Guide for The Encyclopedia of Arda ( an online Tolkien encyclopedia ) states that Jackson 's films were exceptional since filming the whole story of The Lord of the Rings was probably impossible . This notion is partially supported by a review published in 2005 that otherwise criticized a lack of " faithfulness to Tolkien 's spirit and tone . " Douglas Kellner argues that the conservative community spirit of Tolkien 's Shire is reflected in Jackson 's films as well as the division of the Fellowship into " squabbling races " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The release of the films saw a surge of interest in The Lord of the Rings and Tolkien 's other works , vastly increasing his impact on popular culture . It was rumored that the Tolkien family became split on the series , with Christopher Tolkien and his son Simon Tolkien feuding over whether or not it was a good idea to adapt . Christopher has since denied these claims , saying , " My own position is that The Lord of the Rings is peculiarly unsuitable to transformation into visual dramatic form . The suggestions that have been made that I ' disapprove ' of the films , even to the extent of thinking ill of those with whom I may differ , are wholly without foundation . " He added that he had never " expressed any such feeling " . In 2012 , however , he described the films as having " eviscerated " the book , and criticized the resulting " commercialisation " of his father 's work . 
 As a result of the series ' success , Peter Jackson has become a major player in the film business ( sometimes called a mogul ) in the mold of Steven Spielberg and George Lucas , in the process befriending some industry heavyweights like Bryan Singer and Frank Darabont . Jackson has since founded his own film production company , Wingnut Films , as well as Wingnut Interactive , a video game company . He was also finally given a chance to remake King Kong in 2005 . The film was a critical and box office success , although not as successful as The Lord of the Rings series . Jackson has been called a " favourite son " of New Zealand . In 2004 , Howard Shore toured with The Lord of the Rings Symphony , playing two hours of the score . Along with the Harry Potter films , the series has renewed interest in the fantasy film genre . Tourism for New Zealand is up , possibly due to its exposure in the series , with the country 's tourism industry waking up to an audience 's familiarity . 
 In December 2002 , The Lord of the Rings Motion Picture Trilogy : The Exhibition opened at the Te Papa museum in Wellington , New Zealand . As of 2007 , the exhibition has traveled to seven other cities around the world . A musical adaptation of the book was launched in Toronto , Ontario , Canada , in 2006 , but it closed after mostly poor reviews . A shortened version opened in London , United Kingdom , in the summer of 2007 . The success of the films has also spawned numerous video games and many other kinds of merchandise . 
 The legacy of The Lord of the Rings is also that of court cases over profits from the trilogy . Sixteen cast members ( Noel Appleby , Jed Brophy , Mark Ferguson , Ray Henwood , Bruce Hopkins , William Johnson , Nathaniel Lees , Sarah McLeod , Ian <unk> , Paul Norell , Craig Parker , Robert Pollock , Martyn Sanderson , Peter Tait and Stephan Ure ) sued over the lack of revenue from merchandise bearing their appearance . The case was resolved out of court in 2008 . The settlement came too late for Appleby , who died of cancer in 2007 . Saul Zaentz also filed a lawsuit in 2004 claiming he had not been paid all of his royalties . The next year , Jackson himself sued the studio over profits from the first film , slowing development of the prequels until late 2007 . The Tolkien Trust filed a lawsuit in February 2008 , for violating Tolkien 's original deal over the rights that they would earn 7 @.@ 5 % of the gross from any films based on his works . The Trust sought compensation of $ 150 million . A judge denied them this option , but allowed them to win compensation from the act of the studio ignoring the contract itself . On 8 September 2009 , a settlement of this dispute between the Trust and New Line was announced , clearing a potential obstacle to the making of a new film based on The Hobbit . 
 = = Video games = = 
 Numerous video games have been released to supplement the film series . The releases include : The Two Towers , Pinball , The Return of the King , The Third Age , The Third Age ( GBA ) , Tactics , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II , The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II : The Rise of the Witch @-@ king , Conquest , Aragorn 's Quest , War in the North , Lego The Lord of the Rings , Guardians of Middle @-@ earth and Middle @-@ earth : Shadow of Mordor . 
 = = The Hobbit = = 
 Peter Jackson also directed three films based on Tolkien 's 1937 novel The Hobbit , a prequel to the Lord of the Rings novels . The first film , The Hobbit : An Unexpected Journey , was released on 12 December 2012 , the second film , The Hobbit : The Desolation of Smaug , was released on 13 December 2013 , and the third film , The Hobbit : The Battle of the Five Armies , was released on 17 December 2014 . Several actors from The Lord of the Rings , including Ian McKellen , Andy Serkis , Hugo Weaving , Elijah Wood , Ian Holm ( as older Bilbo ) , Christopher Lee , Cate Blanchett and Orlando Bloom reprised their roles . 
 = Laurie Nash = 
 Laurence John " Laurie " Nash ( 2 May 1910 – 24 July 1986 ) was a Test cricketer and Australian rules footballer . An inductee into the Australian Football Hall of Fame , Nash was a member of South Melbourne 's 1933 premiership team , captained South Melbourne in 1937 and was the team 's leading goal kicker in 1937 and 1945 . In cricket , Nash was a fast bowler and hard hitting lower order batsman who played two Test matches for Australia , taking 10 wickets at 12 @.@ 80 runs per wicket , and scoring 30 runs at a batting average of 15 . 
 The son of a leading Australian rules footballer of the early twentieth century who had also played cricket against the touring Marylebone Cricket Club in 1921 , Nash was a star sportsman as a boy . Following the family 's relocation from Victoria to Tasmania , he began to make a name for himself as both a footballer and a cricketer , and became both one of the earliest professional club cricketers in Australia and one of the first fully professional Australian rules footballers . Nash made his Test cricket debut in 1932 , against South Africa and his Victorian Football League ( VFL ) debut in 1933 . 
 While Nash had great success in football , he faced opposition from the cricket establishment for his supposedly poor attitude towards authority . This led fellow cricketer Keith Miller to write that his non @-@ selection as a regular Test player was " the greatest waste of talent in Australian cricket history " . 
 During World War II Nash rejected offers of a home posting and instead served as a trooper in New Guinea , stating that he wished to be treated no differently from any other soldier . Following the end of the war , Nash returned to South Melbourne and won the team goal kicking award , although his age and injuries inhibited any return of his previous successes . Nash retired from VFL football at the end of the 1945 season to play and coach in the country before returning to coach South Melbourne in 1953 . After retiring , Nash wrote columns for newspapers , was a panellist on football television shows and was a publican before his death in Melbourne , aged 76 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nash was born in Fitzroy , Victoria on 2 May 1910 , the youngest of three children of Irish Catholics Robert and Mary Nash . He had a brother , Robert Junior , and one sister , Mary , known as <unk> . 
 Nash belonged to a sporting family ; his grandfather Michael Nash and great @-@ uncle Thomas Nash were leading players for Carlton Football Club in the 1880s , his father Robert captained Collingwood Football Club and coached Footscray Football Club , and played cricket , opening the bowling for Hamilton in a match against the 1920 – 1921 touring English side , while Robert Junior also became a leading footballer in Tasmania and country Victoria . Nash 's mother was an orphan who was probably adopted several times , allowing historians no opportunity to determine any sporting links on her side of the family . Nash 's biographer also claims that former Prime Minister of New Zealand Sir Walter Nash and pianist Eileen Joyce were related to the family . 
 Nash 's father , who had initially worked as a gas stoker , joined the police force in 1913 and served in a number of postings , including Hamilton in western Victoria , taking his family with him . In Hamilton , Nash attended Loreto Convent and began his interest in sport , practising kicking a football made of newspapers and tied together with string . 
 When Nash Senior was transferred back to Melbourne in 1922 , the Nash brothers attended St Ignatius School in the Melbourne working @-@ class suburb of Richmond , where Nash became best friends with fellow student Tommy <unk> , who would also become a leading Australian rules footballer . 
 Although short and stocky , Nash and his brother Robert Junior developed into star junior sportsmen , excelling at football and cricket , although Nash Senior preferred Laurie to become a cricketer , considering it a better and longer career option and forbade his sons from playing senior football until age 20 . 
 Nash 's performance in junior cricket led Victorian district cricket club Fitzroy to sign him for the 1927 / 28 season . Nash made his first grade debut for Fitzroy as a seventeen @-@ year @-@ old and spent two and a half seasons at Fitzroy , earning plaudits for his performances and , until he broke his wrist in a fielding mishap , there were suggestions that he was close to Victorian selection . 
 Nash Senior was a member of a group of 600 police who went on strike in 1923 for better wages but was dismissed from the force and required to find another livelihood . Nash Senior went into the hotel business , firstly in Melbourne before eventually moving his family to Tasmania in 1929 to run the hotel at <unk> . 
 = = Tasmania = = 
 In Tasmania , Nash gained work in a Launceston sport store and made his Tasmanian district cricket debut for the Tamar Cricket Club on 7 December 1929 , taking 7 wickets for 29 ( 7 / 29 ) and 1 / 16 . After one more match for Tamar , in which he took 5 / 41 , Nash was chosen in the Northern Tasmania side in the annual match against Southern Tasmania , where he took match figures of 7 / 40 and top scored in both innings . 
 These performances led Nash to make his first @-@ class cricket debut for Tasmania against Victoria in Launceston on 31 December 1929 , taking 2 / 97 , with future Test player Leo O 'Brien his maiden first @-@ class wicket , and scoring 1 and 48 ( Tasmania 's top score in their second innings ) . 
 Four months later , he made his senior football debut for the Roy Cazaly coached City side in the Northern Tasmanian Football Association ( NTFA ) , immediately standing out on account of his skills , blond hair and confidence in his abilities . Nash made the Tasmanian side for the national carnival in Adelaide where he won the medal for the most outstanding Tasmanian player of the carnival . Nash played in defence for City while Robert Junior played in the forward line and both were considered sensational . 
 Between 1930 and 1932 Nash played 45 games for City ( including premierships in 1930 and 1932 ) , kicking 14 goals , and winning the Tasman Shields Trophy , awarded to the Best and Fairest player in the NTFA , in 1931 and 1932 . Additionally , Nash played 10 games for Northern Tasmania ( 12 goals ) and 5 games for Tasmania at the national carnival . 
 Nash played for Tasmania against the touring West Indian cricket team in December 1930 . Batting at number three , Nash made 41 and 0 and took 2 / 87 , including bowling Learie Constantine , who had scored 100 in 65 minutes . Journalists noted that during Constantine 's innings , Nash was the only Tasmanian bowler to watch the West Indian closely and take note of his strengths and weaknesses , which led to his eventual success against the batsman . 
 In September 1932 Nash married Irene Roles in Launceston , with City and Tasmania team mate Ted Pickett acting as best man . Due to the strict sectarianism of the 1930s , there was some controversy as Irene was a Protestant from one of Launceston 's establishment families , and the wedding was held in a Protestant church . For years afterwards , Nash was subjected to a campaign by Catholic clergy to hold a Catholic wedding ceremony to legitimise his marriage but refused . 
 Laurie and Irene had one child , Noelene , in January 1940 . <unk> states that it was thought that Laurie sought to have additional children but Irene was opposed . 
 = = = Called for throwing = = = 
 On 26 January 1931 Nash was called for throwing in a match for Tasmania against Victoria at Launceston . He later claimed that the throw was deliberate and came out of frustration with his fielders . The call for throwing was early in the innings but Nash was able to recover from the incident to take 5 / 76 out of Victoria 's total of 524 . Earlier in the same match Nash opened the batting and made 110 , his highest first @-@ class score . It has been speculated by cricket historian Bernard Whimpress that Nash 's decision to throw the ball may have been regarded by selectors as " part of a parcel of anti @-@ social behaviours which told against regular selection " for either Australia or Victoria . 
 = = Test debut = = 
 Nash was picked for Tasmania in two matches against the touring South Africans in January 1932 . He failed to perform in the first match in Launceston , taking 1 / 68 and 2 / 45 and scoring 17 and 9 . However , Nash had a lively bowling performance in the Hobart match , making the ball come off the wicket at a great pace and gaining match figures of 9 / 137 , including two wickets in consecutive balls and breaking batsman Eric Dalton 's jaw with a vicious bouncer on the hat @-@ trick ball . South African captain Jock Cameron praised Nash for his performance as his bowling in the match was thought to be as quick and dangerous as any bowler in the world . 
 Following the Hobart match Nash was included in the Australian side to make his Test debut , aged 21 years and 286 days , against South Africa at the Melbourne Cricket Ground beginning 12 February 1932 . Nash was the first Tasmanian based player chosen to play for Australia since Charles Eady in 1902 and would be the last until Roger Woolley debuted in 1983 . Also making his Test debut for Australia was batsman Jack Fingleton while spin bowler Bert Ironmonger was recalled to the side . 
 Nash 's inclusion raised eyebrows , as The Argus wrote " The inclusion of Nash will occasion most surprise " , particularly as Nash was the only fast bowler chosen in the Australian team . However Nash soon silenced any critics with a dangerous opening spell , capturing three of the first four South African wickets to fall and 4 in the first innings for just 18 runs , followed by 1 / 4 in the second as South Africa were routed for 36 and 45 . The match was the first to finish in under six hours ' play . 
 Following the match , The Times commented favourably on Nash , reporting " Nash is a short , powerfully built man , … made the ball kick awkwardly , several balls getting up head @-@ high , and in one spell before luncheon took three wickets for four runs . Nash has plenty of stamina for a fast bowler and is considered by some to be the man for whom the selectors are searching to fill the place of Gregory . " 
 Nash 's performance also drew the interest of VFL clubs , as he was " said to be a better footballer than he is a cricketer . " Victorian Football League clubs Richmond and Footscray sought to recruit Nash but the VFL considered Nash a Fitzroy player due to his time at Fitzroy Cricket Club . 
 = = Bodyline = = 
 The 1932 – 1933 cricket season saw the Douglas Jardine @-@ led England side tour Australia , with Nash expected to open the bowling . English newspaper the News Chronicle stated that the emergence of Nash was " a grim prospect for England in its attempts to recover the Ashes . " Despite this , he was left out of what became known as the Bodyline series . 
 In the wake of England 's tactics of sustained fast short pitched bowling at the body of the Australian batsman , Australian vice @-@ captain Vic Richardson urged that Nash be brought into the Test team to " give the Poms back some of their own medicine . " Another Australian cricketer , Jack Fingleton , later wrote that the Australian selectors erred in not playing Nash , believing he was to be the best exponent in Australia of intimidatory fast bowling . However , the Australian Board of Control for International Cricket , which had been protesting to the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) about the Bodyline tactics of Jardine , believed that the inclusion of Nash would only aggravate an already tense situation , and Australian captain Bill Woodfull thought Bodyline bowling to be unsportsmanlike and refused to use the tactic . 
 Nash himself claimed that he could have ended Bodyline in two overs without needing to resort to a leg field , as he believed that the English batsman could not hook and a few overs of sustained , fast short pitched bowling would have caused England to abandon their Bodyline tactics . 
 As it was , Nash only played one first @-@ class game during the 1932 – 1933 season — for an Australian XI side against MCC at the MCG . Opening the bowling , Nash took 3 / 39 in the first innings and 0 / 18 in the second , with reporters noting that he occasionally got a lot of bounce out of the wicket . By this point Nash had played 17 matches for Tasmania , scoring 857 runs at 29 @.@ 55 and taking 51 wickets at 31 @.@ 96 . There was also talk , which proved unfounded , that Nash would be invited to join the touring team to Canada that Arthur Mailey was compiling . 
 = = Move to Victoria = = 
 = = = 1933 = = = 
 Nash 's football career continued to soar as several Victorian Football League clubs sought to recruit Laurie and Robert Junior . South Melbourne , partly through its connection to Roy Cazaly and partly through its offer to Nash of an unprecedented £ 3 per match , accommodation and a job in a sports store , eventually won the battle for the Nash brothers ' signatures for the 1933 VFL season . Such was the interest in Melbourne in where Nash would play , when South Melbourne committee member Joe Scanlan travelled to Tasmania to sign Nash , he was smuggled aboard the steamer to avoid media attention . 
 Nash moved to Melbourne in late 1932 and began playing cricket for South Melbourne Cricket Club while waiting for his transfer to South Melbourne Football Club to be processed . 
 Laurie starred in practice matches for South Melbourne but Robert Junior struggled and left the club prior to the start of the season to successfully play firstly for VFA club Coburg and then play and coach in country Victoria , Wearing guernsey number 25 , Nash made his VFL debut for South Melbourne against Carlton Football Club at Princes Park on 29 April 1933 , aged 22 years and 362 days . A near @-@ record crowd of 37 @,@ 000 attended the match and Nash immediately became one of the League 's top players , dominating matches from centre half @-@ back . Due in large part to Nash 's performance , South Melbourne finished the 1933 Home and Away season in second . 
 Nash caused the South Melbourne coaching staff concern when he fractured two fingers in a match against Hawthorn two weeks before the final series . Normally this type of injury would require a player to miss six weeks of football but Nash , who kicked six goals in the match , missed just one week , returned for South 's Semi @-@ Final win against Richmond and was considered Best on Ground in South Melbourne 's 1933 premiership win . In the Grand Final Nash played at centre @-@ half @-@ back , took thirteen marks and had twenty @-@ nine kicks and dominated play . 
 Nash was adjudged the finest defender since World War I by The Sporting Globe and was runner @-@ up in the Best and Fairest at South Melbourne . 
 A week after the Grand Final and still on a high from the premiership win , Nash opened the bowling for his district club South Melbourne against Australian captain Bill Woodfull 's team , Carlton . Mindful of the upcoming Test tour of England , Nash thought he could impress Woodfull by bowling him a series of short pitched deliveries , eventually hitting him over the heart ( Woodfull had been hit just under the heart by Harold Larwood during the Bodyline series ) . Nash dismissed Woodfull caught and bowled later that over for 15 but did not realise that " there was no way in the world Woodfull would take this wild and slightly uncouth cricketer with him to England in the current political climate ( or perhaps any other ) " and was not chosen for the subsequent tour of England . 
 = = = 1934 = = = 
 Nash continued to play district cricket and was considered a strong possibility for the 1934 tour of England . He was chosen to play in the Bert Ironmonger / Don Blackie benefit match , which was also a Test trial , but was forced to withdraw after contracting rheumatism in his shoulder . Nash 's replacement , Hans Ebeling , bowled well enough to secure a place in the tour squad instead . 
 Following the 1933 Premiership success , hopes were high for the 1934 VFL season , which was known as the Centenary Premiership year , in recognition of one hundred years since the European settlement of Victoria . Nash continued to move between centre half @-@ back and centre half @-@ forward , kicking 53 goals for the year ( 47 of which from 9 games ) as well as playing a significant role in South Melbourne full @-@ forward Bob Pratt reaching a record 150 goals ( although later in life Pratt would joke that Nash only kicked to him once " but that was a mistake . " ) 
 In August 1934 , Nash was chosen to play for Victoria in an interstate match against South Australia at the MCG , replacing the injured Pratt . Initially selected at centre half @-@ forward , Nash had kicked 2 goals by the start of the second quarter when he was moved to full @-@ forward to replace the injured Bill Mohr and proceeded to kick a further 16 goals to finish with 18 goals , a record for a Victorian player in an interstate match and for the MCG as Victoria defeated South Australia 30 @.@ 19 ( 199 ) to 14 @.@ 10 ( 94 ) . Brownlow Medallist Ivor Warne @-@ Smith wrote of Nash 's performance ; " his was a great achievement . He showed superb marking , good ground play , and accurate kicking . Some of his shots from left @-@ foot snaps were gems … His performance has never been equalled . " He later claimed he would have kicked 27 goals that day but for the selfishness of the rovers who refused to kick to him . Following the match , Dr B. <unk> , who attended the birth of Nash , publicly apologised to the South Australian side , claiming part responsibility for the mayhem inflicted by Nash . 
 South Melbourne finished the home and away series in third position , defeated Collingwood by three points in the first Semi @-@ Final and Geelong by 60 points in the Preliminary Final , with Nash in brilliant form in the drizzling rain , kicking four goals . 
 Going into the 1934 Grand Final , South Melbourne were favourites to retain the premiership but while Nash kicked six goals and was adjudged one of the best players of the match , South Melbourne were defeated by Richmond by 39 points . Such was the surprise around South Melbourne 's loss , there were post @-@ match rumours of South players being offered and accepting bribes to play poorly and Bob Pratt and Peter Reville angrily confronted team mates who underperformed . 
 = = = 1935 = = = 
 Nash resigned his position at the sports store and followed in his father 's footsteps by joining the Victorian police force on 14 January 1935 , and at 5 ' 9 " only just reached the minimum height requirement . Constable Nash served in the South Melbourne area for two years before resigning , having made no arrests in that time . 
 Nash continued to cement his reputation as one of the top footballers in the country , being called " the most versatile player in Australia " , as , in addition to playing at centre half @-@ back and centre half @-@ forward , he successfully played in the ruck . 
 Named at centre half @-@ back for Victoria in the game against Western Australia , Nash arrived in Perth with such a severe cold he was unable to train in the lead up to match . Nash injured his knee and ankle in Victoria 's win over Western Australia in Perth in early July and was unable to train for a week . While Nash did not miss any matches due to the injuries , they bothered him throughout the season and he was forced to miss South Melbourne Footballers ' weekly dance at the Lake Oval Social Hall . Although carrying injuries , Nash continued to show his versatility , playing around the ground and led South Melbourne to the Grand Final , their third in a row , only to be defeated by Collingwood . 
 At the end of the 1935 season , Nash was adjudged the Best Player in the VFL by the Sporting Globe , yet only came runner @-@ up to Ron Hillis in South Melbourne 's Best and Fairest . 
 = = = 1936 = = = 
 Appointed vice @-@ captain of South Melbourne , Nash had his best Brownlow Medal result in 1936 , receiving ten votes and finishing equal sixteenth behind winner Denis Ryan , while at South Melbourne , Nash was voted runner @-@ up in the Best and Fairest and was runner @-@ up in the Leading <unk> award . Nash however was considered by many judges as the best footballer in Australia , being adjudged " VFL Best Player " by the Sporting Globe , " VFL Footballer of the Year " by the Melbourne Herald and " VFL Best Player of the Year " by The Australian , while newspapers reported that crowds " gasped " at the remarkable things he was able achieve with the ball . 
 South Melbourne finished the year as Minor Premier but lost to Collingwood in the Second Semi @-@ Final , although Nash , at centre @-@ half @-@ back , was listed as one of South 's best players in the match . South then won the Preliminary Final against Melbourne , with the dominance of Nash , again at centre @-@ half @-@ back , over his opponent Jack Mueller , himself one of the VFL 's leading players , deciding the result of the final . 
 For the fourth season in a row , South Melbourne reached the Grand Final , only to lose , for the third season in a row , to Collingwood for the second time in a row . Nash kicked one goal in the Grand Final and was adjudged one of South 's best players but Collingwood 's Jack Ross 's dogged tagging of Nash throughout the match was considered the decisive factor in Collingwood 's win . 
 = = = 1937 = = = 
 Nash was selected as captain of South Melbourne for the 1937 season to replace the retiring Jack Bisset , becoming part of the first father and son team to captain a VFL / AFL side . It is thought that South Melbourne 's newly appointed coach Roy Cazaly influenced the selection of Nash as captain , as Cazaly , Nash 's coach in Tasmania , believed Nash to be the best footballer ever . There was some controversy over Nash 's selection as captain , as it had been expected that vice @-@ captain Brighton Diggins would be named captain . In response , Diggins quit South . 
 South Melbourne did not enjoy the same level of success it had in the past four seasons , dropping to ninth position as retirements of some its key players from the previous four seasons , as well as injuries meant Nash was forced to play a lone hand for much of the year . Nash won the club goal kicking award with 37 goals . 
 = = Test comeback = = 
 Nash spent five years out of the cricketing spotlight ( although he dominated Melbourne district cricket , the Victorian selectors refused to select him and he never played a Sheffield Shield match ) . In 1936 – 1937 he topped the district cricket bowling averages . 
 Nash was chosen for Victoria against the touring English cricket team and responded with figures of 2 / 21 and 2 / 16 and had the tourists ducking and weaving with " several head and rib @-@ hunting deliveries an over " . By playing for Victoria in this match , Nash became the first person to represent two different states in cricket and Australian rules football . He remains one of only three players to do so ( the others being Keith Miller and Neil Hawke ) . 
 In response to his bowling performance , Nash was picked for the deciding Fifth Test of the 1936 – 1937 Ashes series at the Melbourne Cricket Ground , with the sides locked at 2 – 2 in the series . His selection invoked complaints from the touring English side , where it was reported that a " feeling bordering on panic " had arisen at the thought of facing Nash during the Test . England captain Gubby Allen pressed for Nash 's banishment from the Australian team , organising a private lunch with Bradman , then Australian captain . Bradman refused to omit Nash , believing " his presence in the team would be a psychological threat to England whether he bowled bouncers or underarm <unk> " . Allen then approached the Australian Board of Control . It has been suggested that the Board of Control wanted to accede to Allen 's demand and veto Nash 's selection but were forced to relent when the selectors threatened to resign if Nash was not included . Finally , Allen informed the umpires that if Nash was to bowl one ball aimed at the body , he would immediately bring his batsmen off the ground . 
 Nash claimed 4 / 70 and 1 / 34 and scored a sedate 17 in seventy @-@ five minutes ( disappointing the crowd which " was expecting fireworks from him " ) as Australia clinched the series . Nash also took a number of catches , including Wally Hammond off Bill O 'Reilly and a spectacular catch to dismiss Ken Farnes , the last England batsman , pocketing the ball and a stump as souvenirs . When later asked about his inclusion , Nash replied " They knew where to come when they stood 2 @-@ all in the rubber . " 
 The media was full of praise for Nash 's performance in the Test , claiming that Nash was a much more reliable fast bowler than his " erratic " opening partner Ernie McCormick . Nash was praised for his stamina , his ability to keep his footing and his direction during long bowling stints and his vicious yorker , which he used to dismiss Leslie Ames in the first innings and Joe Hardstaff junior in the second . 
 Bradman later wrote that Nash 's bowling was scrupulously fair and that any bouncers were few and adhered to the spirit of cricket . 
 = = Cricket wilderness = = 
 Following the Test , Nash was selected for Victoria for their match against South Australia at the Adelaide Oval in what would have been his first Sheffield Shield match . However , Nash was forced to withdraw and fly to Tasmania following his wife Irene 's sudden collapse in Hobart with peritonitis . 
 At the start of the 1937 – 1938 cricket season , it was expected that Nash would be chosen for the 1938 Ashes Tour , with one journalist stating that if he was not selected , the team " would not be truly representative of our nation 's real cricketing strength . " Nash continued to terrorise batsmen in district cricket , including the rare occurrence of taking all 10 wickets in an innings ( for 35 runs ) for South Melbourne against Prahran in 1937 @-@ 38 , but was not selected for Victoria throughout the season . Nash 's non @-@ selection for Victoria led some Victorian Cricket Association delegates to publicly question why " the best fast bowler in Australia , and probably the world , is not chosen to represent Victoria " and demand that the Victorian selectors explain their non @-@ selection of Nash . 
 Nash 's first @-@ class career ended at the age of 26 . His career Test figures 10 wickets at 12 @.@ 60 places him fourth on the list of averages for bowlers to have taken 10 or more Test wickets ( and the best by an Australian ) . His 22 first @-@ class matches reaped 69 wickets at 28 @.@ 33 and 953 runs at 28 @.@ 02 . His district cricket career of 63 matches netted 174 wickets at 14 @.@ 95 . 
 A young Keith Miller also played for the South Melbourne Cricket Club and gained his first wicket in district cricket from a catch by Nash . Miller later declared that the non @-@ selection of Nash as a regular Test player was " the greatest waste of talent in Australian cricket history " , adding that Australian captain Don Bradman wanted Nash in the side to tour England in 1938 but that Nash " suffered injustices at the hands of high @-@ level cricket administration " , who refused to consider his selection . 
 The reasons given for the administrators ' disinclination towards Nash include his reputation for blunt speech , his abrasive personality , which included sledging and even the fact that he wore cut off sleeves , which was considered a serious faux pas in the 1930s . Nash himself believed it was due to his working @-@ class background , saying " I didn 't wear the old school tie . I was a working man 's son . I didn 't fit in " . 
 = = Transfer to Camberwell = = 
 Prior to the 1938 season , the Victorian Football Association ( VFA ) , the second @-@ tier senior football competition in the state , made an ambitious break from tradition in what was ultimately a successful ploy to improve its popularity : it legalised throwing the ball in general play and made a few other rule changes to create a distinct and faster variation of Australian rules football , and ended the legal framework which required players to obtain a clearance when switching from the VFL to the VFA ( or vice versa ) . On March 31 , Nash caused a sensation when he became the first VFL player to defect under this schism , transferring from South Melbourne to Camberwell without a clearance . Nash was already one of the highest paid players in the VFL , but accepted an offer of £ 8 / week to captain @-@ coach the Camberwell Football Club , £ 3 / week to captain @-@ coach the sub @-@ district Camberwell Cricket Club and a job as a Camberwell Council official . 
 South Melbourne and the VFL objected to the transfer and South Melbourne sent out a public appeal for a job for Nash that would match that offered by Camberwell but nothing suitable was forthcoming . There were also threats of legal action against Nash and Camberwell , which did not eventuate , although for playing in another competition without a clearance , Nash was banned from playing in the VFL competition for three years – a suspension which meant he would have to sit out of all football ( both VFA and VFL ) for three years if he wished to return from the VFA to the VFL . 
 Nash was immediately appointed captain of Camberwell and quickly became one of the most popular figures in the VFA , drawing large crowds to even practice matches . Playing mainly at centre @-@ half @-@ back in his first season but later in the forward @-@ line , Nash was runner @-@ up in the 1938 Camberwell Best and Fairest and won the 1939 Best and Fairest ; and in 1939 , he finished second in both of the VFA 's Best and Fairest awards : the Recorder Cup and VFA Medal . Nash spent four seasons at Camberwell , where he played 74 games and kicked 418 goals , including 100 in 1939 and 141 in 1941 . At the start of the 1940 season Nash was still considered amongst the best footballers in the country and , with the transfer of former South Melbourne team mate Bob Pratt and Collingwood full @-@ forward Ron Todd to rival VFA sides Coburg and Williamstown respectively , there was talk that the VFA would now match the VFL for crowds . 
 Nash was officially appointed Captain / Coach of Camberwell Cricket Club on 19 September 1938 and his debut for the club in the summer of 1938 – 1939 meant that he was the first person to be paid for playing grade cricket in Australia . 
 = = War service = = 
 Nash did not rush to enlist in the Australian armed forces on the outbreak of war in 1939 . While there was no public statement from Nash , it is thought that with a family to support and an Irish Catholic anti @-@ <unk> to the British , Nash did not feel an urgency to fight . However , following the commencement of the war against Japan , Nash enlisted on 2 February 1942 . 
 Realising the potential public relations coup in having a star sportsman enlist , officers recommended that Nash be seconded to the Army School of Physical Training ( where Don Bradman had been given a commission ) , which offered greater pay and rank and ensured that Nash would not be posted overseas , away from family . Additionally , a medical examination detected osteoarthritis in both his knees , derived from the number of injuries he sustained throughout his footballing career . Nash refused , stating that he did not wish to be treated differently from ordinary recruits , and enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force , gaining the rank of Trooper . 
