 Nash was posted to the 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion , which had seen action in the Syria @-@ Lebanon and the Netherlands East Indies campaigns . The 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion was sent to the South West Pacific theatre , supporting the 7th Division in the New Guinea campaign and fought in the Finisterre Range campaign in the advance to Lae . 
 Throughout his tour of duty Nash had been wary of preferential treatment towards him due to his fame and opposed any attempts to promote him , which he believed he did not deserve . However , a jeep crash resulted in further injury to Nash 's knees and ultimately led to a medical discharge from the Army on 18 February 1944 . Following his return to Australia , Nash sold War Bonds and appeared at war @-@ related charity functions , including one where he raised an additional £ 100 by singing to the large crowd . 
 Although Nash would claim that he was never prouder than when he was a soldier , always wore his Returned Services League ( RSL ) badge and eagerly attended reunions of the 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion , he never marched on Anzac Day or applied for the campaign medals for which he was eligible . 
 = = Postwar sport = = 
 Although out of shape and with arthritic knees , Nash announced that he was making a football comeback in 1945 . He sought to return to South Melbourne , rather than Camberwell , but Camberwell declined Nash 's transfer application and both clubs stated that they would be naming Nash in their respective sides for Round 1 . An impediment to Nash 's return to South Melbourne arose as a result of Nash having played two games for his old boy scout troop , the 6th Melbourne Scouts , while on leave in mid @-@ 1942 ; these games were considered competitive , and playing in them meant that Nash had not sat out of football for the three years required to serve the suspension he had received for crossing to Camberwell without a clearance . After an appeal by South Melbourne , a special meeting of the VFL was held to amend the rules so ex @-@ servicemen would not be penalised for playing in minor matches . The amendment was made the day before the commencement of the 1945 season , allowing Nash to take his place for South Melbourne in their Round 1 . 
 Nash was slower and more portly than he was in the 1930s , short of match practice and forced to spend most Sundays in hospital having fluid drained from his injured knees swollen from the exertions of the day before , forcing South Melbourne coach Bull Adams to nurse Nash through the season . Additionally , in the Round 5 match against Footscray , he tore the webbing between his fingers which later became infected , causing him to miss the Round 6 match against North Melbourne and although Nash wore a special leather glove to protect his hand , the injury would trouble him for the rest of the season . Despite these setbacks , Nash could still be a match winner and many opposition players saw him as the key player for South Melbourne . Nash 's best return for the year was seven goals against St Kilda in Round 12 and he twice kicked six goals in a match ; against Geelong in Round 15 and Fitzroy in Round 18 . When an opposition player did well against Nash , it was something to savour ; years later leading Richmond player Don " <unk> " Fraser wrote " <unk> Nash does a lot for your confidence , even an ageing Nash . " 
 South Melbourne won the minor premiership in 1945 and reached the 1945 VFL Grand Final , where it lost to Carlton . Named at full @-@ forward , Nash was the oldest player in the Grand Final at 35 years and 150 days . The match , known as ' the Bloodbath ' , was notorious for its <unk> violence . For his part , Nash king @-@ hit Carlton captain Bob Chitty in the final quarter with what he later described as the sweetest punch he had ever thrown , knocking Chitty out , breaking his jaw and leaving a large wound over his left eye which required several stitches ; as the umpire was unsighted , Nash went unreported over this incident . Nash was generally ineffective on the day , and his opponent Vin Brown was a consensus pick for best player on ground . Nash was described as a " sad figure … age and injury had reduced him to almost a caricature , a lion in winter simply going through the motions . His body was no longer capable of performing the feats that a decade earlier had seen him feted as the finest footballer to ever play the game . " 
 Nash played 17 games for South in 1945 , kicking 56 goals . This left him with 99 VFL matches and 246 goals in his career . Nash also played three matches for Victoria , kicking 19 goals . 
 On 18 February 1944 , the day he was discharged from the Army , Nash played an internal trial cricket match for South Melbourne , although he had not played competitive cricket for four years . However , he did not play another first XI district match for South Melbourne after the war . 
 = = Post @-@ VFL footballing career = = 
 Nash trained with South Melbourne during the 1946 pre @-@ season but ultimately retired from VFL football to accept a position as captain @-@ coach of the Ovens and Murray Football League side Wangaratta for a salary of £ 12 per week , four times the wage he would have received playing for South Melbourne . The high wage also meant that Nash was not required to find additional employment to cover his family 's expenses , and in so doing , became one of the first fully professional Australian rules football players . 
 Nash not only led Wangaratta to a premiership but , as a favour to a friend , also coached another country side , Greta in 1946 , leading them to a premiership in the Ovens and King Football League , becoming one of the few people to have coached two different teams to a premiership in the same season . Nash is still remembered in Greta for placing a football in a <unk> and placekicking it over a tall gum tree . 
 In 1947 , Nash was appointed captain @-@ coach of Casterton , in western Victoria , once again at a wage of £ 12 per week . He took Casterton to a grand final that season , losing by a point . The grand final would be Nash 's final official game as a player , although he did play in charity matches for some years . 
 = = = South Melbourne coach = = = 
 Nash 's success as a coach in country football lead South Melbourne to appoint him as coach for the 1953 VFL season . Following his appointment , Nash confidently predicted that he would coach South Melbourne to a premiership that year and at the halfway point of the season South were tipped to play in the finals but injuries to key players led to five consecutive losses and at the end of the season South Melbourne had won nine games and lost nine games to finish eighth in the twelve team competition . 
 There was some criticism of Nash as a coach as he apparently could not understand how players were unable to do things on the football field that came to him naturally . Nash had signed a two @-@ year contract , yet the South Melbourne committee re @-@ advertised the position of coach following the end of the 1953 season and while Nash applied , he was not reappointed . Fellow South Melbourne champion Bob Skilton claimed that had Nash been given time , he " would have become one of the all @-@ time great coaches " . 
 = = Post @-@ sporting career = = 
 Following his retirement from coaching , Nash became involved in the sporting media . He wrote a column for the Sporting Globe newspaper , spoke at <unk> ' nights and made regular television appearances , including on World of Sport , to comment on Australian rules football and point out that there had not been a player of his ability in the VFL since his retirement . 
 In his newspaper column , Nash did not shy away from controversy , claiming on one occasion that Sir Donald Bradman had openly " roasted " a number of leading Australian cricketers for their performance during a Test . The claim sparked an angry response from Bradman , who claimed " everything in the article as attributed to me is completely without foundation in every particular . " 
 In addition to his positions in the media , Nash was also a publican , which proved so financially successfully he was able to pay cash for a house in the upmarket Melbourne suburb of South Yarra . An altercation with a drunken patron resulted in a broken left hip and forced Nash to sell his hotel , the Prince Alfred in Port Melbourne and gain employment as a clerk in the Melbourne Magistrates Court , a position he held until his mandatory retirement at 65 . 
 Along with fellow former Test cricketer Lindsay Hassett , Nash voluntarily served on the executive committee of the Anti @-@ Cancer Council of Victoria and worked closely with the Aboriginal community of Melbourne , partly in recognition of his old friend Doug Nicholls , a former VFL footballer and leading figure in the Indigenous community . He also turned his interest to fishing , stating that he felt " edgy " if he did not go fishing a couple of times a week . 
 Nash strongly opposed the relocation of South Melbourne Football Club to Sydney ( renamed the Sydney Swans ) in 1981 , considering it a repudiation of the proud South Melbourne he had helped create . Nash stated that he had given fifty years to South Melbourne but due to the relocation they had now lost him forever and refused to attend Swans matches for many years , relenting only shortly before his death to attend a match between Sydney and Footscray . 
 Nash was forced to have a pin and plate inserted in his broken left hip and as a result walked with a profound limp . He also began to drink and eat more and stopped his exercise routine , leading him to become bloated , " like an old , red balloon that had been slightly let down " . 
 Nash 's father Bob Senior collapsed and died in 1958 while at the MCG watching Collingwood win the 1958 VFL Grand Final . Laurie Nash later said that it would have been the perfect way for his father to die . Nash 's brother Bob Junior died of emphysema in the early 1970s , while in 1975 Irene Nash , who had been in poor health for some time , died , leaving Nash heartbroken . Every day for five years he visited the cemetery where her remains were scattered . 
 In 1980 Nash met twice widowed Doreen Hutchison and eventually moved in with her . While they never married , Doreen answered to the name " Mrs Nash " . When Doreen died suddenly from a heart attack in 1985 , Nash 's health quickly deteriorated and he suffered a stroke in early 1986 . Visitors to Nash 's bedside remarked that Nash could not believe his own mortality . 
 Following a succession of strokes , Nash died in the Repatriation Hospital in Heidelberg , Victoria on 24 July 1986 , aged 76 . Survived by his daughter Noelene and grandsons Anthony and Simon , a service for Nash was held at a Catholic church in Melbourne and his cremated remains were scattered at Fawkner Memorial Park , near that of his wife Irene . 
 = = Style = = 
 Nash 's great sporting success can be partly attributed to his self @-@ confidence . Once , when asked who was the greatest footballer he had ever seen , Nash replied " I see him in the mirror every morning when I shave " . 
 [ The conversation then turned ] to former South Melbourne great ( and Test cricketer ) Laurie Nash , who was renowned , besides for his prodigious talent , for being on fairly good terms with himself . [ Bob ] Davis : " We were at the Lake Oval one day , and a kid , I think it might have been Billy Gunn , took a mark about 30 yards out straight out in front , and I said to Laurie , who was long retired — I was standing with him — I said : ' Will he kick this goal ? ' And he said : ' I don 't know if he will , but I would , in my pyjamas , dressing gown and carpet slippers , left or right foot . And I mean now ! ' " The Age , Saturday , 28 June 2008 . 
 Yet , whilst Nash tended to sound arrogant in public , he was very modest about his success in private ; in fact , his daughter Noelene was not aware of her father 's sporting success until aged 12 when a friend 's father told her . 
 = = = Footballing style = = = 
 Nash was a superbly fit athlete who never smoked , drank rarely , and dedicated himself to a punishing exercise regime ; something rare in 1930s sports circles . 
 Legendary Richmond Football Club player and coach Jack Dyer asserted that Nash was " Inch for inch , pound for pound , the greatest player in the history of Australian Rules " , adding " He was the only man I knew who could bite off more than he could chew and chew it . " 
 In the view of champion Collingwood full @-@ forward Gordon Coventry , whose record of 1299 VFL career goals between 1920 and 1937 would not be surpassed for 62 years , if Nash had played at full @-@ forward for his entire career , he would have kicked more goals than anyone , Coventry included . In 1936 Coventry stated that Nash was the best player he had seen ; " No player is more versatile , for he can play anywhere . He is fast , has great control of the ball , kicks with either foot and has that little bit of " devil " so essential in the makeup of a champion of to @-@ day . " 
 Fellow footballer Vic Richardson wrote in 1968 that Nash " was faster than any player I have seen in getting the ball moving to players running on . Add his high marking ability and speed to his quick thinking and you had a player who practically originated today 's style of play and one who would be unbeatable at it . " 
 In retirement , Nash was asked why he never won a Brownlow Medal ( the award for the Best and Fairest player in the VFL ) . He replied , " I was never the best and fairest but I reckon I might have been the worst and dirtiest . I played it hard and tough . " 
 = = = Cricketing style = = = 
 Nash 's bowling action has been described as letting " the ball go with a furious arm action , as if a fortune depended on every ball " , making " the ball fizz as he charged through the crease at a speed that always appeared likely to topple him over . " Another witness added " there was little beauty in his bowling . He sprinted to the wicket faster than most bowlers but had an almost round @-@ arm flipping delivery " which made him the most dangerous bowler in Australia on lively pitches . In 1990 , famed Australian historian Manning Clark recalled Nash 's bowling when he wrote of the period in the 1930s when he was an opening batsman for the University of Melbourne in Victorian district cricket and had to draw on his mother 's strength to help him " face Laurie Nash at the South Melbourne ground without flinching . " 
 Nash was also complimented on his control , stamina and " an ever present confidence in his ability " , which , combined with his speed , made him a formidable bowler . Additionally , Nash was also praised for his fielding in almost any position , with one scribe referring to his " amazingly athletic ability " . 
 Nash 's batting stance was described as " peculiar " . 
 His bat touches the turf in line with the off @-@ stump , but his feet are well clear of the leg stump . He grips the bat near the tip of the handle , and it gives an impression that the bat is inordinately long . 
 After making a duck in the first innings of the match between Tasmania and the touring Australian side in March 1930 , members of the Australian side advised Nash to change his stance , stating that it was too unorthodox to be successful . Nash ignored this advice and promptly scored 93 in the second innings of the match . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 Nash also excelled in other sports , winning awards in golf , tennis and quoits , including the Australian cricket team 's 1932 deck quoits championship at the Oriental Hotel in Melbourne , defeating Clarrie Grimmett in the final . Nash 's natural skills in any sport he tried led former first @-@ class cricketer Johnnie Moyes to call Nash " one of the finest all @-@ round athletes of the century " . 
 = = Honours and legacy = = 
 In addition to the awards he received during his playing career , Nash was awarded accolades for his sporting prowess after his retirement . 
 Nash was made a life member of South Melbourne Football Club in 1960 and following his death , the Sydney Swans wore black armbands in their match against Carlton , named their Best and Fairest Award the " Laurie Nash Medal " , in 2003 named him at centre @-@ half @-@ forward in their " Team of the Century " and in 2009 named him as an inaugural member of their Hall of Fame . The central place Nash held at the Swans was illustrated in 2005 , when following Sydney 's grand final win , a cartoon appeared in the Melbourne Herald Sun , featuring Swans players surrounding Nash , who was wearing his South Melbourne guernsey and was drinking from the premiership cup . In 1987 Nash was made a foundation member of the Tasmanian Sporting Hall of Fame and named at centre @-@ half @-@ back in the Tasmanian Australian rules " Team of the Century " . When he was selected for the Australian Football Hall of Fame in 1996 , the summary commented " One of the most gifted players ever , his career was half as long as many but it shone twice as brightly as most . Considered by many judges ( himself included ) the best player in the land … " . In 2003 , he was named at centre half forward in the Camberwell Team of the Century . 
 Test batsman Merv Harvey once claimed that his greatest achievement was scoring runs off Nash 's bowling , which he classed as the fastest he had ever faced , in a club match . Author Ian Shaw called Nash " perhaps the greatest all @-@ round sportsman Australia has ever produced " , while some fans old enough to remember Nash at his peak list him as the greatest player they ever saw and a football journalist who failed to include Nash in a " Best Ever " list was the target of a letter writing campaign from elderly fans . 
 Additionally , by way of a folk memorial , he is recalled in the Australian vernacular term " Laurie Nash " , rhyming slang for " cash " and is mentioned in the 1993 novel Going Away by award winning journalist Martin Flanagan . 
 = She Stoops to Conquer ( 1910 film ) = 
 She Stoops to Conquer is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is an adaptation of Oliver Goldsmith 's She Stoops to Conquer , possibly adapted by Lloyd Lonergan . The scenario removes a subplot in favor of following Marlow who is sent by his father to court the daughter of an old friend of his . He encounters Tony Lumpkin , who directs him to the Hardcastle mansion , claiming it to be an inn . Hardcastle welcomes Marlow , but Marlow treats his host rudely , unaware of Hardcastle 's identity . When the misunderstanding is rectified Marlow refuses to marry Hardcastle 's daughter , for he has taken a liking to the maid servant . Caught in the act of making love to the maid by his father , the woman is revealed to be Hardcastle 's daughter and all ends well . The film was released on August 19 , 1910 , but it received mix reviews by critics . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from August 20 , 1910 . It states : " The play deals with the love affair of two young people , both of whose parents are anxious that they should wed . Young Marlow sent by his father to court the daughter of an old friend , Mr. Hardcastle . Marlow has spent very little time in the company of the fairer sex , and as a consequence thereof is always shy and nervous in their presence . He , therefore , accepts his father 's orders unwillingly and , accompanied by his friend , young Hastings , rides out to meet his future bride . On the road the travelers encounter Hardcastle 's stepson , Tony Lumpkin , who in revenge for punishment his stepfather has inflicted , directs Marlow and his friend to the Hardcastle mansion , claiming that it is an inn where they will be well treated . In the meantime , great preparations are being made at the Hardcastle home for the reception of Hardcastle 's old friend , and when Tony ushers in young Marlow , thinking Hardcastle merely the proprietor of an inn , he treats him with scant courtesy and orders him about , much to the older man 's chagrin . Hardcastle is subjected to his daughter 's extravagant costumes , and she appears on this memorable evening dressed in a simple dress and wearing the cap and apron that housewives in the neighborhood assume . This costume greatly pleases her father , but leads young Marlow further astray . He immediately jumps to the conclusion that she is a most attractive barmaid and loses his heart to her in short order . Upon the arrival of his father , Marlow learns his mistake as regards the inn question , but flatly refuses to marry Hardcastle 's daughter , claiming that she is too grand for him , and citing his preference for the maid servant . While in the act of making love to the supposed barmaid he is discovered by his father , and , when told that this is the young lady his father had intended him to marry , he is overjoyed , as he feels sure that his bashful disposition would never have allowed him to woo and win her had he known her to be a lady of fashion . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Anna Rosemond in an unknown role . 
 Frank H. Crane in an unknown role . 
 According to Hervé Dumont 's Encyclopédie du film historique the role of Kate Hardcastle was played by Rosemond and the role of George Marlow was played by Crane . This information may have come from a surviving film still . One surviving film still was used in an advertisement by the Thanhouser Company . 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenario is an adaptation of Oliver Goldsmith 's She Stoops to Conquer and was not , by that time , not familiar to most theatergoers . The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The impetus to adapt the play for the film may have been inspired by a recent Broadway production as noted in one Thanhouser advertisement , " So revered is She Stoops to Conquer in the hearts of the American public that recently they saw it as an all @-@ star Broadway production with Eleanor Robson as Kate and Kyrle Bellew as Marlow , and it scored an epoch @-@ making success . The present producers don 't claim it to be a Broadway production but they [ do ] know it 's the best picture thing of its kind that has been released this far in the game . " The advertisement also claims to be the first film adaptation of the play , which according to The Complete Index to Literary Sources in Film it is . She Stoops to Conquer would seen numerous adaptations over the following decades , but the Thanhouser Company would also draw from Goldsmith 's work with their first adaptation of The Vicar of Wakefield in 1910 . 
 The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Though the roles of the actors are unknown , leading actress Anna Rosemond is credited with a role . One of the more prominent leading male actors was Frank H. Crane in another unknown role . It is likely that numerous other character roles and persons appeared in the film . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . One of these uncredited roles could have been played by the other leading lady of the company , Violet Heming . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The one reel comedy @-@ drama , approximately 1000 feet long , was released on August 19 , 1910 . The film had a wide national release with known advertisements in Missouri , Texas , Minnesota , Washington D.C. , and Kansas . The film was also show by the Province Theatre of Vancouver , Canada . 
 The film received mixed reviews in trade publications . The Moving Picture World remarked that the play itself was not well @-@ known , but that the plot was depicted adequately enough that it may encourage a re @-@ perusal of the play . There was no fault found by the reviewer who stated , " The characters of Hardcastle , Kate and Marlow are admirably done and seem to correctly interpret the original . The staging and costuming are in harmony with the play and reproduce the scenery of the time depicted with accuracy . The usefulness of a work of this sort does not end with the presentation of the play itself . There is an educational value which includes the costuming and reproduction of the surroundings of the time . These are so unfamiliar now that they afford not a little addition to the interest and pleasure of such a film . The work has been done so well that the company deserves commendation for undertaking the task . It is not an easy manner to reproduce a play of this character , and when it is well done the company performing it deserves praise . " The New York Dramatic Mirror disagreed on almost all points , " In numerous details the illusion is dispelled , for the scenery is manifestly not of the eighteenth century . No contemporary of Goldsmith ever rode in such a <unk> as appears in this film , nor lived in such a house as Mr. Hardcastle . The final tableau is as artificial as set pieces which have gone out of style at funerals . With all of its imperfections there is considerable of virile comedy in the film . " Though the Mirror reviewer stated that despite the elimination of the Hastings and Constance Neville subplot , the acting is clear enough that audiences do not need prior knowledge of the play to appreciate the film . 
 = HMS Ivanhoe ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Ivanhoe was an I @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 , the ship enforced the arms blockade imposed by Britain and France on both sides as part of the Mediterranean Fleet . Before the start of World War II , the ship was modified so that she could be used to lay mines by removing some of her armament . Ivanhoe was transferred to Western Approaches Command shortly after the war began and helped to sink one German submarine in October 1939 . She was converted to a minelayer while undergoing a refit in November – December and laid minefields in German coastal waters as well as anti @-@ submarine minefields off the British coast until she was reconverted back to her destroyer configuration in February 1940 . Ivanhoe reverted to her minelaying role during the Norwegian Campaign in April 1940 and then laid a number of minefields off the Dutch coast during the Battle of the Netherlands in May . The ship participated in the Dunkirk evacuation until she was badly damaged by German aircraft on 1 June . On her first minelaying mission after her repairs were completed , she struck a German mine and had to be scuttled on 1 September 1940 during the Texel Disaster . 
 = = Description = = 
 The I @-@ class ships were improved versions of the preceding H @-@ class . They displaced 1 @,@ 370 long tons ( 1 @,@ 390 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 888 long tons ( 1 @,@ 918 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . They were powered by two Parsons geared steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by three Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The turbines developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 @.@ 5 knots ( 65 @.@ 7 km / h ; 40 @.@ 9 mph ) . Ivanhoe carried a maximum of 455 long tons ( 462 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ships ' complement was 145 officers and ratings . 
 The ships mounted four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . The I class was fitted with two above @-@ water quintuple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rack and two throwers were fitted ; 16 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . She was one of the four I @-@ class destroyers fitted with minelaying equipment in late 1938 – January 1939 at Malta . This consisted of mounts for rails on the deck on which to carry the mines and an electric winch to move the mines down the rails . A pair of sponsons were added to the stern to allow the mines to clear the propellers when dropped into the sea . ' A ' and ' Y ' guns and both sets of torpedo tubes were modified to allow them to be removed to compensate for the weight of the mines . The ship could carry a maximum of 72 mines . Ivanhoe was fitted with the ASDIC sound detection system to locate submarines underwater . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The ship was ordered from Yarrow Shipbuilders at Scotstoun on 30 October 1935 under the 1935 Naval Programme . The ship was laid down on 12 February 1936 and launched on 11 February 1937 as the second Royal Navy warship to carry the name . Ivanhoe was completed on 24 August 1937 and cost £ 259 @,@ 371 excluding items supplied by Admiralty such as guns and communications equipment . She was assigned to the 3rd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning and participated in training exercises with the French Navy in December through January 1938 . The ship was forced to leave these exercises prematurely as she had problems with the tubes in her superheaters . These were replaced at Malta from 15 January – 19 March . Afterwards , Ivanhoe was transferred to Gibraltar where she patrolled Spanish waters enforcing the policies of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee until the end of the war . She was in Cartagena in February – March 1939 to protect British citizens and interests as foreigners , Republican troops and their supporters evacuated the city . 
 Ivanhoe was in transit between Alexandria and Malta when World War II began in September 1939 , but she was in Plymouth on 14 September as the entire 3rd Destroyer Flotilla had been transferred to the Western Approaches Command for escort duties . Together with her sisters , Inglefield , Intrepid , and Icarus , the ship sank the German submarine U @-@ 45 on 14 October . She was refitted at Sheerness Dockyard and converted to a minelayer from 14 November – 13 December . Ivanhoe was transferred to the specialist minelaying 20th Destroyer Flotilla on 12 December and laid her first minefield , along with the other three ships of the flotilla , at the mouth of the Ems estuary on the night of 17 / 18 December . Another minefield was laid on the night of 2 / 3 January 1940 by Ivanhoe and Intrepid and they then laid a series of anti @-@ submarine minefields later in the month . The ship replaced her guns and torpedo tubes at Portland from 27 January – 3 February and resumed her former duties . 
 In early April , Ivanhoe and three other destroyer minelayers were escorted by the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla as they laid mines as part of Operation Wilfred , an operation to lay mines in the Vestfjord to prevent the shipment of Swedish iron ore from Narvik to Germany . The mines were laid on the early morning of 8 April , before the Germans began their invasion , and the destroyers joined the battlecruiser HMS Renown and her escorts after they each successfully laid their 60 mines . The ship was present during , but played no significant part in , Renown 's brief engagement off Lofoten with the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau on 9 April . Later in the month , the ship carried troops of the 15th Infantry Brigade to Åndalsnes . Ivanhoe then loaded mines and laid a minefield in the approaches to Trondheim , together with Icarus and Impulsive , on the night of 29 / 30 April . 
 After a boiler cleaning from 7 – 15 May , Ivanhoe , Esk , and Express , laid 164 mines off the Hook of Holland on the night of 15 / 16 May . Three German minesweepers were later sunk by this minefield on 26 July . Three nights later , the same three ships , reinforced by Intrepid , Impulsive , and the auxiliary minelayer Princess Victoria laid a minefield off the Dutch coast . Princess Victoria struck a German mine on the voyage home and was sunk ; the destroyers rescued the ship 's survivors . They laid five more minefields off the Dutch coast before the end of the month . On 29 May , the ship was transferred to the Dunkirk evacuation effort and ferried 930 troops to Dover that day . She also took aboard the crew of the badly damaged destroyer Grafton and then scuttled Grafton . She was withdrawn from the evacuation on 30 May as too valuable to risk , but this decision was reversed the following day and Ivanhoe evacuated 1 @,@ 290 men to Dover . On the morning of 1 June , already having loaded troops , the ship was attacked off Dunkirk harbour by German aircraft . Two bombs missed to port and starboard , but the third detonated above the upper deck and flooded the two forward boiler rooms . The bomb killed 26 , including five soldiers , and wounded many others . Most of the troops and wounded were taken off by the minesweeper Speedwell and the destroyer Havant . No. 3 boiler room was still operable and the ship reached Dover under her own power . 
 Repairs at Sheerness lasted until 28 August and she was converted back into a minelayer at Immingham from 28 – 31 August as she was transferred back to the 20th Destroyer Flotilla . That night , she sailed with Intrepid , Icarus , Esk and Express to lay a minefield off the Dutch coast , north of Texel . Express hit a mine in a newly @-@ laid German field that night and had her bow blown off . Ivanhoe closed to assist her and struck another mine shortly afterwards . The explosion knocked out her power for several hours , but the ship was able to raise steam by 01 : 45 on 1 September . She reached a speed of 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 mph ) while steaming backwards to lessen the stress on her damaged bow . However , about 04 : 00 , either her propellers fell off or her propeller shafts fractured , and she lost all speed . Around 08 : 00 , four motor torpedo boats arrived ; three of these loaded all but 37 men of the ship 's crew while the fourth stayed with the destroyer to recover the remaining crewmen . Ivanhoe continued to take on water and started to list . Early in the afternoon , she lost all power to her pumps and the captain ordered the ship abandoned after opening her valves to speed her sinking . Shortly afterwards , Ivanhoe was discovered and damaged by a German aircraft , but still did not sink . She had to be scuttled by a torpedo fired by the destroyer Kelvin later in the afternoon . The ship quickly sank afterwards at position 53 ° 26 ′ 42 ″ N 03 ° 45 ′ 24 ″ E. 
 = Battle of Dun Nechtain = 
 The Battle of Dun Nechtain or Battle of Nechtansmere ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Old Irish : Dún Nechtain , Old Welsh : Linn Garan , Old English : Nechtansmere ) was fought between the Picts , led by King Bridei Mac Bili , and the Northumbrians , led by King Ecgfrith on 20 May 685 . 
 The Northumbrian hegemony over Northern Britain , won by Ecgfrith 's predecessors , had begun to disintegrate . Several of Northumbria 's subject nations had rebelled in recent years , leading to a number of large @-@ scale battles against the Picts , Mercians , and Irish , with varied success . Following sieges on neighbouring territories carried out by the Picts , Ecgfrith led his forces against them , despite advice to the contrary , in an effort to reassert his suzerainty over the Pictish nations . 
 A feigned retreat by the Picts drew the Northumbrians into an ambush at Dun Nechtain near the lake of Linn Garan . The battle site has long been thought to have been near the present @-@ day village of Dunnichen in Angus . Recent research , however , has suggested a more northerly location near Dunachton , on the shores of Loch <unk> in Badenoch and Strathspey . 
 The battle ended with a decisive Pictish victory which severely weakened Northumbria 's power in northern Britain . Ecgfrith was killed in battle , along with the greater part of his army . The Pictish victory marked their independence from Northumbria , who never regained their dominance in the north . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the seventh century , the Northumbrians gradually extended their territory to the north . The Annals of Tigernach record a siege of " <unk> " in 638 , which has been interpreted as Northumbria 's conquest of Din Eidyn ( Edinburgh ) during the reign of Oswald , marking the annexation of Gododdin territories to the south of the River Forth . 
 To the north of the Forth , the Pictish nations consisted at this time of the kingdom of Fortriu to the north of the Mounth , and a " Southern Pictish Zone " between there and the Forth . Evidence from the eighth century Anglo @-@ Saxon historian , Bede points to the Picts also being subjugated by the Northumbrians during Oswald 's reign , and that this subjugation continued into the reign of his successor , Oswiu . 
 Ecgfrith succeeded Oswiu as king of Northumbria in 670 . Soon after , the Picts rose in rebellion against Northumbrian subjugation at the Battle of Two Rivers , recorded in the 8th century by Stephen of Ripon , hagiographer of Wilfrid . Ecgfrith was aided by a sub @-@ king , Beornhæth , who may have been a leader of the Southern Picts , and the rebellion ended in disaster for the Northern Picts of Fortriu . Their king , Drest mac <unk> , was deposed and was replaced by Bridei mac Bili . 
 By 679 , the Northumbrian hegemony was beginning to fall apart . The Irish annals record a Mercian victory over Ecgfrith at which Ecgfrith 's brother , Ælfwine of Deira was killed . Sieges were recorded at Dunnottar , in the northern @-@ most region of the " Southern Pictish Zone " near Stonehaven in 680 and at Dundurn in Strathearn in 682 . The antagonists in these sieges are not recorded , but the most reasonable interpretation is thought to be that Bridei 's forces were the assailants . 
 Bridei is also recorded as having " destroyed " the Orkney Islands in 681 , at a time when the Northumbrian church was undergoing major religious reform . It had followed the traditions of the Columban church of Iona until the Synod of Whitby in 664 at which it pledged loyalty to the Roman Church . The Northumbrian diocese was divided and a number of new episcopal sees created . One of these was founded at Abercorn on the south coast of the Firth of Forth , and Trumwine was consecrated as Bishop of the Picts . Bridei , who was <unk> involved with the church of Iona , is unlikely to have viewed an encroachment of the Northumbrian @-@ sponsored Roman church favourably . 
 The attacks on the Southern Pictish Zone at Dunnottar and Dundurn represented a major threat to Ecgfrith 's suzerainty . Ecgfrith was contending with other challenges to his overlordship . In June 684 , countering a Gaelic @-@ Briton alliance , he sent his armies , led by <unk> , son of Beornhæth , to Brega in Ireland . Ecgfrith 's force decimated the local population and destroyed many churches , actions which are treated with scorn by Bede . 
 = = Account of the battle = = 
 While none of the historical sources explicitly state Ecgfrith 's reason for attacking Fortriu in 685 , the consensus is that it was to reassert Northumbria 's eroded hegemony over the Picts . The most thorough description of the battle is given by Bede in his 8th century work Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum ( The Ecclesiastical History of the English People ) ( completed <unk> ) , but this is still brief . Additional detail is given in the Irish annals of Ulster and Tigernach , and by the early Welsh historian Nennius in his Historia Brittonum ( written <unk> ) . 
 Ecgfrith 's attack on Fortriu was made against the counsel of his advisors , including Cuthbert , who had recently been made Bishop of Lindisfarne . The Picts under leadership of Bridei , feigned retreat and drew Ecgfrith 's Northumbrian force into an ambush on Saturday 20 May 685 at a lake in mountains near Duin Nechtain . The Northumbrian army was defeated and Ecgfrith slain . 
 = = Location = = 
 The site of the battle is uncertain . Until relatively recently the battle was most commonly known by its Northumbrian name , the Battle of Nechtansmere , from the Old English for ' Nechtan 's lake ' , following 12th @-@ century English historian Symeon of Durham . The location of the battle near a lake is reinforced by Nennius ' record of the conflict as <unk> Linn Garan , Old Welsh for ' Battle of Crane Lake ' . It is likely that Linn Garan was the original Pictish name for the lake . 
 The most complete narrative of the battle itself is given by Bede , who nevertheless fails to inform us of the location other than his mention that it took place ' in straits of inaccessible mountains ' . 
 The Irish Annals have provided perhaps the most useful resource for identifying the battle site , giving the location as Dún Nechtain , ' Nechtan 's Fort ' , a name that has survived into modern usage in two separate instances . 
 = = = Dunnichen = = = 
 Dunnichen in Angus was first identified as a possible location for the battle by antiquarian George Chalmers in the early 19th century . Chalmers notes that the name ' Dunnichen ' can be found in early charters of Arbroath Abbey as ' Dun Nechtan ' . He further suggests a site , ' Dunnichen Moss ' ( grid reference <unk> ) , to the east of the village , which he informs us had recently been drained but can be seen in old maps as a small lake . Earlier local tradition , related by Headrick in the Second Statistical Account , claimed that the site was the location of the Battle of Camlann , where King Arthur fought Mordred . 
 More recent suggestions for the battle site include the valley to the north of Dunnichen Hill , centering on <unk> Loch ( grid reference <unk> ) and <unk> Loch ( grid reference <unk> ) , which is now much reduced following drainage in the 18th century . 
 The battle scene inscribed on the Aberlemno kirk yard stone is often cited as evidence for the battle site . This interpretation was made based on the stone 's proximity to Dunnichen , only 3 miles ( 5 km ) to the north , but while the short distance seems compelling , the stone is unlikely to be any earlier than mid @-@ 8th century , and the ornamentation of the stone , including the animal forms used and the style of weaponry depicted , suggests it may be as late as the mid @-@ 9th century . Prior to being linked with the Battle of Nechtansmere , the Aberlemno stone had been cited as evidence for the Battle of Barry ( now known to be historically inauthentic ) , and there are a number of other possible interpretations for the carving . 
 = = = Dunachton = = = 
 In a recently published paper , historian Alex Woolf gives a number of reasons for doubting Dunnichen as the battle site , most notably the absence of " inaccessible mountains " in mid @-@ Angus . He makes a case for an alternative site at Dunachton in Badenoch ( grid reference <unk> ) , on the north @-@ western shore of Loch <unk> , which shares Dunnichen 's <unk> origin of Dún Nechtain . James Fraser of Edinburgh University suggests that , while it is too early to discount Dunnichen as a potential battle site , locating it there requires an amount of " special pleading " that Dunachton does not need . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Ecgfrith 's defeat at Dun Nechtain devastated Northumbria 's power and influence in the North of Britain . Bede recounts that the Picts recovered their lands that had been held by the Northumbrians and Dál Riatan Scots . He goes on to tell how the Northumbrians who did not flee the Pictish territory were killed or enslaved . 
 The Northumbrian / Roman diocese of the Picts was abandoned , with Trumwine and his monks fleeing to Whitby , stalling Roman Catholic expansion in Scotland . 
 While further battles between the Northumbrians and Picts are recorded , for example in 697 when Beornhæth 's son <unk> was killed , the Battle of Dunnichen marks the point in which Pictish independence from Northumbria was permanently secured . 
 = Russian ironclad Pervenets = 
 The Russian ironclad Pervenets ( Russian : <unk> ) was a broadside ironclad built for the Imperial Russian Navy in Britain during the 1860s . The ship had to be built abroad as no Russian shipyard had mastered the techniques required to build iron @-@ hulled armored vessels . She was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion and never left Russian waters . Pervenets served with the Gunnery Training Detachment for her entire career until she was reduced to reserve in 1904 . She was disarmed and stricken the following year and finally sold in 1908 . After the end of the Russian Civil War , the ship was reacquired by the Soviets in 1922 and used to transport and store coal , a role she performed until discarded in the late 1950s . However , she was apparently not scrapped until the early 1960s . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship was designed as a coast defense vessel to protect the approaches to Saint Petersburg and was referred to as a " self @-@ propelled armored floating battery " . As such , a heavy armament and protection were the most important factors in the ship 's design . No Russian shipyard could build iron @-@ hulled , ironclad warships , therefore Pervenets was ordered from Great Britain . Her name means firstborn and refers to the Tsesarevich , heir to the Russian Empire . 
 Pervenets was 220 feet ( 67 @.@ 1 m ) long overall , with a beam of 53 feet ( 16 @.@ 2 m ) and a designed draft of 14 feet 6 inches ( 4 @.@ 4 m ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 277 long tons ( 3 @,@ 330 t ) and her iron hull had a pronounced tumblehome . Pervenets was fitted with large rams at bow and stern ; the stern ram also serving to protect her rudder and propeller . The ship did not steer well and had " an unpredictable habit of suddenly lurching to one side or another " , probably as a result of poor water flow to the rudder . She required six men to man her wheel and her total crew numbered 459 officers and men . 
 Originally intended to use a refurbished engine from the steam ship of the line Konstantin , Pervenets received a three @-@ cylinder horizontal return @-@ connecting @-@ rod steam engine built by the British firm of Maudslay , Sons and Field . Rated at 1 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 750 kW ) , it drove a single 10 @-@ foot @-@ 5 @-@ inch ( 3 @.@ 2 m ) propeller . Steam was provided by four rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers . During sea trials on 28 July 1863 , the engine produced a total of 1 @,@ 067 indicated horsepower ( 796 kW ) and gave the ship a maximum speed of 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . During later trials in the Baltic Sea , Pervenets reached 8 @.@ 5 knots ( 15 @.@ 7 km / h ; 9 @.@ 8 mph ) . The ship carried a maximum of 500 long tons ( 510 t ) of coal , but her endurance is unknown . She was schooner @-@ rigged with three masts ; the lower masts were iron and the topmasts and yards were made from pine . 
 Pervenets was completed with 26 of the most powerful guns available to the Russians , the 7 @.@ 72 @-@ inch ( 196 mm ) 60 @-@ pounder smoothbore gun . Twenty @-@ four were mounted on the broadside and two guns were placed in pivot mounts on the upper deck to serve as chase guns . Unfortunately , it proved to be incapable of penetrating 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 114 mm ) of wrought iron armor at a distance of only 200 yards ( 183 m ) during trials in 1859 – 60 . The 60 @-@ pounders on the broadside were entirely replaced by a dozen 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) rifled guns in 1874 , while the chase guns were replaced by two four @-@ barreled 3 @.@ 42 @-@ inch ( 87 mm ) 4 @-@ pounder guns . 
 The entire ship 's side was protected with wrought @-@ iron armor 4 @.@ 5 inches thick that reduced to 4 inches ( 102 mm ) beginning 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) from the ship 's ends . It was backed by 10 inches ( 254 mm ) of teak and extended 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) below the waterline . The ship 's hull was divided by six watertight transverse and two longitudinal bulkheads for protection against underwater damage . The hull had a tumblehome of 27 ° to help deflect shells . The open @-@ topped conning tower was also protected by 4 @.@ 5 inches of armor . 
 = = Service = = 
 Pervenets was ordered from the Thames Iron Works in Blackwall , London on 18 November 1861 because it was an experienced builder of iron @-@ hulled ships and had begun construction of the broadside ironclad HMS Minotaur a few months earlier . Russian naval architects and workmen were sent to London to learn the techniques used by the British shipyard . Construction of the ship actually began the following month and she was launched on 18 May 1863 . While running sea trials on 6 August 1863 at Woolwich , Pervenets accidentally rammed the training ship HMS Warspite , although little damage was inflicted . Escorted by the steam frigate General Admiral , she left for Russia two days later with a British crew . The ship reached Kronstadt on 17 August and was fitted out there . Pervenets entered service on 28 July 1864 and was assigned to the Baltic Fleet . Including delivery and fitting out costs , she cost a total of 917 @,@ 000 rubles . 
 The ship was assigned to the Gunnery Training Detachment for her entire career and was frequently rearmed to train officers and men on some of the latest guns to enter service . In 1881 she mounted ten 8 @-@ inch and two 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) rifled breech loaders on her gun deck and carried two more 6 @-@ inch rifles on the upper deck as chase guns . Also on her upper deck , sometimes mounted on platforms that extended over her bulwarks , were a 9 @-@ inch ( 229 mm ) mortar , a 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 mm ) Baranov gun , a 1 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 44 mm ) Engstrem gun , two 1 @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) Palmcrantz auto @-@ cannon , and a Hotchkiss gun of uncertain caliber , either 37 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) or 47 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) . The mortar was removed in 1881 as it strained the ship 's structure . By 1890 , these guns had been replaced by two 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) , two 47 mm , and four 37 mm guns . 
 Pervenets rolled heavily in service , therefore bilge keels were fitted during the winter of 1864 – 65 , the first used on a Russian ship . To alleviate the cramped conditions of the steersmen , the ship 's wheel was transferred from the gun deck to a platform that spanned her bulwarks in front of the mizzenmast in 1871 . In 1872 she evaluated the Davydov fire @-@ control system that could fire all guns electrically and indicated to the gunners where their guns should be aimed . The conning tower was removed in 1876 – 77 and new boilers were installed . These increased the engine 's power to 1 @,@ 300 indicated horsepower ( 970 kW ) and Pervenets reached 8 @.@ 5 knots on sea trials . She was reclassified as a coast defense ironclad on 13 February 1892 and was placed in reserve on 23 December 1904 . The ship was disarmed the following year and stricken from the Navy List on 15 September 1905 . Turned over to the Port of Kronstadt for disposal , she was sold on 8 September 1908 and renamed Barge No. 1 ( Barzha No. 1 ) . 
 The Soviets acquired the ship on 30 June 1922 and she was used to transport coal to Kronstadt . <unk> No. 1 was transferred to the Baltic Fleet on 7 August 1925 for use as a coal hulk . She was renamed KP @-@ 3 on 1 January 1932 , K @-@ <unk> on 12 July 1943 and <unk> @-@ <unk> on 16 May 1949 . The ship was discarded in the late 1950s , but was apparently not scrapped until the early 1960s . 
 = Skeleton at the 2010 Winter Olympics – Women 's = 
 The women 's skeleton event at the 2010 Winter Olympics took place at the Whistler Sliding Centre on 18 – 19 February . The competition was won by British athlete Amy Williams , who set new course records for the track on her first and third runs . Williams , who had never before won a World Cup or World Championship event , became the first British athlete to win a solo Winter Olympic gold medal in 30 years . German sliders Kerstin Szymkowiak and Anja Huber won the silver and bronze medals respectively . Williams ' teammate Shelley Rudman , who had won the silver medal at the 2006 Winter Olympics , and Canadian Mellisa Hollingsworth , both of whom had been expected to be in medal contention , were disappointed . 
 Williams ' victory was not without controversy , as the United States and Canada filed complaints with the judges related to Williams ' helmet . However , judges ruled that ridges in her helmet did not violate International Bobsleigh and Tobogganing Federation ( FIBT ) rules , and rejected the complaints . 
 = = Logistics = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 The Whistler Sliding Centre in Whistler , British Columbia was the site of women 's skeleton at the 2010 Olympic Games in Vancouver , Canada . The track was constructed between 2005 and 2008 , and became only the 15th competition @-@ level track in the world . It was certified for competition in sliding sports by the International Luge Federation ( FIL ) and the International Bobsleigh and Tobogganing Federation ( FIBT ) in March , 2008 in a process called homologation where hundreds of athletes ran the track . This was the first time many competitors at the 2010 Games were able to try the track and begin to develop strategies for it . Canadian athletes hoped that having it open two years before the Games , and having that amount of time to train on it , would give them an advantage in the Games . The Whistler Sliding Centre quickly gained a reputation as one of the fastest tracks in the world . 
 = = = Rules and description of competition = = = 
 Rules for the Olympic skeleton competitions were set by the FIBT and the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) . They entrusted four to seven officials with making decisions regarding competition rules : one or two technical delegates , a jury president , two jury members , and two optional jury assistants . These decisions were implemented and enforced by a race director , to whom the overall responsibility for running the competition was given . Under the rules , competitors were guaranteed a minimum of six official training runs in the days prior to the competition . The competition itself consisted of four heats , with the starting order of athletes determined by their FIBT rankings prior to the start of the Games . Athletes began their runs on their sleds at a starting block , ran briefly while holding their sleds , and then laid on their stomachs on the sleds through the remainder of the course . Athletes were ranked by the speed of their times between their start and when they crossed the finish line at the bottom of the track . 
 = = Preview = = 
 Much of the speculation about potential medal winners before the Games focused on athletes from Great Britain , the United States , and Canada . Athletes from German @-@ speaking countries had traditionally been dominant in the sliding sports , luge and bobsleigh , but following the re @-@ introduction of skeleton , they had not been as strongly competitive in the new sport . Mellisa Hollingsworth of Canada , the defending Olympic bronze medalist , won the 2009 @-@ 10 Skeleton World Cup , and was considered a strong contender if not the favorite to win . British athlete Shelley Rudman won the only British medal at the 2006 Winter Olympics with her silver in skeleton , and her bronze medal at the European Championships just prior to the Games kept her name in media previews of the Olympic event . Her countrywoman Amy Williams , however , finished outside of the medal places in both the World Cup , in which she placed fifth , and the European Championships , in which she placed sixth . American Noelle Pikus @-@ Pace had not been able to compete in the 2006 Games after a runaway bobsleigh had broken her leg . 
 A number of other athletes had the potential to win medals by virtue of previous strong finishes in international competition . Switzerland 's Maya Pedersen @-@ <unk> was the defending Olympic champion . The defending world champion was Germany 's Marion Trott , who also won the test event held at the venue . The last 2009 @-@ 10 Skeleton World Cup prior to the 2010 Games took place in Igls , Austria ( southeast of Innsbruck ) on 22 January 2010 and was won by Germany 's Anja Huber . 
 = = Standing records = = 
 While the IOC does not consider skeleton times eligible for Olympic records , the FIBT does maintain records for both the start and a complete run at each track it competes . These records were set during the test event for the 2010 Games on 5 February 2009 . 
 = = Qualifying athletes = = 
 On 20 January 2010 , the FIBT announced the teams which had qualified for the 2010 Games , the quotas being subsequently updated on 26 January 2010 . The athletes who qualified for the women 's event were : 
 = = Competition = = 
 The first run start order was released on the afternoon of 17 February 2010 . The first two runs took place on 18 February at 16 : 00 PST ( Pacific Standard Time ) and 17 : 00 PST . On 19 February , the final two runs took take place at 15 : 45 PST and 16 : 45 PST . During the first run , Amy Williams broke the previous course record by nearly a full second , finishing first with a time of 53 @.@ 83 seconds and reaching a top speed of 143 @.@ 3 km / h ( 89 @.@ 0 mph ) . She led the second run as well . German slider Kerstin Szymkowiak was in second place after two runs , nearly a third of a second behind Williams . Mellisa Hollingsworth , competing on home soil and called the favorite to win in a number of media accounts , was in third place , trailing Szymkowiak after two runs by 0 @.@ 09 seconds . Shelley Rudman trailed by nearly a full second , surprising many observers who had expected her to be in medal contention . Japanese athlete Nozomi Komuro was disqualified after the first heat because her sled did not have the required FIBT control sticker . 
 The United States , Canada and Germany , together with two unnamed teams , lodged a protest with officials following Williams ' successful first day of competition . The protest alleged that her helmet was illegal , as ridges in it might give her an unfair aerodynamic advantage . In accordance with competition rules , the jury of officials inspected the helmet , and rejected the protest . Their grounds for doing so were that the ridges in the helmet were not a separate piece affixed to the helmet , expressly banned by FIBT rules , but rather an integral part of the helmet , which made the helmet legal . A second protest , filed jointly by the US and Canada on the 19th , was also rejected . 
 The next day , in her third run , Williams again set a new course record , 53 @.@ 68 seconds , and won the final run as well to secure the gold medal . Williams became the first British sportsperson to win an individual Winter Olympic gold medal in thirty years . Prior to this win , Williams had never won a World Cup or World Championship event . German athletes , Kerstin Szymkowiak and Anja Huber , won the silver and bronze medals , the first Olympic medals for Germany in the sport . Williams ' teammate Shelley Rudman fought her way into the lead briefly after a fast final run , but was overtaken by a five other athletes and finished sixth . Canada 's Hollingsworth dropped from third place after the first two runs to fifth after the final run . American Noelle Pikus @-@ Pace , who was in sixth place after the third run , finished fourth in the overall standings . 
 = = Results = = 
 TR - Track Record . Top finish in each run is in boldface . 
 = Bart to the Future = 
 " Bart to the Future " is the seventeenth episode of the eleventh season of the American animated television sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 19 , 2000 . In the episode , after their picnic in the park is cut short due to a mosquito infestation , the Simpsons stop by at an Indian casino . There , Bart is prevented from entering because of his age . He manages to sneak in but is caught by the guards and sent to the casino manager 's office . This Native American manager shows Bart a vision of his future as a washed @-@ up , wannabe rock musician living with Ralph Wiggum , while Lisa has become the President of the United States and tries to get the country out of financial trouble . " Bart to the Future " was the second episode of The Simpsons after " Lisa 's Wedding " to be set in the future . 
 The episode was directed by Michael Marcantel and written by Dan Greaney , who wanted to explore what Bart 's life would end up like . Several designs were made by the animators for future Bart , but Greaney did not think they matched the personality of the character and had to give clearer instructions on how he wanted him to look . Reception of " Bart to the Future " by critics has been generally mixed to negative . In 2003 , it was named the worst episode of the series by Entertainment Weekly writers who felt the " looking @-@ into @-@ the @-@ future premise " was carried out better in " Lisa 's Wedding . " Around 8 @.@ 77 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing . In 2008 , it was released on DVD along with the rest of the episodes of the eleventh season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons drive to the park for a picnic but discover that it has been overrun by mosquitoes . While heading home , the family finds an Indian casino . Homer and Bart go inside , leaving Marge ( who is still recovering from her gambling addiction from " $ pringfield " ) and Lisa ( who is on the fence about her stance on the morals and ethics of Indian gambling ) in the car . 
 Bart is turned away because of his age but is able to sneak in by hiding in ventriloquist Arthur Crandall 's dummy case . During Crandall 's performance at the casino , Bart bursts out of the case and gets caught by casino guards . He is sent to the casino manager 's office , where the Native American manager shows him a vision of how his future will turn out if he does not change his ways . 
 Thirty years into the future , Bart is a 40 @-@ year @-@ old beer @-@ drinking slacker trying to launch his music career after dropping out of the DeVry Institute . The only gig Bart can get is at a beach bar owned by Nelson Muntz , and even then , Bart is only paid in popcorn shrimp . He survives by <unk> off his parents and their neighbor Ned Flanders . Bart lives with Ralph Wiggum in a beach cottage by the shore , from which Bart finds out that he has been evicted after his disastrous concert at Nelson 's bar . Meanwhile , 38 @-@ year @-@ old Lisa is the first straight female President of the United States , trying to rebuild the country after the economic downfall during the rule of Donald Trump . 
 Bart disrupts one of Lisa 's addresses to the nation to promote his music career , which leads Lisa to be branded unpopular when Bart sings to the public on live television that Lisa will be imposing a tax to get the country out of debt . 
 Lisa later meets with the leaders of America 's creditor nations , who demand that America pay them back . Bart steps in and uses his skills at stalling debt collectors to save the day , pleasing Lisa who had previously been mad at her brother . As a thank @-@ you , Bart asks Lisa to " legalize it " , and Lisa says she will . 
 Meanwhile , Homer has heard about gold buried by Abraham Lincoln on the grounds of the White House and searches for it . When he finally locates the " gold " , it is in fact a chest with a scroll in it that Lincoln had written on explaining that his " gold " is " in the heart of every freedom @-@ loving American . " Homer does not appreciate the metaphor and angrily curses Lincoln . When Bart questions the casino manager about the point of Homer 's storyline , since the vision was supposed to be about Bart 's future , the manager responds , " I guess the spirits thought the main vision was a little thin . " 
 After the vision is over , Bart promises that he will change . Lisa finds Bart and tells him that the family has been kicked out of the casino after Homer pushed a waitress and Marge lost US $ 20 @,@ 000 . Bart tells Lisa about his vision of the future where he has a rock band and a moped , while downplaying Lisa 's future presidency as " some government job . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Bart to the Future " was written by Dan Greaney and directed by Michael Marcantel as part of the eleventh season of The Simpsons ( 1999 – 2000 ) . It was the second episode of the series to show the Simpson family 's life in the future , following the season six episode " Lisa 's Wedding " that aired five years earlier in 1995 @.@ three more future @-@ set episodes have been released since " Bart to the Future " , the first being Future @-@ Drama ( season 16 , 2005 ) , second being " Holidays of Future Passed " ( season 23 , 2011 ) and third being Days of Future Future ( season 25 , 2014 ) . Greaney 's inspiration for " Bart to the Future " came from " Lisa 's Wedding " . He and The Simpsons writer Matt Selman were sitting in Greaney 's office one day , trying to come up with new episode stories , when they received the idea of making a companion piece to that episode . Greaney wanted to write an episode set in the future that focused on Bart instead of Lisa . He thought it would be interesting to explore how the future works out for " a guy like Bart , who doesn 't pay attention to school work and is all about being cool . " 
 Selman commented in an audio commentary for " Bart to the Future " that " the thing that really got the [ Simpsons ] writers excited about the episode was this very specific version of future Bart. " Greaney identified this version as " the guy who blames everyone else and tells everyone else that they used to be cool , that it 's everyone else 's fault that his life hasn 't gone the way he wants it to go . " The Simpsons showrunner Mike Scully also noted that future Bart is the kind of person who is " always waiting for some big sort of cash payoff that he feels he 's owed whether it be an insurance settlement , an inheritance , or something that 's gonna come sooner or later . " Greaney said that everyone in the writing room recognized these traits from people they knew and therefore everyone contributed to the episode by suggesting lines for Bart to say and things for him to do . 
 According to Greaney , the animators originally designed future Bart as " cool and fun " and made several designs where he was " slim , attractive , and hip . " Greaney did not think any of these designs went along with the personality he and the other the writers had assigned to future Bart , so he told the animators to draw the character with belly fat , a ponytail , sags under his eyes , and one earring . Scully said on the audio commentary that he thought the design of Bart looked " great " , though he added that it was " slightly disturbing " to see the older versions of Homer and Marge in the episode , and joked that it is " a little bit sad to watch cartoon characters age . " 
 Greaney needed a setpiece for the episode that enabled him to get into a vision of the characters in the future , and The Simpsons writer George Meyer came up with the idea of the Indian casino . When Homer and Bart first enter the casino , Homer tells Bart that " Although they seem strange to us , we must respect the ways of the Indian . " He proceeds to greet everyone in the casino by saying " Hi @-@ how @-@ are @-@ you ? " in the rhythm of a stereotypical Native American chant . This joke was pitched by Tom Gammill , and there was a debate among the staff of the show about whether or not to include it in the episode as Native Americans could find it offensive . However , according to Scully , Dan Castellaneta ( who voices Homer ) " did [ the joke ] so funny when we were at the table @-@ read so we decided to put it in and risk offending . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 19 , 2000 . It was viewed in approximately 8 @.@ 77 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 7 , the episode finished 28th in the ratings for the week of March 13 – 19 , 2000 . It was the second highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week , following an episode of Malcolm in the Middle ( which received a 10 @.@ 0 rating and was watched in 10 @.@ 1 million homes ) . On October 7 , 2008 , " Bart to the Future " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season . Staff members Mike Scully , Dan Greaney , Matt Selman , and George Meyer participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included on the box set . 
 " Bart to the Future " has received mixed to negative reviews from critics compared to " Lisa 's Wedding " which met with positive response . Nancy Basile of About.com listed it as one of the episodes she felt " shined in season eleven " . While reviewing the eleventh season of The Simpsons , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented on " Bart to the Future " , writing : " This kind of fantasy episode can be hit or miss , and that trend holds true here . However , more of ' Future ' succeeds than flops . Though a few gags bomb , most of them prove pretty good . At no point does this become a classic , but it amuses much of the time . " Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club wrote in 2011 that the episode " was not so good , although better than many of the real stinkers yet to come at that point . Still , it utterly failed to rise to the challenge of ' Lisa ’ s Wedding . ' " 
 In a 2003 article , writers of Entertainment Weekly listed " Bart to the Future " as the worst Simpsons episode of all time . They elaborated that " Choosing the lamest Simpsons episode is like picking the crowning installment of Shasta <unk> — it 's all relative . So while ' Bart to the Future ' was likely better than anything else on TV the week it first aired , even Mojo the monkey could 've banged out a more inventive script [ ... ] Plus , the whole looking @-@ into @-@ the @-@ future premise is merely reliving past glory , carried out far more successfully in 1995 's ' Lisa 's Wedding . ' " Also in 2003 , Ben Rayner of Toronto Star referred to " Bart to the Future " as " a lame 2000 outing " and noted that Entertainment Weekly " rightly dubbed [ it ] the ' worst episode ever ' " . Winnipeg Free Press columnist Randall King wrote in his review of season eleven that the episode " Alone Again , Natura @-@ Diddily " ( which features the death of the character Maude Flanders ) was " proof that the dependably brilliant series could – and did – go seriously wrong when it turned 11 . Killing off Maude was a sin compounded by the Bart to the Future episode [ ... ] " . 
 In his 2006 book Watching with The Simpsons : Television , Parody , and Intertextuality , Jonathan Gray analyzed the many advertisement parodies featured in The Simpsons . He commented on " Bart to the Future " , writing : " As if ads in children 's toys or in churches are not enough , in ' Bart to the Future , ' an episode in which an Indian shaman at a casino treats Bart to a vision of his future , even his vision is interrupted when future @-@ Bart says , ' I guess I am an embarrassment , ' and a ghost responds , ' You sure are . But , hey , there 's an embarrassment of riches at the Caesar 's Pow @-@ Wow Indian Casino . You can bet on it ! ' Here [ ... ] The Simpsons uses parody with great effect , not only to illustrate how annoyingly and disrespectfully ads infringe on any territory , but also to mock their logic and rhetoric . " 
 In 2015 , news media cited the episode as a foreshadowing of Trump 's future run for president . Dan Greaney told The Hollywood Reporter in a 2016 interview that the thought of a Trump presidency at the time " just seemed like the logical last stop before hitting bottom . It was pitched because it was consistent with the vision of America going insane . " In an interview with TMZ on May 2016 , Matt Groening thought that it was unlikely that Donald Trump will become the president of the United States . Meanwhile , scenes from 2015 short " <unk> Voyage " ( which references real @-@ life scenes of Donald Trump around that time ) have been mistakenly identified as those from " Bart to the Future " . 
 = HMS Flint Castle ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Flint Castle ( <unk> ) was one of 44 Castle @-@ class corvettes built for the Royal Navy during World War II . Completed at the end of 1943 , the ship ran aground while training in January 1944 . After repairs were completed the following month , she was briefly assigned to the 39th Escort Group for convoy escort duties in the Atlantic Ocean . Flint Castle was transferred to Escort Group B2 in March and screened convoys to and from Gibraltar until September . That month , she joined Escort Group B3 to escort convoys between Canada and Britain and continued to do so until the end of the war in May 1945 . The ship then became an anti @-@ submarine training ship in Rosyth and Campbeltown , Scotland , before moving to Portland at the beginning of 1947 . Flint Castle remained there until she was taken out of service in March 1956 and broken up beginning in July 1958 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Castle @-@ class corvette was a stretched version of the preceding Flower class , enlarged to improve seakeeping and to accommodate modern weapons . The ships displaced 1 @,@ 010 long tons ( 1 @,@ 030 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 510 long tons ( 1 @,@ 530 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 252 feet ( 76 @.@ 8 m ) , a beam of 36 feet 9 inches ( 11 @.@ 2 m ) and a deep draught of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) . They were powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by two Admiralty three @-@ drum boilers . The engines developed a total of 2 @,@ 880 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 150 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . The Castles carried a maximum of 480 long tons ( 490 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ships ' complement was 99 officers and ratings . 
 The Castle @-@ class ships were equipped with a single QF 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk XVI gun forward , but their primary weapon was their single three @-@ barrel Squid anti @-@ submarine mortar . This was backed up by one depth charge rail and two throwers for 15 depth charges . The ships were fitted with two twin and a pair of single mounts for 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon light AA guns . Provision was made for a further four single mounts if needed . They were equipped with Type <unk> and Type <unk> ASDIC sets to detect submarines by reflections from sound waves beamed into the water . A Type 272 search radar and a HF / DF radio direction finder rounded out the Castles ' sensor suite . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Flint Castle , the only ship of her name to serve in the Royal Navy , was ordered on 19 January 1943 and laid down by Henry Robb at their shipyard in Leith , Scotland on 20 April . The ship was launched on 1 September and completed on 31 December . She arrived at Tobermory , Mull , Scotland , on 12 January 1944 to begin training at the Royal Navy 's Anti @-@ Submarine Training School , HMS Western Isles . Flint Castle ran aground while training on 18 January and was refloated . She arrived at Belfast , Northern Ireland , the following day to begin repairs that lasted until 9 February . The ship was then assigned to the 39th Escort Group and escorted one Atlantic convoy in mid @-@ March before being transferred to the Liverpool @-@ based Escort Group B2 to escort convoys to and from Gibraltar . 
 In September 1944 , Flint Castle was assigned to Escort Group B3 , which protected convoys sailing between St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador , Canada , and Britain . The ship was refitted in Cardiff , Wales , in January – March 1945 and rejoined her group in Liverpool in April . She was assigned to Rosyth Command in June as an anti @-@ submarine training ship and visited ports in Norway and Germany over the next several months . Flint Castle was transferred to the Rosyth Escort Force in June 1946 , which was employed as a training unit ; it was redesignated as the Basic Anti @-@ Submarine Training Flotilla in September . The unit was then transferred to Portland and used a variety of names before settling on the Second Training Squadron in January 1952 . On 15 June 1953 , she took part in the Fleet Review held at Spithead to celebrate the Coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . The ship was used to portray a German anti @-@ submarine vessel in the 1955 film The <unk> Heroes . 
 Flint Castle was taken out of service in March 1956 at Devonport Dockyard , until her demolition began , starting on 10 July 1958 at Faslane . While her service was uneventful , Flint Castle was awarded the battle honour of Atlantic 1944 – 45 . 
 = North Pier , Blackpool = 
 North Pier is the most northerly of the three coastal piers in Blackpool , England . Built in the 1860s , it is also the oldest and longest of the three . Although originally intended only as a promenade , competition forced the pier to widen its attractions to include theatres and bars . Unlike Blackpool 's other piers , which attracted the working classes with open air dancing and amusements , North Pier catered for the " better @-@ class " market , with orchestra concerts and respectable comedians . Until 2011 , it was the only Blackpool pier that consistently charged admission . 
 The pier is designated by English Heritage as a Grade II listed building , due to its status as the oldest surviving pier created by Eugenius Birch . As of 2015 it is still in regular use , despite having suffered damage from fires , storms and collisions with boats . Its attractions include bars , a theatre , a carousel and an arcade . One of the oldest remaining Sooty glove puppets is on display commemorating Harry Corbett buying the original puppet there . 
 = = Location = = 
 North Pier was built at the seaward end of Talbot Road , where the town 's first railway station , Blackpool North , was built . Its name reflects its location as the most northerly of Blackpool 's three piers . It is about 450 yards ( 410 m ) north of Blackpool Tower , which is roughly the midpoint of Blackpool 's promenade . The sea front is particularly straight and flat on this stretch of coastline , and the 550 yards ( 500 m ) pier extends at right angles into the Irish Sea , more or less level with the promenade . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of Blackpool Pier ( eventually North Pier ) started in May 1862 , in Layton @-@ cum @-@ <unk> , part of the parish of Bispham . In October 1862 severe storms suggested that the planned height of the pier was insufficient , and it was increased by 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) . North Pier was the second of fourteen piers designed by Eugenius Birch , and since Margate Pier was destroyed by a storm in 1978 , it is the oldest of the remaining examples of his work still in use . It was the first of Birch 's piers to be built by Glasgow engineering firm Richard Laidlaw and Son . 
 The pier , which cost £ 11 @,@ 740 to build , originally consisted of a promenade 468 yards ( 428 m ) long and 9 yards ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) wide , extending to 18 yards ( 16 m ) wide at the pier @-@ head . The bulk of the pier was constructed from cast iron , with a wooden deck laid on top . The cast iron piles on which the structure rests were inserted using Birch 's screw pile process ; the screw @-@ tipped piles were twisted into the sand until they hit bedrock . This made construction much quicker and easier , and guaranteed that the pier had a solid foundation . The cast iron columns , 12 inches ( 300 mm ) in diameter , were filled with concrete for stability at intervals of 20 yards ( 18 m ) , and supported by struts that were on average were slightly more than 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick . The pier 's promenade deck is lined with wooden benches with ornamental cast iron backs . At intervals along the pier are hexagonal kiosks built around 1900 in wood and glass with minaret roofs topped with decorative finials . On opening two of the kiosks were occupied by a bookstall and confectionery stall and the kiosks near the ends of the pier were seated shelters . The pier @-@ head is a combination of 420 tons of cast iron and 340 tons of wrought iron columns ; standing 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the low water line , it sees a regular 35 feet ( 11 m ) change in sea level due to the tide . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The pier was officially opened in a grand ceremony on 21 May 1863 , even though the final 50 yards ( 46 m ) had not yet been completed . All the shops in the area were closed and decorated with flags and streamers for the ceremony , which included a procession and a cannon salute , and was attended by more than 20 @,@ 000 visitors . Although the town only had a population of approximately 4 @,@ 000 , more than 200 @,@ 000 holiday makers regularly stayed there during the summer months ; this included 275 @,@ 000 admissions in 1863 , 400 @,@ 000 in 1864 and 465 @,@ 000 the following year . The pier was officially opened by Major Preston , and he and 150 officials then travelled to the Clifton Hotel for a celebratory meal . 
 The pier was intended primarily for leisure rather than seafaring ; for the price of 2d ( worth approximately £ 4 @.@ 90 in 2012 ) the pier provided the opportunity for visitors to walk close to the sea without distractions . This fee was insufficient to deter " trippers ' " , which led to Major Preston campaigning for a new pier to cater for the ' trippers ' . In 1866 , the government agreed that a second pier could be built , despite objections from the Blackpool Pier Company that it was close to their pier and therefore unnecessary . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 As permitted by the original parliamentary order , a landing jetty was built at the end of North Pier in incremental stages between 1864 and 1867 . The full length of the jetty was 158 yards ( 144 m ) , and the extensions increased the pier 's total length to its current 550 yards ( 500 m ) . The Blackpool Pier Company used the jetty to operate pleasure steamers that made trips to the surrounding areas . In 1871 swimming and diving lessons were added to the pier . 
 In 1874 , the pier @-@ head was extended to allow Richard <unk> Freeman to incorporate a pavilion , which opened in 1877 . The interior decoration led it to be known as the " Indian Pavilion " , and it was Blackpool 's primary venue for indoor entertainment until the Winter Gardens opened in 1879 . 
 To differentiate itself from the new pier , North Pier focused on catering for the " better classes " , charging for entry and including attractions such as an orchestra and band concerts , in contrast to the Central Pier ( or the " People 's pier " ) , which regularly had music playing and open @-@ air dancing . The pier owners highlighted the difference , charging at least a shilling ( worth approximately £ 19 @.@ 90 in 2012 ) for concerts and ensuring that advertisements for comedians focused on their lack of vulgarity . Sundays were given over to a church parade . 
 On 8 October 1892 , a storm @-@ damaged vessel , Sirene , hit the southern side of the pier , causing four shops and part of the deck to collapse onto the beach below . Several columns were also dislodged , and the ship 's bowsprit hit the pier entrance . All eleven crew members were rescued when they were hauled onto the pier . Damage to the pier was estimated to be £ 5 @,@ 000 and was promptly repaired . 
 Nelson 's former flagship , HMS Foudroyant , was moored alongside North Pier for an exhibition , but slipped anchor and was wrecked on the shore in a violent storm on 16 June 1897 , damaging part of the jetty . The wreck of the ship broke up during December storms . 
 The pier was closed for the winter during 1895 – 96 as it unsafe ; as a result , the pier was widened as electric lighting was added . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 An Arcade Pavilion was added in 1903 at the entrance to the pier and contained a wide range of amusements to suit all tastes . Further alterations were made to the pier in 1932 @-@ 33 when the open air stand was replaced with a stage and sun lounge . 
 In 1936 , a pleasure steamer returning from Llandudno crashed into the pier . The collision left a 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) gap , and stranded a number of people at the far end . 
 The 1874 Indian Pavilion was severely damaged by fire in 1921 . It was refurbished , but was then destroyed by a second fire in 1938 . In 1939 it was replaced by a theatre , built in an Art Deco style . At around the same time , the bandstand was removed and replaced with a sun lounge . 
 In the 1960s , the Merrie England bar and an amusement arcade were constructed at the end of the pier nearest to the shore . The 1939 theatre , which is still in use , narrowly escaped damage in 1985 when the early stages of a fire were noticed by performer Vince Hill . In the 1980s , a Victorian @-@ styled entrance was built . In 1991 the pier gained the Carousel bar as an additional attraction , and a small tramway to ease access to the pier @-@ head . By this point , the pier had ceased to have any nautical use , but the jetty section was adapted for use as a helicopter pad in the late 1980s . The Christmas Eve storm of 1997 destroyed the landing jetty , including the helipad . 
 The North Pier is one of the few remaining examples of Birch 's classic pier architecture and is a Grade II Listed building , the only Blackpool pier to hold that status . It was recognised as " Pier of the Year " in 2004 by the National Piers Society . 
 = = Attractions = = 
 North Pier 's attractions include a Gypsy palm reader and an ice cream parlour , the North Pier Theatre , a Victorian tea room , and the Carousel and Merrie England bars . The arcade , built in the 1960s , has approximately eleven million coins pass through its machines each year . 
 One of the earliest Sooty bear puppets used by Harry Corbett is on display on the pier . Corbett bought the original Sooty puppet on North Pier for his son , Matthew . When Corbett took the puppet on BBC 's Talent Night programme , he marked the nose and ears with soot so that they would show up on the black and white television , giving the puppet its name . 
 The Carousel bar on the pier @-@ head has a Victorian wrought iron canopy , and its outdoor sun @-@ lounge is classified as the largest beer garden in Blackpool . Next to the bar is a two tier carousel , the " Venetian Carousel " , which is protected from sand and spray by a glass wall . 
 After the fire in 1938 , the pavilion was replaced with a 1 @,@ 564 seat theatre which has since hosted a number of acts including ; Frankie Vaughan , Frank Randle , Tessie O 'Shea , Dave Morris , Bernard Delfont , Morecambe and Wise , Paul Daniels , Freddie Starr , Russ Abbot , Bruce Forsyth , Des O 'Connor , Joe <unk> , Lily Savage , Brian Conley and Hale and Pace . 
 In 2002 a heritage room with photographs was opened up , the foyer entrance was refurbished and a disabled lift added . By 2005 , there was no longer a live organist playing in the sun lounge although other live entertainment continues . In 2013 , the live organist was brought back into the sun lounge . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 The pier was built and owned by the Blackpool Pier Company , created with three thousand £ 5 @-@ shares in 1861 ( worth approximately £ 2 @,@ 990 in 2012 ) . The same firm operated the pier in 1953 , and the company was incorporated in 1965 . The Resorts Division of First Leisure , including the pier , was sold to Leisure Parks for £ 74 million in 1998 . In 2009 , the pier was sold to the Six Piers group , which owns Blackpool 's other two piers , and hoped to use it as a more tranquil alternative to them . The new owners opened the Victorian @-@ themed tea room , and built an eight @-@ seat shuttle running the length of the pier . 
 In April 2011 , the pier was sold to a Blackpool family firm , Sedgwick 's , the owners of amusement arcades and the big wheel on Blackpool 's Central Pier . Peter Sedgwick explained that he proposed to his wife on North Pier forty years ago , and promised to buy it for her one day . He said that he wants to restore the Victorian heritage of the pier and re @-@ instate the pier 's tram . An admission charge of fifty pence to access the board @-@ walk section of the pier was abolished by the <unk> . 
 = = Liquidation = = 
 A petition to wind up the Northern Victorian Pier Limited ( the company used by the Sedgwick family to manage Blackpool North Pier ) was presented on 17 September 2012 by Carlsberg UK Limited , a creditor of the company , and this was to be heard at Blackpool County Court on 15 November 2012 . 
 At the 11th hour , an agreement to pay the outstanding balance owed to Carlsberg was made and Peter Sedgwick 's company escaped liquidation . 
 = Business routes of Interstate 94 in Michigan = 
 There are currently eight business routes of Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) in the US state of Michigan . These business routes connect I @-@ 94 to the downtown business districts of neighboring cities . These eight routes are all business loops which bear the Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) designation . These loops are former routings of I @-@ 94 's two predecessors in Michigan : US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) or US 25 . The westernmost BL I @-@ 94 runs through the twin cities of Benton Harbor and St. Joseph along the former routing of US 12 and US 31 / US 33 that now includes a section of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour in the state . The loops in Kalamazoo , Battle Creek , Marshall , Albion , and Jackson were also formerly segments of US 12 which were later designated as separate version of Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) through their respective cities before becoming BL I @-@ <unk> in 1960 . The route of the business loop through Ann Arbor was previously US 12 and then later M @-@ 14 before receiving its current moniker . The BL I @-@ 94 through Port Huron was previously US 25 and then Business US Highway 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) . 
 = = Benton Harbor – St. Joseph = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a 10 @.@ 7 @-@ mile ( 17 @.@ 2 km ) state trunkline highway and business loop that runs from I @-@ 94 through the downtowns of Benton Harbor and St. Joseph . The highway begins at exit 23 on I @-@ 94 in Lincoln Township where it runs along Lakeshore Drive , passing through the community of Shoreham . This section of the loop has five lanes ( two in each direction with a center turn lane ) before it drops a lane in each direction south of Shoreham , and it is part of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour ( LMCT ) . BL I @-@ 94 briefly runs concurrently with M @-@ 63 along Main Street in downtown St. Joseph . This section widens to a four @-@ lane divided street . BL I @-@ 94 separates from M @-@ 63 on the one @-@ way pairing of Ship Street ( eastbound ) and Port Street ( westbound ) for three blocks before crossing the St. Joseph River to Benton Harbor ; the LMCT concurrency ends at this point . From there it follows the five @-@ laned Main Street through downtown Benton Harbor through roundabouts at Riverview Drive and 5th Street . At the latter roundabout , the roadway narrows back to three lanes . The easternmost leg of the loop , from Urbandale Avenue easterly to the eastern terminus at exit 33 on I @-@ 94 in Benton Township , is a four @-@ lane , limited @-@ access , divided highway ; it features an unusual intersection with Crystal Avenue which is a diamond interchange built at @-@ grade . 
 The highway through the downtowns of Benton Harbor and St. Joseph was a part of US 12 when the United States Numbered Highway System was created in late 1926 . US 31 was also routed concurrently through the area . The US 33 designation was later added to US 31 from the state line northward to US 12 in St. Joseph in 1937 . On November 2 , 1960 , the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway opened around the Benton Harbor – St. Joseph area , and the former route of US 12 through downtown was renumbered BL I @-@ 94 . By the next year , US 33 was extended along BL I @-@ 94 / US 31 , and the eastern end of BL I @-@ 94 was converted to a divided highway . In 1962 , US 31 was rerouted out of downtown Benton Harbor and St. Joseph to follow a new freeway east of Benton Harbor , removing it from BL I @-@ 94 / US 33 . US 33 was truncated in 1986 , removing it from BL I @-@ 94 and replacing it with M @-@ 63 the following year when signage was updated . The Great Lakes Circle Tours were approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) and its counterparts in Minnesota , Ontario and Wisconsin . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Berrien County . 
 = = Kalamazoo = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a state trunkline highway that forms a business loop for 11 @.@ 1 miles ( 17 @.@ 9 km ) from the I @-@ 94 freeway through downtown Kalamazoo . The western terminus is at exit 74 on I @-@ 94 in Portage . The business loop runs concurrently northward with US 131 for about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) on that four @-@ lane freeway to an interchange with Bus . US 131 ( Stadium Drive ) in Oshtemo Township . From there BL I @-@ 94 separates from US 131 and follows Bus . US 131 northeasterly along the five lanes of Stadium Drive ( two in each direction with a center turn lane ) through commercial areas and a part of the campus of Western Michigan University on the west side of Kalamazoo . At the intersection with Michigan Avenue , BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 131 merges with M @-@ 43 and splits into a one @-@ way pairing of streets ; the eastbound direction follows Michigan Avenue , while westbound traffic uses Michikal Street to connect from Kalamazoo Avenue a few blocks north . These two streets are between three and five lanes wide as BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 131 / M @-@ 43 runs through the heart of downtown Kalamazoo . At the intersections with the one @-@ way pairing of Westnedge Avenue and Park Street , Bus US 131 turns northward and the unsigned M @-@ 331 runs southward . Northbound traffic uses Park Street , and <unk> carries southbound for each of the two highways . On the eastern side of downtown , Michigan Avenue turns northwesterly to intersect with Kalamazoo Avenue near the Kalamazoo River . Now a two @-@ way , five @-@ lane street , BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 43 ( Michigan Avenue ) crosses the Portage Creek next to Rose Park ; east of this creek crossing , M @-@ 43 ( Michigan Avenue ) continues across the Kalamazoo River and BL I @-@ 94 turns southeasterly along the five @-@ lane King Highway . On the far @-@ eastern edge of the city , BL I @-@ 94 intersects the western end of M @-@ 96 . BL I @-@ 94 turns southeasterly off King Highway , which continues as M @-@ 96 . BL I @-@ 94 ( <unk> Memorial Parkway ) is a four @-@ lane expressway to its eastern terminus at I @-@ 94 's exit 81 . 
 On December 7 , 1959 , the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway opened on the south side of Kalamazoo . When US 12 was shifted to follow the new freeway , the former route through downtown Kalamazoo was redesignated Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) . The next year , it was renumbered BL I @-@ 94 . In 1963 , the US 131 freeway opened on the west side of Kalamazoo . Along with the creation of Bus . US 131 along a portion of the BL I @-@ 94 routing , BL I @-@ 94 was rerouted along the US 131 freeway on the west end back to I @-@ 94 . The section of Stadium Drive west of US 131 and the 9th Street routing was removed from BL I @-@ 94 . Kalamazoo and the newly built Michikal avenues were transferred to state jurisdiction in 1965 . Since then , Kalamazoo and Michigan avenues have been used as a pair of one @-@ way streets downtown . Kalamazoo and Michikal were then signed as westbound BL I @-@ 94 from Stadium Drive to Michigan Avenue while Main Street and Michigan Avenue continued to serve eastbound traffic . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Kalamazoo County . 
 = = Battle Creek = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a state trunkline highway serving as a business loop from I @-@ 94 through downtown Battle Creek . The highway begins at exit 92 on I @-@ 94 near the Kalamazoo – Calhoun county line . BL I @-@ 94 runs concurrently along M @-@ 37 northwesterly from the freeway on the two @-@ lane Columbia Avenue on the eastern edge of Fort Custer . At an intersection south of the W.K. Kellogg Airport , BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 37 turns northward on the two @-@ lane Skyline Drive and runs on the western side of the airport . At the airport 's northwestern corner , the business loop intersects M @-@ 96 ( West Dickman Road ) and turns easterly , merging onto M @-@ 96 . BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 37 / M @-@ 96 follows the Battle Creek – Springfield city line on the northern edge of the airport . Dickman Road through here is four lanes wide with a center turn lane added halfway across the northern edge of the airport . At the intersection with Helmer Road North , M @-@ 37 turns northward to separate from the business loop . One block farther east , M @-@ 96 turns southward on Helmer Road South , also separating from BL I @-@ 94 at the eastern edge of the airport . From there , the business loop follows West Dickman Road along a four @-@ lane divided highway ( except between 24th and 20th streets ) through a residential area on the northern side of Battle Creek . Dickman Road turns southeasterly as a five @-@ lane undivided highway through downtown Battle Creek , parallel to a curve in the Kalamazoo River near its confluence with the Battle Creek River . BL I @-@ 94 skirts the edge of downtown by turning southward and then eastward to cross the Kalamazoo River . On the eastern side of the river , the business loop intersects I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 . East of the freeway interchange , Dickman Road narrows to three lanes and ends at Main Street . BL I @-@ 94 turns northwesterly along Main Street , northeasterly along Hamblin Avenue and then southeasterly on Michigan Avenue on the eastern side of downtown . BL I @-@ 94 follows the three @-@ lane Michigan Avenue , narrowing to two lanes east of Porter Street . BL I @-@ 94 rejoins M @-@ 96 at an intersection with Columbia Avenue in Emmett Township near the Kalamazoo River . BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 96 ( Michigan Avenue ) runs concurrently as a three @-@ lane roadway through Emmett Township . The center turn lane drops southeast of Wattles Road , and the business loop continues to its eastern terminus at exit 104 on I @-@ 94 . 
 In late 1940 , a southerly bypass of downtown Battle Creek opened . U.S. Highway 12 ( US 12 ) was rerouted out of downtown to follow Columbia Avenue . The former route was redesignated Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) . In 1958 or 1959 , a section of the route of Bus . US 12 was split onto a one @-@ way pairing of streets through downtown Battle Creek . On December 7 , 1959 , the southern I @-@ 94 / US 12 bypass of Battle Creek was dedicated and opened to traffic . The former routing of US 12 along Columbia Avenue was turned over to local control and the route of Bus . US 12 was extended via Michigan Avenue easterly and M @-@ 78 ( Capitol Avenue ) southerly to connect to the new freeway . Later the next year , this business loop was redesignated BL I @-@ 94 . When the first segment of I @-@ 194 opened in 1961 , BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 78 was rerouted to follow the freeway . In 1964 , the western end of the business loop was realigned to follow Dickman Road west to Fort Custer and south along Skyline Drive to I @-@ 94 . The next year , as I @-@ 194 was completed and M @-@ 78 was replaced by an extended M @-@ 66 , BL I @-@ 94 was rerouted through the downtown area . From Dickman Road , BL I @-@ 94 followed I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 north to the end of the freeway at Hamblin Avenue and turned along Hamblin to Michigan Avenue via Jay Street . A minor realignment in 1970 shifted the connection between Hamblin and Michigan avenues . The one @-@ way setup through downtown was removed in 1984 . M @-@ 96 and M @-@ 37 were extended in 2000 , running concurrently between Skyline Drive and the Helmer Road intersections . M @-@ 89 replaced part of M @-@ 37 but did not follow the latter 's routing to I @-@ 994 / M @-@ 66 near downtown . Then in 2008 , BL I @-@ 94 was removed from the northern segment of I @-@ 194 / M @-@ 66 freeway and rerouted to follow Dickman Road to Main Street back to Hamblin Avenue . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Calhoun County . 
 = = Marshall = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a 5 @.@ 52 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 8 @.@ 88 km ) state trunkline highway serving as a business loop from the I @-@ 94 freeway through downtown Marshall . The highway begins at a cloverleaf interchange in Marshall Township between I @-@ 94 and I @-@ 69 , exit 108 on the former and exit 38 for the latter . The business loop turns southward running concurrently with I @-@ 69 . At the interchange with M @-@ 96 about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) south , BL I @-@ 94 departs the <unk> @-@ lane freeway to follow Michigan Avenue northeasterly along a four @-@ lane divided highway . Near the city limits , the highway intersects M @-@ 227 and then turns due east along a four @-@ lane undivided street . Within the city limits , Michigan Avenue is a Pure Michigan Byway named Marshall 's Territorial Road . The western half of Michigan Avenue in the city is mostly a residential neighborhood . The intersection with Kalamazoo Avenue is a roundabout around the Brooks Memorial Fountain . East of Kalamazoo Avenue , Michigan Avenue passes through the middle of downtown Marshall . East of downtown , Michigan Avenue once again passes through residential neighborhoods , narrowing to three lanes . The street angles northeasterly at the intersection with Gordon Street . At the intersection with the two @-@ lane <unk> Road in Marengo Township , BL I @-@ 94 turns northerly off Michigan Avenue past several businesses to its eastern terminus at I @-@ 94 's exit 112 . 
 The first business loop in Marshall was a Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) that was designated in 1960 after the I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway was completed north of the city . It followed US 27 ( Kalamazoo Avenue ) to Michigan Avenue . From there , Bus . US 12 followed the current routing of BL I @-@ 94 along Michigan Avenue and <unk> Road . The business route was redesignated as BL I <unk> in late 1961 . The section of BL I @-@ 94 along US 27 ( Kalamazoo Avenue ) became Bus . US 27 with the completion of the I @-@ 69 / US 27 freeway bypass in 1967 . BL I @-@ 94 was rerouted and cosigned with Bus . US 27 along Michigan Avenue and the new freeway on the west end . The concurrency with Bus . US 27 was removed in 1972 . On January 11 , 2001 . BL I @-@ 94 inside the city of Marshall was designated as a Michigan Heritage Route ( now called a Pure Michigan Byway ) . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Calhoun County . 
 = = Albion = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a 4 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) state trunkline highway serving as a business loop from the I @-@ 94 freeway through downtown Albion . The highway begins at exit 121 on I @-@ 94 . The access from westbound I @-@ 94 is through a right @-@ in / right @-@ out connection on the north side of the freeway to C Drive North . State maintenance starts at the end of those ramps to C Drive North and runs to Eaton Avenue where the business loop turns southward to cross the freeway . The northern end of the business loop on Easton Avenue has five lanes ( two in each direction with a center turn lane ) running through a commercial area next to the freeway and continues with four lanes through residential neighborhoods southward to an intersection with M @-@ 199 ( Austin Avenue ) . BL I @-@ 94 turns southeasterly along four @-@ lane Austin Avenue for two blocks and then southward onto four @-@ lane Superior Street . About five blocks farther south in downtown Albion , BL I @-@ 94 intersects M @-@ 99 . The two highways turn eastward running concurrently along four @-@ lane Michigan Avenue out of downtown . East of downtown , BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 99 passes through residential areas and turns northeasterly at the intersection with Clark Street , narrowing to two lanes . The more rural section of Michigan Avenue carrying the business loop crosses into Parma Township in Jackson County . At exit 124 on I @-@ 94 , BL I @-@ 94 ends and M @-@ 99 continues northward . 
 The I @-@ 94 / US 12 freeway in opened in Calhoun County in 1960 . At this time , Eaton Avenue was transferred to state control , and the rest of the former route of US 12 through Albion was redesignated Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) . Later that year , Bus . US 12 was redesignated BL I @-@ 94 . 
 Major intersections 
 = = Jackson = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a 10 1 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 16 @.@ 5 km ) state trunkline highway that serves as a business loop from the I @-@ 94 freeway through downtown Jackson . The western end is at exit 138 on I @-@ 94 west of Jackson in Blackman Township . This interchange is also the eastern terminus of M @-@ 60 and the two run concurrently southward along a section of four @-@ lane freeway west of the Jackson County Airport . BL I @-@ 94 / M @-@ 50 form a wrong @-@ way concurrency ; eastbound BL I @-@ 94 is also westbound M @-@ 60 . Less than a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south of I @-@ 94 , BL I @-@ 94 turns eastward onto the two @-@ lane Michigan Avenue running south of the airport . East of Laurence Avenue , the street widens to include a center turn lane . The business loop then passes the Westwood Mall southeast of the airport and west of downtown ; west of the mall , Michigan Avenue drops the center turn lane and widens to four lanes . At an intersection with West Avenue , BL I @-@ 94 merges with Business U.S. Highway 127 ( Bus . US 127 ) and M @-@ 50 . On the western edge of downtown Jackson , traffic follows a one @-@ way pairing of three @-@ lane streets that form a loop around the center of the business district . The southern half carrying BL I @-@ 94 east / Bus . US 127 south / M @-@ 50 east follows Washington Avenue , and the northern half follows Louis Glick Highway . East of downtown , Cooper Street rejoins the two sides of the loop . South of the loop , Cooper Street carries Bus . US 127 south / M @-@ 50 east and north of the loop , it carries M @-@ 106 . BL I @-@ 94 departs the loop north of the Grand River crossing near the Amtrak train station on the five @-@ lane Michigan Avenue . The business loop continues northeasterly through the east side of Jackson in a commercial area . East of Page Avenue , the center turn lane drops and returns east of Dettman Road . BL I @-@ 94 crosses US 127 in Leoni Township . East of that freeway , it follows two @-@ lane Ann Arbor Road past the campus of East Jackson High School . The highway turns more northerly through a rural section of Jackson County . It is bounded by fields interspersed with some businesses . Ann Arbor Road turns eastward to run parallel to the south side of I @-@ 94 near <unk> Lake . A connector , Sargent Road , intersects Ann Arbor Road to tie the business loop northward into an interchange with I @-@ 94 at exit 145 . 
 The US 12 bypass of Jackson was partially completed in late 1951 or early 1952 . US 12 turned south along US 127 ( Lansing Road ) at the end of the freeway to connect back to the existing routing of US 12 through the west end of town . The former routing along Ann Arbor Road and Michigan Avenue into downtown to US 12 / US 127 / M @-@ 50 / M @-@ 60 became Business US Highway 12 ( Bus . US 12 ) at this time . The bypass of Jackson was extended west to Parma in 1953 . BUS US 12 was rerouted along US 127 / M @-@ 50 / M @-@ 60 on West Avenue to connect back to US 12 . The last routing change to Bus . US 12 with the opening of the M @-@ 60 bypass of Jackson by the middle of 1961 . Bus . US 12 was extended westward along Michigan Avenue to the new freeway west of town in Blackman Township and northerly to a new western terminus at I @-@ 94 / US 12 . The business loop was redesignated BL I @-@ 94 in late 1960 . 
 In 1964 , several changes were made to the business routes in downtown Jackson . Eastbound BL I @-@ 94 traffic was shifted off Michigan Avenue along Blackstone Street to Washington Avenue , and from there it ran along Washington to Francis Street and back to Michigan Avenue . The westbound traffic was shifted north at Mechanic Street to Pearl Street , continuing until turning south at Blackstone back to Michigan Avenue . The eastern end was updated further in 1968 to use Louis Glick Highway to connect to the northern half of the loop around downtown to Michigan Avenue . A set of connector streets on the western side of the downtown loop opened in November 1969 to streamline the flow of traffic further resulting in the last changes to the BL I @-@ 94 routing in Jackson . Eastbound traffic was redirected to the connector on Michigan Avenue just east of Third Street . This connector curved south then east to Washington Avenue near First Street . Louis Glick Highway was extended west from Blackstone curving south to merge into Michigan . In 2012 , the eastern terminus of the business route was shifted easterly to follow Ann Arbor and Sargent roads to exit 145 on I @-@ 94 ; as a result , the former partial interchange between I @-@ 94 and Ann Arbor Road which formerly served as the business route 's eastern terminus was obliterated . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Jackson County . 
 = = Ann Arbor = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is a business loop running from the I @-@ 94 freeway through downtown Ann Arbor . It starts at exit 172 on I @-@ 94 near on the western side of the city and follows four @-@ lane Jackson Road easterly through a residential area and under I @-@ 94 before passing through a commercial area next to Veterans Memorial Park . East of the park , the business loop runs east @-@ northeasterly along Jackson Road through residential areas to a Y @-@ intersection with Dexter Road and Huron Street . BL I @-@ 94 follows the four @-@ lane Huron Street eastward into downtown Ann Arbor . At the intersection with Main Street , Business US Highway 23 ( Bus . US 23 ) turns onto Huron Street , and the two designations run concurrently , adding a center turn lane to Huron Street for a few blocks . The business loop passes to the north of University of Michigan 's Central Campus and then turns southward through it on the five @-@ lane Washtenaw <unk> near Forest Avenue at the edge of campus , BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 23 turns southeasterly through residential neighborhoods and drops the center turn lane again . At the intersection with Stadium Boulevard , Washtenaw Avenue turns more easterly , adds a center turn lane again and crosses County Farm Park . East of the park , BL I @-@ 94 / Bus . US 23 runs through a commercial area out to US 23 . At exit 37 on US 23 , Bus . US 23 ends and BL I @-@ 94 turns southward along US 23 . The business loop follows the four @-@ lane freeway southward through a residential area on the edge of Ann Arbor and ends at exit 180 on I @-@ 94 . 
 The business loop follows the former routing of US 12 . This routing was first designated as M @-@ 14 in 1956 when US 12 was moved to a freeway bypass to the south of town . I @-@ 94 was first designated by the middle of 1960 along the US 12 freeway , and a new BL I @-@ 94 designation was created by the middle of the next year . BL I @-@ 94 followed M @-@ 14 from the Jackson Road interchange to Main Street along Jackson Road and Huron Street . At Main Street , BL I @-@ 94 turned along US 23 on Huron Street , Washtenaw Avenue and Carpenter Road back to I @-@ 94 / US 12 . The US 23 freeway was finished on November 2 , 1962 . BL I @-@ 94 was rerouted on the east end to follow the new US 23 freeway , returning the Carpenter Road alignment to local control . Bus . US 23 replaced US 23 along Huron Street and Washtenaw Avenue in the city of Ann Arbor at this time . A new M @-@ 14 freeway opened on November 16 , 1965 , removing the M @-@ 14 concurrency from the routing . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in Washtenaw County . 
 = = Port Huron = = 
 Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) is an 8 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) business loop serving the cities of Marysville and Port Huron . It starts southwest of Marysville near St. Clair County International Airport at exit 266 on I @-@ 94 . The highway runs northeasterly along five @-@ lane Gratiot Avenue past several businesses near the exit . BL I @-@ 94 enters Marysville and passes through the city 's downtown area . On the eastern side of the city , the business loop turns northward along the four @-@ lane divided Gratiot Boulevard near the St. Clair River . The intersection where the business loop turns is also the northern terminus of M @-@ 29 . North of Ravenswood Road , BL I @-@ 94 splits into the one @-@ way pairing of two @-@ lane Military Street ( northbound ) and Electric Avenue ( southbound ) . This area is mostly residential running along the river . Electric Avenue merges back into Military Street , which widens to four lanes , near Beard Street . 
 At the intersections with Oak Street ( eastbound ) and Griswold Street ( eastbound ) , BL I @-@ 69 merges in from those two one @-@ way streets . BL I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 continues northward along Military Street through downtown Port Huron . The business loop crosses the Black River near its mouth . North of the river. the business loop follows Huron Avenue through the northern side of downtown Port Huron . At the intersection with Glenwood Avenue , BL I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 turns northwesterly onto Pine Grove Avenue through a residential area on the northern side of the city . The street has five lanes ( two in each direction plus a center turn lane ) . The business loop passes under I @-@ 94 / I @-@ 69 at the toll and customs plazas for the Blue Water Bridge . There is a partial interchange to connect the business loop to and from the eastbound direction of the freeway and the toll plaza . North of the freeway crossing , the business loop intersects the southern end of M @-@ 25 and turns westward onto Hancock Street for two blocks . Then it turns southward along a connector freeway to terminate at an interchange with westbound I @-@ 94 / I @-@ 69 . 
 Before the completion of the freeways in the Port Huron area , the route of the business loop was part of US Highway 25 ( US 25 ) . After the freeway was completed in the area , the former route was redesignated Business US 25 ( Bus . US 25 ) in 1964 . The US 25 designation was decommissioned in 1973 , and the former Bus . US 25 through the area was designated as part of an extended M @-@ 25 . In 1986 , the BL I @-@ 94 designation was created , and the former BS I @-@ 69 was extended with it through downtown Port Huron . At the same time , M @-@ 25 was truncated to end on the north side of Port Huron . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire highway is in St. Clair County . 
 = Arjen Robben = 
 Arjen Robben ( Dutch pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ( n ) ] ; born 23 January 1984 ) is a Dutch professional footballer who plays for German club Bayern Munich and is the captain of the Netherlands national team . Robben has appeared at the 2004 , 2008 and 2012 UEFA European Championships , and the 2006 , 2010 and 2014 FIFA World Cups . He is a forward who usually plays as a left or right sided winger . Robben is known for his dribbling skills , speed , crossing ability and his accurate left foot long @-@ range shots from the right wing . 
 Robben first came to prominence with Groningen , for whom he was player of the year for the 2000 – 01 Eredivisie season . Two years later he signed for PSV , where he became the Netherlands ' Young Player of the Year and won an Eredivisie title . The following season Robben 's signature was pursued by leading English clubs , and after protracted transfer negotiations he joined Chelsea in 2004 . 
 Robben 's Chelsea debut was delayed through injury , but upon returning to fitness he helped Chelsea bring home two consecutive Premier League titles , and was the FA Premier League Player of the Month in November 2005 . After a third season in England which was punctuated by injury , Robben moved to Spanish club Real Madrid for € 35 million . In August 2009 , Robben transferred to Bayern Munich for a fee of around € 25 million , scoring two goals on his debut . In his first season in Munich , Bayern won the league title , Robben 's fifth league title in eight years , and Robben scored the winning goal in the 2013 UEFA Champions League Final . After his first season with Bayern , Robben was also named Footballer of the Year in Germany . 
 In 2014 , Robben was ranked the fourth @-@ best footballer in the world by The Guardian . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robben was born in <unk> , a satellite town of Groningen , in the north @-@ eastern Netherlands . He took to football from an early age , becoming an adherent of the <unk> Method . Robben 's skill in ball control and technical footwork made him a valuable player , and he was quickly signed by regional club FC Groningen . Here , he developed his distinctive style of cutting inside from the right onto his left foot to score some quite spectacular goals . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Groningen = = = 
 Groningen placed Robben in their first team for the 1999 – 2000 season . He scored three goals in league play . Manager Jan van Dijk added the winger to the first team before Groningen 's November 2000 away game against Twente , but he did not play until 3 December 2000 against RKC Waalwijk as a substitute for the injured Leonardo dos Santos in the 79th minute . During the winter , Robben managed to play himself into the starting lineup . In 18 starts for Groningen over the 2000 – 01 season , he scored two goals . Robben was named player of the year for his first season with the club , and with teammate Jordi <unk> , he demonstrated the strength of the Groningen youth academy . Robben stayed with Groningen and improved steadily during the 2001 – 02 season , playing in 28 matches and scoring six goals . Robben transferred to PSV for € 3 @.@ 9 million before the 2002 – 03 season . 
 = = = PSV = = = 
 During his first season for PSV , the 2002 – 03 season , Robben played 33 matches and scored 12 goals . He was named " PSV co @-@ player of the year " along with striker Mateja Kežman , with whom he formed an attacking partnership still fondly referred to by PSV fans as " Batman and Robben . " He helped lead PSV to their 17th Dutch title , and won the Talented Player of the Year award . After this good start , PSV could not keep up with rival Ajax and were forced into a fight for second place in the Eredivisie . Robben travelled to London and met with Manchester United coach Sir Alex Ferguson . Ferguson 's offer came in much too low for PSV 's and Robben 's liking ; PSV chairman Harry van <unk> told Manchester United the most that their € 7 million offer would buy them was a shirt with Robben 's autograph . Almost immediately , Chelsea owner Roman Abramovich offered € 18 million ( £ 12 @.@ 1 million ) , and PSV accepted . The rest of his season with PSV was disappointing . He injured his hamstring twice and missed several games . By the end of the season , Robben scored five times in 23 Eredivisie matches . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 = = = = 2004 – 05 season = = = = 
 Robben did not make his competitive debut for Chelsea until November 2004 , as he was injured in a pre @-@ season friendly match against Roma , breaking a metatarsal bone in his right foot in a challenge from Olivier Dacourt . During this time , he told club doctors that he had noticed an unfamiliar growth on one of his testicles . The medical team quickly did tests to check for testicular cancer , but he was subsequently given the all clear . 
 Robben proved to be a crucial player for the 2004 – 05 season ; in November 2004 , he was awarded the FA Premier League " Player of the Month " award . Robben ended the 2004 – 05 season with seven goals , his second highest professional total . He was shortlisted for the PFA Young Player of the Year , but was beaten by Wayne Rooney of Manchester United . Robben was badly injured in a league game away to Blackburn Rovers and forced to sit out Chelsea 's title run @-@ in and progress to the semi @-@ finals of the UEFA Champions League . Back to fitness for 2005 – 06 , Robben was an integral part of the Chelsea left wing . In 28 matches , Robben contributed six goals as Chelsea won a second consecutive Premier League championship , the first back @-@ to @-@ back titles for the west London club . 
 = = = = 2005 – 06 season = = = = 
 The 2005 – 06 season saw Robben involved in an unsporting incident with Liverpool goalkeeper Pepe Reina . Towards the end of a league game between Chelsea and Liverpool at Stamford Bridge , which Chelsea won 2 – 0 , Reina shoved his hand in Robben 's face after some provocative words from Robben . Robben fell theatrically to the turf , and Reina received a red card for " violent behaviour , " as violent conduct is illegal . As a result of the incident Reina commented that Robben " did well enough to win an Oscar " for his theatrics . Liverpool manager Rafael Benítez later joked in a post @-@ match interview that he " would soon be going to hospital to check on Robben 's condition . " Reina 's red card was not rescinded . 
 = = = = 2006 – 07 season = = = = 
 Robben was later named man of the match on 23 December 2006 against Wigan Athletic , a match where he got two assists and the winning goal . 
 Robben was inflicted with yet another injury in a match against Liverpool on 20 January 2007 . Robben made his return in a 3 – 0 victory against Middlesbrough in February , driving in a shot that took a deflection past Mark Schwarzer for an own goal by Abel Xavier . He came on as a substitute for Claude Makélélé in the 2007 League Cup Final against Arsenal and set up the winning goal for Didier Drogba . Robben scored a goal in the second round of the UEFA Champions League against Porto , which led to Chelsea winning the tie 3 – 2 on aggregate . At the end of March 2007 , Robben underwent a knee operation after sustaining a knee injury upon returning from international duty that was expected to rule him out for at least four weeks . He only made two further appearances for Chelsea , both of which were as a substitute and both of which would prove to be key games for the club . His first appearance since returning from injury was against Liverpool in the UEFA Champions League semi @-@ final second leg which went to penalties . Robben went on to have his penalty saved by Pepe Reina , and Chelsea ultimately lost . His final appearance for the club came against Manchester United in the 2007 FA Cup Final . Robben replaced Joe Cole at half time , but was then subsequently substituted himself for Ashley Cole in extra time as Chelsea emerged victorious . Spanish club Real Madrid were interested in two of Chelsea 's players . Then @-@ manager Bernd Schuster is said to have demanded Michael Ballack , while Madrid 's former president , Ramón Calderón , was known to favour Robben . Robben said to reporters of Spanish newspaper AS , " I do not know when a deal will be reached . I would like to send a message to the Madrid fans , but I can 't until my future is sorted . " 
 Real Madrid eventually secured Robben 's services in August 2007 . He told Chelsea 's official club website , " It was difficult to leave because I had a great time in my three years at Chelsea and I made a lot of friends . There was no time to say goodbye because the deal was closed on the Wednesday at 10 o 'clock in the evening and the following morning I had to fly . If I have one day off I would want to come back and say goodbye because to the fans I owe a big thank you because they were always good to me . In my three years I won all the prizes there are to win in England . " 
 = = = Real Madrid = = = 
 Robben completed his move to Real Madrid on a five @-@ year deal on 22 August 2007 , with the transfer fee reported as £ 24 million ( € 35 million ) . He made his debut on 18 September as a substitute for Raúl during a Champions League match against Werder Bremen , which Real Madrid won 2 – 1 . His league debut came on 23 September , this time as a substitute for Royston Drenthe in a 1 – 1 away draw against Real Valladolid . On 10 February 2008 , Robben scored his first goal , this time at home in a 7 – 0 victory against Valladolid . Robben proved crucial for many Real Madrid matches , making his famous runs down the left wing and quickly became a first choice for the left midfield position , making 28 appearances during his debut season and scoring five goals . Real Madrid won the league title with some games to spare , and were already the champions of Spain when they played their arch @-@ rivals Barcelona on 7 May 2008 . The Barcelona players formed a guard of honor as the Madrid team came onto the pitch at the Santiago Bernabéu , and Robben played an important part in Real Madrid 's subsequent 4 – 1 victory , scoring the champions ' second goal . 
 He retained his key role in the Real Madrid midfield during the 2008 – 09 season , playing 35 times and scoring eight goals . Although the Dutchman was one of the Spanish side 's most important players in the pre @-@ season games leading up to the 2009 – 10 season , having scored three goals and help set up another four , he was among the players whose place in the first team became threatened following the arrival of Florentino Pérez and the signings of Cristiano Ronaldo and Kaká . Real Madrid accepted a bid of around € 25 million for Robben from Bayern Munich . Robben claimed he was " forced " to leave Real Madrid , saying that he " didn 't want to go , but the club wanted to sell him . " 
 = = = Bayern Munich = = = 
 = = = = 2009 – 10 season = = = = 
 On 28 August 2009 , Robben moved to Bayern Munich for around € 25 million . He was given the number 10 shirt , last worn by his fellow Dutchman , Roy Makaay . His debut came the day after . He came on as a half @-@ time substitute against VfL Wolfsburg , scored two goals , and helped his team beat last season 's champions in Bayern 's first win of the 2009 – 10 season . On 9 March 2010 , Robben scored the deciding goal in Bayern 's 2 – 3 defeat ( 4 – 4 on aggregate over two legs ) against Fiorentina , taking them through to the quarter @-@ finals of the 2009 – 10 Champions League on away goals . 
 On 7 April 2010 , Robben sent Bayern into the semi @-@ finals of the Champions League with a stunning volley against Manchester United from the edge of the area into the corner of the net . The game ended 3 – 2 to United ( 4 – 4 on aggregate ) , with Bayern advancing again due to away goals . 
 On 17 April 2010 , he scored his first hat @-@ trick in the Bundesliga against Hannover 96 in the Allianz Arena . The game ended 7 – 0 to the Bavarians . On 8 May 2010 , he won his first Bundesliga title with Bayern after scoring two goals in their 3 – 1 victory over Hertha BSC , finishing as Bayern 's top scorer in the process . 
 A week later , Bayern played in the DFB @-@ Pokal Final against the previous champions of the tournament , Werder Bremen , in Berlin 's Olympiastadion . Bayern won the game by 4 – 0 , with Robben scoring the first of his team 's goals from a penalty kick . Robben thus helped the Bavarians achieve their 15th DFB @-@ Pokal title . On 25 May 2010 , Robben was named Footballer of the Year in Germany for 2010 . He won the award by attaining a record 72 @.@ 1 % of the vote and was the first Dutch person to win the title . 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 The 2010 – 11 started badly for Robben , after medical tests confirmed that his hamstring had not properly healed and that he would be out for two months . Bayern chairman Karl @-@ Heinz Rummenigge stated that " Of course , Bayern Munich are very angry " with the Royal Dutch Football Association ( KNVB ) , and would be seeking compensation from them , continuing . " Once again we must pay the bill as a club after a player is seriously injured playing for a national team . " On 15 January 2011 , he returned to first team action , coming on as a substitute in the 1 – 1 away draw with Wolfsburg . 
 Robben was nominated for the " UEFA Champions League Best Midfielder , " but the award went to his international compatriot Wesley Sneijder . He has also been nominated for the prestigious Ballon d 'Or award , and the FIFA Puskás Award , which goes to the best goal of the year , and he has also been nominated for FIFA ’ s " FIFPro World XI 2010 " squad , thanks to his fantastic season with Bayern Munich . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 In the second leg of the semi @-@ finals of the 2011 – 12 UEFA Champions League , against his former club Real Madrid which was now managed by José Mourinho ( who had been his manager at Chelsea ) , after Bayern fell behind 2 – 0 , Robben converted a penalty to level the tie at 3 – 3 . Bayern advanced to the final after winning the resulting penalty shootout . 
 On 3 May 2012 it was reported that Robben has signed a new contract with Bayern which would last until 2015 . 
 Robben had an extra @-@ time penalty saved by former teammate Petr Čech in the 2012 UEFA Champions League Final at the Allianz Arena against Chelsea . Had he scored , Bayern Munich would have led Chelsea 2 – 1 . However the match ended in a penalty shootout which Chelsea won . That was the fourth major cup final that he had been on the losing side during the last two years ( World Cup final , two Champions League finals and the DFB Pokal ) . Three days later in the same stadium while playing as a second @-@ half substitute for the Netherlands in a friendly against Bayern Munich , he was jeered by some disgruntled Bayern Munich fans every time he touched the ball ( due to his penalty miss in the Champions League final , and as he did not play on Bayern 's side during that match due to a decision taken by Netherlands coach Bert van Marwijk ) . The match had been organized to compensate Bayern , since Robben aggravated an injury playing for the Netherlands at the 2010 World Cup , and went on to miss several months of the 2010 – 11 season . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 In the 2012 – 13 season , Robben had started the season on the bench , as manager Jupp Heynckes preferred to start Thomas Müller on the right wing , with Toni Kroos at the attacking midfielder position . Robben had played through the season as a substitute , but earned his chance to start again after Kroos was injured during the Champions League tie against Juventus . He started on the right wing for the rest of the season , having moved Müller back to the middle . Robben started against Borussia Dortmund in the quarterfinals of the DFB @-@ Pokal and scored the game 's lone goal in the 43rd minute . In the Champions League semi @-@ final against FC Barcelona , Robben started both games and scored in both games , including the go @-@ ahead goal in the second leg . Bayern would then go on to return to the Final . Robben atoned for his penalty miss the previous season by setting up teammate Mario Mandžukić 's goal to open the scoring in the 60th minute then netting an 89th @-@ minute winner in a 2 – 1 victory over Borussia Dortmund to give Bayern their fifth European Cup . During the presentation he was named Man of the Match by UEFA . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 Robben scored his first goals of the 2013 – 14 season in the 2013 DFL @-@ Supercup , where Bayern were beaten 4 – 2 by Borussia Dortmund . On 9 August 2013 , his opening goal helped Bayern to a 3 – 1 win over Borussia Mönchengladbach in their first match of the Bundesliga campaign . On 17 September , he scored in Bayern 's Champions League opener against CSKA Moskva at the Allianz Arena . He went on to score two further goals during the Champions League group stage ; in away wins against Manchester City and CSKA as Bayern finished as group winners . On 23 November , Robben was one of three scorers as Bayern beat title rivals Borussia Dortmund 3 – 0 at the Westfalenstadion . On 4 December , Robben was substituted with a deep cut on his right knee in a 2 – 0 DFB @-@ Pokal win away to FC Augsburg which prevented him from taking part in the 2013 FIFA Club World Cup . 
 On 1 March 2014 , Robben scored a hat @-@ trick in Bayern 's 5 – 1 win over FC Schalke 04 . On 19 March , he signed a contract extension with Bayern , which will keep him at the club until 2017 . On 9 April , Robben scored Bayern 's third goal in a 3 – 1 Champions League quarter @-@ final against Manchester United , to secure qualification to the semi @-@ finals . On 17 May , Robben scored Bayern 's opening goal in a 2 – 0 extra @-@ time defeat of Borussia Dortmund in the 2014 DFB @-@ Pokal Final , giving him his third league and cup double in five seasons with the club . His goal made him the first player to score in three separate DFB @-@ Pokal finals . On 13 July , after winning the third place match at the 2014 FIFA World Cup , Louis van Gaal invited Robben to follow him to Manchester United , but the latter ruled out the move . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 In Bayern 's opening match of the 2014 – 15 Bundesliga season , Robben scored one goal and assisted the other as the team defeated VfL Wolfsburg 2 – 1 on 22 August 2014 . On 1 November , he scored the winning goal from a penalty kick against Borussia Dortmund in Der <unk> . On 16 December 2014 , Robben scored his 100th competitive goal for Bayern Munich in a home match against SC Freiburg . 
 On 21 February 2015 , Robben scored twice in a 6 – 0 win against SC Paderborn 07 , giving him the record of having scored against every Bundesliga team he had faced . He ended 2014 – 15 alongside teammate Robert <unk> as joint second @-@ top goalscorer in the Bundesliga with 17 goals . This was in spite of the player missing the last two months of the season through injury . 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 Robben started his 2015 – 16 season by scoring the opening goal of the DFL – Supercup against Wolfsburg . The match finished in a 1 – 1 draw , and Robben scored in the subsequent shootout , however Bayern were defeated . 
 Robben 's first goal of the Bundesliga season came from a penalty kick in a 3 – 0 defeat of Bayer 04 Leverkusen on 29 August . However , an injury suffered six days later when playing for the Netherlands against Iceland in qualification for UEFA Euro 2016 kept him out of Bayern 's next nine fixtures . On 24 October , Robben returned to the Bayern team , playing 65 minutes and scoring the opening goal of a 4 – 0 win against 1 . FC Köln , the club 's 1,000th Bundesliga victory . He made his first UEFA Champions League appearance of the season on 4 November , scoring after coming on as a substitute in Bayern 's 5 – 1 win over Arsenal . 
 = = International career = = 
 In April 2003 , he made his international debut in a friendly match against Portugal at the age of 19 . On 28 August 2015 , Robben was named captain of the Netherlands national team , replacing Robin van Persie . 
 = = = Euro 2004 = = = 
 Robben 's first participation at an international tournament came at UEFA Euro 2004 when manager Dick Advocaat called up younger players , such as Wesley Sneijder and John Heitinga . During the group stage of the tournament , Advocaat substituted Robben in the 66th minute to defend a 2 – 1 lead over the Czech Republic . However , the Czech team then scored two goals and won 3 – 2 , which led to criticism about Advocaat 's decision . In the quarter @-@ finals , Robben scored the deciding kick in the penalty shootout between the Netherlands and Sweden , which ensured that at the fifth attempt , the Dutch finally won a shootout . 
 = = = 2006 World Cup = = = 
 Robben played in his first 2006 World Cup qualifier in 2006 . In six games for the Netherlands , Robben scored two goals . The Netherlands qualified for the 2006 FIFA World Cup and in the Netherlands opening match against Serbia and Montenegro , Robben scored the winning goal in the 18th minute , and was named the Man of the match . In the match against Côte d 'Ivoire , Robben received this award the second time , thus becoming one of the eight players in the tournament to have won the Man of the Match Award more than once . 
 = = = Euro 2008 = = = 
 During UEFA Euro 2008 , manager Marco van Basten changed the formation to 4 – 2 – 3 – 1 , preferring the midfield trio of Rafael van der Vaart , Wesley Sneijder and Dirk Kuyt . Robben was left to battle it out with Robin van Persie for a place on the wing . In the group match against France , which the Netherlands won 4 – 1 , Robben was brought on at half @-@ time . He dragged the ball out of reach of a defender near the half @-@ way line and paced his way ahead of three defenders , then crossed straight to Van Persie who powered a shot into the goal past Grégory <unk> . At 2 – 0 , Thierry Henry scored a goal , making it 2 – 1 , and almost directly after the restart , Robben was played through by Sneijder and he ran at the France goal and was forced into an acute angle , but despite the angle , he shot the ball into the net past <unk> . 
 = = = 2010 World Cup = = = 
 Robben was selected by the Netherlands manager Bert van Marwijk for the final squad of 23 for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . In the team 's last friendly match against Hungary , just before its flight to South Africa on 4 June , Robben fell awkwardly , and picked up a hamstring injury which caused concern over his fitness for the tournament . On 5 June , Van Marwijk announced that he 'd " decided not to summon any substitute for Arjen . I want to give him every chance to still participate in the World Cup . " On 12 June 2010 , Robben arrived in South Africa to join the team . He was an unused substitute for the opening game against Denmark as they coasted to a 2 – 0 victory , and again in the 1 – 0 victory against Japan . He came on in the 73rd minute against Cameroon in their 2 – 1 victory , hitting the post from which Klaas @-@ Jan Huntelaar scored from the rebound . 
 On 28 June 2010 , he started his first match against Slovakia in which he went on to score the first goal in the second round as the Netherlands won 2 – 1 . He also went on to pick up the man of the match award . Robben scored the third goal with a well @-@ placed header in the semi @-@ finals against Uruguay which the Netherlands won 3 – 2 to reach the final . Robben played for the full match in the final as the Netherlands lost 1 – 0 to Spain . Robben had Netherlands 's best opportunity of the match when played in on goal by Wesley Sneijder in the 62nd minute of the match , but was denied by Iker Casillas . Robben was nominated for the 2010 World Cup Golden Ball , the tournament 's best player , which was won by Diego Forlán . 
 = = = Euro 2012 = = = 
 Robben was selected to play for the Netherlands at UEFA Euro 2012 . He started in the first group stage match , a 1 – 0 loss to Denmark , in which he hit the post with a curled effort . In the next match , a 2 – 1 loss to Germany , he hopped over the advertising boards and walked the long way round after being subbed off for Dirk Kuyt because he thought he could have inspired the Netherlands to a win . After a 2 – 1 loss to Portugal , the Netherlands were knocked out with three straight defeats . 
 = = = 2014 World Cup = = = 
 In the Netherlands ' first match of the 2014 FIFA World Cup , Robben scored two goals in a 5 – 1 win over Spain . In the Netherlands ' second group stage match , a 3 – 2 win over Australia , Robben scored the team 's opening goal as they qualified for the knockout stage . In the Round of 16 knock @-@ out game with Mexico , the Netherlands won on a penalty awarded after Robben went down following a challenge from Rafael Márquez . The Associated Press said that Robben 's " theatrical " fall " did little to defuse the debate about his reputation for diving . " Robben maintained that the penalty was correct but admitted to falling easily earlier in the match , telling a Dutch TV channel that " the one [ at the end ] was a penalty , but the other one was a dive in the first half . I shouldn 't be doing that . " 
 In the quarter @-@ final , Robben scored the Netherlands ' second kick in a 4 – 3 penalty shootout defeat of Costa Rica . On 11 July , Robben was named on the 10 @-@ man shortlist for FIFA 's Golden Ball award for the tournament 's best player . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Robben is regarded as one of the best wingers in the world , with ESPN stating he is " able to take on and beat defenders at the drop of a hat , Robben 's ability to get to the byline and deliver in accurate crosses instils fear into any defence . " Usually deployed on the right wing , Robben often cuts inside on his left foot to move to a more central attacking position , and uses his speed and dribbling skills to take on defenders until he finds the space to make an attempt on goal . 
 He is predominantly a left footed player . During a match he will often drift to the left wing , with his teammate , in the case of Bayern Munich , Franck Ribéry , switching over to the right . Another factor in his playing style is his relationship with the right @-@ fullback . At Bayern , this partnership with Philipp Lahm has had benefits for the team 's efficiency and chemistry . Robben 's defensive work improved when he went to Bayern where he often tracks back and covers for his partner when he pushes forward and becomes a temporary right back . 
 Robben has been often accused of diving , and he has at times openly admitted to the charges . In December 2011 , Robben apologised for a dive against VfL Bochum in a DFB @-@ Pokal match which earned him a yellow card , saying " I must not do things like this " . In July 2014 , Robben admitted to diving in the first half of Netherlands ' match against Mexico in the last 16 round of the 2014 FIFA World Cup , but maintained that he had not dived for the decisive penalty he won in stoppage time which Netherlands converted to win 2 – 1 . Following the incident , Robben 's former manager at Chelsea , José Mourinho , claimed that Robben 's speed and creativity cause opponents who cannot stop him to foul him , but " sometimes [ Robben ] tries to get an advantage , or to get a penalty " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Robben married his girlfriend Bernadien <unk> on 9 June 2007 in Groningen . The two met while in high school in the city , at the Kamerlingh Onnes , and have two sons , Luka born in 2008 and Kai born 2012 and a daughter , Lynn born in 2010 . Robben 's father , Hans , works as his agent . 
 The circumstances of Arjen and Bernadien 's first meeting have been reported by his former youth coach , Barend <unk> . ' Arjen was driven and determined at a young age . He was always on time , never late . But one Friday afternoon he showed up 15 minutes past the start of practice . I asked him what was going on . " We were at the market square , having fun " , he said . There were some girls with him and his friends , so I asked , " Was she worth it ? " " Yes , trainer , she was " , he told me . I told him to get his gear and join the training session . At his wedding , I heard the woman he met that day was now his wife and mother of his children . Bernadien is her <unk> 
 = = Sponsorship = = 
 Robben has a sponsorship deal with German sportswear and equipment supplier , Adidas . Robben features in EA Sports ' FIFA video game series , and was the third highest rated player in FIFA 15 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 18 June 2016 . 
 1 . ^ Includes Dutch FA Cup , English FA Cup , Spanish FA Cup , German FA Cup . 
 2 . ^ Includes UEFA Champions League and UEFA Europa League . 
 3 . ^ Includes Eredivisie playoff , English League Cup , FA Community Shield , Spanish Super Cup , German Super Cup , and UEFA Super Cup . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 13 November 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 PSV 
 Eredivisie : 2002 – 03 
 Johan Cruijff Schaal : 2003 
 Chelsea 
 Premier League : 2004 – 05 , 2005 – 06 
 FA Cup : 2006 – 07 
 Football League Cup : 2004 – 05 , 2006 – 07 
 FA Community Shield : 2005 
 Real Madrid 
 La Liga : 2007 – 08 
 Supercopa de España : 2008 
 Bayern Munich 
 Bundesliga : 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 DFB @-@ Pokal : 2009 – 10 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2015 – 16 
 DFB @-@ Supercup : 2010 , 2012 
 UEFA Champions League : 2012 – 13 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2013 
 FIFA Club World Cup : 2013 
 = = = International = = = 
 Netherlands 
 FIFA World Cup : Runner @-@ up 2010 ; Third Place 2014 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Dutch Football Talent of the Year : 2002 – 03 
 Johan Cruijff Prijs : 2002 – 03 
 Premier League Player of the Month : November 2004 
 PFA Team of the Year : 2005 
 ESM Team of the Year : 2004 – 05 , 2009 – 10 , 2014 – 15 
 Bravo Award : 2005 
 Goal of the Month in Germany : January 2010 , March 2010 , April 2010 , February 2013 
 The kicker Man Of The Year : 2010 
 Footballer of the Year in Germany : 2010 
 UEFA Team of the Year : 2011 , 2014 
 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award 2013 ( 4th place ) 
 UEFA Best Player in Europe Award 2014 ( 3rd place ) 
 UEFA Champions League Final Man of the Match : 2013 
 UEFA Champions League Team of the Season : 2013 – 14 
 FIFA World Cup Bronze Ball : 2014 
 FIFA World Cup All @-@ Star Team : 2014 
 FIFA FIFPro World XI : 2014 
 FIFA Ballon d 'Or : 4th place 2014 
 Dutch Sportsman of the Year : 2014 
 = Money Jungle = 
 Money Jungle is a studio album by pianist Duke Ellington with double bassist Charles Mingus and drummer Max Roach . It was recorded on September 17 , 1962 , and released in February 1963 by United Artists Jazz . All but one of the compositions were written by Ellington , with four of the seven on the original LP being recorded for the first time on this album . Later releases on CD added eight tracks from the same recording session . 
 The album was reviewed positively at the time of its release and subsequent reviews have remained highly favorable . Negative comments have concentrated on differences in playing style among the three musicians , brought about by the generational gap between Ellington and the others , and an argument that led to Mingus leaving the studio mid @-@ session . Hundreds of musicians have been influenced by the recording , in particular by the freedom of individual expression within a small @-@ group setting . 
 = = Background = = 
 Producer Alan Douglas had helped Duke Ellington with errands when they were both working in Paris in the early 1960s . Later , after Douglas had joined United Artists and moved to New York , he received , according to his own account , a surprise visit from Ellington , who suggested recording a piano @-@ based album ( Ellington was known as a big band leader ) . Douglas suggested Charles Mingus as double bassist , who then insisted on having Max Roach as drummer . Mingus had played with Ellington before , deputising for the regular bassist in the leader 's orchestra in 1953 , but was fired after four days , following a fight with another musician , Juan Tizol . 
 At the time of the 1962 recording , Ellington was 63 years old , while Mingus was 40 and Roach 38 . The generational difference was strengthened by Ellington being a guiding figure for the other two , who were born when Ellington was becoming an influence on music . In 1962 , Ellington did not have a recording contract , while Mingus was signed to United Artists and had not recorded a trio album since 1957 . According to Roach , the three musicians met the day before the recording , and Ellington told them to " Think of me as the poor man 's Bud Powell " and that he would not like to play only his own material . 
 = = Recording and music = = 
 The recording was made on Monday , September 17 , 1962 , at Sound Makers Studios in New York City , on 57th Street , between Sixth Avenue and Seventh . The session was due to begin at 1 pm . Roach arrived at midday to set up his drums and found that Ellington was already there , writing out some material . Despite his suggestion the previous day , all of the compositions used were brought by Ellington . For each piece , according to Roach , he and Mingus were given " a lead sheet that just gave the basic melody and harmony " , plus a visual image described by the pianist : one example was , " crawling around on the streets are serpents who have their heads up ; these are agents and people who have exploited artists . Play that along with the music " . The musicians had declined the chance to rehearse , so the recording , which was made on three @-@ track tape , was of their first experience playing together . 
 Money Jungle is a post @-@ bop album . The original LP contained seven tracks – six composed by Ellington , and one , " Caravan " by Juan Tizol , strongly associated with him . The title track is a 12 @-@ bar blues that opens with strongly played notes from Mingus , then Ellington joins in with dissonant chords ; Roach supports using ride cymbal , snare and bass drum . In the final minute , Down Beat magazine observed , Mingus bends the " strings with such force that he makes the instrument sound like a cross between a berimbau and a Delta blues guitar " . " Fleurette Africaine " is a ballad developed from a simple melody stated on the piano , and features " Mingus ' floating bassline and Roach 's understated drumming " . " Very Special " is another 12 @-@ bar blues , possibly improvised . These three compositions , plus " Wig Wise " , with its " angular , descending line " , were written specifically for this album . On " Caravan " , Ellington plays the melody in low octaves , adding " Webern @-@ like notes on the top " , imitating an orchestral sound . " Warm Valley " and " Solitude " are ballads , the latter being a piano solo piece until Mingus and Roach enter in the final minute . 
 The CD releases feature four more compositions : " Switch Blade " , " Backward Country Boy Blues " , " REM Blues " , and " A Little Max ( <unk> ) " . The last of these is a Latin @-@ influenced track that features Roach . " Switch Blade " is " a slow blues that showcases Mingus ' virtuosity with a looseness that puts feeling before precision . [ ... He ] intersperses his basslines with countermelodies and answers to what Duke plays . " According to drummer Terri Lyne Carrington , " Backward Country Boy Blues " was probably given its title because part of the usual blues construction is reversed – the V chord precedes the IV chord . 
 There have been persistent rumors of clashes among the musicians during the session . Douglas ' version is that Mingus complained about Roach 's playing , then left the studio mid @-@ session , taking his bass with him . Ellington caught up with Mingus on the street outside and persuaded him to return . Ellington 's account was slightly different – the reason for Mingus leaving was the same , but he was persuaded to return at the elevator . Another version is that Mingus was upset because Ellington did not use any of Mingus ' compositions for the recording . Duke 's son , Mercer Ellington , stated that the trio had a contract with United Artists for two albums , but they could not be persuaded to record together again . Critic Thomas Cunniffe suggests that , listening to the tracks in the order in which they were recorded , " one can easily hear the tension building during the uptempo numbers " , and that Mingus ' temporary departure probably occurred after playing " Money Jungle " , which " represents the apex of the group 's inner tension , with Mingus plucking the strings with his fingernails , Roach firing up the music with polyrhythms and Ellington laying down highly dissonant chords " . 
 = = Release history = = 
 The original LP was released by United Artists Jazz in 1963 in mono and stereo versions . United Artists was bought by EMI in 1979 , and subsidiary Blue Note Records reissued the album on CD in 1987 . This contained more recordings from the same session : four previously unreleased works written for the session , plus two alternative takes . The order presented in this edition was that in which the songs were recorded . The sound quality of the original recording was improved for the 2002 Blue Note CD release by engineer Ron McMaster , using the original tapes and 24 @-@ bit remastering , adding clarity to the drums in particular . For this release , the first seven songs were arranged in their original order , with the other four songs and four alternative takes placed afterward , increasing the number of tracks to 15 . 
 = = Reception and influence = = 
 = = = Critics = = = 
 Contemporaneous reviews were favorable . The album was awarded the Grand Prix of the Jazz Magazine of France . In a five @-@ star review , Down Beat magazine 's Don <unk> called Money Jungle " astonishing " and described Roach and Mingus as " some of the fastest company around . " He repeatedly praised Mingus for pushing Ellington into new musical territory : " I 've never heard Ellington play as he does on this album ; Mingus and Roach , especially Mingus , push him so strongly that one can almost hear Ellington show them who 's boss – and he dominates both of them , which is no mean accomplishment . " Billboard was also positive , describing it as " memorable " for its content as well as " the historical importance of the three playing together " . 
 Much later reviews have been largely positive . Ken Dryden of Allmusic called it a " sensational recording session " and recommended it to " every jazz fan " . The Penguin Guide to Jazz claimed that Mingus " completely steals the show " , but suggested that the " long @-@ standing Ellington staples " " Caravan " and " Warm Valley " are relatively weak renditions , and that Mingus either did not know the changes or was disgruntled on the latter track . The Financial Times in 2013 described it as " an angular piano @-@ trio masterpiece that [ ... ] confirmed Ellington 's inherent modernism " . Jay Trachtenberg of The Austin Chronicle praised Ellington 's playing and " the modernity of his ideas " , and said that the album " stands , more than ever , as a masterful meeting of jazz royalty . " Writing of the record 's 1986 " remixed and reprogrammed " reissue , Village Voice critic Robert Christgau said " the angular chromaticism and modernist swing of this session relegate most piano @-@ trio records back to the supper clubs . " 
 The sound quality of the original recording has been described as " disappointingly woolly " , with " incidents of <unk> distortion from the piano microphone " . The stereo recording has the piano " up front and center " , with the double bass " far to the right channel " and the drums " Strictly in the left channel and slightly behind the piano " . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Hundreds of musicians have been inspired by the album . Pianist Lafayette Gilchrist states that Money Jungle was the first jazz album that he bought , and that it " sounds like an orchestra being played by a trio . I was inspired to make something [ ... ] big and grandiose just like that " . Drummer Jeff " Tain " Watts observed that the members of the trio were " doing their thing , but they ’ re together " , and compares this with later groups led by Keith Jarrett and Wayne Shorter , stating that the later groups " have a much freer way of doing it , but everybody 's kind of in their own zone and yet they ’ re definitely playing the composition in tune with each other , just like Duke and Max and Mingus were doing on Money Jungle . " Trumpeter Miles Davis had a different view of the session : in a 1964 Down Beat blind listening test , he criticised the record company for putting the three musicians together , saying that " Max and Mingus can play together , by themselves . Mingus is a hell of a bass player , and Max is a hell of a drummer . But Duke can 't play with them , and they can 't play with Duke . " 
 Pianists have been impressed by Ellington 's playing . Fred Hersch believes that it is one of Ellington 's best recordings on piano , as he was forced by the other musicians to improvise in ways beyond what he would normally have played . Matthew Shipp commented on the free elements in the playing , describing the album as " one of the greatest examples of piano playing I 've ever heard " . John Medeski remarked on the forceful , contrapuntal interaction , facilitated by space . 
 In 1999 , the band Rhythm and Brass included Money Jungle tracks on their album More Money Jungle ... Ellington Explorations . Drummer Terri Lyne Carrington led the 2013 release Money Jungle : Provocative in Blue , which includes cover versions of tracks from the original album . Of the compositions premiered on the album , " Fleurette Africaine " and " Wig Wise " are commonly recorded by others . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs composed by Duke Ellington , except where stated . 
 = = = LP ( 1963 – <unk> ) = = = 
 = = = LP reissue ( 1986 – Blue Note ) = = = 
 = = = CD ( 1987 – Blue Note ) = = = 
 Composers are as above . 
 = = = CD ( 2002 – Blue Note ) = = = 
 Composers are as above . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 Duke Ellington – piano 
 Charles Mingus – double bass 
 Max Roach – drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = Sheerness = 
 Sheerness / <unk> / is a town located beside the mouth of the River Medway on the north @-@ west corner of the Isle of Sheppey in north Kent , England . With a population of 13 @,@ 000 it is the largest town on the island . 
 Sheerness began as a fort built in the 16th century to protect the River Medway from naval invasion . In 1665 , plans were first laid by the Navy Board for a Royal Navy dockyard where warships might be provisioned and repaired , a site favoured by Samuel Pepys , then Clerk of the Acts of the navy , for shipbuilding over Chatham . After the raid on the Medway in 1667 , the older fortification was strengthened ; in 1669 a Royal Navy dockyard was established in the town , where warships were stocked and repaired until its closure in 1960 . 
 Beginning with the construction of a pier and a promenade in the 19th century , Sheerness acquired the added attractions of a seaside resort . Industry retains its important place in the town and the Port of Sheerness is one of the United Kingdom 's leading car and fresh produce importers . The town is the site of one of the UK 's first co @-@ operative societies and also of the world 's first multi @-@ storey building with a rigid metal frame . 
 = = History = = 
 The first structure in what is now Sheerness was a fort built by order of Henry VIII to prevent enemy ships from entering the River Medway and attacking the naval dockyard at Chatham . In 1666 work began to replace it with a stronger fort . However , before its completion , this second fort was destroyed during the 1667 Dutch raid on the Medway . The Secretary of the Admiralty , Samuel Pepys , subsequently ordered the construction of a naval dockyard at Sheerness as an extension to that at Chatham , where naval ships would be maintained and repaired . Low quality housing and the poor water supply near the dockyard led to a lack of workers and caused construction delays , and the first dry @-@ dock was not completed until 1708 . Using materials they were allowed to take from the yard , dockyard construction workers built the first houses in Sheerness . The grey @-@ blue naval paint they used on the exteriors led to their homes becoming known as the Blue Houses . This was eventually corrupted to Blue Town , the modern name of the north @-@ west area of Sheerness . 
 Following the Napoleonic Wars , an opportunity was taken to rebuild the Dockyard . The site was leveled in 1815 , and over the next 15 years the new Dockyard was laid out , according to meticulous plans drawn up by John Rennie . A full @-@ scale model created at the time , which still exists , shows how much of the original remains . The principal architects were Edward Holl and his successor George Taylor who was already an established architect with a practice in London and had been responsible for some of London 's most fashionable squares . In all the project cost £ 2 @,@ 586 @,@ 083 and was completed by 1830 , providing fine terraced houses for naval officers . Sheerness was unusual among Dockyards in the unity and clarity of its design , having been built in one phase of construction , of a single architectural style according to a unified plan ( rather than developing piecemeal over time ) . 
 From the completion of the dockyard until 1960 Sheerness was one of the bases of the Nore Command of the Royal Navy , which was responsible for protecting British waters in the North Sea . The command was named after the Nore sandbank in the Thames Estuary , about 3 miles ( 5 km ) east of Sheerness . In 1797 , discontented sailors in the Royal Navy mutinied just off the coast of Sheerness . 
 By 1801 the population of the Minster @-@ in @-@ Sheppey parish , which included both Sheerness and the neighbouring town of Minster , reached 5 @,@ 561 . In 1816 , one of the UK 's first co @-@ operative societies was started in Sheerness , chiefly to serve the dockyard workers and their families . The Sheerness Economical Society began as a co @-@ operative bakery but expanded to produce and sell a range of goods . By the middle of the 20th century , the society had spread across the Isle of Sheppey and had been renamed the Sheerness and District Cooperative Society . 
 In the early 1820s a fire destroyed many buildings at the dockyard , including all the Blue Houses . New houses and a major redevelopment of the dockyard followed . On 5 September 1823 , the rebuilt dockyard was formally opened by the Duke of Clarence ( later William IV ) . A high brick wall and a moat were constructed around the yard to serve as a defence measure and remained in place until the end of the 19th century . As the settlement expanded eastwards , away from the dockyard and the Blue Houses , the wider area became known as Sheerness , taking its new name from the brightness or clearness of the water at the mouth of the River Medway . Completed in 1860 and still standing today , the Sheerness Boat Store was the world 's first multi @-@ storey building with a rigid metal frame . In 1863 , mains water was installed in the town , and the Isle of Sheppey 's first railway station opened at the dockyard . Towards the end of the 19th century , Sheerness achieved official town status and formed its own civil parish , separate from Minster @-@ in @-@ Sheppey . The 1901 Census recorded the Sheerness parish as having 18 @,@ 179 residents and 2 @,@ 999 houses . 
 The town 's low rainfall and ample sunshine made it popular as a seaside resort , with tourists arriving by steamboat and train . The Sheppey Light Railway opened in 1901 , connecting the new Sheerness East station with the rest of the island . However , by 1950 , lack of demand led to the railway 's closure . The Sheerness and District Tramways , which opened in 1903 , only lasted until 1917 . 
 In 1944 the United States cargo ship SS Richard Montgomery ran aground and sank 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) off the coast of Sheerness , with large quantities of explosives on board . Due to the inherent danger and projected expense , the ship and its cargo have never been salvaged ; if the wreck were to explode , it would be one of the largest non @-@ nuclear explosions of all time . A 2004 report published in New Scientist warned that an explosion could occur if sea water penetrated the bombs . 
 In March 1960 the Royal Navy ceased operating the Sheerness dockyard and the Medway Port Authority took over the site for commercial use . The dockyard closure led to thousands of job losses , and most of the nearby houses and shops in the Bluetown area were eventually abandoned and demolished . By the 1961 census , the population of Sheerness had fallen to 13 @,@ 691 . The dockyard closure also led to the decline of the Sheerness and District Cooperative Society , as many of its members were dockyard workers . At the time , the society was the island 's main retailer , but it has since been reduced to a few shops and been merged with a larger society . 
 In 2003 , the Beachfields Park project was organised to publicise Beachfields ' heritage and to preserve it for future generations . Students of Cheyne Middle School and Minster College , with assistance from local organisations , researched the funfair , <unk> , Prisoner of the War hut , boating lake and bowling green . As part of the project , students wrote a book , Tales of Beachfields Park , which won the Historical Association Young Historian Primary School Award for Local History . 
 As of 2007 , Bluetown is an industrial area , and Sheerness has become the largest port in the UK for motor imports . Prior to the closure of the Dockyard , twenty @-@ five of its historic buildings were listed in recognition of their " architectural distinction and value " ; regardless of this , the majority were subsequently demolished ( including Admiralty House and the quadrangular Great Store ) and others were left to decay . In the early 21st century a concerted effort was made to save the remaining buildings and several have now been restored to residential use . In July 2013 Swale Borough Council announced that a deal had been reached to secure restoration of Rennie and Taylor 's Royal Dockyard Church ( which had been gutted by a fire in 2001 ) , with a view to it one day being used , among other things , for displaying the above @-@ mentioned model of the Dockyard . 
 Most notable former residents of Sheerness and Blue Town include Sir Stanley Hooker , inventor of the VTOL engine ; Dr Richard Beeching , <unk> of the British rail network ; Michael Crawford , actor ; Rod Hull , entertainer . 
 = = Mills = = 
 Sheerness has had four windmills . They were the Little Mill , a smock mill that was standing before 1813 and burnt down on 7 February 1862 ; The Hundred Acre Mill , a small tower mill which was last worked in 1872 and demolished in 1878 leaving a base which remains today ; The Great Mill , a smock mill , the building of which was started in 1813 and completed in 1816 , which was demolished in 1924 leaving the base , upon which a replica mill body is being built to serve as flats . On 23 January 2008 a fire started in the mill tower . The fire was declared not to have been a case of arson ; Little is known of the fourth windmill , said to have been a vertical axle windmill designed by Stephen Hooper . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Sheerness is in the parliamentary constituency of Sittingbourne and Sheppey . Since the constituency 's creation in 1997 until 2010 the Member of Parliament was Derek Wyatt of the Labour Party . At the 2010 general election , Gordon Henderson of the Conservative Party won the seat . Before 1997 , Sheppey and Sittingbourne were part of the constituency of Faversham . Sheerness is in the local government district of Swale . The town is split between the two local government wards of Sheerness East and Sheerness West , which have four of the forty @-@ seven seats on the Swale Borough Council . At the 2007 local elections , three of those seats were held by the Labour Party and one by the Sheppey First party . Swale Borough Council is responsible for running local services , such as recreation , refuse collection and council housing ; Kent County Council is responsible for education , social services and trading standards . Both councils are involved in town planning and road maintenance . From 1894 to 1968 , Sheerness formed its own local government district , Sheerness Urban District , and lay within the administrative county of Kent . Over much of the past century , the Labour Party has received the most support in Sheerness , mainly due to the town 's industrial nature . As early as 1919 , the town had four Labour councillors ; Faversham elected its first only in 1948 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sheerness is located at 51 ° 26 ′ 28 ″ N 0 ° 45 ′ 39 ″ E ( 51 @.@ 441 , 0 @.@ <unk> ) , in the north @-@ west corner of the Isle of Sheppey in North Kent . To the north , sandy beaches run along the coast of the Thames Estuary . To the west , the outlet of the River Medway flows into the Estuary . An area of wetlands known as The <unk> lies between the river and the south @-@ western part of town . Marshland lies to the south and the east . The main rock type of the Isle of Sheppey is London Clay , which covers most of North Kent . Along with most of the Kent coast , the uninhabited coastal areas of the island have been designated Sites of Special Scientific Interest , due to their wildlife and geological features . 
 The nearest towns to Sheerness are Minster , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east , and Queenborough , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the south . The villages of Minster @-@ on @-@ Sea and Halfway Houses are 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the south @-@ east , and the village of Grain is 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the west , across the River Medway . 
 The main commercial and leisure areas of the town are located around the north coast , where there is easy access to the pleasure beach . The industrial areas are in the west , beside the wetlands and the River Medway . The Bluetown industrial area and the Port of Sheerness are in the north @-@ western part of the town . The residential districts of Mile Town and Marine Town are in the central and the eastern areas respectively . 
 The mean annual temperature in Sheerness is 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) . The average annual maximum temperature is 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) , and the average annual minimum temperature is 6 ° C ( 43 ° F ) . The warmest time of the year is July and August , when maximum temperatures average 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . The coolest time of the year is January and February , when minimum temperatures average 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . 
 The average annual rainfall in Sheerness is 28 inches ( 711 mm ) . The average annual duration of sunshine is 1 @,@ 700 hours ; the months May to August have the most hours of sunshine . On average , there are fewer than six days of lying snow per year , and 16 days with thunder per year . 
 = = Demography = = 
 At the 2001 UK census , Sheerness had a population of 11 @,@ 654 . The Office for National Statistics estimated the population in mid @-@ 2005 to be 11 @,@ 000 , a decrease of 5 @.@ 6 % since the 2001 census . 
 The population density at the 2001 census was 9 @.@ 8 persons per acre ( 24 @.@ 2 persons per hectare ) and for every 100 females , there were 96 @.@ 4 males . Residents of Sheerness had an average age of 34 @.@ 7 years , younger than the 38 @.@ 2 Swale average . Of all residents , 51 % were single ( never married ) and 24 % married ; in Swale , 42 % were single and 35 % were married . Of the 4 @,@ 870 households , 34 % were one @-@ person households , 15 % were married couples with dependent children , and 11 % were lone parents with dependent children . Of those aged 16 – 74 in Sheerness , 44 % had no academic qualifications , higher than the 34 % in all of Swale . 
 According to the 2001 data , Sheerness has a low proportion of foreign @-@ born residents compared to the rest of England , at 3 % . Ninety @-@ eight percent of residents were recorded as white ; the largest minority group was recorded as Asian , at 1 @.@ 1 % of the population . The 2000s saw a rise in the foreign @-@ born population , with the town now having a significant eastern European population . Data from the 2011 census is not yet available to give specific numbers . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Port of Sheerness is a significant feature of the Isle of Sheppey 's economy . Covering more than 1 @.@ 5 million square metres , it is one of the largest foreign car importers in the UK , and it handles thousands of tonnes of fruits and meat products from all over the world . Inexpensive land and good infrastructure , including a rail network that branches off the main passenger line , have attracted industries to the port area , including producers of pharmaceuticals , steel , sausages and garden gnomes . The major employers are HBC Engineering Solutions , Sheerness Steel , Regis Furniture and The Bond Group - although HBC has closed and the Steel plant is currently closed but may reopen . The steel mill was established in 1972 , designed to recycle scrap steel into rods and coils . It survived a number of closure threats and changes of ownership ; from 2003 it was operated by <unk> . <unk> went into administration in January 2012 , with the loss of 350 jobs . Six months later , the plant was bought back by the former owners Al @-@ <unk> Group . As of October 2014 there are plans to reopen the plant as a rolling mill . The port has a seafarers ' centre , which was refurbished in May 2015 , and is operated by Apostleship of the Sea a seafarers ' charity . 
 The seafront is popular with tourists , and in 2007 Sheerness ' recently refurbished town centre had more than 200 shops . 
 At the 2001 UK census , 35 @.@ 8 % of residents aged 16 – 74 were employed full @-@ time , 11 @.@ 6 % part @-@ time , 5 @.@ 8 % self @-@ employed and 6 @.@ 2 % unemployed , while 1 @.@ 5 % were students with jobs , 3 @.@ 4 % students without jobs , 11 @.@ 9 % retired , 10 @.@ 6 % looking after home or family , 8 @.@ 5 % permanently sick or disabled and 4 @.@ 8 % economically inactive for other reasons . The unemployment rate of 6 @.@ 2 % was high compared to the national rate of 3 @.@ 4 % and was the highest rate throughout the Swale district . Five percent of Sheerness residents aged 16 – 74 had a higher education qualification compared to 20 % nationally . 
 Employment by industry was 22 % manufacturing ; 18 % retail ; 10 % construction ; 10 % transport and communications ; 9 % real estate ; 8 % health and social work ; 6 % public administration ; 5 % education ; 5 % hotels and restaurants ; 1 % finance ; 1 % agriculture ; 1 % energy and water supply ; and 4 % other community , social or personal services . Compared to national figures , Sheerness had a relatively high percentage of workers in manufacturing , transport and communications , and a relatively low percentage in agriculture , hotels , restaurants , education , health , social work and finance . 
 At the 2001 UK census , 4 @,@ 292 of the town 's residents were employed and there were 5 @,@ 532 jobs within the town . According to Office for National Statistics estimates , the average gross weekly income of households in Sheerness from April 2001 to March 2002 was £ 385 ( £ 20 @,@ 075 per year ) . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Sheerness ' sand and shingle beach was awarded a European Blue Flag for cleanliness and safety . Flower gardens decorate the seafront , and a sea wall forms a promenade along the coast . The Sheppey Leisure Complex located near the beach contains a swimming pool and badminton , squash and tennis courts . Other sports clubs include Sheerness Town Bowls Club , Sheerness East Cricket Club , the Isle of Sheppey Sailing Club , Beachfields Skatepark , Sheerness East Table Tennis Club , <unk> Yacht Club , and Sheerness Swimming Club and Lifeguard Corps . Sheerness Golf Club was founded in 1906 , and has an 18 @-@ hole course just to the south @-@ east of town . Sheerness East Football Club , established in 1932 , play in the Kent County League Premier Division . Sports can be played for free at the town 's recreation grounds at Beachfields Park , Festival Playing Field , and Seager Road Sports Ground . The annual arts and heritage Sheerness Promenade Festival opened in September 2011 with appearances by Michael Palin and Dan Cruickshank . It takes place in late July at the Sheppey Little Theatre , the Heritage Centre in Blue Town and various other venues in Sheerness . 
 Sheerness has a library and clubs for photography , music , singing , dancing and writing . The youth club in Meyrick Road , in East Sheerness has been operational for over 50 years and has played a vital role in the development of many young people . 
 Sheerness ' town centre is home to the largest freestanding cast iron clock tower in Kent . It is 36 feet ( 11 m ) tall and was built in 1902 at a cost of around £ 360 to commemorate the coronation of King Edward VII . In 2002 , the clock tower was restored to celebrate the Silver and Golden Jubilees of Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = Media = = 
 The Sheerness Times Guardian is now the only newspaper serving the town and island at large , owned by the KM Group . The Sheppey Gazette recently closed after around 100 years of publication . It was owned by Northcliffe Media . 
 The Island has its own radio station , BRFM 95 @.@ 6 FM is Community Radio Station , which can also be heard online at <unk> that broadcasts 24 hours a day , 7 days a Week from Minster @-@ on @-@ Sea . BRFM in October 2011 was granted a 5 @-@ year extension to its broadcast licence by regulator Ofcom and will remain broadcasting to Swale until 2016 . The station is run by a dedicated team of 20 volunteers . BRFM 95 @.@ 6 plays a wide range of music , with news , weather and local events being broadcast around the clock , the station also provides for specialist music during weekday evenings . 
 In July 2013 the island received some notoriety for an attack on a tour bus of Jewish boys by local youths who shouted epithets , and threw stones and eggs , telling the boys to " go back to where you came from ! " 
 = = Transport = = 
 Sheerness @-@ on @-@ Sea railway station is on the Sheerness Line , run by the Southeastern rail company . The line connects Sheerness with the town of Sittingbourne , 6 miles ( 10 km ) south on the mainland of Kent . Sittingbourne is on the Chatham Main Line , which connects London with Ramsgate and Dover in East Kent . Train journeys from Sheerness @-@ on @-@ Sea to London Victoria take 1 hour 45 minutes . 
 Arriva Southern Counties operate bus routes reaching most of the island , as well as Sittingbourne , Maidstone , and Canterbury Arriva Bus company use several routes , including 334 , 341 , 361 , 360 , 362 , 363 and special day trips to Bluewater Shopping Centre , Hempstead Valley , Pentagon in Chatham , Maidstone Market and Lakeside Shopping Centre . <unk> Coaches also serve Sheerness and the local area , going from Sheerness to Warden Bay via Minster @-@ On @-@ Sheppey . The <unk> road terminates at Sheerness , running from Maidstone via Sittingbourne . The road crosses the M2 motorway near Sittingbourne , and the M20 motorway near Maidstone . 
 Coach Link ( part of The Kings Ferry ) also provide service from Sheerness , Minster , Halfway , Queenborough and part of the mainland to London Victoria Rail Station early in the morning and a return journey in the evening . Three school buses run from the Isle Of Sheppey to Sittingbourne school in the morning and after school finishes . 
 No passenger ferry services currently operate from Sheerness , although <unk> Line used to run a ferry service to Vlissingen in the Netherlands from 1974 until 1994 . 
 = = Education = = 
 Until September 2009 , The Isle of Sheppey was the only area in Kent to still have a middle school system . On the island , primary schools taught pupils from ages 4 – 9 , middle schools from ages 9 – 13 and secondary schools from ages 13 – 18 . Minster College in the neighbouring town of Minster was the only secondary school on the island . Sheerness had one middle school , Isle of <unk> Academy , with 800 pupils , although Danley Middle School and St George 's Middle School were found in Halfway and Minster , respectively . In 2006 , the Cheyne Middle School 's Key Stage 2 performance ranked 322nd out of Kent 's 386 primary and middle schools . The town 's primary schools are Richmond First School , Rose Street Primary School , St Edward 's Roman Catholic Primary School and West Minster Primary School all of which cover ages 4 – 11 . Sheppey College , in Sheerness , is a branch of Canterbury College that provides a range of further education courses . 
 On 1 September 2009 , Cheyne Middle school and Minster College merged to become The Isle of Sheppey Academy ( now Oasis Academy Isle of Sheppey ) . Danley Middle school close and St George 's Middle School changed into a primary school with a £ 3m fund , and Richmond First School now houses an extra year of students . This change was to bring the Island up to date with the rest of the UK with the two @-@ tier system ( Primary school , and then secondary school ) . Respectively , The Isle of Sheppey Academy now ranges from students of year 6 - 11 , as well as housing the Island 's 6th form students . 
 For a while nobody was sure whether or not the plans for the Academy would go ahead , after the news that the current Government was scrapping Labour 's ' Building Schools for the Future ' scheme . For weeks Students , Teachers and Staff and Parents waited to hear whether or not the Academy would be built , and after much pressure on the Government from our local MP Gordon Henderson , it was announced that the Academy would receive the full £ 56 million funding and the go @-@ ahead for all building to take place . Building for the Isle of Sheppey Academy is now expected to start within the first few months of 2011 . Building was then completed in January 2013 . 
 At present there are currently 7 primary schools on the Isle of Sheppey : Queenborough First School ; Richmond Primary School , Rose Street Primary School and Westminster Primary School ( both part of the Sheerness West Federation ) , Minster Primary School , St George 's Primary School and Eastchurch Primary School ( Split over two sites , one in Eastchurch the other in <unk> ) . 
 = Xenogears Original Soundtrack = 
 The Xenogears Original Soundtrack is the official soundtrack to Square 's role @-@ playing video game Xenogears . It was composed by Yasunori Mitsuda and contains 44 tracks , including a Bulgarian choral song and two pieces performed by the Irish singer Joanne Hogg . Though the game was released in both Japan and North America , the album was published in Japan exclusively as a 2 @-@ CD set on March 1 , 1998 . 
 The soundtrack was composed with strong traditional and Irish music influences , while the lyrics for the vocal tracks were written by the game 's director Tetsuya Takahashi and its scenario writer Masato Kato . The soundtrack reached # 55 in Japan and was generally well received by critics , though some disagreed on whether the album can be fully appreciated by non @-@ players . 
 Two arranged versions of the soundtrack , Creid ( 1998 ) and Myth : The Xenogears Orchestral Album ( 2011 ) , were also released by Mitsuda . The composer , along with Joanne Hogg , reprised their roles for the soundtrack to Xenogears 's spiritual prequel Xenosaga Episode I : Der Wille zur Macht in 2002 . Tribute albums were also produced by fans . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Context = = = 
 Xenogears entered development in 1996 and was released in 1998 . The game 's soundtrack was Yasunori Mitsuda 's first major solo work , as his previous soundtracks were collaborations with other composers with the exception of the score to Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki , which never saw an album release . Mitsuda worked closely with Masato Kato , the event planner and script writer of Xenogears , to compose the score . Mitsuda considered it hard at times to maintain his motivation throughout the whole two @-@ year period , especially since he had to wait for the end to see the most dramatic tracks implemented . The game 's director Tetsuya Takahashi did not initially think " music was all that important " compared to graphics , but eventually acknowledged its importance when he realized it could strongly enhance the expressivity of the images . Takahashi explained that without Mitsuda 's music , he would not have been able to achieve his goals for the project . 
 The development team wanted to have a Western singer contribute to the score . Mitsuda initially had difficulties finding an artist that matched his vision , but eventually chose Joanne Hogg from the Celtic band Iona after stumbling upon their album The Book of Kells in a CD store and listening to the song " Chi @-@ Rho " . Hogg was enthusiastic in contributing as it was her first video game @-@ related recording . She did not play the game for the project , however . Irish music was not well known in Japan at the time , but Mitsuda felt that a " Celtic boom " was about to hit the country . His prediction would later turn true with the popularity of the American film Titanic and the Irish <unk> show Riverdance . 
 " Stars of Tears " , one of the songs included on the soundtrack album , did not appear in the final version of the game . It was originally intended to play in a cut scene at the start of the game along with the main staff credits . The scene , however , was removed for pacing issues , as it would have made the combined opening movie and introduction scenes last roughly ten minutes . Another song on the soundtrack , " Small Two of Pieces ~ Screeching Shards ~ " , was the first ending theme with sung lyrics to ever appear in a game developed by Square . 
 = = = Composition and writing = = = 
 The score contains 41 instrumental tracks , in addition to a choral track and two songs . According to Mitsuda , the music of Xenogears belongs to the traditional music genre . Though he first described it as stemming from " a world of [ his ] own imagining " rather than any specific country , he has also claimed a strong Irish or Celtic music influence . Mitsuda felt that composing for the game was very difficult due to the unfamiliarity of most Japanese with foreign <unk> , but expressed his wish for listeners of the soundtrack to open up to music from all over the world . His musical approach was to insert Celtic influences into " easy @-@ to @-@ listen @-@ to " pop tracks , rather than making either " dense " Celtic music or simple background music . Other influences on the soundtrack include Arabic music on the desert town theme " <unk> , Town of <unk> Sands " , and religious music , in keeping with the game 's storyline . Mitsuda explained that he wanted music that " felt religious , but from a different angle " . 
 The opening movie of the game was produced before the corresponding track " Dark Dawn " was , and Mitsuda had to rearrange his composition after realizing some parts were out of synch with the frames by about a minute and a half . The choral track , titled " The Beginning and the End " , was performed by a 41 @-@ voice choir named The Great Voices of Bulgaria and features lyrics written by Tetsuya Takahashi . His lyrics were translated from Japanese to English then to Bulgarian for the recording . Joanne Hogg sang in English on " Stars of Tears " and " Small Two of Pieces ~ Screeching Shards ~ " . The latter took Mitsuda " an awfully long amount of time " just to compose the demo version . Masato Kato wrote the original lyrics for the two songs , and Hogg arranged them so that they would fit the melodies better and sound more Celtic . As with most of his previous soundtracks , Mitsuda composed a musical box arrangement of one of the main themes ; in Xenogears ' case , the track " Distant Promise " is the musical box version of " Small Two of Pieces " . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The instrumental tracks of the score were programmed with the PlayStation sound module in Tokyo , Japan , while " The Beginning and the End " was recorded live in Sofia , Bulgaria . Hogg 's songs were recorded in two days in Dublin , Ireland in 1996 ; they featured the Riverdance musician Davy Spillane on low whistle . When Titanic premiered in November 1997 , Mitsuda noticed coincidental similarities between the film 's ending song , Celine Dion 's " My Heart Will Go On " , and the Irish @-@ themed music he was composing for Xenogears . He felt irritated and devoted himself to complete the soundtrack 's recording before Titanic came out . 
 As with some of his previous soundtracks , Mitsuda would stay in the Japanese studio for long amounts of time and regularly fall asleep from overwork , while some melodies would first come to him in his dreams , such as that of " Ties of Sea and Flames " . The composer collapsed during the soundtrack mastering process due to exhaustion , and had to be taken to the hospital by ambulance . The score involved in total nearly a hundred people . At one point , the music staff considered adding sound effects and voice narrations into the soundtrack album , but the idea was scrapped in favour of normal renditions of the game 's music . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The album reached # 55 on the Japan Oricon charts . Soundtrack Central felt that Mitsuda " created a masterpiece in Xenogears " , while RPGFan thought it was " most certainly his greatest achievement " . On the other hand , one reviewer on Square Enix Music Online ( unrelated to Square Enix ) felt it did not represent Mitsuda 's best album , saying that " what was an amazing soundtrack in its day ... has [ not ] stood the test of time very well . " Reviewers disagreed whether the album could only be enjoyed by Xenogears players , or if it could be appreciated by a wider audience . 
 Several reviewers noted the diversity of styles present in the score . Soundtrack Central thought it was a " superb mix of epic adventure and traditional themes " , while Square Enix Music Online appreciated the melding of futuristic , ethnic and religious themes , feeling that the recurring chanting sound effects made everything sound coherent . Critics also noticed similarities between some melodies and Mitsuda 's previous work Chrono Trigger , though reviewers felt that those of Xenogears were more " widely based " and had a distinctive Celtic sound . The reviewers also praised the sound system used for the instrumental tracks as being up to the highest standard for the PlayStation console . 
 The emotional tracks were considered the strongest part of the score , and were praised for their ability to musically reflect the various locales and characters seen in the game . The opening track " Dark Dawn " was similarly lauded for showcasing all the influences of the soundtrack in a single composition . The battle themes were described as a weaker area and were called either effective or repetitive , with Square Enix Music Online noting that " Mitsuda has never been very good at composing interesting battle tracks " . The final boss theme " The One Who <unk> Fangs at God " received the most diverse comments , ranging from praises to criticism , due to its reliance on synth choral sound effects rather than a clear melody . The ending song " Small Two of Pieces " was received positively and , as Mitsuda predicted , compared to " My Heart Will Go On " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 While in Ireland , Mitsuda also worked with Spillane and Maire Breatnach , another musician from Riverdance , to record an arranged album of Xenogears . Titled Creid and released in April 1998 , the arranged album features 10 instrumental and vocal tracks from the soundtrack arranged in a more dominant Celtic style . " Stars of Tears " and " Small Two of Pieces " appear on the album as " Two Wings " and " Möbius " respectively , and are sung in Japanese by Tetsuko " Techie " Honma . A second arranged album , titled Myth : The Xenogears Orchestral Album , was released on February 23 , 2011 . The original soundtrack versions of " Stars of Tears " and " Small Two of Pieces " were featured on the 2001 compilation Square Vocal Collection , and again in 2009 on the compilation Colours of Light . The Xenogears soundtrack remains one of Mitsuda 's favourite projects , and one of the works that he continues to feel a " special connection " to . 
 In 2002 , Mitsuda composed the score to Monolith Soft 's Xenosaga Episode I : Der Wille zur Macht , the spiritual prequel to Xenogears , also directed by Tetsuya Takahashi . Joanne Hogg returned to sing the soundtrack 's vocal themes , while the instrumental tracks were performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra . Monolith Soft did not ask Mitsuda and Hogg to reprise their roles for Episode II and Episode III , however . 
 A tribute album titled Xenogears Light : An Arranged Album , was published in limited quantities by the fan group OneUp Studios in 2005 . The album features 20 tracks arranged from the Xenogears score and performed with acoustic instruments , such as piano , flute , guitar and violin . Another , unofficial album of remixes titled Humans + Gears was produced as a digital album by OverClocked Remix on October 19 , 2009 consisting of 33 tracks on two " discs " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Disc one = = = 
 = = = Disc two = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information is taken from the Xenogears ending credits and the independent site Square Enix Music Online . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Flag of Indiana = 
 The flag of Indiana was designed by Paul Hadley and officially adopted by the state of Indiana on May 31 , 1917 . It was the state 's first official flag and has remained unchanged since then except for the creation of a statute to standardize the production of the flag . 
 = = History = = 
 To commemorate the state ’ s 1916 centennial anniversary , the Indiana General Assembly issued a resolution to adopt a state flag . At the request of the General Assembly , a contest was sponsored by the Indiana Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution to design a flag to serve as the official state banner . As an incentive to increase the number of submissions , the contest offered the winner a one hundred dollar cash prize . More than two hundred submissions were received and examined by the Society before a winner was selected . The entry created by Paul Hadley of Mooresville , Indiana , was ultimately chosen as the winner of the contest and the cash prize . 
 On May 31 , 1917 , the flag was chosen as the state 's official banner . The General Assembly made only one change to Hadley 's original design : they added the word Indiana , in a crescent shape , over the top of the torch . The state banner was later renamed the state 's flag in a new statute passed in 1955 that also standardized the dimensions of the flag . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The flag consists of a gold torch that represents liberty and enlightenment ; the rays around the torch represent their far @-@ reaching influence . The nineteen stars represent Indiana 's place as the nineteenth state to join the United States . The thirteen stars in the outer loop symbolize the original Thirteen Colonies , the five inner stars represent the next five states added to the Union , and the one large star above the torch represents Indiana . 
 In 2001 , a survey conducted by the North American Vexillological Association ( <unk> ) placed Indiana 's flag 32nd in design quality out of the 72 Canadian provincial , U.S. state and U.S. territorial flags ranked . 
 = = Statute = = 
 The current statute that governs the design of the state flag states : 
 The flag 's dimensions shall be three feet fly by two feet hoist ; or five feet fly by three feet hoist ; or any size proportionate to either of those dimensions . The field of the flag shall be blue with nineteen stars and a flaming torch in gold or buff . Thirteen stars shall be arranged in an outer circle , representing the original thirteen states ; five stars shall be arranged in a half circle below the torch and inside the outer circle of stars , representing the states admitted prior to Indiana ; and the nineteenth star , appreciably larger than the others and representing Indiana shall be placed above the flame of the torch . The outer circle of stars shall be so arranged that one star shall appear directly in the middle at the top of the circle , and the word " Indiana " shall be placed in a half circle over and above the star representing Indiana and midway between it and the star in the center above it . Rays shall be shown radiating from the torch to the three stars on each side of the star in the upper center of the circle . 
 = = Usage = = 
 Several other laws govern the use of the state flag . The flag is required to be flown by all state militias and the Indiana National Guard . It is to be on display at the Indiana Statehouse at all times . The flag must also be displayed at any agency that is funded in part or in full by the state government , including public schools , state universities , and state parks . In all other respects the flag should be treated with the same care and respect as the flag of the United States . 
 In late 2008 , Tribune Media station <unk> in Indianapolis began to use the flag 's design as part of their station 's logo until acquiring CBS affiliation in January 2015 . 
 A variation of the Indiana state flag was used as the Gotham flag in the 1989 movie Batman . The flag can be seen in the mayor 's office . 
 The logo of the BP @-@ acquired Amoco Corporation ( formerly Standard Oil of Indiana ) prominently features a torch to commemorate the company 's Indiana origins ; it remains in use at the few BP stations using Amoco and Standard trade dress to maintain trademark protection . 
 = Junkers Ju 87 = 
 The Junkers Ju 87 or Stuka ( from <unk> , " dive bomber " ) was a German dive bomber and ground @-@ attack aircraft designed by Hermann Pohlmann and first flew in 1935 . The Ju 87 made its combat debut in 1937 with the Luftwaffe 's Condor Legion during the Spanish Civil War . It served the Axis forces in World War II . 
 The aircraft was easily recognisable by its inverted gull wings and fixed spatted undercarriage . Upon the leading edges of its faired main gear legs were mounted the Jericho @-@ <unk> ( " Jericho trumpet " ) wailing sirens , becoming the propaganda symbol of German air power and the blitzkrieg victories of 1939 – 1942 . The Stuka 's design included several innovative features , including automatic pull @-@ up dive brakes under both wings to ensure that the aircraft recovered from its attack dive even if the pilot blacked out from the high g @-@ forces . 
 The Ju 87 operated with considerable success in the close air support and anti @-@ shipping at the outbreak of World War II . It spearheaded the air assaults in the Invasion of Poland in September 1939 and the Norwegian Campaign the following year . In May 1940 the Ju 87s were crucial in the rapid conquest of the Netherlands , Belgium and France against all targets . Although sturdy , accurate , and very effective against ground targets , the Ju 87 , like many other dive bombers of the war , was vulnerable to modern fighter aircraft . During the Battle of Britain a lack of manoeuvrability , speed and defensive armament meant that the Stuka required a heavy fighter escort to operate effectively . 
 The Stuka operated with further success after the Battle of Britain , and its potency as a precision ground @-@ attack aircraft became valuable to German forces in the Balkans Campaign , the African and Mediterranean theaters and the early stages of the Eastern Front where it was used for general ground support , but also in the anti @-@ shipping role and as an effective specialised anti @-@ tank aircraft . 
 Once the Luftwaffe lost air superiority , on all fronts , the Ju 87 again became an easy target for enemy fighter aircraft . Despite these developments , because there was no better replacement , the type continued to be produced until 1944 . By the end of the conflict , the Stuka had been largely replaced by ground @-@ attack versions of the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 , but was still in use until the last days of the war . An estimated 6 @,@ 500 Ju 87s of all versions were built between 1936 and August 1944 . 
 Some notable airmen flew the Ju 87 . Oberst Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel was the most successful Stuka ace and the most highly decorated German serviceman of the Second World War . The vast majority of German ground attack aces flew this aircraft at some point in their careers . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Early design = = = 
 The Ju 87 's principal designer , Hermann Pohlmann , held the opinion that any dive @-@ bomber design needed to be simple and robust . This led to many technical innovations , such as the retractable undercarriage being discarded in favour of one of the Stuka 's distinctive features , its fixed and " spatted " undercarriage . Pohlmann continued to carry on developing and adding to his ideas and those of <unk> Ing Karl Plauth ( Plauth was killed in a flying accident in November 1927 ) , and produced the Ju A 48 which underwent testing on 29 September 1928 . The military version of the Ju A 48 was designated the Ju K 47 . 
 After the Nazis came to power , the design was given priority . Despite initial competition from the Henschel Hs 123 , the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( RLM , the German aviation ministry ) turned to the designs of Herman Pohlmann of Junkers and co @-@ designer of the K 47 , Karl Plauth . During the trials with the K 47 in 1932 , the double vertical stabilisers were introduced to give the rear gunner a better field of fire . The main , and what was to be the most distinctive , feature of the Ju 87 was its double @-@ spar inverted gull wings . After Plauth 's death , Pohlmann continued the development of the Junkers dive bomber . The Ju A 48 registration D @-@ <unk> , was originally fitted with a BMW 132 engine , producing some 450 kW ( 600 hp ) . The machine was also fitted with dive brakes for dive testing . The aircraft was given a good evaluation and " exhibited very good flying characteristics " . 
 Ernst Udet took an immediate liking to the concept of dive @-@ bombing after flying the Curtiss Hawk II . When he invited Walther Wever and Robert Ritter von Greim to watch Udet perform a trial flight in May 1934 at the Jüterbog artillery range , it raised doubts about the capability of the dive bomber . Udet began his dive at 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) and released his 1 kg ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) bombs at 100 m ( 330 ft ) , barely recovering and pulling out of the dive . The chief of the Luftwaffe Command Office , Walther Wever , and Secretary of State for Aviation Erhard Milch , feared that such high @-@ level nerves and skill could not be expected of " average pilots " in the Luftwaffe . Nevertheless , development continued at Junkers . Udet 's " growing love affair " with the dive bomber pushed it to the forefront of German aviation development . Udet went so far as to advocate that all medium bombers have dive @-@ bombing capabilities , which initially doomed the only dedicated , strategic heavy bomber design to enter German front @-@ line service during the war years — the 30 meter wingspan He <unk> — into having an airframe design ( due to Udet examining its design details in November 1937 ) that could perform " medium angle " <unk> missions , until Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring exempted the He <unk> , Germany 's only operational heavy bomber , in September 1942 from being tasked with such a mismatched mission profile for its 30 @-@ meter wingspan airframe . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The design of the Ju 87 had begun in 1933 as part of the <unk> @-@ <unk> . The Ju 87 was to be powered by the British Rolls @-@ Royce Kestrel engine . Ten engines were ordered by Junkers on 19 April 1934 for £ 20 @,@ 514 , two shillings and sixpence . The first Ju 87 prototype was built by AB <unk> in Sweden and secretly brought to Germany in late 1934 . It was to have been completed in April 1935 , but , due to the inadequate strength of the airframe , construction was not completed until October 1935 . However , the mostly complete Ju 87 V1 <unk> 4921 ( less non @-@ essential parts ) took off for its maiden flight on 17 September 1935 . The aircraft originally did not carry any registration , but later was given the registration D @-@ <unk> . The flight report , by Hauptmann Willy <unk> , stated the only problem was with the small radiator , which caused the power plant to overheat . 
 The Ju 87 V1 , powered by a Rolls @-@ Royce Kestrel V12 cylinder liquid @-@ cooled engine , and with a twin tail , crashed on 24 January 1936 at <unk> near Dresden , killing Junkers ' chief test pilot , Willy <unk> , and his engineer , Heinrich <unk> . The square twin fins and rudders proved too weak ; they collapsed and the aircraft crashed after it entered an inverted spin during the testing of the terminal dynamic pressure in a dive . The crash prompted a change to a single vertical stabiliser tail design . To withstand strong forces during a dive , heavy plating was fitted , along with brackets riveted to the frame and <unk> , to the fuselage . Other early additions included the installation of hydraulic dive brakes that were fitted under the leading edge and could rotate 90 ° . 
 The RLM was still not interested in the Ju 87 and was not impressed that it relied on a British engine . In late 1935 , Junkers suggested fitting a DB 600 in @-@ line engine , with the final variant to be equipped with the Jumo 210 . This was accepted by the RLM as an interim solution . The reworking of the design began on 1 January 1936 . The test flight could not be carried out for over two months due to a lack of adequate aircraft . The 24 January crash had already destroyed one machine . 
 The second prototype was also beset by design problems . It had its twin stabilizers removed and a single tail fin installed due to fears over stability . Due to a shortage of power plants , instead of a DB 600 , a BMW " Hornet " engine was fitted . All these delays set back testing until 25 February 1936 . By March 1936 , the second prototype , the V2 , was finally fitted with the Jumo <unk> power plant , which a year later was replaced by a Jumo 210 G ( W.Nr. <unk> ) . Although the testing went well , and the pilot , Flight Captain <unk> , praised its performance , Wolfram von Richthofen told the Junkers representative and Construction Office chief engineer Ernst <unk> that the Ju 87 stood little chance of becoming the Luftwaffe 's main dive bomber , as it was underpowered in his opinion . On 9 June 1936 , the RLM ordered cessation of development in favour of the Heinkel He 118 , a rival design . Udet cancelled the order the next day , and development continued . 
 On 27 July 1936 , Udet crashed the He 118 prototype , He 118 V1 D @-@ <unk> . That same day , Charles Lindbergh was visiting Ernst Heinkel , so Heinkel could only communicate with Udet by telephone . According to this version of the story , Heinkel warned Udet about the propeller 's fragility . Udet failed to consider this , so in a dive , the engine <unk> and the propeller broke away . Immediately after this incident , Udet announced the Stuka the winner of the development contest . 
 = = = <unk> the design = = = 
 Despite being chosen , the design was still lacking and drew frequent criticism from Wolfram von Richthofen . Testing of the V4 prototype ( A Ju 87 A @-@ 0 ) in early 1937 revealed several problems . The Ju 87 could take off in just 250 m ( 820 ft ) and climb to 1 @,@ 875 m ( 6 @,@ 152 ft ) in just eight minutes with a 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bomb load , and its cruising speed was 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) . However , Richthofen pushed for a more powerful engine . According to the test pilots , the Heinkel He 50 had a better acceleration rate , and could climb away from the target area much more quickly , avoiding enemy ground and air defences . Richthofen stated that any maximum speed below 350 km / h ( 220 mph ) was unacceptable for those reasons . Pilots also complained that navigation and powerplant instruments were mixed together , and were not easy to read , especially in combat . Despite this , pilots praised the aircraft 's handling qualities and strong airframe . 
 These problems were to be resolved by installing the Daimler @-@ Benz DB 600 engine , but delays in development forced the installation of the Jumo 210 Da in @-@ line engine . Flight testing began on 14 August 1936 . Subsequent testing and progress fell short of Richthofen 's hopes , although the machine 's speed was increased to 280 km / h ( 170 mph ) at ground level and 290 km / h ( 180 mph ) at 1 @,@ 250 m ( 4 @,@ 100 ft ) , while maintaining its good handling ability . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Basic design ( based on the B series ) = = = 
 The Ju 87 was a single @-@ engined all @-@ metal cantilever monoplane . It had a fixed undercarriage and could carry a two @-@ person crew . The main construction material was duralumin , and the external coverings were made of Duralumin sheeting . Parts that were required to be of strong construction , such as the wing flaps , were made of <unk> ( a German aluminum alloy containing titanium as a hardening element ) and its components made of Elektron . Bolts and parts that were required to take heavy stress were made of steel . 
 The Ju 87 was fitted with detachable hatches and removable coverings to aid and ease maintenance and overhaul . The designers avoided welding parts wherever possible , preferring moulded and cast parts instead . Large airframe segments were interchangeable as a complete unit , which increased speed of repair . 
 The airframe was also subdivided into sections to allow transport by road or rail . The wings were of standard Junkers double @-@ wing construction . This gave the Ju 87 considerable advantage on take @-@ off ; even at a shallow angle , large lift forces were created through the aerofoil , reducing take @-@ off and landing runs . 
 In accordance with the Aircraft Certification Center for " Stress Group 5 " , the Ju 87 had reached the acceptable structural strength requirements for a dive bomber . It was able to withstand diving speeds of 600 km / h ( 370 mph ) and a maximum level speed of 340 km / h ( 210 mph ) near ground level , and a flying weight of 4 @,@ 300 kg ( 9 @,@ 500 lb ) . Performance in the diving attack was enhanced by the introduction of dive brakes under each wing , which allowed the Ju 87 to maintain a constant speed and allow the pilot to steady his aim . It also prevented the crew from suffering extreme g forces and high acceleration during " pull @-@ out " from the dive . 
 The fuselage had an oval cross @-@ section and housed a water @-@ cooled inverted V @-@ 12 engine . The cockpit was protected from the engine by a firewall ahead of the wing center section where the fuel tanks were located . At the rear of the cockpit , the bulkhead was covered by a canvas cover which could be breached by the crew in an emergency , enabling them to escape into the main fuselage . The canopy was split into two sections and joined by a strong welded steel frame . The canopy itself was made of Plexiglas and each compartment had its own " sliding hood " for the two crew members . 
 The engine was mounted on two main support frames that were supported by two tubular struts . The frame structure was triangulated and emanated from the fuselage . The main frames were bolted onto the power plant in its top quarter . In turn , the frames were attached to the firewall by universal joints . The firewall itself was constructed from asbestos mesh with dural sheets on both sides . All conduits passing through had to be arranged so that no harmful gases could penetrate the cockpit . 
 The fuel system comprised two fuel tanks between the main ( forward ) and rear spars of the ( inner ) anhedral wing section of the port and starboard wings , each with 240 @-@ litre ( 63 US gal ) capacity . The tanks also had a predetermined limit which , if passed , would warn the pilot via a red warning light in the cockpit . The fuel was injected via a pump from the tanks to the power plant . Should this shut down , it could be pumped manually using a hand @-@ pump on the fuel cock Armature . The powerplant was cooled by a 10 @-@ litre ( 2 @.@ 6 US gal ) , ring @-@ shaped aluminium water container situated between the propeller and engine . A further container of 20 @-@ litre ( 5 @.@ 3 US gal ) was positioned under the engine . 
 The control surfaces operated in much the same way as other aircraft , with the exception of the innovative automatic pull @-@ out system . Releasing the bomb initiated the pull @-@ out , or automatic recovery and climb , upon the deflection of the dive brakes . The pilot could override the system by exerting significant force on the control column and taking manual control . 
 The wing was the most unusual feature . It consisted of a single center section and two outer sections installed using four universal joints . The center section had a large negative dihedral ( anhedral ) and the outer surfaces a positive dihedral . This created the inverted gull , or " cranked " , wing pattern along the Ju 87 's leading edge . The shape of the wing improved the pilot 's ground visibility and also allowed a shorter undercarriage height . The center section protruded by only 3 m ( 9 ft 10 in ) on either side . 
 The offensive armament was two 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 17 machine guns fitted one in each wing outboard of undercarriage , operated by a mechanical pneumatics system from the pilot 's control column . The rear gunner / radio operator operated one 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 15 machine gun for defensive purposes . 
 The engine and propeller had automatic controls , and an auto @-@ trimmer made the aircraft tail @-@ heavy as the pilot rolled over into his dive , lining up red lines at 60 ° , 75 ° or 80 ° on the cockpit side window with the horizon and aiming at the target with the sight of the fixed gun . The heavy bomb was swung down clear of the propeller on crutches prior to release . 
 = = = Diving procedure = = = 
 Flying at 4 @,@ 600 m ( 15 @,@ 100 ft ) , the pilot located his target through a bombsight window in the cockpit floor . The pilot moved the dive lever to the rear , limiting the " throw " of the control column . The dive brakes were activated automatically , the pilot set the trim tabs , retarded his throttle and closed the coolant flaps . The aircraft then rolled 180 ° , automatically nosing the aircraft into a dive . Red tabs protruded from the upper surfaces of the wing as a visual indicator to the pilot that , in case of a g @-@ induced black @-@ out , the automatic dive recovery system would be activated . The Stuka dived at a 60 @-@ 90 ° angle , holding a constant speed of 500 – 600 km / h ( 350 @-@ 370 mph ) due to dive @-@ brake deployment , which increased the accuracy of the Ju 87 's aim . 
 When the aircraft was reasonably close to the target , a light on the contact altimeter came on to indicate the bomb @-@ release point , usually at a minimum height of 450 m ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) . The pilot released the bomb and initiated the automatic pull @-@ out mechanism by depressing a knob on the control column . An elongated U @-@ shaped crutch located under the fuselage swung the bomb out of the way of the propeller , and the aircraft automatically began a 6 g pullout . Once the nose was above the horizon , dive brakes were retracted , the throttle was opened , and the propeller was set to climb . The pilot regained control and resumed normal flight . The coolant flaps had to be reopened quickly to prevent overheating . The automatic pull @-@ out was not liked by all pilots . Helmut <unk> later said that he and his unit disconnected the system because it allowed the enemy to predict the Ju 87 's recovery pattern and height , making it easier for ground defences to hit an aircraft . 
 Physical stress on the crew was severe . Human beings subjected to more than 5 g forces in a seated position will suffer vision impairment in the form of a grey veil known to Stuka pilots as " seeing stars " . They lose vision while remaining conscious ; after five seconds , they black out . The Ju 87 pilots experienced the visual impairments most during " pull @-@ up " from a dive . 
 Eric " Winkle " Brown RN , a British test pilot and Commanding Officer of Captured Enemy Aircraft Flight section , tested the Ju 87 at RAE Farnborough . He said of the Stuka , " I had flown a lot of dive @-@ bombers and it ’ s the only one that you can dive truly vertically . Sometimes with the dive @-@ bombers ... maximum dive is usually in the order of 60 degrees .. When flying the Stuka , because it ’ s all automatic , you are really flying vertically ... The Stuka was in a class of its own . " 
 = = = G @-@ force test at Dessau = = = 
 Extensive tests were carried out by the Junkers works at their Dessau plant . It was discovered that the highest load a pilot could endure was 8 @.@ 5 g for three seconds , when the aircraft was pushed to its limit by the centrifugal forces . At less than 4 g , no visual problems or loss of consciousness were experienced . Above 6 g , 50 % of pilots suffered visual problems , or " grey " out . With 40 % , vision vanished altogether from 7 @.@ 5 g upwards and black @-@ out sometimes occurred . Despite this blindness , the pilot could maintain consciousness and was capable of " bodily reactions " . However , after more than three seconds , half the subjects passed out . The pilot would regain consciousness two or three seconds after the centrifugal forces had dropped below 3 g and had lasted no longer than three seconds . In a crouched position , pilots could withstand 7 @.@ 5 g and were able to remain functional for a short duration . In this position , Junkers concluded that ⅔ of pilots could withstand 8 g and perhaps 9 g for three to five seconds without vision defects which , under war conditions , was acceptable . During tests with the Ju 87 A @-@ 2 , new technologies were tried out to reduce the effects of g forces . The pressurised cabin was of great importance during this research . Testing revealed that at high altitude , even 2 g could cause death in an unpressurised cabin and without appropriate clothing . This new technology , along with special clothing and oxygen masks , was researched and tested . When the United States Army occupied the Junkers factory at Dessau on 21 April 1945 , they were both impressed at and interested in the medical flight tests with the Ju 87 . 
 = = = Other designs = = = 
 The concept of dive bombing became so popular among the leadership of the Luftwaffe that it became almost obligatory in new aircraft designs . Later bomber models like the Junkers Ju 88 and the Dornier Do 217 were equipped for dive bombing . The Heinkel He 177 strategic bomber was initially supposed to have dive bombing capabilities , a requirement that contributed to the failure of the design , with the requirement not rescinded until September 1942 by Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring . 
 Once the Stuka became too vulnerable to fighter opposition on all fronts , work was done to develop a replacement . None of the dedicated close @-@ support designs on the drawing board progressed far due to the impact of the war and technological difficulties . So the Luftwaffe settled on the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 fighter aircraft , with the Fw 190F becoming the ground @-@ attack version . The Fw 190F started to replace the Ju 87 for day missions in 1943 , but the Ju 87 continued to be used as a night nuisance @-@ raider until the end of the war . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Ju 87A = = = 
 The second prototype had a redesigned single vertical stabiliser and a 610 PS ( 449 kW or 602 hp ) Junkers Jumo 210 A engine installed , and later the Jumo 210 Da . The first A series variant , the A @-@ 0 , was of all @-@ metal construction , with an enclosed cockpit under a " greenhouse " well @-@ framed canopy ; bearing twin radio masts on its aft sections , diagonally mounted to either side of the airframe 's planform centreline and unique to the -A version . To ease the difficulty of mass production , the leading edge of the wing was straightened out and the ailerons ' two aerofoil sections had smooth leading and trailing edges . The pilot could adjust the elevator and rudder trim tabs in flight , and the tail was connected to the landing flaps , which were positioned in two parts between the ailerons and fuselage . The A @-@ 0 also had a flatter engine cowling , which gave the pilot a much better field of vision . In order for the engine cowling to be flattened , the engine was set down nearly 0 @.@ 25 m ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) . The fuselage was also lowered along with the gunner 's position , allowing the gunner a better field of fire . 
 The RLM ordered seven A @-@ 0s initially , but then increased the order to 11 . Early in 1937 , the A @-@ 0 was tested with varied bomb loads . The underpowered Jumo <unk> , as pointed out by von Richthofen , was insufficient , and was quickly replaced with the Jumo 210D power plant . 
 The A @-@ 1 differed from the A @-@ 0 only slightly . As well as the installation of the Jumo 210D , the A @-@ 1 had two 220 L ( 60 US gal ) fuel tanks built into the inner wing , but it was not armoured or protected . The A @-@ 1 was also intended to be fitted with a quartet of 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 17 machine guns in its wings , but two of these - one per side - were omitted due to weight concerns ; the pair that remained were fed a total of 500 rounds of ammunition , stored in the design 's characteristic transverse strut @-@ braced , large @-@ planform undercarriage " trousers " , not used on the Ju 87B versions and onward . The pilot relied on the Revi C 21C gun sight for the two MG 17s . The gunner had only a single 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 ) MG 15 , with 14 drums of ammunition , each containing 75 rounds . This represented a 150 @-@ round increase in this area over the Ju 87 A @-@ 0 . The A @-@ 1 was also fitted with a larger 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) propeller . 
 The Ju 87 was capable of carrying a 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb , but only if not carrying the rear gunner / radio operator as , even with the Jumo 210D power plant , the Ju 87 was still underpowered for operations with more than a 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bomb load . All Ju 87 As were restricted to 250 kg ( 550 lb ) weapons ( although during the Spanish Civil War missions were conducted without the gunner ) . 
 The Ju 87 A @-@ 2 was retrofitted with the Jumo <unk> fitted with a two @-@ stage supercharger . The only further significant difference between the A @-@ 1 and A @-@ 2 was the H @-@ PA @-@ III controllable @-@ pitch propeller . By mid @-@ 1938 , 262 Ju 87 As had been produced , 192 from the Junkers factory in Dessau , and a further 70 from Weser Flugzeugbau ( " Weserflug " - WFG ) in Lemwerder near Bremen . The new , more powerful , Ju 87B model started to replace the Ju 87A at this time . 
 Prototypes 
 Ju 87 V1 : W.Nr 4921 . Flown on 17 September 1935 
 Ju 87 V2 : W.Nr <unk> , registration D @-@ <unk> . Flown on 25 February 1936 . Flown again as registration D @-@ <unk> on 4 June 1937 
 Ju 87 V3 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 27 March 1936 
 Ju 87 V4 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 20 June 1936 
 Ju 87 V5 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 14 August 1936 
 Production variants 
 Ju 87 A @-@ 0 : Ten pre @-@ production aircraft , powered by a 640 PS ( 471 kW or 632 hp ) Jumo <unk> engine . 
 Ju 87 A @-@ 1 : Initial production version . 
 Ju 87 A @-@ 2 : Production version fitted with an improved 680 PS ( 500 kW or 670 hp ) Jumo <unk> engine . 
 = = = Ju 87B = = = 
 The Ju 87 B series was to be the first mass @-@ produced variant . A total of six pre @-@ production Ju 87 B @-@ 0 were produced , built from Ju 87 An airframes . The first production version was the Ju 87 B @-@ 1 , with a considerably larger engine , its Junkers Jumo 211D generating 1 @,@ 200 PS ( 883 kW or 1 @,@ 184 hp ) , and completely redesigned fuselage and landing gear , replacing the twin radio masts of the " A " version with a single mast mounted further forward on the " greenhouse " canopy , and much simpler , lighter @-@ weight wheel " spats " used from the -B version onwards , discarding the transverse strut bracing of the " A " version 's <unk> design . This new design was again tested in Spain , and after proving its abilities there , production was ramped up to 60 per month . As a result , by the outbreak of World War II , the Luftwaffe had 336 Ju 87 B @-@ 1s on hand . The B @-@ 1 was also fitted with " Jericho trumpets " , essentially propeller @-@ driven sirens with a diameter of 0 @.@ 7 m ( 2 @.@ 3 ft ) mounted on the wing 's leading edge directly forward of the landing gear , or on the front edge of the fixed main gear fairing . This was used to weaken enemy morale and enhance the intimidation of dive @-@ bombing . After the enemy became used to it , however , they were withdrawn . The devices caused a loss of some 20 – 25 km / h ( 10 @-@ 20 mph ) through drag . Instead , some bombs were fitted with whistles on the fin to produce the noise after release . 
 The trumpets were a suggestion from Generaloberst Ernst Udet ( but some authors say the idea originated from Adolf Hitler ) . The Ju 87 B @-@ 2s that followed had some improvements and were built in a number of variants that included ski @-@ equipped versions ( the B @-@ 1 also had this modification ) and at the other end , with a tropical operation kit called the Ju 87 B @-@ 2 trop . Italy 's Regia Aeronautica received a number of the B @-@ 2s and named them the " Picchiatello " , while others went to the other members of the Axis , including Hungary , Bulgaria and Romania . The B @-@ 2 also had an oil hydraulic system for closing the cowling flaps . This continued in all the later designs . 
 Production of the Ju 87 B started in 1937 . 89 B @-@ 1s were to be built at Junkers ' factory in Dessau and another 40 at the Weserflug plant in Lemwerder by July 1937 . Production would be carried out by the Weserflug company after April 1938 , but Junkers continued producing Ju 87 up until March 1940 . 
 = = = Ju 87R = = = 
 A long range version of the Ju 87B was also built , known as the Ju 87R , the letter allegedly being an abbreviation for <unk> , " ( operational ) range " . They were primarily intended for anti @-@ shipping missions . The Ju 87R had a B @-@ series airframe with an additional oil tank and fuel lines to the outer wing stations to permit the use of two 300 L ( 79 @.@ 25 US gal ) standardised capacity under @-@ wing drop tanks , used by a wide variety of Luftwaffe aircraft through most of the war . This increased fuel capacity to 1 @,@ 080 litres ( 500 L in main fuel tank of which 480 L where usable + 600 L from drop tanks ) . To prevent overload conditions , bomb carrying ability was often restricted to a single 250 kg ( 550 lb ) bomb if the aircraft was fully loaded with fuel . The Ju 87 R @-@ 1 had a B @-@ 1 airframe with the exception of a modification in the fuselage which enabled an additional oil tank . This was installed to feed the engine due to the increase in range after the addition of the extra fuel tanks . 
 The Ju 87 R @-@ 2 had the same airframe as the B @-@ 2 , and strengthened to ensure it could withstand dives of 600 km / h ( 370 mph ) . The Jumo 211D in @-@ line engine was installed , replacing the R @-@ 1s Jumo 211A . Due to an increase in overall weight by some 700 kg ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) , the Ju 87 R @-@ 2 was 30 km / h ( 19 mph ) slower than the Ju 87 B @-@ 1 and had a lower service ceiling . The Ju 87 R @-@ 2 had an increased range advantage of 360 km ( 220 mi ) . The R @-@ 3 and R @-@ 4 were the last R variants developed . Only a few were built . The R @-@ 3 was an experimental tug for gliders and had an expanded radio system so the crew could communicate with the glider crew by way of the tow rope . The R @-@ 4 differed from the R @-@ 2 in the Jumo 211J powerplant . 
 Known prototypes 
 Ju 87 V6 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 14 June 1937 ( A @-@ 0 to B @-@ 0 conversion ) 
 Ju 87 V7 : W.Nr <unk> . Prototype of the Ju 87B , powered by a 1 @,@ 000 PS ( 735 kW or 986 hp ) Jumo 211A . Flown on 23 August 1937 ( A @-@ 0 to B @-@ 0 conversion ) 
 Ju 87 V8 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 11 November 1937 
 Ju 87 V9 : W.Nr <unk> . Flown on 16 February 1938 as D @-@ <unk> . Flown again as WL @-@ <unk> on 16 October 1939 
 Ju 87 <unk> : W.Nr <unk> . Registration D @-@ <unk> . Destroyed in a crash in 1942 . 
 Ju 87 <unk> : W.Nr <unk> . Stammkennzeichen code of GT + AX . 
 Ju 87 <unk> and Ju 87 V18 may never have been built . 
 = = = Ju 87C = = = 
 On 18 August 1937 , the RLM decided to introduce the Ju 87 Tr ( C ) . The Ju 87 C was intended to be a dive and torpedo bomber for the Kriegsmarine . The type was ordered into prototype production and available for testing in January 1938 . Testing was given just two months and was to begin in February and end in April 1938 . The prototype V10 was to be a fixed wing test aircraft , while the following V11 would be modified with folding wings . The prototypes were Ju 87 B @-@ 0 airframes powered by Jumo 211 A engines . Owing to delays , the V10 was not completed until March 1938 . It first flew on 17 March and was designated Ju 87 C @-@ 1 . On 12 May , the V11 also flew for the first time . By 15 December 1939 , 915 arrested landings on dry land had been made . It was found the arresting gear winch was too weak and had to be replaced . Tests showed the average braking distance was 20 – 35 metres ( 66 – 115 ft ) . The Ju 87 V11 was designated C @-@ 0 on 8 October 1938 . It was fitted out with standard Ju 87 C @-@ 0 equipment and better wing @-@ folding mechanisms . The " carrier Stuka " was to be built at the Weserflug Company 's Lemwerder plant between April and July 1940 . 
 Among the " special " equipment of the Ju 87 C was a two @-@ seat rubber dinghy with signal ammunition and emergency ammunition . A quick fuel dump mechanism and two inflatable 750 L ( 200 US gal ) bags in each wing and a further two 500 L ( 130 US gal ) bags in the fuselage enabled the Ju 87 C to remain afloat for up to three days in calm seas . On 6 October 1939 , with the war already underway , 120 of the planned Ju 87 Tr ( C ) s on order at that point were cancelled . Despite the cancellation , the tests continued using catapults . The Ju 87 C had a takeoff weight of 5 @,@ 300 kg ( 11 @,@ 700 lb ) and a speed of 133 km / h ( 83 mph ) on departure . The Ju 87 could be launched with a SC 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb and four SC 50 kg ( 110 lb ) bombs under the fuselage . The C @-@ 1 was to have two MG 17s mounted in the wing with a MG 15 operated by the rear gunner . On 18 May 1940 , production of the C @-@ 1 was switched to the R @-@ 1 . 
 Known prototypes 
 Ju 87 V10 : Registration D @-@ <unk> ( changed to Stammkennzeichen of TK + HD ) . W.Nr <unk> . First flown 17 March 1938 
 Ju 87 V11 : Stammkennzeichen of TV + OV . W.Nr <unk> . First flown 12 May 1938 
 = = = Ju 87D = = = 
 Despite the Stuka 's vulnerability to enemy fighters having been exposed during the Battle of Britain , the Luftwaffe had no choice but to continue its development , as there was no replacement aircraft in sight . The result was the D @-@ series . In June 1941 , the RLM ordered five prototypes , the Ju 87 <unk> – 25 . A Daimler @-@ Benz DB 603 powerplant was to be installed in the Ju 87 D @-@ 1 , but it did not have the power of the Jumo 211 and performed " poorly " during tests and was dropped . The Ju 87 D @-@ series featured two coolant radiators underneath the inboard sections of the wings , while the oil cooler was relocated to the position formerly occupied by the single , <unk> " chin " coolant radiator . The D @-@ series also introduced an aerodynamically refined cockpit with better visibility and space . In addition , armour protection was increased and a new dual @-@ barrel 7 @.@ 92 mm ( .312 in ) MG 81Z machine gun with an extremely high rate of fire was installed in the rear defensive position . Engine power was increased again , the Jumo 211J now delivering 1 @,@ 420 PS ( 1 @,@ 044 kW or 1 @,@ 400 hp ) . Bomb carrying ability was nearly quadrupled from 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) in the B @-@ version to 1 @,@ 800 kg ( 4 @,@ 000 lb ) in the D @-@ version ( <unk> load for short ranges , overload condition ) , a typical bomb load ranged from 500 – 1 @,@ 200 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 – 2 @,@ 600 lb ) . 
 The internal fuel capacity of the Ju 87D was raised to 800 L ( of which 780 L were usable ) by adding additional wing tanks while retaining the option to carry two 300 L drop tanks . Tests at Rechlin @-@ <unk> Airfield revealed it made possible a flight duration of 2 hours and 15 minutes . With an extra two 300 L ( 80 US gal ) fuel tanks , it could achieve four hours flight time . 
 The D @-@ 2 was a variant used as a glider tug by converting older D @-@ series airframes . It was intended as the tropical version of the D @-@ 1 and had heavier armour to protect the crew from ground fire . The armour reduced its performance and caused the Oberkommando der Luftwaffe to " place no particular value on the production of the D @-@ 2 " . The D @-@ 3 was an improved D @-@ 1 with more armour for its ground @-@ attack role . A number of Ju 87 D @-@ 3s were designated D @-@ 3N or D @-@ 3 trop and fitted with night or tropical equipment . The D @-@ 4 designation applied to a prototype torpedo @-@ bomber version , which could carry a 750 – 905 kg ( 1 @,@ 653 – 1 @,@ 995 lb ) aerial torpedo on a PVC 1006 B rack . The D @-@ 4 was to be converted from D @-@ 3 airframes and operated from the aircraft carrier Graf Zeppelin . Other modifications included a flame <unk> and , unlike earlier D variants , two 20 mm MG 151 / 20 cannon , while the radio operator / rear gunner 's ammunition supply was increased by 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 rounds . 
 The Ju 87 D @-@ 5 was based on the D @-@ 3 design and was unique in the Ju 87 series as it had wings 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @-@ feet ) longer than previous variants . The two 7 @.@ 92 mm MG 17 wing guns were exchanged for more powerful 20 mm MG 151 / 20s to better suit the aircraft 's ground @-@ attack role . The window in the floor of the cockpit was reinforced and four , rather than the previous three , aileron hinges were installed . Higher diving speeds were obtained of 650 km / h ( 400 mph ) up to 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . The range was recorded as 715 km ( 444 mi ) at ground level and 835 km ( 519 mi ) at 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 The D @-@ 6 , according to " Operating instructions , works document 2097 " , was built in limited numbers to train pilots on " rationalised versions " . However , due to shortages in raw materials , it did not go into mass production . The D @-@ 7 was another ground attack aircraft based on D @-@ 1 airframes upgraded to D @-@ 5 standard ( armour , wing cannons , extended wing panels ) , while the D @-@ 8 was similar to the D @-@ 7 but based on D @-@ 3 airframes . The D @-@ 7 and D @-@ 8 were both were fitted with flame dampers , and could conduct night operations . 
 Production of the D @-@ 1 variant started in 1941 with 495 ordered . These aircraft were delivered between May 1941 and March 1942 . The RLM wanted 832 machines produced from February 1941 . The Weserflug company was tasked with their production . From June to September 1941 , 40 Ju 87 Ds were expected to be built , increasing to 90 thereafter . Various production problems were encountered . Just one of the planned 48 was produced in July . Of the 25 the RLM hoped for in August 1941 , none were delivered . Only in September 1941 did the first two of the planned 102 Ju 87s roll off the production lines . The shortfalls continued to the end of 1941 . During this time , the WFG plant in Lemwerder moved production to Berlin . Over 165 Ju 87s had not been delivered and production was only 23 Ju 87 Ds per month out of the 40 expected . By the spring of 1942 to the end of production in 1944 , 3 @,@ 300 Ju 87s , mostly D @-@ 1s , D @-@ 2s and D @-@ 5s had been manufactured . 
 In January 1943 , a variety of Ju 87 Ds became " test beds " for the Ju 87 G variants . At the start of 1943 , the coastal Luftwaffe <unk> test centre at Tarnewitz tested this combination from a static position . Oberst G. Wolfgang <unk> noted the experiments were not successful , and suggested the cannon be installed on the Messerschmitt Me 410 . However , testing continued , and on 31 January 1943 , Ju 87 D @-@ 1 W.Nr 2552 was tested by Hauptmann Hans @-@ Karl Stepp near the <unk> training area . Stepp noted the increase in drag , which reduced the aircraft 's speed to 259 km / h ( 161 mph ) . Stepp also noted that the aircraft was also less agile than the existing D variants . D @-@ 1 and D @-@ 3 variants operated in combat with the 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) BK 37 cannon in 1943 . 
 Known prototypes 
 Ju 87 V 21 . Registration D @-@ <unk> . W.Nr <unk> . Airframe conversion from B @-@ 1 to D @-@ 1 . First flown on 1 March 1941 . 
 Ju 87 V 22 Stammkennzeichen of SF + TY . W.Nr <unk> . Also airframe conversion from B @-@ 1 to D @-@ 1 . First flown on 1 March 1941 . 
 Ju 87 V 23 Stammkennzeichen of PB + UB . W.Nr <unk> . Also airframe conversion from B @-@ 1 to D @-@ 1 . First flown on 1 March 1941 . 
 Ju 87 V 24 Stammkennzeichen of BK + EE . W.Nr <unk> . Also airframe conversion from B @-@ 1 to D @-@ 1 / D @-@ 4 . First flown on 1 March 1941 . 
 Ju 87 V 25 Stammkennzeichen of BK + EF . W.Nr <unk> . Also airframe conversion from B @-@ 1 to D @-@ 4 trop . First flown on 1 March 1941 . 
 Ju 87 V 30 , the only known prototype of the Ju 87 D @-@ 5 . W.Nr <unk> . First flown on 20 June 1943 . 
 Ju 87 V 26 @-@ 28 , Ju 87 V 31 , and V 42 @-@ 47 were experiments of unknown variants . 
 = = = Ju <unk> = = = 
 With the G variant , the ageing airframe of the Ju 87 found new life as an anti @-@ tank aircraft . This was the final operational version of the Stuka , and was deployed on the Eastern Front . The reverse in German military fortunes after 1943 and the appearance of huge numbers of well @-@ armoured Soviet tanks caused Junkers to adapt the existing design to combat this new threat . The Henschel Hs <unk> had proved a potent ground attack weapon , but its large fuel tanks made it vulnerable to enemy fire , prompting the RLM to say " that in the shortest possible time a replacement of the Hs 129 type must take place . " With Soviet tanks the priority targets , the development of a further variant as a successor to the Ju 87D began in November 1942 . On 3 November , Erhard Milch raised the question of replacing the Ju 87 , or redesigning it altogether . It was decided to keep the design as it was , but the power @-@ plant was upgraded to a Junkers Jumo 211J , and two 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) cannons were added . The variant was also designed to carry a 1 @,@ 000 kg ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) free @-@ fall bomb load . Furthermore , the armoured protection of the Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 Sturmovik was copied - a feature pioneered by the 1916 @-@ 17 origin Junkers <unk> of World War I Imperial Germany 's Luftstreitkräfte - to protect the crew from ground fire now that the Ju 87 would be required to conduct low level attacks . 
 Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel , a Stuka ace , had suggested using two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) Flak 18 guns , each one in a self @-@ contained under @-@ wing gun pod , as the Bordkanone BK 3 @,@ 7 , after achieving success against Soviet tanks with the 20 mm MG 151 / 20 cannon . These gun pods were fitted to a Ju 87 D @-@ 1 , W.Nr 2552 as " Gustav the tank killer " - the co @-@ incidence of " Gustav " being the standard word for " G " in the Germans ' own spelling alphabet of the time could have inspired the choice of letter for the subtype . The first flight of the machine took place on 31 January 1943 , piloted by Hauptmann Hans @-@ Karl Stepp . The continuing problems with about two dozens of the Ju <unk> @-@ 1 , and slow development of the Henschel Hs <unk> @-@ 3 , each of them equipped with a large , PaK 40 @-@ based , <unk> Bordkanone 7 @,@ 5 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) cannon in a conformal gun pod beneath the fuselage , meant the Ju <unk> was put into production . In April 1943 , the first production Ju 87 G @-@ 1s were delivered to front line units . The two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) cannons were mounted in under @-@ wing gun pods , each loaded with two six @-@ round magazines of armour @-@ piercing tungsten carbide @-@ cored ammunition . With these weapons , the <unk> ( " cannon @-@ bird " ) , as it was nicknamed , proved spectacularly successful in the hands of Stuka aces such as Rudel . The G @-@ 1 was converted from older D @-@ series airframes , retaining the smaller wing , but without the dive brakes . The G @-@ 2 was similar to the G @-@ 1 except for use of the extended wing of the D @-@ 5 . 208 G @-@ 2s were built and at least a further 22 more were converted from D @-@ 3 airframes . 
 Only a handful of production Gs were committed in the Battle of Kursk . On the opening day of the offensive , Hans @-@ Ulrich Rudel flew the only " official " Ju 87 G , although a significant number of Ju 87D variants were fitted with the 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) cannon , and operated as unofficial Ju 87 Gs before the battle . In June 1943 , the RLM ordered 20 Ju <unk> as production variants . The G @-@ 1 later influenced the design of the Fairchild Republic A @-@ 10 Thunderbolt II , with Hans Rudel 's book , Stuka Pilot being required reading for all members of the A @-@ X project . 
 = = = Night @-@ harassment variants = = = 
 The Soviet Air Force practice of harassing German ground forces using antiquated Polikarpov Po @-@ 2 and R @-@ 5 biplanes at night to drop flares and fragmentation bombs , inspired the Luftwaffe to form its own <unk> ( harassment squadrons ) . On 23 July 1942 , Junkers offered the Ju 87 B @-@ 2 , R @-@ 2 and R @-@ 4s with <unk> ( " flame <unk> " ) . On 10 November 1943 , the RLM GL / C @-@ E2 Division finally authorised the design in directive No. 1117 . This new equipment made the Ju 87 more difficult to detect from the ground in darkness . 
 Pilots were also asked to complete the new " Blind Flying Certificate 3 " , which was especially introduced for this new type of operation . Pilots were trained at night , over unfamiliar terrain , and forced to rely on their instruments for direction . The Ju 87 's standard Revi <unk> gunsight was replaced with the new <unk> ( " <unk> " ) <unk> . On some Ju 87s , the Revi 16D was exchanged for the <unk> 16D . To help the pilot see his instrument panel , a violet light was installed . On 15 November 1942 , the Auxiliary Staffel were created . By mid @-@ 1943 , Luftflotte 1 was given four Staffeln while Luftflotte 4 and Luftwaffe Kommando Ost ( Luftwaffe Command East ) were given six and two respectively . In the first half of 1943 , 12 <unk> ( " night battle groups " ) had been formed , flying a multitude of different types of aircraft , including the Ju 87 , which proved itself ideally suited to the low @-@ level slow flying needed . 
 = = Production = = 
 Despite teething problems with the Ju 87 , the RLM ordered 216 Ju 87 A @-@ 1s into production and wanted to receive delivery of all machines between January 1936 and 1938 . The Junkers production capacity was fully occupied and licensing to other production facilities became necessary . The first 35 Ju 87 A @-@ 1s were therefore produced by the Weser Flugzeugbau ( WFG ) . By 1 September 1939 , 360 Ju 87 As and Bs had been built by the Junkers factories at Dessau and Weserflug factory in Lemwerder near Bremen . By 30 September 1939 , Junkers had received 2 @,@ 365 @,@ 196 Reichsmark ( RM ) for Ju 87 construction orders . The RLM paid another 243 @,@ 646 RM for development orders . According to audit records in Berlin , by the end of the financial year on 30 September 1941 , 3 @,@ 059 @,@ 000 RM had been spent on Ju 87 airframes . By 30 June 1940 , 697 Ju 87 B @-@ 1s and 129 B @-@ 2s alone had been produced . Another 105 R @-@ 1s and seven R @-@ 2s had been built . 
 The range of the B @-@ 2 was not sufficient , and it was dropped in favour of the Ju 87 R long @-@ range versions in the second half of 1940 . The 105 R @-@ 1s were converted to R @-@ 2 status and a further 616 production R @-@ 2s were ordered . In May 1941 , the development of the D @-@ 1 was planned and was ordered into production by March 1942 . However , the expansion of the Junkers Ju 88 production lines to compensate for the withdrawal of Dornier Do 17 production delayed production of the Ju 87 D. The Weserflug plant in Lemwerder experienced production shortfalls . This prompted Erhard Milch to visit and threaten the company into meeting the RLM 's Ju 87 D @-@ 1 requirements on 23 February 1942 . To meet these demands , 700 skilled workers were needed . Skilled workers had been called up for military service in the Wehrmacht . Junkers were able to supply 300 German workers to the Weserflug factory , and as an interim solution , Soviet prisoners of war and Soviet civilians deported to Germany . Working around the clock , the shortfall was made good . WFG received an official commendation . By May 1942 , demand increased further . Chief of Procurement General Walter <unk> found that each unit needed 100 Ju 87s as standard strength and an average of 20 per month to cover attrition . Not until June – December 1942 did production capacity increase , and 80 Ju 87s were produced per month . 
 By 17 August 1942 , production had climbed rapidly after Blohm & Voss BV 138 production was scaled down and licence work had shut down at WFG . Production now reached some 150 Ju 87 D airframes per month , but spare parts were failing to reach the same production levels . <unk> parts were particularly in short supply . Milch ordered production to 350 Ju 87s per month in September 1942 . This was not achievable due to the insufficient production capacity in the Reich . 
 The RLM considered setting up production facilities in Slovakia . But this would delay production until the buildings and factories could be furnished with the machine tools . These tools were also in short supply , and the RLM hoped to purchase them from Switzerland and Italy . The Slovaks could provide 3 @,@ 500 – 4 @,@ 000 workers , but no technical personnel . The move would only produce another 25 machines per month at a time when demand was increasing . In October , production plans were dealt another blow when one of <unk> plants burned down , leaving a chronic shortage of <unk> and undercarriage parts . Junkers director and member of the Luftwaffe industry council Carl <unk> reported that by January 1943 only 120 Ju 87s could be produced at Bremen and 230 at Berlin @-@ Tempelhof . 
 = = = Decline and end of production = = = 
 After evaluating Ju 87 operations on the Eastern Front , Hermann Göring ordered production limited to 200 per month in total . General der Schlachtflieger ( " General of Close @-@ Support Aviation " ) Ernst Kupfer decided continued development would " hardly bring any further tactical value " . Adolf Galland , a fighter pilot with operational and combat experience in strike aircraft , said that abandoning development would be premature , but 150 machines per month would be sufficient . 
 On 28 July 1943 , strike and bomber production was to be scaled down , and fighter and bomber destroyer production given priority . On 3 August 1943 , Milch contradicted this and declared that this increase in fighter production would not affect production of the Ju 87 , Ju 188 , Ju 288 and Ju 290 . This was an important consideration as the life expectancy of a Ju 87 had been reduced ( since 1941 ) from 9 @.@ 5 months to 5 @.@ 5 months to just 100 operational flying hours . On 26 October , General der Schlachtflieger Ernst Kupfer reported the Ju 87 could no longer survive in operations and that the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190F should take its place . Milch finally agreed and ordered the minimal continuance of Ju 87 D @-@ 3 and D @-@ 5 production for a smooth transition period . In May 1944 , production wound down . 78 Ju 87s were built in May and 69 rebuilt from damaged machines . In the next six months , 438 Ju 87 Ds and Gs were added to the Ju 87 force as new or repaired aircraft . It is unknown whether any Ju 87s were built from parts unofficially after December 1944 and the end of production . 
 Overall , some 550 Ju 87 As and <unk> were completed at the Junkers factory in Dessau . Production of the Ju 87 R and D variants were transferred to the Weserflug company , which was to produce 5 @,@ 930 of the 6 @,@ 500 Ju 87s produced in total . During the course of the war , little damage was done to the WFG plant at Lemwerder . Attacks throughout 1940 @-@ 45 caused little lasting damage and succeeded only in damaging some Ju 87 airframes , in " contrast " to the Focke @-@ Wulf plant in Bremen . At Berlin @-@ Tempelhof , little delay and damage was caused to Ju 87 production , despite the heavy bombings and large @-@ scale destruction inflicted on other targets . The WFG again went unscathed . The Junkers factory at Dessau was heavily attacked , but not until Ju 87 production had ceased . The Ju 87 repair facility at the Wels aircraft works was destroyed on 30 May 1944 , and the site abandoned Ju 87 links . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 Among the many German aircraft designs that participated in the Condor Legion , and as part of other German involvement in the Spanish Civil War , a single Ju 87 A @-@ 0 ( the V4 prototype ) was allocated serial number 29 @-@ 1 and was assigned to the VJ / 88 , the experimental Staffel of the Legion 's fighter wing . The aircraft was secretly loaded onto the ship <unk> and departed Hamburg harbor on the night of 1 August 1936 , arriving in Cádiz five days later . The only known information pertaining to its combat career in Spain is that it was piloted by Unteroffizier Herman <unk> , and took part in the Nationalist offensive against Bilbao in 1937 . Presumably the aircraft was then secretly returned to Germany . 
 In January 1938 , three Ju 87 As arrived . Several problems became evident - the spatted undercarriage sank into muddy airfield surfaces , and the spats were temporarily removed . In addition , the maximum 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bomb load could only be carried if the gunner vacated his seat , therefore the bomb load was restricted to 250 kg ( 550 lb ) . These aircraft supported the Nationalist forces and carried out anti @-@ shipping missions until they returned to Germany in October 1938 . 
 During the Catalonia Offensive in January 1939 , the Junkers Ju 87 returned to Spain . On the morning of 21 January 1939 , 34 Heinkel He 111 , along with some escorts and three Ju 87B , attacked the Port of Barcelona , five days before the city was captured by the Fascists . 29 Republican fighters were defending the city . There were more than 100 aircraft operating over the city and , while a Ju 87 was dive @-@ bombing a ship , a Republican Polikarpov I @-@ 15 pilot , Francisco <unk> Jiménez , claimed it destroyed near el Vendrell , in Coma @-@ <unk> , but the Stuka was capable of landing on the beach without crashing . That was the only time a Stuka attacked the capital of Catalonia . On 24 January 1939 , a group of Stukas prevented the destruction of a bridge near Barcelona by strafing the demolition engineers on Molins de Rei . During the attack the Republican ground defenders , equipped with a quadruple PM M1910 mounting , hit one pilot ( Heinz Bohne ) in both legs and the Stuka crashed , seriously injuring Bohne , and his machine gunner , Albert Conrad . Those two were the only Stuka casualties of the war . 
 As with the Ju 87 A @-@ 0 , the B @-@ 1s were returned discreetly to the Reich . The experience of the Spanish Civil War proved invaluable - air and ground crews perfected their skills , and equipment was evaluated under combat conditions . The Ju 87 had not been tested against numerous and well @-@ coordinated fighter opposition , and this lesson was to be learned later at great cost to the Stuka crews . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 All Stuka units were moved to Germany 's eastern border in preparation for the invasion of Poland . On the morning of 15 August 1939 , during a mass @-@ formation dive @-@ bombing demonstration for high @-@ ranking commanders of the Luftwaffe at Neuhammer training grounds near Sagan , 13 Ju 87s and 26 crew members were lost when they crashed into the ground almost simultaneously . The planes dived through cloud , expecting to release their practice bombs and pull out of the dive once below the cloud ceiling , unaware that on that particular day the ceiling was too low and unexpected ground mist formed , leaving them no time to pull out of the dive . 
 = = = = Poland = = = = 
 On 1 September 1939 , the Wehrmacht invaded Poland , triggering World War II . <unk> der Luftwaffe records indicate a total force of 366 Ju 87 A and Bs were available for operations on 31 August 1939 . The first Ju 87 operation was to destroy Polish demolition charges fixed to the rail bridges over the Vistula , that linked Eastern Germany to the Danzig corridor and East Prussia as well as Polish Pomerania . To do this , Ju 87s were ordered to perform a low @-@ level attack on the Polish Army Garrison headquarters . II. and III . / StG 1 targeted the cables along the embankment , the electricity plant and signal boxes at <unk> ( now Tczew , Poland . At exactly 04 : 26 CET , a <unk> ( " chain " or flight of three ) of Ju 87s of 3 . / StG 1 led by Staffelkapitän Oberleutnant Bruno Dilly carried out the first bombing attack of the war . The Stukas attacked 11 minutes before the official German declaration of hostilities and hit the targets . The Ju 87s achieved complete success . However , the mission failed as the German Army delayed their advance allowing the Poles to carry out repairs and destroy all but one of the bridges before the Germans could reach them . 
 A Ju 87 achieved the first air victory during World War II on the morning of 1 September 1939 , when Rottenführer Leutnant Frank <unk> of I. / StG 2 " Immelmann " shot down a Polish PZL <unk> fighter while it was taking off from Balice airfield ; its pilot , Captain Mieczysław <unk> , was killed . In air @-@ to @-@ air combat , Ju 87 formations were well protected by German fighter aircraft and losses were light against the tenacious , but short lived opposition . 
 The Ju 87s reverted to ground attack missions for the campaign after the opening air attacks . Ju 87s were involved in the controversial but effective attacks at Wieluń . The lack of anti @-@ aircraft artillery in the Polish Army magnified the impact of the Ju 87 . At Piotrków <unk> I. / StG 76 and I. / StG 2 destroyed a Polish infantry division de @-@ training there . Troop trains were also easy targets . StG 77 destroyed one such target at <unk> . During the Battle of Radom six Polish divisions trapped by encircling German forces were forced to surrender after a relentless four @-@ day bombardment by StG 51 , 76 and 77 . Employed in this assault were 50 kg ( 110 lb ) fragmentation bombs , which caused appalling casualties to the Polish ground troops . Demoralised , the Poles surrendered . The Stukas also participated in the Battle of Bzura which resulted in the breaking of Polish resistance . The dive bomber wings ( Sturzkampfgeschwader ) alone dropped 388 tonnes ( 428 tons ) of bombs during this battle . During the Siege of Warsaw and the Battle of Modlin , the Ju 87 wings contributed to the defeat of well @-@ entrenched and resolute Polish forces . IV ( Stuka ) . / LG 1 was particularly effective in destroying the fortified Modlin . 
 The Luftwaffe had a few anti @-@ shipping naval units such as 4 . ( St ) / <unk> 186 to deal with Polish naval forces . This unit performed effectively , sinking the 1540 @-@ ton destroyer Wicher and the minelayer Gryf of the Polish Navy ( both moored in a harbour ) . The torpedo boat Mazur ( 412 tons ) was sunk at Oksywie ; the gunboat General Haller ( 441 tons ) was sunk in Hel Harbour on 6 September — during the Battle of Hel — along with the minesweeper <unk> ( 183 tons ) and its sister ships <unk> and <unk> with several auxiliaries . The Polish naval units trapped in the Baltic were destroyed by Ju 87 operations . 
 Once again , enemy air opposition was light ; the Stukawaffe ( Stuka force ) lost just 31 aircraft during the campaign . 
 = = = = Norway = = = = 
 Operation Weserübung began on 9 April 1940 with the invasions of Norway and Denmark , Denmark capitulated within the day whilst Norway continued to resist with British and French help . The campaign was not a Blitzkrieg of fast @-@ moving armoured divisions supported by air power as the mountainous terrain ruled out close Panzer / Stuka cooperation . Instead , the Germans relied on paratroops , airborne troops transported by Junkers Ju 52s and specialised ski troops . The Ju 87s were given the role of ground attack and anti @-@ shipping missions . The Ju 87 proved to be the most effective weapon in the Luftwaffe 's armoury carrying out the latter task . 
 On 9 April , the first Stukas took off at 10 : 59 from occupied airfields to destroy Oscarsborg Fortress , after the loss of the German cruiser Blücher , which disrupted the amphibious landings in Oslo through Oslofjord . The 22 Ju 87s had helped suppress the Norwegian defenders during the ensuing Battle of Drøbak Sound , but the defenders did not surrender until after Oslo had been captured . As a result , the German naval operation failed . StG 1 caught the 735 ton Norwegian destroyer <unk> off Stavanger and hit her in the engine room . <unk> was run aground and scuttled . The Stuka wings were now equipped with the new Ju 87 R , which differed from the Ju 87 B by having increased internal fuel capacity and two <unk> underwing drop tanks for more range . 
 The Stukas , however , had numerous successes against Allied naval vessels and in particular the Royal Navy which posed a formidable threat to German naval and coastal operations . The heavy cruiser Suffolk was attacked on 17 April . Her stern was virtually destroyed but she limped back to Scapa Flow with 33 dead and 38 wounded crewmen . The light cruiser squadron consisting of the sister ships <unk> and Curlew were subjected to lengthy attacks which badly damaged the former for one Ju 87 lost . A witness later said , " they threatened to take our masthead with them in every screaming nerve @-@ racking dive " . The same fate nearly befell the sloop Black Swan . On the 27 April a bomb passed through the quarter deck , a wardroom , a water tank and 4 @-@ inch ( 10 @.@ 2 cm ) magazine and out through the hull to explode in the fjord . The muffled explosion limited the damage to her hull . Black Swan fired 1 @,@ 000 rounds but failed to shoot any of her attackers down . HMS Bittern was sunk on 30 April . The French large destroyer Bison was sunk along with HMS Afridi by Sturzkampfgeschwader 1 on 3 May 1940 during the evacuation from Namsos . Bison 's forward magazine was hit , killing 108 of the crew . Afridi , which attempted to rescue Bison 's survivors , was sunk with the loss of 63 sailors . 49 officers and men , 13 soldiers and 33 survivors from Bison were lost aboard Afridi . All ships were targeted . Armed trawlers were used under the German air umbrella in attempt to provide smaller targets . Such craft were not armoured or armed . The Ju 87 's demonstrated this on 30 April when they sank the Jardine ( 452 tons ) and Warwickshire ( 466 tons ) . On 15 May the Polish troopship Chrobry ( 11 @,@ 442 tons ) was sunk . 
 The Stukas also had operational effect when little damage was done . On 1 May 1940 Vice Admiral Lionel Victor Wells commanded a Home Fleet expedition of seven destroyers the heavy cruiser Berwick the aircraft carriers Glorious and Ark Royal and the battleship Valiant . The Stuka waves achieved several near misses but were unable to obtain a hit . Nevertheless , Victor ordered that no ship was to operate within range of the Ju 87 's Norwegian airfields . The Ju 87 's had , in effect , driven British sea power from the Norwegian coast . Moreover , Victor reported to the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Home Fleet Admiral Charles Forbes , that carrier operations were no longer practical under the current conditions . 
 In the following weeks StG 1 continued their sea operations . Off Namsos on 5 May 1940 they caught and sank the Royal Norwegian Navy transports <unk> ( 335 tons ) and <unk> ( 1 @,@ 146 tons ) . The Ju 87s then took to bombing the town and the airstrip to support the German forces under the command of Eduard Dietl . The town fell in the first week of May . In the remaining four weeks of the campaign in Norway the Ju 87s supported German forces in containing the Allied land forces in Narvik until they withdrew in early June . 
 = = = = France and the Low Countries = = = = 
 The Ju 87 units had learned some lessons from the Polish and Norwegian campaigns . The failures of Poland and the Stukas of I. / StG 1 to silence the <unk> fort , ensured even more attention was paid to pin @-@ point bombing during the Phoney War period . This was to pay off in the Western campaign . 
 When Fall Gelb ( Case yellow ) began on 10 May 1940 , the Stuka helped swiftly neutralise the fortress of Eben Emael , Belgium . The headquarters of the commander responsible for ordering the destruction of the Belgian Army @-@ held bridges along the Albert Canal was stationed in the village of <unk> ( 14 km / mi to the north ) . However , the Stuka demonstrated its accuracy when the small building was destroyed by four direct hits . As a result , only one of the three bridges was destroyed , allowing the German Army to rapidly advance in the opening days of the Battle of Belgium . The Ju 87 proved to be a useful asset to Army Group B in the Low Countries . In pitched battles against French armoured forces at Hannut and Gembloux Ju 87s effectively neutralised artillery and armour . 
 The Ju 87s also assisted German forces in the Battle of the Netherlands . The Dutch Navy in concert with the British were evacuating the Dutch Royal Family and Dutch Gold reserves through the country 's ports . Ju 87s sank the Dutch Jan Van Galen ( 1 @,@ 316 tons ) and Johan <unk> Van Nassau ( 1 @,@ 520 tons ) as they provided close @-@ shore artillery support at Waalhaven and the <unk> Zee Dyke . The British Valentine was crippled , beached and scuttled while Winchester , Whitley and Westminster were damaged . Whitley was later beached and scuttled after an air attack on 19 May . 
 The Ju 87 units were also instrumental in the Battle of France . It was here that most of the Ju 87 @-@ equipped units were concentrated . They assisted in the breakthrough at Sedan , the critical and first major land battle of the war on French territory . The Stukawaffe flew 300 sorties against French positions , with StG 77 alone flying 201 individual missions . The Ju 87s benefited from heavy fighter protection from Messerschmitt Bf 109 units . When resistance was organised , the Ju 87s could be vulnerable . For example , on 12 May , near Sedan , six French Curtiss H @-@ 75s from Groupe de Chasse I / 5 ( Group Interception ) attacked a formation of Ju 87s , claiming 11 out of 12 unescorted Ju 87s without loss ( the Germans recorded six losses over Sedan entire ) . For the most part , Allied opposition was disorganised . During the battles of <unk> , Arras , <unk> and Calais the Ju 87 operations broke @-@ up counterattacks and offered pin @-@ point aerial artillery support for German infantry . 
 The Luftwaffe benefited from excellent ground @-@ to @-@ air communications throughout the campaign . Radio equipped forward liaison officers could call upon the Stukas and direct them to attack enemy positions along the axis of advance . In some cases the Stukas responded in 10 – 20 minutes . Oberstleutnant Hans Seidemann ( Richthofen 's Chief of Staff ) said that " never again was such a smoothly functioning system for discussing and planning joint operations achieved " . 
 During the Battle of Dunkirk , many Allied ships were lost to Ju 87 attacks as the British Operation Dynamo sought to evacuate British and French armies from the pocket . The French destroyer <unk> was sunk on 21 May 1940 , followed by the paddle steamer Crested Eagle on 28 May . The French Channel @-@ steamer Côte d <unk> ( 3 @,@ 047 ) followed . The Ju 87s operated to maximum effectiveness when the weather allowed . RAF fighter units were held back and Allied air cover was patchy at best . On 29 May the destroyer Grenade was sunk outside the harbour with severe loss of life . The French destroyer Mistral was crippled by bomb damage the same day . Jaguar and Verity were badly damaged while the trawlers Calvi and Polly Johnson ( 363 and 290 tons ) disintegrated under bombardment . The merchant ship Fenella ( 2 @,@ 376 tons ) was sunk having taken on 600 soldiers . The attacks brought the evacuation to a halt for a time . The rail ships <unk> and <unk> ( 1 @,@ 564 and 1 @,@ 567 tons ) were sunk also . By 29 May , the Allies had lost 31 vessels sunk and 11 damaged . On 1 June the Ju 87s sank the Skipjack ( 815 tons ) while the destroyer Keith was sunk and Basilisk was crippled before being scuttled by Whitehall . Whitehall was later badly damaged and along with Ivanhoe , staggered back to Dover . Havant , commissioned for just three weeks , was sunk and in the evening the French destroyer Foudroyant sank after a mass @-@ attack . Further victories against shipping were claimed before nightfall on 1 June . The steamer Pavon was lost while carrying 1 @,@ 500 Dutch soldiers most of whom were killed . The oil tanker Niger was also destroyed . A flotilla of French minesweepers were also lost — Denis Papin ( 264 tons ) , the Le <unk> ( 380 tons ) and Venus ( 264 tons ) . 
 In total , 89 merchantmen ( of 126 @,@ 518 grt ) were lost , and the Royal Navy lost 29 of its 40 destroyers used in the battle ( 8 sunk , 23 damaged and out of service ) . The campaign ended after the French surrender on 25 June 1940 . Allied air power had been ineffective and disorganised , and as a result , Stuka losses were mainly due to ground fire . Some 120 machines , one @-@ third of the Stuka force , were destroyed or damaged by all causes from 10 May to 25 June 1940 . 
 = = = = Battle of Britain = = = = 
 For the Battle of Britain , the Luftwaffe 's Order of battle included bomber wings equipped with the Ju 87 . Lehrgeschwader 2 's IV . ( St ) , Sturzkampfgeschwader 1 's III . Gruppe and Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 's III . Gruppe , Sturzkampfgeschwader 51 and Sturzkampfgeschwader 3 's I. Gruppe were committed to the battle . As an anti @-@ shipping weapon , the Ju 87 proved a potent weapon in the early stages of the battle . On 4 July 1940 , StG 2 made a successful attack on a convoy in the English Channel , sinking four freighters : <unk> , Dallas City , Deucalion and <unk> . Six more were damaged . That afternoon , 33 Ju 87s delivered the single most deadly air assault on British territory in history , when 33 Ju 87s of III . / StG 51 , avoiding Royal Air Force ( RAF ) interception , sank the 5 @,@ 500 ton anti @-@ aircraft ship HMS <unk> in Portland Harbour , killing 176 of its 298 crew . One of <unk> 's gunners , Leading Seaman John F. Mantle continued to fire on the Stukas as the ship sank . He was awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross for remaining at his post despite being mortally wounded . Mantle may have been responsible for the single Ju 87 lost during the raid . 
 During August , the Ju 87s also had some success . On 13 August the opening of the main German attacks on airfields took place ; it was known to the Luftwaffe as Adlertag ( " Eagle Day " ) . Messerschmitt Bf 109s of Jagdgeschwader 26 ( JG 26 ) were sent out in advance of the main strike and successfully drew off RAF fighters , allowing 86 Ju 87s of StG 1 to attack RAF Detling in Kent unhindered . The attack killed the station commander , destroyed 20 RAF aircraft on the ground and a great many of the airfield 's buildings . However , Detling was not an RAF Fighter Command station . 
 The Battle of Britain proved for the first time that the Junkers Ju 87 was vulnerable in hostile skies against well @-@ organised and determined fighter opposition . The Ju 87 , like other dive bombers , was slow and possessed inadequate defences . Furthermore , it could not be effectively protected by fighters because of its low speed , and the very low altitudes at which it ended its dive bomb attacks . The Stuka depended on air superiority , the very thing being contested over Britain . It was withdrawn from attacks on Britain in August after prohibitive losses , leaving the Luftwaffe without precision ground @-@ attack aircraft . 
