 The memorial foundation purchased the poet 's Lockerbie home in Indianapolis and it is now maintained as a museum . The James Whitcomb Riley Museum Home is the only late @-@ Victorian home in Indiana that is open to the public and the United States ' only late @-@ Victorian preservation , featuring authentic furniture and decor from that era . His birthplace and boyhood home , now the James Whitcomb Riley House , is preserved as a historical site . A Liberty ship , commissioned April 23 , 1942 , was christened the SS James Whitcomb Riley . It served with the United States Maritime Commission until being scrapped in 1971 . 
 James Whitcomb Riley High School opened in South Bend , Indiana in 1924 . In 1950 , there was a James Whitcomb Riley Elementary School in Hammond , Indiana , but it was torn down in 2006 . East Chicago , Indiana had a Riley School at one time , as did neighboring Gary , Indiana and Anderson , Indiana . One of New Castle , Indiana 's elementary schools is named for Riley as is the road on which it is located . The former Greenfield High School was converted to Riley Elementary School and listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1986 . 
 In 1940 , the U.S. Postal Service issued a 10 @-@ cent stamp honoring Riley . 
 As a lasting tribute , the citizens of Greenfield hold a festival every year in Riley 's honor . Taking place the first or second weekend of October , the " Riley Days " festival traditionally commences with a flower parade in which local school children place flowers around Myra Reynolds Richards ' statue of Riley on the county courthouse lawn , while a band plays lively music in honor of the poet . Weeks before the festival , the festival board has a queen contest . The 2010 – 2011 queen was Corinne Butler . The pageant has been going on many years in honor of the Hoosier poet 
 According to historian Elizabeth Van Allen , Riley was instrumental in helping form a midwestern cultural identity . The midwestern United States had no significant literary community before the 1880s . The works of the Western Association of Writers , most notably those of Riley and Wallace , helped create the midwest 's cultural identity and create a rival literary community to the established eastern <unk> . For this reason , and the publicity Riley 's work created , he was commonly known as the " Hoosier Poet . " 
 = = Critical reception and style = = 
 Riley was among the most popular writers of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , known for his " uncomplicated , sentimental , and humorous " writing . Often writing his verses in dialect , his poetry caused readers to recall a nostalgic and simpler time in earlier American history . This gave his poetry a unique appeal during a period of rapid industrialization and urbanization in the United States . Riley was a prolific writer who " achieved mass appeal partly due to his canny sense of marketing and publicity . " He published more than fifty books , mostly of poetry and humorous short stories , and sold millions of copies . 
 Riley is often remembered for his most famous poems , including the " The Raggedy Man " and " Little Orphant Annie " . Many of his poems , including those , where partially autobiographical , as he used events and people from his childhood as an inspiration for subject matter . His poems often contained morals and warnings for children , containing messages telling children to care for the less fortunate of society . David <unk> and Van Allen both see these messages as Riley 's subtle response to the turbulent economic times of the Gilded Age and the growing progressive movement . Riley believed that urbanization robbed children of their innocence and sincerity , and in his poems he attempted to introduce and idolize characters who had not lost those qualities . His children 's poems are " exuberant , performative , and often display Riley 's penchant for using humorous characterization , repetition , and dialect to make his poetry accessible to a wide @-@ ranging audience . " 
 Although hinted at indirectly in some poems , Riley wrote very little on serious subject matter , and actually mocked attempts at serious poetry . Only a few of his sentimental poems concerned serious subjects . " Little Mandy 's Christmas @-@ Tree " , " The Absence of Little Wesley " , and " The Happy Little Cripple " were about poverty , the death of a child , and disabilities . Like his children 's poems , they too contained morals , suggesting society should pity the downtrodden and be charitable . 
 Riley wrote gentle and romantic poems that were not in dialect . They generally consisted of sonnets and were strongly influenced by the works of John Greenleaf Whittier , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , and Alfred , Lord Tennyson . His standard English poetry was never as popular as his Hoosier dialect poems . Still less popular were the poems Riley authored in his later years ; most were to commemorate important events of American history and to eulogize the dead . 
 Riley 's contemporaries acclaimed him " America 's best @-@ loved poet " . In 1920 , Henry Beers lauded the works of Riley " as natural and unaffected , with none of the discontent and deep thought of cultured song . " Samuel Clemens , William Dean Howells , and Hamlin Garland , each praised Riley 's work and the idealism he expressed in his poetry . Only a few critics of the period found fault with Riley 's works . Ambrose Bierce criticized Riley for his frequent use of dialect . Bierce accused Riley of using dialect to " cover up [ the ] faulty construction " of his poems . Edgar Lee Masters found Riley 's work to be superficial , claiming it lacked irony and that he had only a " narrow emotional range " . By the 1930s popular critical opinion towards Riley 's works began to shift in favor of the negative reviews . In 1951 , James T. Farrell said Riley 's works were " cliched . " <unk> wrote that modern critics consider Riley to be a " minor poet , whose work — provincial , sentimental , and superficial though it may have been — nevertheless struck a chord with a mass audience in a time of enormous cultural change . " Thomas C. Johnson wrote that what most interests modern critics was Riley 's ability to market his work , saying he had a unique understanding of " how to commodify his own image and the nostalgic dreams of an anxious nation . " 
 Among the earliest widespread criticisms of Riley were opinions that his dialect writing did not actually represent the true dialect of central Indiana . In 1970 Peter Revell wrote that Riley 's dialect was more similar to the poor speech of a child rather than the dialect of his region . Revell made extensive comparison to historical texts and Riley 's dialect usage . Philip <unk> wrote that that while " some critics have dismissed him as sub @-@ literary , insincere , and an artificial entertainer , his defenders reply that an author so popular with millions of people in different walks of life must contribute something of value , and that his faults , if any , can be ignored . " 
 = Australian Army during World War I = 
 The Australian Army was the largest service in the Australian military during World War I. The First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) was the Army 's main expeditionary force and was formed from 15 August 1914 with an initial strength of 20 @,@ 000 men , following Britain 's declaration of war on Germany . Meanwhile , the separate , hastily raised 2 @,@ 000 @-@ man Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) , landed near Rabaul in German New Guinea on 11 September 1914 and obtained the surrender of the German garrison after ten days ; it later provided occupation forces for the duration of the war . In addition , small military forces based on the pre @-@ war Permanent Forces and part @-@ time Citizen Forces were maintained in Australia to defend the country from attack . 
 The AIF initially consisted of one infantry division and one light horse brigade . The first contingent departed Australia by ship for Egypt on 1 November 1914 , where it formed part of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) . The infantry division fought during the Gallipoli Campaign between April and December 1915 , reinforced by a second division which was later raised , as well as three light horse brigades . After being evacuated to Egypt the AIF was expanded to five infantry divisions , forming part of the I and II ANZAC Corps , which were committed to the fighting in France and Belgium along the Western Front in March 1916 . Meanwhile , two mounted divisions remained in the Middle East to fight against Turkish forces in the Sinai and Palestine Campaign . 
 Later combined into the Australian Corps in 1917 , the AIF divisions in France and Belgium were often used to spearhead operations , playing a significant role in the defeat of the German Army in 1918 . By the end of the war the AIF had gained a reputation as a highly effective military force . Following the armistice on 11 November 1918 , a process of demobilisation began , with the last Australian personnel being repatriated in late 1919 . In all , 416 @,@ 809 Australians enlisted during the war and 334 @,@ 000 served overseas . The AIF sustained approximately 210 @,@ 000 casualties , of which 61 @,@ 519 were killed or died of wounds , a casualty rate among the highest of any belligerent for the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Commonwealth of Australia was founded on 1 January 1901 . On 1 March , 29 @,@ 010 colonial soldiers , consisting of 1 @,@ 544 professional soldiers , 16 @,@ 105 paid militia and 11 @,@ 361 unpaid volunteers , were transferred to the new Australian Army . However , the units continued to be administered under the various colonial Acts . Major General Sir Edward Hutton , a former commander of the New South Wales Military Forces , was appointed as the first commander of the Commonwealth Forces . The Defence Act 1903 brought all of the state units under one piece of legislation ; although more significantly , it prevented the raising of standing infantry units , only allowing the establishment of permanent administrative and instructional staff for headquarters , garrison artillery , fortress engineers , submarine mining engineers , and service , medical and ordnance units . It also stipulated that the force could only be maintained by voluntary enlistment and that it could not serve outside Australia . In this it effectively established the pre @-@ eminence of the Citizen Forces , ensuring that the Australian Army would primarily consist of part @-@ time militia and volunteer forces , which would be supported by a small permanent force limited to filling staff , training and garrison roles . It equally ensured that any force sent overseas could only be done so on a voluntary basis . 
 Yet despite significant reorganisations of the post @-@ Federation Army in 1903 and 1906 , the force @-@ in @-@ being was increasingly seen as dysfunctional and inadequate , suffering from perceived institutional problems regarding structure , command and administration , as well as limited financial resources and poor training . In time this led the government to decide to adopt an entirely new military system . In 1911 , two significant changes followed a report by Lord Kitchener following his inspection of local forces in 1909 . The Royal Military College , Duntroon was established to train staff officers , and a system of universal national service began with boys aged 12 to 18 becoming cadets , and men aged 18 to 26 serving in the Citizen Forces . These reforms were part of a process of raising a large civilian militia to defend the country against a feared attack by Japan . This force was based on conscription , and was intended to be complete in 1920 . The resources devoted to this plan greatly exceeded those allocated to preparations to raise an expeditionary force to serve outside Australia . In total , a peace @-@ time force of around 80 @,@ 000 citizen soldiers , with a war @-@ time establishment of 135 @,@ 000 , was to be raised and would include 84 infantry battalions ( later increased to 92 ) , 28 light horse regiments ( subsequently raised to 31 ) , 49 field batteries and seven howitzer batteries ( total of 224 guns ) , 14 field engineer companies , seven communication companies , and various support troops . 
 This force was to be organised into brigades , with no divisional headquarters raised , although it was envisioned that up to six divisions could be formed if required . The infantry was planned to be organised into 21 brigades ( later 23 ) of four battalions each , while the light horse would initially form seven brigades ( later eight ) . The field artillery be organised into 14 brigades , while eight of the field batteries would be attached to the light horse brigades , and the <unk> batteries would not be brigaded . A small permanent force of 3 @,@ 200 men would operate in support . The new scheme also entailed reorganisation of the military districts , with the 1st Military District based on Queensland , the 2nd on New South Wales , the 3rd on Victoria , the 4th on South Australia , the 5th on Western Australia and the 6th on Tasmania . The Northern Territory and New Guinea were initially <unk> , but were later incorporated into the 1st Military District . 
 Steps had also been taken to expand the pre @-@ Federation network of coastal defences to provide protection against raids from Japanese or German warships prior to World War I. In 1912 , these defences were manned by 14 companies of the Australian Garrison Artillery , each of which had a strength of over 100 men . Meanwhile , in September 1912 the government officially approved the formation of an Australian military air arm . In so doing Australia became the first of the Dominions , and one of the few nations outside of Europe , to begin to develop such a capability , even if it was initially only a modest one . The Central Flying School was established at Point Cook , Victoria in 1913 . Flying training did not begin immediately , though , and it was not until 1914 , that the first class of pilots were accepted . No. 1 Flight of the Australian Flying Corps was raised in the 3rd Military District on 14 July 1914 . 
 Following Britain 's declaration of war on Imperial Germany on 4 August 1914 at the outbreak of the World War I , Australia and the other members of the British Empire were automatically involved , with Prime Minister Joseph Cook stating on 5 August that " ... when the Empire is at war , so also is Australia . " Within days , Brigadier General William Bridges and his staff officer , Major Brudenell White , had completed plans for the creation of the Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) . White proposed an expeditionary force of 18 @,@ 000 men , including 12 @,@ 000 Australians and 6 @,@ 000 New Zealanders . Cook subsequently approved the proposal , although he increased the offer to 20 @,@ 000 men to serve in any destination desired by the British government . On 6 August 1914 , London cabled its acceptance of the force and asked that it be sent as soon as possible . Recruiting offices opened on 10 August and by the end of 1914 , 52 @,@ 561 volunteers had been accepted , despite strict physical fitness guidelines . Meanwhile , after an additional British request for assistance on 6 August 1914 , the Australian government hurriedly prepared another expeditionary force , known as the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) , to destroy the German wireless stations at Yap in the Caroline Islands , Nauru , and Rabaul in New Britain . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Home Army = = = 
 Despite some progress , by 1914 the Citizen Forces were still incomplete , numbering approximately 45 @,@ 915 men , with many units still to be raised . During the precautionary stage on 2 August 1914 prior to the outbreak of war , Citizen Forces units were called up to guard key infrastructure and essential points and man coastal forts and harbour defences . Militia fortress companies assisted the permanent artillery and engineers in manning defence electric lights at Port Jackson , Port Phillip , Fort Lytton , Fremantle and on the Derwent River . All coastal defence batteries were activated hours before the declaration of war against Germany ( which took place at 9 : 00 am Melbourne time on 4 August ) . The next morning the first Allied shots of the war were fired by the garrison at Fort Nepean , which was located at the opening of Port Phillip Bay , after the examination battery there fired a shell over the bows of the German cargo ship SS Pfalz when the ship failed to stop . In accordance with pre @-@ war plans mines were ready to be laid by the Royal Australian Engineers to protect Port Jackson and Port Phillip ; however , the risk of attack was not considered sufficient to justify the establishment of the minefields and their ongoing maintenance . 
 After the initial call @-@ up of reservists to man the garrison artillery , the commanding officers of the other militia units were directed to begin preparations to raise an infantry division and a light horse division for home defence tasks . By the end of August 1914 the Government had judged that a force of this size was unnecessary given that Australia was distant from the war zones . Instead , it was decided to maintain only a small number of infantry battalions and light horse regiments on active duty at any one time . By the end of 1914 the home defence force comprised 100 @,@ 000 reservists , of whom 56 @,@ 000 were members of the Citizen Forces and 51 @,@ 000 were rifle club volunteers . Despite fears of sabotage and uprisings by German @-@ Australians , no domestic threat eventuated . From 1915 , only skeleton garrisons were maintained at coastal forts , but the personnel manning them were forbidden to enlist in the AIF . This ban was lifted in April 1915 but the presence of a German commerce raider in Australian waters caused a mobilisation from February to April 1916 , while another occurred in April 1918 for the same reason . In June 1918 , 9 @,@ 215 home service troops were on active duty in Australia , alongside 2 @,@ 476 regular soldiers . Up to 50 @,@ 000 militiamen enlisted in the AIF during the war . 
 = = = Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force = = = 
 The Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) began forming following a request by the British government on 6 August 1914 . The AN & MEF comprised one battalion of infantry of 1 @,@ 000 men enlisted in Sydney — known as the 1st Battalion , AN & MEF — plus 500 naval reservists and ex @-@ sailors who would serve as infantry . Another battalion of militia from the Queensland @-@ based Kennedy Regiment , which had been hurriedly dispatched to garrison Thursday Island , also contributed 500 volunteers to the force . Under the command of Colonel William Holmes , the AN & MEF departed Sydney on 19 August aboard HMAS Berrima and halted at Palm Island off Townsville until the New Zealand force , escorted by the battlecruiser HMAS Australia , cruiser HMAS Melbourne , and the French cruiser Montcalm , occupied Samoa on 30 August . The AN & MEF then moved to Port Moresby where it met the Queensland contingent aboard the transport TSS Kanowna . The force then sailed for German New Guinea on 7 September but the Kanowna was left behind when her stokers refused to work . The soldiers from the Kennedy Regiment were also left in Port Moresby as Holmes felt that they were not trained or equipped well enough to be committed to the fighting that was expected . Following the capture of German possessions in the region in September , the AN & MEF provided occupation forces for the duration of the war . Holmes returned to Australia in early 1915 and re @-@ enlisted in the AIF , as did most of his men . They were replaced by the 3rd Battalion , AN & MEF , which was known as the " Tropical Force " because it had been specially enlisted for service in the tropics . 
 = = = First Australian Imperial Force = = = 
 At the start of the war , Australia 's military forces were focused upon the part @-@ time militia . The small number of regular personnel were mostly artillerymen or engineers , and were generally assigned to the task of coastal defence . Due to the provisions of the Defence Act 1903 , which precluded sending conscripts overseas , upon the outbreak of war it was realised that a totally separate , all volunteer force would need to be raised . The Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) began forming shortly after the outbreak of war , officially coming into being on 15 August 1914 . Upon formation , the AIF consisted of the 1st Division and the 1st Light Horse Brigade . As part of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps ( ANZAC ) , the 1st Division subsequently fought alongside the combined New Zealand and Australian Division at Gallipoli between April and December 1915 , being reinforced by the 2nd Division which was later raised , as well as three light horse brigades . After being evacuated to Egypt the AIF was expanded to five infantry divisions , which were committed to the fighting in France and Belgium along the Western Front in March 1916 as part of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) . Meanwhile , two mounted divisions remained in the Middle East to fight against Turkish forces in the Sinai and Palestine , serving with the Egyptian Expeditionary Force . In contrast to the static trench warfare that developed in Europe , the troops in the Middle East mostly experienced a more fluid form of warfare involving manoeuvre and combined arms tactics . 
 Continuing to grow through the war , the AIF eventually consisted of five infantry divisions , two mounted divisions and a mixture of other units . At the start of the Gallipoli Campaign , the AIF had four infantry brigades with the first three making up the 1st Division . The 4th Brigade was joined with the sole New Zealand infantry brigade to form the New Zealand and Australian Division . The 2nd Division was formed in Egypt in 1915 and was sent to Gallipoli in August to reinforce the 1st Division , doing so without its artillery and having only partially completed its training . After Gallipoli , the infantry underwent a major expansion . The 3rd Division was formed in Australia and sent to France . The New Zealand and Australian Division was broken up with the New Zealand elements forming the New Zealand Division , while the original Australian infantry brigades ( 1st to 4th ) were split in half to form another four brigades which were used to form the 4th and 5th Divisions . This ensured the battalions of the two new divisions had a core of experienced soldiers . Organised into I and II ANZAC Corps , the divisions were subsequently deployed to the Western Front . The 6th Division commenced forming in England in February 1917 , but was never deployed to France and was broken up in September of that year to provide reinforcements to the other five divisions . In November 1917 the five Australian divisions of I and II ANZAC Corps merged to become the Australian Corps . 
 During the Gallipoli Campaign four light horse brigades had been dismounted and fought alongside the infantry divisions . However , in March 1916 the ANZAC Mounted Division was formed in Egypt ( so named because it contained one mounted brigade from New Zealand ) . Likewise , the Australian Mounted Division — formed in February 1917 — was originally named the Imperial Mounted Division because it contained the British 5th and 6th Mounted Brigades . Each division consisted of three mounted light horse brigades , each of which consisted of three regiments . Following the expansion of the Desert Column in August 1917 these divisions formed part of the Desert Mounted Corps , which consisted of the ANZAC Mounted Division , Australian Mounted Division and the Imperial Camel Corps Brigade ( which included a number of Australian , British and New Zealand camel companies ) . The AIF also included the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , which consisted of four operational squadrons — Nos. 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 , and four training squadrons — Nos. 5 , 6 , 7 and 8 . More than 2 @,@ 000 women served with the AIF , mainly in the Australian Army Nursing Service . In addition , a number of other specialist units were also raised , including tunnelling companies , motor transport units , railway , ordnance , workshops and service units , and hospitals and other specialist medical and dental units . One small armoured unit was also raised . 
 The AIF was an all volunteer force for the duration of the war . Australia was one of only two belligerents on either side not to introduce conscription during the war ( along with South Africa ) . Although a system of compulsory training had been introduced in 1911 for home service , under Australian law it did not extend to overseas service . In Australia , two plebiscites on using conscription to expand the AIF were defeated in October 1916 and December 1917 , thereby preserving the volunteer status but stretching the AIF 's reserves towards the end of the war . Ultimately , the voluntary system of recruitment proved unable to sustain the force structure of the AIF , failing to provide sufficient replacements for the heavy casualties it sustained and requiring a number of units to be disbanded towards the end of the war . Each infantry battalion originated from a geographical region , with men recruited from that area . New South Wales and Victoria , the most populous states , filled their own battalions ( and even whole brigades ) while the " Outer States " — Queensland , South Australia , Western Australia and Tasmania — often combined to assemble a battalion . The light horse and artillery were also recruited on a territorial basis . 
 Hastily deployed , the first contingent of AIF was essentially untrained and suffered from widespread equipment shortages . In early 1915 the AIF was largely an inexperienced force , with only a small percentage of its members having previous combat experience . However , many officers and non @-@ commissioned personnel ( NCOs ) had previously served in the pre @-@ war permanent or part @-@ time forces , and a significant proportion of the enlisted personnel had received some basic military instruction as part of Australia 's compulsory training scheme . Predominantly a fighting force based on infantry battalions and light horse regiments , the AIF had a high proportion of close combat troops to support personnel . Nevertheless , the AIF eventually included a large number of logistics and administrative units which were capable of meeting most of the force 's needs , and in some circumstances provided support to nearby allied units . Each division also included a range of combat support and service units , including artillery , machine @-@ gun , mortar , engineer , pioneer , signals , logistic , medical , veterinary and administrative units . Corps troops included light horse , army artillery , and cyclists . Regardless , the AIF mainly relied on the British Army for medium and heavy artillery support and other weapons systems necessary for combined arms warfare that were developed later in the war , including aircraft and tanks . 
 Although operationally placed at the disposal of the British , the AIF was administered as a separate national force , with the Australian government reserving the responsibility for the promotion , pay , clothing , equipment and feeding of its personnel . The AIF was administered separately from the home @-@ based army in Australia , and a parallel system was set up to deal with non @-@ operational matters including record @-@ keeping , finance , ordnance , personnel , quartermaster and other issues . The AIF also had separate conditions of service , rules regarding promotion and seniority , and graduation list for officers . This responsibility initially fell to Bridges , in addition to his duties as its commander ; however , an Administrative Headquarters was later set up in Cairo in Egypt . Following the redeployment of the Australian infantry divisions to the Western Front it was relocated to London . Additional responsibilities included liaison with the British War Office as well as the Australian Department of Defence in Melbourne , whilst also being tasked with the command of all Australian troops in Britain . A training headquarters was also established at Salisbury . 
 By the end of the war the AIF had gained a reputation as a well @-@ trained and highly effective military force , enduring more than two years of costly fighting on the Western Front before playing a significant role in the final Allied victory in 1918 , albeit as a smaller part of the wider British Empire war effort . Like the other Dominion divisions from Canada and New Zealand , the Australians were viewed as being among the best of the British forces in France , and were often used to spearhead operations . The exploits of the AIF at Gallipoli , and then on the Western Front , subsequently became central to the national mythology . Commemorating and celebrating the AIF became an entrenched tradition following World War I , with Anzac Day forming the centrepiece of remembrance of the war . The soldiers who served in the AIF , known colloquially as " Diggers " , in time became " ... one of the paramount Australian archetypes . " 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 = = = Occupation of German New Guinea = = = 
 Following the outbreak of war Australian forces moved quickly to reduce the threat to shipping posed by the proximity of Germany 's Pacific colonies . The Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force ( AN & MEF ) , a 2000 @-@ man volunteer force — separate from the AIF — and consisting of an infantry battalion plus 500 naval reservists and ex @-@ sailors , was rapidly formed under the command of Colonel William Holmes . The objectives of the force were the wireless stations on Nauru , and those at Yap in the Caroline Islands , and at Rabaul in German New Guinea . The force reached Rabaul on 11 September 1914 and occupied it the next day , encountering only brief resistance from the German and native defenders during fighting at Bita Paka and Toma . German New Guinea surrendered on 17 September 1914 . Australian losses were light , including six killed during the fighting . 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 After a period of rudimentary training in Australia , the first contingent of the AIF departed by ship in a single convoy from Albany on 1 November 1914 . Although they were originally bound for England to undergo further training prior to employment on the Western Front , the Australians were instead sent to British @-@ controlled Egypt in order to pre @-@ empt any Turkish attack against the strategically important Suez Canal , and with a view to opening another front against the Central Powers . Aiming to knock Turkey out of the war the British then decided to stage an amphibious lodgement at Gallipoli and following a period of training and reorganisation the Australians were included amongst the British , Indian and French forces committed to the campaign . The combined Australian and New Zealand Army Corps — commanded by British general William Birdwood — subsequently landed at Anzac Cove on the Gallipoli peninsula on 25 April 1915 . Although promising to transform the war if successful , the Gallipoli Campaign was ill @-@ conceived and shortly after the landing a blood stalemate developed . This ultimately lasted eight months before Allied commanders decided to evacuate the troops without having achieved the campaign 's objectives . Australian casualties totalled 26 @,@ 111 , including 8 @,@ 141 killed . 
 = = = Egypt and Palestine = = = 
 After the withdrawal from Gallipoli the Australians returned to Egypt and the AIF underwent a major expansion . In 1916 , the infantry began to move to France while the mounted infantry units remained in the Middle East to fight the Turks . Australian troops of the ANZAC Mounted Division and the Australian Mounted Division saw action in all the major battles of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign , playing a pivotal role in fighting the Turkish troops that were threatening British control of Egypt . The Australians first saw combat during the Senussi Uprising in the Libyan Desert and the Nile Valley , during which the combined British forces successfully put down the primitive pro @-@ Turkish Islamic sect with heavy casualties . The ANZAC Mounted Division subsequently saw considerable action in the Battle of Romani between 3 and 5 August 1916 against the Turks who were eventually pushed back . Following this victory the British forces went on the offensive in the Sinai , although the pace of the advance was governed by the speed by which the railway and water pipeline could be constructed from the Suez Canal . Rafa was captured on 9 January 1917 , while the last of the small Turkish garrisons in the Sinai were eliminated in February . 
 The advance entered Palestine and an initial , unsuccessful attempt was made to capture Gaza on 26 March 1917 , while a second and equally unsuccessful attempt was launched on 19 April . A third assault occurred between 31 October and 7 November and this time both the ANZAC Mounted Division and the Australian Mounted Division took part . The battle was a complete success for the British , overrunning the Gaza – Beersheba line and capturing 12 @,@ 000 Turkish soldiers . The critical moment was the capture of Beersheba on the first day , after the Australian 4th Light Horse Brigade charged more than 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) . The Turkish trenches were overrun , with the Australians capturing the wells at Beersheba and securing the valuable water they contained along with over 700 prisoners for the loss of 31 killed and 36 wounded . Later , Australian troops assisted in pushing the Turkish forces out of Palestine and took part in actions at Mughar Ridge , Jerusalem and the Megiddo . The Turkish government surrendered on 30 October 1918 . Units of the Light Horse were subsequently used to help put down a nationalist revolt in Egypt in 1919 and did so with efficiency and brutality , although they suffered a number of fatalities in the process . Total Australian battle casualties in the campaign were 4 @,@ 851 , including 1 @,@ 374 dead . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Five infantry divisions of the AIF saw action in France and Belgium , leaving Egypt in March 1916 . I ANZAC Corps subsequently took up positions in a quiet sector south of Armentieres on 7 April 1916 and for the next two and a half years the AIF participated in most of the major battles on the Western Front , earning a formidable reputation . Although spared from the disastrous first day of the Battle of the Somme , within weeks four Australian divisions had been committed . The 5th Division , positioned on the left flank , was the first in action during the Battle of Fromelles on 19 July 1916 , suffering 5 @,@ 533 casualties in a single day . The 1st Division entered the line on 23 July , assaulting Pozieres , and by the time that they were relieved by the 2nd Division on 27 July , they had suffered 5 @,@ 286 casualties . Mouquet Farm was attacked in August , with casualties totalling 6 @,@ 300 men . By the time the AIF was withdrawn from the Somme to reorganise , they had suffered 23 @,@ 000 casualties in just 45 days . 
 In March 1917 , the 2nd and 5th Divisions pursued the Germans back to the Hindenburg Line , capturing the town of Bapaume . On 11 April , the 4th Division assaulted the Hindenburg Line in the disastrous First Battle of Bullecourt , losing over 3 @,@ 000 casualties and 1 @,@ 170 captured . On 15 April , the 1st and 2nd Divisions were counter @-@ attacked near Lagnicourt and were forced to abandon the town , before recapturing it . The 2nd Division then took part in the Second Battle of Bullecourt , beginning on 3 May , and succeeded in taking sections of the Hindenburg Line and holding them until relieved by the 1st Division . Finally , on 7 May the 5th Division relieved the 1st , remaining in the line until the battle ended in mid @-@ May . Combined , these efforts cost 7 @,@ 482 Australian casualties . 
 On 7 June 1917 , II ANZAC Corps — along with two British corps — launched an operation in Flanders in order to eliminate a salient south of Ypres . The attack commenced with the detonation of a million pounds ( 454 @,@ 545 kg ) of explosives that had been placed underneath the Messines ridge , destroying the German trenches . The advance was virtually unopposed , and despite strong German counterattacks the next day , it succeeded . Australian casualties during the Battle of Messines included nearly 6 @,@ 800 men . I ANZAC Corps then took part in the Third Battle of Ypres in Belgium as part of the campaign to capture the Gheluvelt Plateau , between September and November 1917 . Individual actions took place at Menin Road , Polygon Wood , Broodseinde , Poelcappelle and Passchendaele and over the course of eight weeks of fighting the Australians suffered 38 @,@ 000 casualties . 
 On 21 March 1918 , the German Army launched its Spring Offensive in a last @-@ ditched effort to win the war , unleashing 63 divisions over a 70 @-@ mile ( 110 km ) front . As the Allies fell back the 3rd and 4th Divisions were rushed south to Amiens on the Somme . The offensive lasted for the next five months and all five AIF divisions in France were engaged in the attempt to stem the tide . By late May the Germans had pushed to within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of Paris . During this time the Australians fought at Dernacourt , Morlancourt , Villers @-@ Bretonneux , Hangard Wood , Hazebrouck , and Hamel . At Hamel the commander of the Australian Corps , Lieutenant General John Monash , successfully used combined arms — including aircraft , artillery and armour — in an attack for the first time . 
 The German offensive ground to a halt in mid @-@ July and a brief lull followed , during which the Australians undertook a series of raids , known as Peaceful Penetrations . The Allies soon launched their own offensive — the Hundred Days Offensive — ultimately ending the war . Beginning on 8 August 1918 the offensive included four Australian divisions striking at Amiens . Using the combined arms techniques developed earlier at Hamel , significant gains were made on what became known as the " Black Day " of the German Army . The offensive continued for four months , and during the Second Battle of the Somme the Australian Corps fought actions at Lihons , Etinehem , Proyart , Chuignes , and Mont St Quentin , before their final engagement of the war on 5 October 1918 at Montbrehain . While these actions were successful , the Australian divisions suffered considerable casualties and by September 1918 the average strength of their infantry battalions was between 300 and 400 , which was less than 50 percent of the authorised strength . The AIF was withdrawn for rest and reorganisation following the engagement at Montbrehain , and was subsequently out of the line when the armistice was declared on 11 November 1918 . Although , some artillery units continued to support British and American units into November , and the AFC maintained flying operations until the end of the war . Total Australian casualties on the Western Front numbered 181 @,@ 000 , including 46 @,@ 000 of whom died . Another 114 @,@ 000 men were wounded , 16 @,@ 000 gassed , and approximately 3 @,@ 850 were taken prisoners of war . 
 = = = Other theatres = = = 
 Small numbers of AIF personnel also served in other theatres . Australian troops from the 1st Australian Wireless Signal Squadron provided communications for British forces during the Mesopotamian Campaign . They participated in a number of battles , including the Battle of Baghdad in March 1917 and the Battle of Ramadi in September that year . Following the Russian Revolution in 1917 , the Caucasus Front collapsed , leaving Central Asia open to the Turkish Army . A special force , known as Dunsterforce after its commander , Major General Lionel Dunsterville , was formed from hand @-@ picked British officers and NCOs to organise any remaining Russian forces or civilians who were ready to fight the Turkish forces . Some 20 Australian officers served with Dunsterforce in the Caucasus Campaign and one party under Captain Stanley Savige was instrumental in protecting thousands of Assyrian refugees . Australian nurses staffed four British hospitals in Salonika , and another 10 in India . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 The position of Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) had been established in 1909 and was responsible for maintaining the war organisation of the Army , preparing defensive plans , the training and examination of officers , and the collection and interpretation of intelligence . In addition , the incumbent also sat as First Military Member of the Military Board . The Military Board was responsible to the Minister for Defence for the administration of the Australian Military Forces ( AMF ) . Colonel James Gordon Legge was appointed CGS on 1 May 1914 , replacing Brigadier General Joseph Gordon , but was still en route from Britain when war had broken out . With Bridges occupied in organising the AIF , Legge took over the organisation of the AN & MEF for service in New Guinea . After Bridges departed for overseas , Legge took over responsibility for the training of AIF reinforcements . 
 When originally formed in 1914 the AIF was commanded by Bridges , who also commanded the 1st Division . After Bridges ' death at Gallipoli in May 1915 , the Australian government appointed Legge , a Boer War veteran , to replace Bridges in command of both . However , British Lieutenant General Sir John Maxwell , the commander of British Troops in Egypt , objected to Legge bypassing him and communicating directly with Australia . The Australian government failed to support Legge , who thereafter deferred to Lieutenant General William Birdwood , the commander of the Australian and New Zealand Army Corps . When Legge was sent to Egypt to command the 2nd Division , Birdwood made representations to the Australian government that Legge could not act as commander of the AIF , and that the Australian government should transfer Bridges ' authority to him . This was done on a temporary basis on 18 September 1915 . Birdwood was officially confirmed as commander of the AIF on 14 September 1916 , backdated to 18 September 1915 , while also commanding I ANZAC Corps on the Western Front . 
 Meanwhile , Colonel Godfrey Irving was appointed temporary CGS on 24 May 1915 , replacing Legge . His chief responsibility was overseeing the expansion of the training establishment in Australia to provide reinforcements for the AIF units overseas , and raising and training what would become the 2nd Division . Colonel Hubert Foster took over as CGS in January 1916 . However , following a period of ill @-@ health Legge had been relieved of command his division and returned to Australia . Resuming his post as CGS in October 1917 , he remained in the position until 1920 . In this position Legge 's role was primarily one of dealing with politicians in Australia , and providing reinforcements for the AIF overseas . 
 Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel , a regular officer who had commanded the 1st Light Horse Brigade upon its formation in 1914 and later the ANZAC Mounted Division , became the first Australian to command a corps , when he took command of the Desert Mounted Corps in 1917 . Birdwood was later given command of the Australian Corps on its formation in November 1917 . Another Australian , Monash , took over command of the corps on 31 May 1918 . Despite being promoted to command the British Fifth Army , Birdwood retained command of the AIF . By this time four of the five divisional commanders were Australian officers . The vast majority of brigade commands were also held by Australian officers . As a result of the policy of appointing officers exclusively from enlisted personnel that was later adopted in the AIF , by 1918 the majority of company and battalion commanders had risen from the ranks . A number of British staff officers were attached to the headquarters of the Australian Corps , and its predecessors , due to a shortage of suitably trained Australian officers . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The weaponry and equipment of the Australian Army had mostly been standardised on that used by the British Army prior to the outbreak of World War I. Meanwhile , in the years prior to the war basic defence industries had been established in Australia for the production of uniforms , webbing , boots , small arms and explosives and ammunition . Despite this , the majority of the equipment initially issued came from British Army stocks until Australian production was able to be increased to meet the demand that resulted from rapid military expansion at the start of the war . These included such items as heliographs , water bottles , bits , stirrups , spurs and shovels , although saddlery and harnesses were provided by a local government manufacturer . Although Australia had a relatively limited industrial base during the war , it was ultimately able to supply the majority of the Army 's more simple requirements ; however , the remainder of the more complex equipment had to be purchased from suppliers in Britain . 
 During the war the equipment used changed as tactics evolved , and generally followed British developments . The standard issued rifle was the .303 @-@ inch Short Magazine Lee – Enfield Mark III ( SMLE ) , and while a factory had been constructed at Lithgow in New South Wales in 1912 , local production was at first limited to 15 @,@ 000 rifles a year , which proved insufficient . As a result , the AIF was initially equipped from stocks held by the Citizen Forces , until production was increased to 35 @,@ 000 rifles a year by the end of 1914 . A number of Lithgow @-@ made <unk> were later also supplied to New Zealand forces . Ammunition was supplied from factories in Australia , New Zealand and Britain . Meanwhile , the speed with which the AIF was initially raised meant that it suffered from a range of equipment shortages , especially artillery . These were unable to be rectified prior to the landing at Gallipoli and later impacted on the conduct of the campaign . Artillery was unable to be manufactured in Australia , nor were additional weapons able to be obtained from Britain in the short term . In time though these shortfalls were overcome , and as additional AIF divisions were raised the Australian field artillery was also expanded and was equipped from British Army depots on their arrival in France in 1916 . 
 The pre @-@ war Australian Army uniform formed the basis of that worn by the AN & MEF and the AIF , which both adopted the broad @-@ brimmed slouch hat and rising sun badge . Infantrymen used 1908 @-@ pattern webbing , while light horsemen used leather bandoliers and load carriage equipment . A large pack was issued as part of marching order . In 1915 , infantrymen were issued with the SMLE and long sword bayonet , while periscope rifles were also used . From 1916 they also used manufactured hand grenades and <unk> rifle grenades , both of which had been in short supply at Gallipoli ( necessitating the use of improvised " jam @-@ tin " grenades ) . A grenade discharge cup was issued for fitting to the muzzle of a rifle for the projection of the Mills bomb from 1917 . Machine @-@ guns initially included a small number of Maxim or Vickers medium machine @-@ guns , but subsequently also included the Lewis light machine @-@ gun , the latter two of which were issued in greater numbers as the war continued so as to increase the firepower available to the infantry in response to the tactical problems of trench warfare . Light horse units underwent a similar process , although were issued Hotchkiss guns to replace their Lewis guns in early 1917 . 
 From 1916 the Stokes light trench mortar was issued to infantry to replace a range of trench catapults and smaller trench mortars , whilst it was also used in a battery at brigade @-@ level to provide organic indirect fire support . In addition , individual soldiers often used a range of personnel weapons including knives , clubs , knuckle @-@ dusters , revolvers and pistols . Snipers on the Western Front used Pattern 1914 Enfield sniper rifles with telescopic sights . Light horsemen also carried bayonets ( as they were initially considered mounted infantry ) , although the Australian Mounted Division adopted cavalry swords in late 1917 . Artillery included 18 @-@ pounders which equipped the field batteries , 4 @.@ 5 @-@ inch howitzers used by the howitzer batteries , and 8 @-@ inch and 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch howitzers which equipped the heavy ( siege ) batteries . The 9 @.@ 45 @-@ inch heavy mortar equipped a heavy trench mortar battery , while medium trench mortar batteries were equipped with the 2 @-@ inch medium mortar , and later the 6 @-@ inch mortar . Light Horse units were supported by British and Indian artillery . The main mount used by the light horse was the Waler , while draught horses were used by the artillery and for wheeled transport . Camels were also used , both as mounts and transport , and donkeys and mules were used as pack animals . 
 = = Training and doctrine = = 
 In 1914 , the Australian Army mostly copied British Army doctrine , in as much as one existed semi @-@ officially in the form of the Field Service Regulations . Pre @-@ war planning had largely seen the Australian Army focus on defending the continent from invasion with a relatively small force , and as a result any future war was thought to likely be a highly mobile one . This was in contrast to the offensive focus of many British and European theorists of this time , despite their influence on local professional military debate . As a result , there was an emphasis on entrenchments , and whilst there was a recognition of the problems posed by increasing firepower as a result of the continued development of small arms and artillery technology , there was considered to be little requirement for the direct assault of static defensive positions given the room for manoeuvre afforded by the vastness of the Australian continent . Meanwhile , in order to be compatible with British forces , pre @-@ war agreements ensured that Australian Army units were mostly organised , trained and equipped in accordance with British Army doctrine and establishment tables . 
 Despite the efforts of the compulsory training scheme in the years before the war , very few of the men who served in the AN & MEF had had previous military experience . It had been hastily equipped and received only rudimentary training prior to its departure within days of its formation . During the stop over at Palm Island the men went ashore almost every day , and although the shingle beach , rocky ground and bush made the terrain unsuited to tactical manoeuvres , they were able to practice maintaining contact in dense jungle , a skill which later proved important during the fighting at Bita Paka . Yet , with the force remaining at Palm Island for only a week this training was limited and was unlikely to have adequately prepared the force if it were more seriously tested . Ultimately though this lack of training did not end up being costly as German resistance proved only limited , with the fighting over in less than a day and resulting in fewer than a dozen Australian casualties . 
 In the early stages of the AIF 's formation training was rudimentary and performed mainly at unit @-@ level . There were no formal schools and volunteers proceeded straight from recruiting stations to their assigned units , which were still in the process of being established . Upon arrival , in makeshift camps the recruits received basic training in drill and musketry from officers and non @-@ commissioned officers , who were not trained instructors and had been appointed mainly because they had previous service in the part @-@ time forces . In some units this training took place over a period of six to eight weeks , although others spent as little as one day on live firing before departing for overseas . Following the embarkation of the initial force to the Middle East , further training was undertaken in the desert . This was more organised than the training provided in Australia , but was still rushed . Individual training was consolidated but progressed quickly into collective training at battalion and brigade @-@ level . Training exercises , marches , drill and musketry practices followed but the standard of the exercises was limited and lacked realism , meaning that commanders did not benefit from handling their troops under battlefield conditions . 
 Some soldiers had received training through the compulsory training scheme , while others had served as volunteers in the part @-@ time forces before the war or as members of the British Army , but their numbers were limited . In contrast , the majority of officers initially appointed had previous military experience . This was largely through service in the pre @-@ war militia , though , where there had been little to no formal officer training . In addition , there was a small cadre of junior officers who had been trained for the permanent force at the Royal Military College , Duntroon , but their numbers were very small and at the outbreak of the war the first class had to be graduated early in order for them to join the AIF , being placed mainly in staff positions . Other than small numbers of Duntroon graduates , from January 1915 the only means to be commissioned into the AIF was from the ranks of enlisted personnel . While the AIF 's initial senior officers had been members of the pre @-@ war military , few had any substantial experience in managing brigade @-@ sized or larger units in the field as training exercises on this scale had been rarely conducted before the outbreak of hostilities . This inexperience contributed to tactical mistakes and avoidable casualties during the Gallipoli Campaign . 
 After the AIF was transferred to the European battlefield , the training system was greatly improved . Efforts were made at standardisation , with a formal training organisation and curriculum — consisting of 14 weeks basic training for infantrymen — being established . In Egypt , as the AIF was expanded in early 1916 , each brigade established a training battalion . These formations were later sent to the United Kingdom and were absorbed into a large system of depots that was established on Salisbury Plain by each branch of the AIF including infantry , engineers , artillery , signals , medical and logistics . After completing their initial instruction at depots in Australia and the United Kingdom , soldiers were posted to in @-@ theatre base depots where they received advanced training before being posted as reinforcements to operational units . Like the British Army , the AIF sought to rapidly pass on " lessons learned " as the war progressed , and these were widely transmitted through regularly updated training documents . The experience gained through combat also improved the skills of the surviving officers and men , and by 1918 the AIF was a very well trained and well led force . Indeed , after coming to terms with the conditions on the Western Front the Australians had played a part in the development of new combined arms tactics for offensive operations that occurred throughout the BEF , while in defence they employed patrolling , trench raids , and Peaceful Penetration tactics to dominate no man 's land . In this manner the AIF ultimately developed its own tactical doctrine . 
 Following the deployment of the AIF a reinforcement system was used to replace wastage . Reinforcements received training in Australia before sailing as drafts and joining their assigned units at the front . To provide officer reinforcements , a series of AIF officer schools , such as that at Broadmeadows , were established in Australia before officer training was eventually concentrated at a school near Duntroon . These schools produced a large number of officers , but they were eventually closed in 1917 due to concerns that their graduates were too inexperienced and after this most replacement officers were drawn from the ranks of the AIF 's deployed units , and candidates attended either British officer training units , or in @-@ theatre schools established in France . After February 1916 , the issue of NCO training was also taken more seriously , and several schools were established , with training initially being two weeks in duration before being increased to two months . 
 Meanwhile , the Citizen Forces deteriorated during the war as the AIF was given precedence for manpower and other resources . While the size of the force increased during 1915 , a high proportion volunteered for overseas service with the AIF . Many officers were used to train AIF recruits , and camp facilities and equipment were also assigned to the expeditionary force . This greatly disrupted the Citizen Forces training activities , with few units conducting camps during late 1915 or 1916 . While there were intakes of conscripts to the Citizen Forces during 1916 and 1917 , few were ever required to undertake periods of training or active service . In October 1916 approximately 37 @,@ 000 reservists were called up for a short period of compulsory training ahead of the first plebiscite on conscription . By 1918 the Citizen Forces were close to collapse as many of its best members had transferred to the AIF and the remaining personnel were largely untrained . Attempts were made to revive the Citizen Forces during the last months of the war . The initially successful German Spring Offensive , which began in March , led to concerns Japan could attack Australia . In response , regular training camps for militia units were reinstated . A scheme to set up a reserve force manned by returned AIF veterans attracted 17 @,@ 000 volunteers , yet they received no training . 
 = = Demobilisation = = 
 After the war , all AIF units went into camp and began the process of demobilisation . The AIF 's involvement in the occupation of former German or Turkish territory was limited as Prime Minister William Hughes requested their early repatriation . The exceptions were No. 4 Squadron , AFC and the 3rd Australian Casualty Clearing Station , which participated in the occupation of the Rhineland . The 7th Light Horse Regiment was also sent to occupy the Gallipoli peninsula for six weeks , along with a New Zealand regiment . At the time of the armistice , there were 95 @,@ 951 soldiers in France and a further 58 @,@ 365 in England , 17 @,@ 255 in the Middle East plus nurses in Salonika and India , all to be transported home . Around 120 Australians decided to delay their departure and instead joined the British Army , serving in Northern Russia during the Russian Civil War , although officially the Australian government refused to contribute forces to the campaign . 
 By May 1919 , the last troops were out of France , and 70 @,@ 000 were encamped on Salisbury Plain . The men returned home on a " first come , first go " basis , with the process overseen by Monash in Britain and Chauvel in Cairo . Many of the soldiers undertook government @-@ funded training in civilian occupations while awaiting repatriation to Australia . Only 10 @,@ 000 Australian soldiers remained in England by September . Monash , the senior Australian commander , was repatriated on 26 December 1919 . The last transport organised to repatriate troops was H.T. <unk> , which departed London on 13 April 1920 . The AIF officially ceased to exist on 1 April 1921 , and on 1 July 1921 the military hospitals in Australia passed into civilian hands . As a volunteer force , all units were demobilised at the end of the war . Australia 's part @-@ time military force , the Citizen Forces , was subsequently reorganised to replicate the AIF 's divisional structure and the numerical designations of many of its units to perpetuate their identities and battle honours . The AFC remained part of the Australian Army until 1919 , when it was disbanded ; later forming the basis of the Royal Australian Air Force . 
 Meanwhile , following the end of hostilities in November 1918 the role of the AN & MEF in the former German colonies in New Guinea had become primarily one of civil administration , although it continued to provide a garrison for the next two and a half years . The military government continued until 1921 when Australia received a mandate from the League of Nations to govern the territory . Despite the AN & MEF having seen no further action following the initial seizure of the colony , in the years that followed the climate and a range of tropical diseases , such as malaria , had resulted in dozens of fatalities before the deployment concluded . Although interrupted by Japanese occupation between 1942 – 45 , Australian administration lasted until 1975 when Papua New Guinea gained its independence . 
 The war exposed deficiencies in Australia 's pre @-@ war military system which had emphasised the creation of a large part @-@ time militia . Indeed , despite the considerable effort and resources expended raising it , the Citizen Forces had not been used during the war as no major threat to Australia had emerged , while an expeditionary force of volunteers had had to be raised from scratch in order to fight overseas . After the war senior military officers advised a range of legislative and organizational reforms ; however , the perceived success of the AIF , war @-@ wariness , a general community antipathy toward military matters and preparedness , distrust of militarism , and funding constraints in the inter @-@ war years meant that they were largely not adopted by the government when the Citizen Forces were re @-@ established . Instead , a similar system remained in place until World War II . This resulted in an inefficient " two army " system which would once again require the raising of a separate volunteer force to serve overseas on the outbreak of hostilities in 1939 . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 A total of 416 @,@ 809 men enlisted in the Army during the war and 331 @,@ 781 men were sent overseas to serve as part of the AIF . A further 3 @,@ 011 men served in the AN & MEF . The AIF sustained approximately 210 @,@ 000 casualties , of which 61 @,@ 519 were killed or died of wounds . This represented a total casualty rate of 64 @.@ 8 percent , which was among the highest of any belligerent for the war . About another 4 @,@ 000 men were captured . The majority of casualties occurred among the infantry ( which sustained a casualty rate of 79 percent ) ; however , the artillery ( 58 percent ) and light horse ( 32 percent ) also incurred significant losses . 
 = Puncheon Run Connector = 
 The Puncheon Run Connector is an unnumbered four @-@ lane freeway in Dover , Delaware . It is named after Puncheon Run , a stream it follows . It provides a connection between U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) and the northbound direction of the Delaware Route 1 ( DE 1 ) toll road , with an intermediate interchange at Bay Road . The road is part of the National Highway System and serves as part of a north @-@ south route for traffic crossing the Delmarva Peninsula . Planning for the Puncheon Run Connector began in the 1980s and originally included a freeway upgrade for US 13 south to Woodside . The connector was scaled back to its current routing in 1992 . The freeway was built between 1998 and 2000 at a cost of $ 25 million . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Puncheon Run Connector begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with US 13 in Dover , heading to the northeast as a four @-@ lane freeway . After passing over State Street , the freeway curves to the east and passes between woods to the south and residential and commercial development to the north . The road crosses over the marshy St. Jones River and continues east @-@ northeast , passing between a residential neighborhood to the south and the Delaware Department of Transportation ( DelDOT ) headquarters to the north before coming to an eastbound exit and westbound entrance at Bay Road . Immediately after the Bay Road interchange , the Puncheon Run Connector merges into northbound DE 1 a short distance to the north of Dover Air Force Base . 
 The Puncheon Run Connector has an annual average daily traffic count of 13 @,@ 406 vehicles . The entire length of the Puncheon Run Connector is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning for the Puncheon Run Connector dates back to the 1980s , when a " Relief Route " was proposed for US 13 between Dover and Wilmington . In 1987 , plans called for the Puncheon Run Connector to be built along its current alignment between US 13 and DE 1 , with an intermediate interchange at US 113 ( Bay Road ) , in addition to US 13 being upgraded to a freeway south to Woodside , with interchanges at Webbs Lane in Dover and DE 10 in Camden . In 1992 , DelDOT held a meeting to discuss proposals for the road , including a possible Far West By @-@ Pass Connector through the western part of Dover . The city of Dover initially opposed the Puncheon Run Connector and favored the Far West By @-@ Pass Connector as the latter would ease traffic congestion caused by development in the western part of the city . Plans for the connector were modified in 1992 to not include the upgrade of US 13 to a freeway between Woodside and Dover . Prior to the construction of the Puncheon Run Connector , a site along Puncheon Run had to be excavated by DelDOT and Louis Berger & Associates as it consisted of Native American artifacts from prehistoric times . The excavation of the site lasted from October 1997 to September 1998 . Construction on the road began in October 1998 . The Puncheon Run Connector was completed and opened to traffic in a ribbon cutting ceremony on December 19 , 2000 . The road was constructed by David A. Bramble , Inc. and G.A. & F.C. Wagman , Inc. at a cost of $ 25 million . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Kent County . 
 = Robert White ( judge ) = 
 Robert White ( March 29 , 1759 – March 9 , 1831 ) was a distinguished early American military officer , lawyer , judge , and politician in the U.S. state of Virginia . 
 White represented Frederick County in the Virginia House of Delegates ( 1789 – 1792 ) and served as a judge of the General Court of Virginia ( 1793 – 1831 ) . Prior to his political and law careers , White served in the Virginia militia and Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War . 
 White was the grandson of Virginia pioneer settler and physician Dr. Robert White ( 1688 – 1752 ) and thus a member of the prominent White political family of Virginia and West Virginia . He was the nephew of United States House Representative Alexander White ( 1738 – 1804 ) and the brother of United States House Representative Francis White ( 1761 – 1826 ) . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Robert White was born on March 29 , 1759 , in Winchester , Virginia . He was a son of John White , one of the justices serving on the first Bench of Magistrates of the Frederick County court , and his wife , Ann Patton White . White was also a grandson of Dr. Robert White , an early physician and pioneer settler of Frederick County . White received his primary education at a grammar school near Marsh Creek in Pennsylvania under the direction of Reverend <unk> , a Presbyterian minister . At the age of 16 , White undertook a hiatus from his education to serve in the American Revolutionary War . 
 = = Military career = = 
 In 1775 , White enlisted as a private in the Virginia militia company under the command of Captain Hugh Stephenson ( or Stevenson ) , which had been organized in Berkeley County , Virginia ( present @-@ day Jefferson County , West Virginia ) . Stephenson 's company departed for the Boston campaign " a few days " before Daniel Morgan 's company departed from Winchester . White , along with Stephenson 's company , departed on June 20 , 1775 , from Morgan 's Spring near Shepherdstown and marched to Boston to reinforce commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Continental Army George Washington 's forces who had besieged the British Army forces there . 
 While in Boston , White 's " chivalric bearing " received the attention of Washington , who " saw in the boy the germ of that remarkable decision of character " . On March 17 , 1776 , British forces withdrew from Boston , thus ending the Boston campaign . In the summer of 1776 , White was elevated to the rank of ensign . White then fought as a lieutenant at the Battle of Germantown on October 4 , 1777 , under Major William Darke of Berkeley County . Throughout the spring of 1778 , White was engaged in attacking British Army detachments . 
 Later in 1778 at Short Hills , New Jersey , White suffered a fractured femur caused by a musket ball and received a wound to the head from the stock of a British Army grenadier 's musket . Following the engagement at Short Hills , White was taken as a prisoner of war by the British forces . White had fallen unconscious and was taken to the tent of " an amiable and accomplished " British officer who had rescued him from death . He was later exchanged , and in the autumn of 1778 White returned to Winchester " by slow and painful efforts , exceedingly lame , weak and emaciated by acute and protracted suffering " . His wounds had not yet healed by the time of his return to Winchester , but following the removal of bone fragments , the wound began to close . White remained permanently physically disabled as a result of his injuries . 
 While " not fully recovered from his wounds " , White received the commission of a captain of cavalry in 1779 . He commenced the recruitment and training of American troops in Philadelphia to fight in the war , but due to the severity of his injuries , he retired from military service at the age of 20 and returned to Winchester . White was inducted as an original member of the Society of the Cincinnati for his military service during the war . 
 = = Law and political careers = = 
 Following his military service and return to Winchester in 1779 , White studied jurisprudence under his uncle , Alexander White , one of the most preeminent lawyers practicing in the Shenandoah Valley . During the course of his four years of law studies , White read the legal treatises of William Blackstone and Edward Coke among others while lying on his back or propped up on a couch recovering from his injuries . White was admitted to practice law at Winchester in December 1782 , after which he engaged in the practice of law for eleven years . 
 White 's health continued to improve , and his law practice was " an extensive and profitable " one . In a May 1837 biographical sketch of White published in the Southern Literary Messenger , White was described as " an able lawyer , clear and cogent in argument , but not eloquent , his voice rather harsh and shrill , and in the impetuosity of debate his enunciation was sometimes affected even to stammering " . White maintained a " lofty eminence " within the Frederick County bar for over a decade . During this time , White served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates from 1789 to 1793 representing the multi @-@ member district of Frederick County . White ran for election against Matthew Page and Joseph Holmes for the seat in 1791 , and won alongside Page with 310 votes to Page 's 335 votes . White ran for election to his seat in 1793 against Page , Thomas Buck , and James Singleton . White received the largest total of votes with a result of 388 . 
 = = Judicial career and later life = = 
 White was appointed as the first judge serving Virginia 's tenth judicial district , which was composed of five counties , including Hampshire County . Winchester was chosen by an act of the Virginia General Assembly as the " center point " of this judicial district , where all judicial records were kept . His appointment as a judge of the tenth judicial district paid a meager compensation of 1 @,@ 600 dollars per annum . 
 White was then appointed a judge of the General Court of Virginia on November 16 , 1793 , and he continued to hold that office until his death in 1831 . In that period , White served as the president of the General Court of Virginia for several years before his death . Serving on the General Court of Virginia required White to travel to Richmond in June and November of each year . Until 1825 , White served as both a judge on the General Court of Virginia and a judge of Virginia 's tenth judicial district . 
 During the War of 1812 , White took a dislike to the " encroachment of military power " as Winchester began to attract a sizable number of recruits going off to fight in the war . White refused to permit military officers to appear before him in his courtroom with their swords by their sides . Several of White 's judicial opinions became well known as " powerful specimens of sound learning and extensive research " including the <unk> case , in which the defendant was tried for murder , and the Preston case , in which there was a legal question regarding estoppel . From his office , White conducted the teaching of jurisprudence to John Buchanan , a notable Maryland jurist who later served in the Maryland House of Delegates and as an associate justice on the Maryland Court of Appeals . 
 In the spring of 1825 , White was en route to serve on the court of Loudoun County and stayed the night at a tavern along the Shenandoah River . He was discovered by the proprietor the following morning suffering with paralysis . White remained stricken with paralysis for several weeks and returned to his home in Winchester on a litter . His position as judge of the tenth judicial district was assumed by two judges : William <unk> and John Scott . White remained paralyzed for the remainder of his life . On July 1 , 1825 , White gave power of attorney to his son , John Baker White , for the management of his affairs . White later died at his residence in Winchester on March 9 , 1831 . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 White married Arabella Baker , the daughter of John Baker and his wife , Judith Wood Baker ( born February 15 , 1761 ) , of Shepherdstown , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . White and his wife had three children together : 
 White and his family resided in Winchester on Washington Street south of Cecil Street " for many years " until White 's death in 1831 . White 's house , one of the " earliest built brick houses " in Winchester , was destroyed by fire , after which George H. Byrd built a residence on the same site . Byrd deeded the property to his brother , Colonel William Byrd ; henceforth that house has been known as the " Byrd House " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the 1970s , three restored portraits painted in 1799 of White , his wife Arabella Baker White , and their son Robert Baker White and daughter Juliet White Opie , were donated to the Historical Society of Winchester by Baker Hall of Huntington , West Virginia , and Louisa Tabb Hall of Charles Town , West Virginia . All three portraits were painted by renowned painter Charles Peale Polk , a nephew of the well @-@ known painter Charles Willson Peale . 
 = Sooner or Later ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Sooner or Later " is a song recorded by the American singer Madonna from her soundtrack album I 'm Breathless . Written by American composer Stephen Sondheim and produced by Madonna and Bill Bottrell , the song was used in the parent film , Dick Tracy . " Sooner or Later " was composed to evoke the theatrical nature and style of the film . A 1930s jazz ballad with piano , drum , double bass , and horns , the track conjures up the atmosphere of a smoky nightclub . Madonna sings in her lowest register accompanied by a variable pitch . 
 Critical response to the track was positive , with reviewers deeming it as an important addition to Madonna 's music catalog . At the 63rd Academy Awards held on March 25 , 1991 , the song won an Oscar for Best Original Song , awarded to Sondheim . Madonna attended the ceremony along with singer Michael Jackson as her date , and performed " Sooner or Later " onstage , being inspired by the look of actress Marilyn Monroe . She later included it in the set list of her 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , Madonna was part of the film Dick Tracy starring as Breathless Mahoney — a new role introduced for her — with Warren Beatty playing the title character . Madonna told Premiere magazine that initially she had waited for Beatty to call her for the film . When Beatty did not reciprocate , the singer decided to involve herself voluntarily . She pursued the part of Mahoney , but offered to work for minimum wages to avoid favoritism . Dick Tracy was the ninth @-@ highest grossing film in the US in 1990 , and number twelve globally . The film also received positive reviews from critics . Roger Ebert from the Chicago Sun @-@ Times praised the matte paintings , art direction and prosthetic makeup design , stating : " Dick Tracy is one of the most original and visionary fantasies I 've seen on a screen " . 
 By the 1980s record labels started to release albums that were closely associated with a film , thereby gaining double promotion . These were mostly termed as soundtracks although many of them were not related to the film . After the filming for Dick Tracy was over by May 1989 , Madonna started working on the soundtrack . She had begun recording three songs by Stephen Sondheim for the film — " Sooner or Later " , " More " and " What Can You Lose " — which would be part of the album , but also had to write and develop new songs comparable in style to the previous . She produced the entire album , including the Sondheim songs . " I want people to think of me as a musical comedy actress . That 's what this album is about for me . It 's a stretch . Not just pop music , but songs that have a different feel to them , a theatrical feel " , she said at the time . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , the harmonic and melodic styles of the songs she developed with Sondheim were more " complex " than her usual recordings , hence Madonna found it difficult and demanding . She spoke about the " wilderness " of the tunes , saying that she was not confident of doing justice to the songs , and neither was Sondheim . But he kept on encouraging the singer so that the recording sessions would not be affected . Madonna also recruited producer Patrick Leonard and engineer Bill Bottrell to help her with the project . She and Leonard toiled to create music that would fit the style and production of the film , set in the era of the Untouchables law enforcement . 
 " Sooner or Later " was composed as a 1930s jazz ballad with comping piano , brushed drum sounds , double bass and horns . Rooksby described the track as " conjuring the atmosphere of a smoky nightclub " . Madonna sings in her lowest range as the melody shifts continuously . It opens with a " lazy " clarinet solo and portrays the singer as a kind of sexual magnate . " I always get my man " , she sings " If you 're on my list it 's just a question of when " . The song is set in the time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 75 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B ♭ major with Madonna 's voice spanning from F3 to B ♭ 4 . The song follows a basic sequence of B ♭ 9 – B ♭ 6 / F – B ♭ 9 – B ♭ 6 / F as its chord progression . In the film , " Sooner or Later " is the signature song of Breathless and was primarily performed during a montage just after Dick Tracy has placed a microphone in Alphonse " Big Boy " Caprice 's boardroom and operator . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Lucky Lara from Manila Standard Today listed the Sondheim songs as highlights from the album , commenting how they fit Madonna 's " nasal voice as a glove " , and their addition to Madonna 's catalogue of songs would give her " the edge in future career moves " . According to Lara , with " Sooner or Later " , Madonna " shows off a side to her singing that audiences haven 't heard yet , and what a side it is . She proves to her critics that she isn 't just the glitter and trash of the dance club scene , and that she can belt it out nearly as well as the best of them " . According to Ray Boren from Deseret News " is very much a period piece , with an intimate club feel " . Another positive review came from Mark Coleman from Rolling Stone , who described the song as Madonna 's " breathy emotionality " , observing that Madonna did not whisper the line " I always get my man " , rather sang it aloud , bringing " conviction to a somewhat generic line " . According to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , songs including " Sooner or Later " are " typical Sondheim , with agile wordplay and devious chromatic harmonies " . 
 At the 63rd Academy Awards held on March 25 , 1991 , the song won an Oscar for Best Original Song , awarded to Sondheim who did not attend the ceremony . In the award ceremony the song was listed as " Sooner or Later ( I Always Get My Man ) " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On the 1990 Blond Ambition World Tour , Madonna performed " Sooner or Later " atop of a piano , as a chanteuse with a piano player in a cabaret . The wardrobe for the performance consisted of a green and white couture corset , with conical bra cups , beaded fringing and striped sequined embroidery , designed by Jean Paul Gaultier , underneath a long black robe . On his review of the concert , Richard Harrington from The Washington Post , opined Madonna " acquitted herself quite well on ' Sooner or Later ' " . Two different performances were taped and released on video , the Blond Ambition Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and the Blond Ambition World Tour Live , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . 
 At the 1991 Academy Awards , Madonna appeared with singer Michael Jackson as her date and performed " Sooner or Later " . According to journalist Liz Smith , Madonna had promised to perform at the award show if either " Sooner or Later " or " More " was nominated in the Best Original Song category . She wore a long , tight , white dress designed by Bob Mackie and covered in sequins and pearls . On her neck she wore $ 20 million worth of jewelry from Harry Winston . Taraborrelli recalled that Madonna had appropriated every move and mannerisms of Marilyn Monroe for the performance , making it a tribute to the actress . When she appeared onstage , there was technical difficulty resulting in the mike not appearing from below the ground , and a stage @-@ hand passing it to her . According to Madonna 's brother Christopher Ciccone , she was quite nervous during the performance ; " Had she been singing to an audience of screaming fans , she wouldn 't have been at all nervous . But this time she was performing in an auditorium full of established actors and actresses , a group of people to which she really didn 't belong , who didn 't respect her as an actress but whose respect she desperately wanted to win " . 
 Janet Maslin from The New York Times criticized Madonna 's performance , saying that the singer " vamped awkwardly through [ the song ] , managing to seem even <unk> in action than she did seated beside Michael Jackson in the audience . " In retrospective reviews , Billboard ranked it as the seventh " most awesome " Oscar performance of all time , saying that " Madonna gave a performance that took us back to the glamorous days of old Hollywood . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from I 'm Breathless album liner notes , Sire Records and Warner Bros. Records . 
 = No. 82 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 82 Squadron RAAF was a Royal Australian Air Force fighter squadron that operated during World War II and its immediate aftermath . It was formed in June 1943 , flying Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks and , initially , Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobras from bases in Queensland and New Guinea . The squadron became operational in September 1944 , and undertook ground attack missions against Japanese targets in the Pacific theatre . Following the end of hostilities , No. 82 Squadron was re @-@ equipped with North American P @-@ 51 Mustangs and deployed to Japan , where it formed part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . It remained there until October 1948 , when it was disbanded . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During 1943 , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) received 399 Curtiss P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighter aircraft . Their arrival allowed the service to expand its combat force by forming five new Kittyhawk @-@ equipped squadrons to join the three squadrons that had operated the type in the South West Pacific area since 1942 . No. 82 Squadron was formed at Bankstown , New South Wales , on 18 June 1943 . It was the third of the new Kittyhawk squadrons to be established , following No. 84 Squadron in February and No. 86 Squadron in March ; No. 78 Squadron was formed in July and No. 80 Squadron in September . Commanded by Squadron Leader Stanley Galton , No. 82 Squadron 's original complement was 279 , including fifteen officers . It was to have been equipped wholly with P @-@ 40M Kittyhawks but initially included a flight of Bell P @-@ 39 Airacobras . No. 82 Squadron conducted training at Bankstown until April 1944 , when personnel briefly moved to Hughes Airfield in the Northern Territory , before being redeployed to Townsville , Queensland , for further training . 
 The squadron transferred to Port Moresby , New Guinea , at the end of August 1944 and then on to Noemfoor Island in mid @-@ September , where it joined Nos. 76 and 77 Squadrons as part of No. 81 Wing under No. 10 Operational Group ( later the Australian First Tactical Air Force ) . Three of No. 82 Squadron 's Kittyhawks crashed due to engine trouble while staging through Nadzab and Tadji . Operating from <unk> strip , the squadron flew its first combat mission on 30 September , bombing <unk> airstrip with aircraft from No. 77 Squadron . On 18 October , one aircraft was lost to ground fire during an attack on Kai Island , while another was reported missing . No. 82 Squadron found it difficult to remain operational as most of its ground crew remained in Townsville until moving forward the following month ; in the meantime , the pilots took responsibility for arming and refuelling their aircraft . On 23 November , they dive bombed Japanese airfields on Halmahera with aircraft of No. 76 Squadron . 
 No. 82 Squadron continued to conduct ground attack missions in New Guinea until March 1945 , when it relocated to Morotai Island in the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) . From Morotai , the squadron conducted ground attack missions in the NEI and escorted Allied convoys carrying troops bound for the liberation of Borneo . The relegation of First Tactical Air Force to areas of operation bypassed by the main Allied thrust towards the Philippines and Japan led to poor morale , culminating in the so @-@ called " Morotai Mutiny " of April 1945 . Squadron Leader Bert Grace , commanding officer of No. 82 Squadron , was among eight senior pilots who tended their resignations in protest at what they saw as the waste of resources on targets of dubious military value . The officers were persuaded to continue on operations , and Grace oversaw the squadron 's move to Labuan island in June as part of Operation Oboe Six , the invasion of North Borneo . The Kittyhawks flew in support of Australian Army units until the end of the war . On one such mission on 8 August 1945 , No. 82 Squadron made a 900 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) round trip to attack targets around Kuching in Sarawak . During the first strike two Japanese aircraft were destroyed as they were taking off from the airstrip , while a transport was also destroyed and two more were damaged . The fighters then attacked several barges near Kuching Town and on the Sarawak River . Fourteen members of the squadron were killed on operations during the war . 
 = = = Occupation of Japan = = = 
 Shortly after the end of the war , No. 82 Squadron was selected to join the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in Japan . It re @-@ equipped with North American P @-@ 51D Mustang fighters between 12 September and 11 January 1946 , losing two aircraft to accidents in the process . The squadron deployed to Bofu , a former kamikaze base , during 13 – 18 March 1946 , once again as part of No. 81 Wing with Nos. 76 and 77 Squadrons ; Nos. 381 and 481 Squadrons provided logistics and maintenance support , respectively . No. 82 Squadron lost three of its twenty @-@ eight Mustangs , along with an escorting de Havilland Mosquito , in bad weather en route to Bofu , killing all crew members . From April 1946 , the squadron conducted surveillance patrols over Japan as well as participating in routine exercises and flypasts . The Australians found that , far from offering resistance , the Japanese went out of their way to be accommodating . No. 82 Squadron 's commanding officer , Squadron Leader Graham Falconer , remarked following a dinner with Bofu 's mayor , " I felt that we were being treated more as visitors than as an occupying force ! " 
 No. 81 Wing transferred to Iwakuni in April 1948 , the same month that the Federal government determined to reduce Australia 's contribution to BCOF . As part of this reduction , Nos. 76 and 82 Squadrons were slated for disbandment , leaving No. 77 Squadron as the sole RAAF fighter unit in the country . No. 82 Squadron conducted further training and exercises until September , and was disbanded at Iwakuni on 29 October 1948 . 
 = Caribbean reef shark = 
 The Caribbean reef shark ( Carcharhinus <unk> ) is a species of requiem shark , belonging to the family Carcharhinidae . It is found in the tropical waters of the western Atlantic Ocean from Florida to Brazil , and is the most commonly encountered reef shark in the Caribbean Sea . With a robust , streamlined body typical of the requiem sharks , this species is difficult to tell apart from other large members of its family such as the dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) and the silky shark ( C. falciformis ) . Distinguishing characteristics include dusky @-@ colored fins without prominent markings , a short free rear tip on the second dorsal fin , and tooth shape and number . 
 Measuring up to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) long , the Caribbean reef shark is one of the largest apex predators in the reef ecosystem , feeding on a variety of fishes and cephalopods . They have been documented resting motionless on the sea bottom or inside caves , unusual behavior for an active @-@ swimming shark . If threatened , it may perform a threat display in which it frequently changes direction and dips its pectoral fins . Like other requiem sharks , it is viviparous with females giving birth to 4 – 6 young every other year . Caribbean reef sharks are of some importance to fisheries as a source of meat , leather , liver oil , and fishmeal , but recently they have become more valuable as an ecotourist attraction . In the Bahamas and elsewhere , bait is used to attract them to groups of divers in controversial " shark feedings " . This species is responsible for a small number of attacks on humans . The shark attacks only happen usually in the spring / summer part of the year . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The Caribbean reef shark was originally described as <unk> perezi by Felipe Poey in 1876 , in the scientific journal Anales de la Sociedad Española de Historia Natural . The type specimens were six individuals caught off the coast of Cuba . The genus <unk> was synonymized with Carcharhinus by later authors . 
 Based on morphological similarities , Jack Garrick in 1982 grouped this species with the bignose shark ( C. altimus ) and the sandbar shark ( C. plumbeus ) , while Leonard Compagno in 1988 placed it as the sister species of the grey reef shark ( C. amblyrhynchos ) . A phylogenetic analysis based on allozyme data , published by Gavin Naylor in 1992 , indicated that the Caribbean reef shark is the sister taxon to a clade formed by the Galapagos shark ( C. galapagensis ) , dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) , oceanic whitetip shark ( C. longimanus ) , and the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) . However , more work is required to fully resolve the interrelationships within Carcharhinus . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Caribbean reef shark occurs throughout the tropical western Atlantic Ocean , from North Carolina in the north to Brazil in the south , including Bermuda , the northern Gulf of Mexico , and the Caribbean Sea . However , it is extremely rare north of the Florida Keys . It prefers shallow waters on or around coral reefs , and is commonly found near the drop @-@ offs at the reefs ' outer edges . This shark is most common in water shallower than 30 m ( 98 ft ) , but has been known to dive to 378 m ( 1 @,@ 240 ft ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 A heavy @-@ bodied shark with a " typical " streamlined shape , the Caribbean reef shark is difficult to distinguish from other large requiem shark species . It usually measures 2 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long ; the maximum recorded length is 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) and the maximum reported weight is 70 kg ( 150 lb ) . The coloration is dark gray or gray @-@ brown above and white or white @-@ yellow below , with an inconspicuous white band on the flanks . The fins are not prominently marked , and the undersides of the paired fins , the anal fin , and the lower lobe of the caudal fin are dusky . 
 The snout is rather short , broad , and rounded , without prominent flaps of skin beside the nostrils . The eyes are large and circular , with nictitating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . There are 11 – 13 tooth rows in either half of both jaws . The teeth have broad bases , serrated edges , and narrow cusps ; the front 2 – 4 teeth on each side are erect and the others increasingly oblique . The five pairs of gill slits are moderately long , with the third gill slit over the origin of the pectoral fins . The first dorsal fin is high and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) . There is a low <unk> ridge running behind it to the second dorsal fin , which is relatively large with a short free rear tip . The origin of the first dorsal fin lies over or slightly forward of the free rear tips of the pectoral fins , and that of the second dorsal fin lies over or slightly forward of the anal fin . The pectoral fins are long and narrow , tapering to a point . The dermal denticles are closely spaced and overlapping , each with five ( sometimes seven in large individuals ) horizontal low ridges leading to marginal teeth . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Despite its abundance in certain areas , the Caribbean reef shark is one of the least @-@ studied large requiem sharks . They are believed to play a major role in shaping Caribbean reef communities . These sharks are more active at night , with no evidence of seasonal changes in activity or migration . Juveniles tend to remain in a localized area throughout the year , while adults range over a wider area . 
 Caribbean reef sharks are sometimes seen resting motionless on the sea floor or inside caves ; it is the first active shark species in which such a behavior was reported . In 1975 , Eugenie Clark investigated the famed " sleeping sharks " inside the caves at Isla Mujeres off the Yucatan Peninsula , and determined that the sharks were not actually asleep as their eyes would follow divers . Clark speculated that freshwater upwellings inside the caves might loosen parasites on the sharks and produce an enjoyable " narcotic " effect . If threatened , Caribbean reef sharks sometimes perform a threat display , in which they swim in a short , jerky fashion with frequent changes in direction and repeated , brief ( 1 – 1 @.@ 2 second duration ) drops of the pectoral fins . This display is less pronounced than the better @-@ known display of the grey reef shark ( C. amblyrhynchos ) . 
 Juvenile Caribbean reef sharks are preyed upon by larger sharks such as the tiger shark ( Galeocerdo cuvier ) and the bull shark ( C. leucas ) . Few parasites are known for this species ; one is a dark variegated leech often seen trailing from its first dorsal fin . Off northern Brazil , juveniles seek out cleaning stations occupied by <unk> gobies ( Elacatinus <unk> ) , which clean the sharks of parasites while they lie still on the bottom . Horse @-@ eye jacks ( <unk> latus ) and bar jacks ( <unk> ruber ) routinely school around Caribbean reef sharks . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The Caribbean reef shark feeds on a wide variety of reef @-@ dwelling bony fishes and cephalopods , as well as some elasmobranchs such as eagle rays ( Aetobatus narinari ) and yellow stingrays ( Urobatis jamaicensis ) . It is attracted to low @-@ frequency sounds , which are indicative of struggling fish . In one observation of a 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long male Caribbean reef shark hunting a yellowtail snapper ( Lutjanus <unk> ) , the shark languidly circled and made several seemingly " half @-@ hearted " turns towards its prey , before suddenly accelerating and swinging its head sideways to capture the snapper at the corner of its jaws . Young sharks feed on small fishes , shrimps , and crabs . Caribbean reef sharks are capable of everting their stomachs , which likely serves to cleanse indigestible particles , parasites , and mucus from the stomach lining . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Reproduction is viviparous ; once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the yolk sac develops into a placental connection through which they receive nourishment from their mother . Mating is apparently an aggressive affair , as females are often found with biting scars and wounds on their sides . At the Fernando de Noronha Archipelago and Atol das Rocas off Brazil , parturition takes place at the end of the dry season from February to April , while at other locations in the Southern Hemisphere , females give birth during the Amazon summer in November and December . The average litter size is four to six , with a gestation period of one year . Females become pregnant every other year . The newborns measure no more than 74 cm ( 29 in ) long ; males mature sexually at 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 7 m ( 59 – 67 in ) long and females at 2 – 3 m ( 79 – 118 in ) . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Normally shy or indifferent to the presence of divers , the Caribbean reef shark has been known to become aggressive in the presence of food and grows sufficiently large to be considered potentially dangerous . As of 2008 , the International Shark Attack File lists 27 attacks attributable to this species , 4 of them unprovoked , and none fatal . 
 This species is taken by commercial and artisanal longline and gillnet fisheries throughout its range . It is valued for meat , leather , liver oil , and fishmeal . The Caribbean reef shark is the most common shark landed in Colombia ( accounting for 39 % of the longline catch by occurrence ) , where it is utilized for its fins , oil , and jaws ( sold for ornamental purposes ) . In Belize , this species is mainly caught as bycatch on hook @-@ and @-@ line intended for groupers and snappers ; the fins are sold to the lucrative Asian market and the meat sold in Belize , Mexico , and Guatemala to make " <unk> " , a tortilla @-@ like confection . A dedicated shark fishery operated in Belize from the mid @-@ 1900s to the early 1990s , until catches of all species saw dramatic declines . The flesh of this species may contain high levels of methylmercury and other heavy metals . 
 = = = Shark feeding = = = 
 A profitable ecotourism industry has arisen around this species involving organized " shark feeds " , in which groups of reef sharks are attracted to divers using bait . Some US $ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 is spent annually on shark viewing in the Bahamas , where at some sites a single living Caribbean reef shark has a value between US $ 13 @,@ 000 and US $ 40 @,@ 000 ( compared to a one @-@ time value of US $ 50 – 60 for a dead shark ) . This practice has drawn controversy , as opponents argue that the sharks may learn to associate humans with food , increasing the chances of a shark attack , and that the removal of reef fishes for bait may damage the local ecosystem . Conversely , proponents maintain that shark feeds contribute to conservation by incentivizing the protection of sharks and educating people about them . Thus far , there has been little evidence that shark feeds have increased the risk of attack in the surrounding area . Shark feeding has been outlawed off the coast of Florida , but continues at other locations in the Caribbean . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the Caribbean reef shark as Near Threatened ; its population has declined off Belize and Cuba from overfishing and exploitation continues in other regions . They are also threatened by the degradation and destruction of their coral reef habitat . Commercial fishing for this species is prohibited in United States waters . They are protected in the Bahamas due to their significance to ecotourism , as well as in a number of Marine Protected Areas ( MPAs ) off Brazil and elsewhere . However , enforcement against illegal fishing is lacking in some of these reserves , and many areas in which this species is abundant are not protected . 
 = Champagne ( wine region ) = 
 The Champagne wine region ( archaic English : <unk> ) is a historic province within the administrative province of Champagne in the northeast of France . The area is best known for the production of the sparkling white wine that bears the region 's name . EU law and the laws of most countries reserve the term " Champagne " exclusively for wines that come from this region located about 100 miles ( 160 km ) east of Paris . The viticultural boundaries of Champagne are legally defined and split into five wine producing districts within the administrative province : Aube , Côte des Blancs , Côte de Sézanne , Montagne de Reims , and Vallée de la Marne . The towns of Reims and Épernay are the commercial centers of the area . 
 Located at the northern edges of France , the history of the Champagne wine region has had a significant role in the development of this unique terroir . The area 's proximity to Paris promoted the region 's economic success in its wine trade but also put the villages and vineyards in the path of marching armies on their way to the French capital . Despite the frequency of these military conflicts , the region developed a reputation for quality wine production in the early Middle Ages and was able to continue that reputation as the region 's producers began making sparkling wine with the advent of the great Champagne houses in the 17th and 18th centuries . The principal grapes grown in the region include Chardonnay , Pinot noir , and Pinot Meunier . Pinot noir is the most widely planted grape in the Aube region and grows very well in Montagne de Reims . Pinot Meunier is the dominant grape in the Vallée de la Marne region . The Côte des Blancs is dedicated almost exclusively to Chardonnay . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 The Champagne province is located near the northern limits of the wine world along the 49th parallel . The high altitude and mean annual temperature of 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) creates a difficult environment for wine grapes to fully ripen . <unk> is aided by the presence of forests which helps to stabilize temperatures and maintain moisture in the soil . The cool temperatures serve to produce high levels of acidity in the resulting grape which is ideal for sparkling wine . 
 During the growing season , the mean July temperature is 18 ° C ( 66 ° F ) . The average annual rainfall is 630 mm ( 25 inches ) , with 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 inches ) falling during the harvest month of September . Throughout the year , growers must be mindful of the hazards of fungal disease and early spring frost . 
 Ancient oceans left behind chalk subsoil deposits when they receded 70 million years ago . Earthquakes that rocked the region over 10 million years ago pushed the marine sediments of belemnite fossils up to the surface to create the belemnite chalk terrain . The belemnite in the soil allows it to absorb heat from the sun and gradually release it during the night as well as providing good drainage . This soil contributes to the lightness and finesse that is characteristic of Champagne wine . The Aube area is an exception with predominately clay based soil . The chalk is also used in the construction of underground cellars that can keep the wines cool through the bottle maturation process . 
 = = History = = 
 The Carolingian reign saw periods of prosperity for the Champagne region beginning with Charlemagne 's encouragement for the area to start planting vines and continuing with the coronation of his son Louis the Pious at Reims . The tradition of crowning kings at Reims contributed to the reputation of the wines that came from this area . The Counts of Champagne ruled the area as an independent county from 950 to 1316 . In 1314 , the last Count of Champagne assumed the throne as King Louis X of France and the region became part of the Crown territories . 
 = = = Military conflicts = = = 
 The location of Champagne played a large role in its historical prominence as it served as a " crossroads " for both military and trade routes . This also made the area open to devastation and destruction during military conflicts that were frequently waged in the area . In 451 A.D. near Châlons @-@ en @-@ Champagne Attila and the Huns were defeated by an alliance of Roman legions , Franks and Visigoths . This defeat was a turning point in the Huns ' invasion of Europe . 
 During the Hundred Years ' War , the land was repeatedly ravaged and devastated by battles . The Abbey of <unk> , including its vineyards , was destroyed in 1560 during the War of Religion between the Huguenots and Catholics . This was followed by conflicts during the Thirty Year War and the Fronde Civil War where soldiers and mercenaries held the area in occupation . It was not until the 1660s , during the reign of Louis XIV , that the region saw enough peace to allow advances in sparkling wine production to take place . 
 = = = History of wine production = = = 
 The region 's reputation for wine production dates back to the Middle Ages when Pope Urban II , a native Champenois , declared that the wine of Aÿ in the Marne département was the best wine produced in the world . For a time Aÿ was used as a shorthand designation for wines from the entire Champagne region , similar to the use of Beaune for the wines of Burgundy . The poet Henry d <unk> 's work La Bataille des Vins rated wines from the towns of Épernay , <unk> and Reims as some of the best in Europe . As the region 's reputation grew , popes and royalty sought to own pieces of the land with Pope Leo X , Francis I of France , Charles V of Spain , and Henry VIII of England all owning vineyard land in the region . A batch of wine from Aÿ received in 1518 by Henry VIII 's chancellor , Cardinal Thomas Wolsey , is the first recorded export of wine from the Champagne region to England . 
 The still wines of the area were highly prized in Paris under the designation of vins de la <unk> and vins de la <unk> wines of the river and wines of the mountain in reference to the wooded terrain and the river Marne which carried the wines down to the Seine and into Paris . The region was in competition with Burgundy for the Flemish wine trade and tried to capitalize on Reims ' location along the trade route from Beaune . In the 15th century , Pinot noir became heavily planted in the area . The resulting red wine had difficulty comparing well to the richness and coloring of Burgundy wines , despite the addition of elderberries to deepen the color . This led to a greater focus on white wines . 
 The Champagne house of Gosset was founded as a still wine producer in 1584 and is the oldest Champagne house still in operation today . <unk> was founded in 1729 and was soon followed by <unk> Frères ( 1730 ) , <unk> ( 1734 ) , Moët et Chandon ( 1743 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1772 ) . 
 The nineteenth century saw an explosive growth in Champagne production going from a regional production of 300 @,@ 000 bottles a year in 1800 to 20 million bottles in 1850 . 
 = = = = Rivalry with Burgundy = = = = 
 A strong influence on Champagne wine production was the centuries @-@ old rivalry between the region and Burgundy . From the key market of Paris to the palace of Louis XIV of France at Versailles , proponents of Champagne and Burgundy would compete for dominance . For most of his life , Louis XIV would drink only Champagne wine with the support of his doctor Antoine d 'Aquin who advocated the King drink Champagne with every meal for the benefit of his health . As the King aged and his ailments increased , competing doctors would propose alternative treatments with alternative wines , to sooth the King 's ills . One of these doctors , Guy @-@ Crescent Fagon conspired with the King 's mistress to oust d 'Aquin and have himself appointed as Royal Doctor . Fagon quickly attributed the King 's continuing ailments to Champagne and ordered that only Burgundy wine must be served at the royal table . 
 This development had a ripple effect throughout both regions and in the Paris markets . Both Champagne and Burgundy were deeply concerned with the " healthiness " reputation of their wines , even to the extent of paying medical students to write theses touting the health benefit of their wines . These theses were then used as advertising pamphlets that were sent to merchants and customers . The Faculty of Medicine in Reims published several papers to refute Fagon 's claim that Burgundy wine was healthier than Champagne . In response , Burgundian winemakers hired physician Jean @-@ Baptiste de Salins , dean of the medical school in Beaune , to speak to a packed auditorium at the Paris Faculty of Medicine . Salins spoke favorably of Burgundy wine 's deep color and robust nature and compared it to the pale red color of Champagne and the " instability " of the wine to travel long distances and the flaws of the bubbles from when secondary fermentation would take place . The text of his speech was published in newspapers and pamphlets throughout France and had a damaging effect on Champagne sales . 
 The war of words would continue for another 130 years with endless commentary from doctors , poets , playwrights and authors all arguing for their favorite region and their polemics being reproduced in advertisements for Burgundy and Champagne . On a few occasions , the two regions were on the brink of civil war . A turning point occurred when several Champagne wine makers abandoned efforts to produce red wine in favor of focusing on harnessing the effervescent nature of sparkling Champagne . As the bubbles became more popular , doctors throughout France and Europe commented on the health benefits of the sparkling bubbles which were said to cure malaria . As more Champenois winemakers embarked on this new and completely different wine style , the rivalry with Burgundy mellowed and eventually waned . 
 = = Classifications and vineyard regulations = = 
 In 1927 , viticultural boundaries of Champagne were legally defined and split into five wine producing <unk> The Aube , Côte des Blancs , Côte de Sézanne , Montagne de Reims , and Vallée de la Marne . This area covers 33 @,@ 500 hectares ( 76 @,@ 000 acres ) of vineyards around 319 villages that are home to 5 @,@ 000 growers who make their own wine and 14 @,@ 000 growers who only sell grapes . The region is set to expand to include 359 villages in the near future . 
 The different districts produce grapes of varying characteristics that are blended by the Champagne houses to create their distinct house styles . The <unk> of the Montagne de Reims that are planted on northern facing slopes are known for their high levels of acid and the delicacy they add to the blend . The grapes on the southern facing slope add more power and character . Grapes across the district contribute to the bouquet and <unk> . The abundance of southern facing slopes in the Vallée de la Marne produces the <unk> wines with full aroma . The Côte des Blancs grapes are known for their finesse and the freshness they add to blends with the extension of the nearby Côte de Sézanne offering similar though slightly less distinguished traits . 
 In 1942 , the Comité <unk> du Vin de Champagne ( CIVC ) was formed with the purpose of protecting Champagne 's reputation and marketing forces as well as setting up and monitoring regulations for vineyard production and <unk> methods . Champagne is the only region that is permitted to exclude AOC or Appellation d <unk> <unk> from their labels . 
 For each vintage , the CIVC rated the villages of the area based on the quality of their grapes and vineyards . The rating was then used to determine the price and the percentage of the price that growers get . The Grand Cru rated vineyards received 100 percent rating which entitled the grower to 100 % of the price . Premier <unk> were vineyards with 90 – 99 % ratings while Deuxième <unk> received 80 – 89 % ratings . Under appellation rules , around 4 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 8 @,@ 800 pounds ) of grapes can be pressed to create up to 673 gallons ( either 2 @,@ 550 L or 3 @,@ 060 L ) of juice . The first 541 gallons ( either 2 @,@ 050 L or 2 @,@ 460 L ) are the <unk> and the next 132 gallons ( either 500 L or 600 L ) are the taille . Prior to 1992 , a second taille of 44 gallons ( either 167 L or 200 L ) was previously allowed . For vintage Champagne , 100 % of the grapes must come from that vintage year while non @-@ vintage wine is a blend of vintages . Vintage champagne must spend a minimum of three years of aging but only 9 months on its lees with some of premier Champagne houses keeping their wines on lees for upwards of five to ten years . Non @-@ vintage Champagne must spend a minimum of 15 months of aging but only a minimum of 9 months on the lees . Most of the Champagne houses keep their wines on the lees through the whole time of aging because it is more expense to bottle the wine then age it and finally shipped . 
 = = = Revision of the Champagne region = = = 
 The worldwide demand for Champagne has been continuously increasing throughout the 1990s and early 2000s . A record in worldwide shipping of Champagne ( including domestic French consumption ) of 327 million bottles was set in 1999 in anticipation of end of millennium celebrations , and a new record was set in 2007 at 338 @.@ 7 million bottles . Since the entire vineyard area authorized by the 1927 AOC regulations is now planted , various ways of expanding the production have been considered . The allowed yield was increased ( to a maximum of 15 @,@ 500 kg per hectare during an experimental period from 2007 to 2011 ) and the possibility of revising the production region was investigated . 
 After an extensive review of vineyard conditions in and around the existing Champagne region , INAO presented a proposal to revise the region on March 14 , 2008 . The proposal was prepared by a group of five experts in the subjects of history , geography , geology , <unk> and agronomy , working from 2005 . The proposal means expanding the region to cover vineyards in 357 rather than 319 villages . This is to be achieved by adding vineyards in forty villages while simultaneously removing two villages in the Marne <unk> that were included in the 1927 regulations , Germaine and Orbais @-@ l <unk> . 
 The proposed 40 new Champagne villages are located in four <unk> : 
 22 in Marne : <unk> @-@ les @-@ <unk> , <unk> , Boissy @-@ le @-@ Repos , <unk> , <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> , Bussy @-@ le @-@ Repos , Champfleury , <unk> , Courcy , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , La Ville @-@ sous @-@ Orbais , Le <unk> @-@ <unk> , <unk> , Montmirail , Mont @-@ sur @-@ Courville , Peas , Romain , Saint @-@ Loup , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 15 in Aube : <unk> , <unk> @-@ la @-@ Grange , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> @-@ aux @-@ Bois , Macey , <unk> , <unk> , Saint @-@ Germain @-@ l <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Two in Haute @-@ Marne : <unk> and <unk> . 
 One , <unk> @-@ en @-@ Brie , in Aisne . 
 The INAO proposal was to be subject to review before being made into law and was immediately questioned in numerous public comments . The mayor of one the villages to be delisted , Germaine , immediately appealed against INAO 's proposal , with the possibility of additional appeals by vineyard owners . The initial review process is expected to be finished by early 2009 . This will be followed by another review of the specific parcels that will be added or deleted from the appellation . The earliest vineyard plantings are expected around 2015 , with their product being marketed from around 2021 . However , the price of land that are allowed to be used for Champagne production is expected to immediately rise from 5 @,@ 000 to one million euro per hectare . 
 While some critics have feared the revision of the Champagne region is about expanding production irrespective of quality , British wine writer and Champagne expert Tom Stevenson has pointed out that the proposed additions constitute a consolidation rather than expansion . The villages under discussion are situated in gaps inside the perimeter of the existing Champagne regions rather than outside it . 
 = = Production other than sparkling wine = = 
 While totally dominating the region 's production , sparkling Champagne is not the only product that is made from the region 's grapes . Non @-@ sparkling still wines , like those made around the village <unk> , are sold under the appellation label Coteaux Champenois . There is also a rosé appellation in the region , Rosé des <unk> . The regional vin de liqueur is called <unk> de Champagne . Since the profit of making sparkling Champagne from the region 's grape is now much higher , production of these non @-@ sparkling wines and fortified wines is very small . 
 The pomace from the grape pressing is used to make Marc de Champagne , and in this case the production does not compete with that of Champagne , since the pomace is a by @-@ product of wine production . 
 = Tropical Depression One @-@ E ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Depression One @-@ E was the earliest known tropical cyclone to impact the Mexican state of Sinaloa . The first system of the 2009 Pacific hurricane season , One @-@ E formed out of an area of disturbed weather on June 18 , 2009 , and initially tracked slowly northwards . Throughout the day , convection developed around the center of circulation and the system was anticipated to become a tropical storm . Late on June 18 , the National Hurricane Center noted that the system was on the verge of becoming a tropical storm ; it would have been named Andres had this occurred . However , the following day , strong wind shear caused the depression to rapidly degenerate into a trough of low pressure before dissipating off the coast of Sinaloa . 
 Although no longer a tropical cyclone , the remnants of the depression brought moderate rainfall to parts of Sinaloa , Nayarit and Jalisco . High winds accompanied the rainfall and left about 50 @,@ 000 residences without power . Several trees were downed and some structures sustained damage from fresh water flooding . Landslides occurred along major highways and significant structural damage was reported around Mazatlán . However , there was no loss of life or reports of injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Depression One @-@ E originated from a tropical wave that exited the coast of Africa on May 29 . Little convective activity was associated with the system as it traveled across the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea . On June 10 , the wave crossed Central America and entered the northeastern Pacific basin . Over the following few days , the system gradually became better organized and on June 15 , an area of low pressure developed from the wave . The system continued to organize , and on June 17 the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted the likelihood for tropical cyclogenesis ; although , at the time , the circulation was not well @-@ defined . It organized further , and on June 18 , the NHC initiated advisories on the first tropical depression of the 2009 season about 350 miles ( 565 km ) south @-@ southwest of Mazatlán , Sinaloa . Deep convection persisted near the southern portion of the depression ; however , the northern portion of the depression was partially devoid of convective activity . The depression traveled northward along the periphery of a mid @-@ level ridge over Mexico and an unusually strong mid to upper @-@ level trough situated over the Baja California Peninsula . 
 Later on June 18 , forecast models indicated that the system might rapidly degenerate prior to landfall . However , the NHC continued to forecast that the depression would attain tropical storm @-@ status before landfall . Shortly after , the depression became increasingly disorganized as convection separated from the center of circulation due to increasing wind shear . Stable air ahead of the system inhibited the possibility of rapid development as warm waters supported intensification . By the morning of June 19 , the center of circulation was situated along the southern edge of deep convection , indicating that the depression was beginning to degenerate . Despite this , the NHC continued to anticipate intensification prior to landfall . Embedded within an easterly flow ahead of a mid @-@ level trough , the storm turned towards the north @-@ northeast and accelerated slightly . At 11 : 00 am PDT ( 1800 UTC ) , the depression reached its peak intensity with winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1003 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 62 inHg ) . Operationally , the depression was considered to be slightly stronger , having a minimum pressure of 1001 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 56 inHg ) . Later that day , the depression began to degenerate into an open trough as it was situated underneath cirrus clouds instead of cumulonimbus clouds . Visible satellite imagery showed that the depression became increasingly ill @-@ defined and the NHC estimated that the depression degenerated into a trough of low pressure near the Islas Marías during the afternoon of June 19 . The remnants of the depression were monitored by the United States Naval Research Laboratory for several more hours until the system moved inland over Sinaloa . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 When the storm was declared a depression on June 18 , a tropical storm watch was declared by the Mexican Government for the Islas Marías , as well as for areas between Topolobampo and El Roblito in Sinaloa . The captain of the Mazatlán port advised ships to remain at port due to rough seas . A blue alert was declared for Sinaloa due to the possibility of deadly mudslides . Crews throughout the state quickly cleared debris from streams and streets to allow for better drainage . Shelters were prepped for possible evacuees but never opened . Late on June 18 , a tropical storm warning was declared for the Islas Marías and the watch along Sinaloa was extended southward to Cabo Corrientes in Jalisco . The following day , the Government of Mexico discontinued the warning for the Islas Marías and the watch for areas south of El Roblito was also discontinued . Upon the storm 's sudden dissipation later that day , the remaining watch areas were discontinued . 
 On June 19 , 2 @.@ 44 in ( 62 mm ) of rain fell in Mazatlán , near where the remnants of the depression moved ashore . Rainfall rates in the region exceeded 1 in / h ( 25 mm / h ) at times . High winds in Mazatlán knocked down several trees , cutting power to local residents . Heavy rains also triggered street flooding throughout the city . Several hours after the storm , electric companies reported than an estimated 50 @,@ 000 residences were without power . Following an assessment of damage to the power grid , 20 power poles were found to have been damaged , 15 circuit breakers were damaged and 15 sections of power lines were downed . Numerous villages were flooded , some requiring the evacuation of residents . Around 11 : 00 am PDT ( 1800 UTC ) six people were stranded offshore Sinaloa . High winds caused significant structural damage throughout Mazatlán . 
 Traffic lights were downed by high winds , causing numerous traffic delays . Landslides along major roadways caused several accidents , one involving a bus that was damaged by rocks . One business was significantly damaged , with at least one main wall collapsing . To speed up the removal of debris , members of the Mexican army were deployed throughout Sinaloa . According to officials in Mexico , Tropical Depression One @-@ E was the first known tropical cyclone to impact the state of Sinaloa during the month of June on record . With the system impacting land on June 19 , it marked the earliest date that a tropical cyclone had impacted the state , with the average date of first impact being August 15 . 
 = Northwest Passage ( Fringe ) = 
 " Northwest Passage " is the 21st episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 41st episode overall . The episode follows Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) as he continues to stay away from Boston after learning his true parallel universe origins ; his travels take him to a small town , where he helps the local police investigate mysterious disappearances . 
 The episode was written by Ashley Edward Miller , Zack Stentz , Nora Zuckerman , and Lilla Zuckerman . Joe Chappelle served as the episode director . It featured a guest appearance by actress Martha Plimpton . Pearl Jam musician Mike McCready helped write the music for the episode . 
 " Northwest Passage " first aired in the United States on May 6 , 2010 to an estimated 5 @.@ 82 million viewers . It received generally positive reviews , as many critics praised the writers ' decision to focus on Peter in a new location . Others noted references to the television series Twin Peaks . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After learning his true origins in " The Man from the Other Side " , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) leaves Boston and travels to a small town in the state of Washington . At a diner , Peter makes plans for a date with a local woman named Krista , but before they can meet she is kidnapped and murdered . Initially , the police suspects Peter is involved in the disappearance until told he was at his hotel all night . Peter decides to aid them in the investigation after catching a glimpse of Thomas Jerome Newton ( Sebastian Roché ) , believing the shapeshifters are responsible and are coming after him ; however , he does not wish Walter to be involved , asking Agent Broyles ( Lance Reddick ) to keep his location secret . 
 During the autopsy , Peter explains to Sheriff Mathis ( Martha Plimpton ) how removing a part of a brain could provide information to the killers . Mathis ' partner , deputy officer Bill Ferguson ( Patrick Gilmore ) , soon disappears . After they go to the scene of Krista 's murder , Peter encounters Newton , but he escapes . Peter becomes suspicious of Mathis when he sees blood on her jacket ; however , he believes her when she shows him her cut from a fall , which is bleeding normal blood , not the mercury typical of shapeshifters ; he then explains the concept of shapeshifters to her . 
 Peter begins to doubt the shapeshifters ' motives after another body is found , but eventually comes up with an idea to read and track the victims ' adrenaline spikes , which allows him to find where the murders took place : a dairy farm . They find the owner , who confesses to killing the women because they rejected him , and kidnapped and tortured Mathis 's partner when he discovered the culprit . Repeatedly at the hotel , Peter receives calls with static , strange noises , and clicks , which he suspects are coming from Newton . In the end , Peter decides and prepares to head back to Boston , but is approached by Newton , who has brought " Mr. Secretary " , the man from the Other Side , to see Peter . The man is revealed to be his actual father from the parallel universe , " Walternate " . 
 Meanwhile , back in Boston , a distraught Walter ( John Noble ) suffers a small mental breakdown at a supermarket . Olivia ( Anna Torv ) and Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) escort him home , discovering his house is in disarray . After they ask why he didn 't come to them for help , Walter replies he needs to learn to care for himself if Peter fails to return . He discovers a way to find Peter using his unique energy signature , but changes his mind after worrying that Peter will not forgive him . However , Olivia learns Peter 's whereabouts from Broyles ; they prepare to fly to Washington . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Northwest Passage " was co @-@ written by producers Ashley Edward Miller , Zack Stentz , staff writers Lilla Zuckerman and Nora Zuckerman . Co @-@ executive producer Joe Chappelle served as episode director . 
 Miller later noted that unlike other episode scenes such as in " Grey Matters " , Walter 's breakdown at the supermarket " came largely out of nowhere . It was a thought experiment that took on a life of its own . " Miller continued that at the time , he and Stentz thought they were writing Olivia @-@ focused episodes , but " In retrospect , we really wrote a four @-@ part story about Walter , his relationship to children , and the struggle between Walter @-@ who @-@ was and Walter @-@ who @-@ is . If you look at it that way , his decision at the end of ' Northwest Passage ' becomes the moment where he reconciles those things . He doesn 't resolve them , but he comes to grips with them . Once again in retrospect , I think that 's what the supermarket breakdown was really about . This happens — you think a scene is about one thing when you 're in the middle of it , and realize it 's something else entirely when you look back . Characters can be sneaky motherfuckers that way . " 
 A fan of Fringe , Pearl Jam musician Mike McCready talked with series composer Chris Tilton about writing some music for " Northwest Passage " . McCready said he started " throwing ideas back and forth . And I think they just wanted a northwest guy to do it , because they were shooting it in the northwest " . He elaborated that " My role was smaller than someone who wrote all the music for it , but I think I was none the less integral in there . I mean , it was fun . Chris sent me his cues , and I just kind of rearranged them into guitar ideas " . 
 The episode featured guest actress Martha Plimpton as Sheriff Tracy Mathis . On her role , she later commented " That episode turned out really well ; I was really pleased with it , and where else but on Fringe would I get to play the sheriff of a small town ? " 
 The crew shot an alternate ending in which Mathis questions Peter about his faith with the FBI . This was available on the DVD special features . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan for grade school children focusing on the science seen in " Northwest Passage " , with the intention of having " students learn about the scientific method and how it can be used to collect data through experimentation and observation in order to formulate and test a hypothesis . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Many critics noted the similarities between the episode and the David Lynch television series Twin Peaks , with one reviewer writing there was a " definite Peaks @-@ y vibe to tonight 's episode , from the setting — <unk> County , Washington , home of a diner with " famous pies " — to the off @-@ kilter camera angles and hushed tone " . Twin Peaks was originally titled " Northwest Passage " before its pilot , and both focused on solving a murder mystery in Washington state . Other reviewers felt the " Mulder / Scully " -like investigation and the line " You want to believe " was a homage to The X @-@ Files . 
 A song by Leonard Cohen , " Anthem " is quoted in this episode . " Anthem " lyrics are : " There is a crack in everything / That 's how the light gets in . " The Sheriff played by Martha Plimpton has a pen with " find the crack " printed on it , she states to Peter Bishop " that 's how the light gets in . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The first airing of " Northwest Passage " was watched by an estimated 5 @.@ 82 million viewers in the United States . It earned a 3 @.@ 7 / 6 ratings share among all households and a 2 @.@ 2 / 6 share among viewers 18 – 49 . This was a ten percent jump from the previous week . SFScope writer Sarah Stegall speculated that the episode 's " standalone mystery " , combined with the recent Fringe season renewal , helped contribute to the ratings gain . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 A.V. Club writer Noel Murray graded the episode with a B + , explaining " It was the atmosphere that sold me on " Northwest Passage " , an episode with a fairly middling mystery and only minimal advancement of the master @-@ plot . ( Though the end @-@ point of that advancement was a doozy , and has me eating a little crow . ) At times tonight the show almost felt like a backdoor pilot for a new series , with Peter tooling around the Pacific Northwest meeting local law enforcement and cracking cases . And while that 's a show I 'd definitely watch , I confess I 'm anxious to jump ahead to next week , when there 'll be inter @-@ dimensional conflict and doppelgangers galore " . Murray considered the ending with the appearance of Walternate a " strong finish to a mostly strong episode " . IGN 's Ramsey Isler gave it 7 @.@ 8 / 10 , writing that " Fringe 's sophomore season is building up to an epic 2 @-@ part finale . This episode doesn 't reveal much in terms of overall Fringe mythology until the very awesome ending , and even then it just confirms what we already knew or suspected . Still , this installment deserves credit for using a different formula and giving Joshua Jackson some much @-@ deserved time in the spotlight all by himself " . 
 SFScope 's Sarah Stegall praised the writers for showcasing Peter , believing Jackson gave " a solid , convincing performance that teaches us more about Peter than we learned in the first half of this season " . She also was pleased with Peter 's reactions to the obstacles thrown in his path , but criticized the writing for having another man behind the murders ( ' Too much coincidence . Way too much coincidence . From a plotting standpoint , it was clumsy ' ) . Stegall concluded her review by praising all of the actors ' performances , explaining that other than the " clumsy " killer plot twist , " I had no complaints at all about this episode . The supporting cast was top notch " . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly enjoyed how the episode mystery was processed from Peter 's point of view , and loved the revelation at the end about Walternate . MTV columnist Josh Wigler praised the episode 's " pretty mature storytelling " for not making Peter " go on an angry rampage " or become " an angsty ball of self @-@ loathing " after the previous episode 's events . He continued , " You can see that he 's hurting , but he 's still not quite sure how to process everything . Excellent work from the writers and Joshua Jackson " . 
 After trying various science fiction shows after Lost , the Los Angeles Times ' Andrew Hanson felt the episode made " him feel like [ he ] picked a winner " . Like other critics , Hanson loved the twist ending , writing that " Fringe is making it more and more difficult for me to pick my favorite episode " . Television Without Pity called Walternate 's sudden appearance one of 2010 's " Most Memorable TV Moments " , explaining " We knew we 'd meet him eventually , but the way they surprised us with him at the end of a stand @-@ alone episode was a fitting introduction for such an ominous and shadowy character , and we knew even then that it marked a new and improved era for the show . " At the time , TV Fanatic called " Northwest Passage " the best Fringe episode to date , giving the series ' its first " five out of five stars " . 
 = Raccoon = 
 The raccoon ( / <unk> / or US / <unk> / , Procyon lotor ) , sometimes spelled <unk> , also known as the common raccoon , North American raccoon , northern raccoon and colloquially as coon , is a medium @-@ sized mammal native to North America . The raccoon is the largest of the <unk> family , having a body length of 40 to 70 cm ( 16 to 28 in ) and a body weight of 3 @.@ 5 to 9 kg ( 8 to 20 lb ) . Its grayish coat mostly consists of dense underfur which insulates it against cold weather . Two of the raccoon 's most distinctive features are its extremely dexterous front paws and its facial mask , which are themes in the mythology of several Native American ethnic groups . Raccoons are noted for their intelligence , with studies showing that they are able to remember the solution to tasks for up to three years . The diet of the omnivorous raccoon , which is usually nocturnal , consists of about 40 % invertebrates , 33 % plant foods , and 27 % vertebrates . 
 The original habitats of the raccoon are deciduous and mixed forests , but due to their adaptability they have extended their range to mountainous areas , coastal marshes , and urban areas , where some homeowners consider them to be pests . As a result of escapes and deliberate introductions in the mid @-@ 20th century , raccoons are now also distributed across mainland Europe , Caucasia , and Japan . 
 Though previously thought to be solitary , there is now evidence that raccoons engage in gender @-@ specific social behavior . Related females often share a common area , while unrelated males live together in groups of up to four animals to maintain their positions against foreign males during the mating season , and other potential invaders . Home range sizes vary anywhere from 3 hectares ( 7 @.@ 4 acres ) for females in cities to 5 @,@ 000 hectares ( 12 @,@ 000 acres ) for males in prairies . After a gestation period of about 65 days , two to five young , known as " kits " , are born in spring . The kits are subsequently raised by their mother until dispersal in late fall . Although captive raccoons have been known to live over 20 years , their life expectancy in the wild is only 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 1 years . In many areas , hunting and vehicular injury are the two most common causes of death . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " raccoon " was adopted into English from the native Powhatan term , as used in the Virginia Colony . It was recorded on Captain John Smith 's list of Powhatan words as <unk> , and on that of William Strachey as <unk> . It has also been identified as a Proto @-@ Algonquian root * <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ em , meaning " [ the ] one who rubs , scrubs and scratches with its hands " . 
 Similarly , Spanish colonists adopted the Spanish word <unk> from the Nahuatl <unk> of the Aztecs , meaning " [ the ] one who takes everything in its hands " . In many languages , the raccoon is named for its characteristic dousing behavior in conjunction with that language 's term for bear , for example <unk> in German , <unk> <unk> in Italian , <unk> in Hungarian and <unk> ( <unk> ) in Japanese . In French and European Portuguese , the washing behavior is combined with these languages ' term for rat , yielding , respectively , <unk> <unk> and <unk> @-@ <unk> . The raccoon 's scientific name , Procyon lotor , is neo @-@ Latin , meaning " before @-@ dog washer " , with lotor Latin for " washer " and Procyon Latinized Greek from <unk> , " before " and κύων , " dog " . 
 The colloquial abbreviation coon is used in words like coonskin for fur clothing and in phrases like old coon as a self @-@ designation of trappers . In the 1830s , the U.S. Whig Party used the raccoon as an emblem , causing them to be pejoratively known as ' coons ' by their political opponents , who saw them as too sympathetic to African @-@ Americans . Soon after that it became an ethnic slur , especially in use between 1880 and 1920 ( see coon song ) , and the term is still considered offensive . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In the first decades after its discovery by the members of the expedition of Christopher Columbus , who was the first person to leave a written record about the species , taxonomists thought the raccoon was related to many different species , including dogs , cats , badgers and particularly bears . Carl Linnaeus , the father of modern taxonomy , placed the raccoon in the genus Ursus , first as Ursus cauda <unk> ( " long @-@ tailed bear " ) in the second edition of his Systema Naturae ( 1740 ) , then as Ursus <unk> ( " washer bear " ) in the tenth edition ( 1758 – 59 ) . In 1780 , Gottlieb Conrad Christian Storr placed the raccoon in its own genus Procyon , which can be translated as either " before the dog " or " doglike " . It is also possible that Storr had its nocturnal lifestyle in mind and chose the star Procyon as eponym for the species . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on fossil evidence from France and Germany , the first known members of the family Procyonidae lived in Europe in the late Oligocene about 25 million years ago . Similar tooth and skull structures suggest procyonids and weasels share a common ancestor , but molecular analysis indicates a closer relationship between raccoons and bears . After the then @-@ existing species crossed the Bering Strait at least six million years later in the early Miocene , the center of its distribution was probably in Central America . <unk> ( <unk> and <unk> ) and raccoons ( Procyon ) have been considered to share common descent from a species in the genus <unk> present between 5 @.@ 2 and 6 @.@ 0 million years ago . This assumption , based on morphological comparisons of fossils , conflicts with a 2006 genetic analysis which indicates raccoons are more closely related to <unk> . Unlike other procyonids , such as the crab @-@ eating raccoon ( Procyon <unk> ) , the ancestors of the common raccoon left tropical and subtropical areas and migrated farther north about 2 @.@ 5 million years ago , in a migration that has been confirmed by the discovery of fossils in the Great Plains dating back to the middle of the Pliocene . Its most recent ancestor was likely Procyon <unk> , a large Blancan raccoon from the <unk> Formation characterized by its narrow back teeth and large lower jaw . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 As of 2005 , Mammal Species of the World recognizes 22 subspecies . Four of these subspecies found only on small Central American and Caribbean islands were often regarded as distinct species after their discovery . These are the <unk> raccoon and Guadeloupe raccoon , which are very similar to each other ; the Tres Marias raccoon , which is larger than average and has an angular skull ; and the extinct Barbados raccoon . Studies of their morphological and genetic traits in 1999 , 2003 and 2005 led all these island raccoons to be listed as subspecies of the common raccoon in Mammal Species of the World 's third edition . A fifth island raccoon population , the Cozumel raccoon , which weighs only 3 to 4 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 to 8 @.@ 8 lb ) and has notably small teeth , is still regarded as a separate species . 
 The four smallest raccoon subspecies , with a typical weight of 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 7 kg ( 4 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 0 lb ) , are found along the southern coast of Florida and on the adjacent islands ; an example is the Ten Thousand Island raccoon ( Procyon lotor marinus ) . Most of the other 15 subspecies differ only slightly from each other in coat color , size and other physical characteristics . The two most widespread subspecies are the eastern raccoon ( Procyon lotor lotor ) and the Upper Mississippi Valley raccoon ( Procyon lotor <unk> ) . Both share a comparatively dark coat with long hairs , but the Upper Mississippi Valley raccoon is larger than the eastern raccoon . The eastern raccoon occurs in all U.S. states and Canadian provinces to the north of South Carolina and Tennessee . The adjacent range of the Upper Mississippi Valley raccoon covers all U.S. states and Canadian provinces to the north of Louisiana , Texas and New Mexico . 
 The taxonomic identity of feral raccoons inhabiting Eurasia is unknown , as the founding populations consisted of uncategorized specimens from zoos and fur farms . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 Head to hindquarters , raccoons measure between 40 and 70 cm ( 16 and 28 in ) , not including the bushy tail which can measure between 20 and 40 cm ( 8 and 16 in ) , but is usually not much longer than 25 cm ( 10 in ) . The shoulder height is between 23 and 30 cm ( 9 and 12 in ) . The body weight of an adult raccoon varies considerably with habitat , making the raccoon one of the most variably sized mammals . It can range from 2 to 14 kilograms ( 4 to 30 lb ) , but is usually between 3 @.@ 5 and 9 kilograms ( 8 and 20 lb ) . The smallest specimens are found in southern Florida , while those near the northern limits of the raccoon 's range tend to be the largest ( see Bergmann 's rule ) . Males are usually 15 to 20 % heavier than females . At the beginning of winter , a raccoon can weigh twice as much as in spring because of fat storage . The largest recorded wild raccoon weighed 28 @.@ 4 kg ( 62 @.@ 6 lb ) and measured 140 cm ( 55 in ) in total length , by far the largest size recorded for a <unk> . 
 The most characteristic physical feature of the raccoon is the area of black fur around the eyes , which contrasts sharply with the surrounding white face coloring . This is reminiscent of a " bandit 's mask " and has thus enhanced the animal 's reputation for mischief . The slightly rounded ears are also bordered by white fur . Raccoons are assumed to recognize the facial expression and posture of other members of their species more quickly because of the conspicuous facial coloration and the alternating light and dark rings on the tail . The dark mask may also reduce glare and thus enhance night vision . On other parts of the body , the long and stiff guard hairs , which shed moisture , are usually colored in shades of gray and , to a lesser extent , brown . Raccoons with a very dark coat are more common in the German population because individuals with such coloring were among those initially released to the wild . The dense underfur , which accounts for almost 90 % of the coat , insulates against cold weather and is composed of 2 to 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) long hairs . 
 The raccoon , whose method of locomotion is usually considered to be plantigrade , can stand on its hind legs to examine objects with its front paws . As raccoons have short legs compared to their compact torso , they are usually not able either to run quickly or jump great distances . Their top speed over short distances is 16 to 24 km / h ( 10 to 15 mph ) . Raccoons can swim with an average speed of about 5 km / h ( 3 mph ) and can stay in the water for several hours . For climbing down a tree headfirst — an unusual ability for a mammal of its size — a raccoon rotates its hind feet so they are pointing backwards . Raccoons have a dual cooling system to regulate their temperature ; that is , they are able to both sweat and pant for heat dissipation . 
 Raccoon skulls have a short and wide facial region and a voluminous braincase . The facial length of the skull is less than the cranial , and their nasal bones are short and quite broad . The auditory bullae are inflated in form , and the sagittal crest is weakly developed . The dentition — 40 teeth with the dental formula : 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 23 @.@ 1 @.@ 4 @.@ 2 — is adapted to their omnivorous diet : the carnassials are not as sharp and pointed as those of a full @-@ time carnivore , but the molars are not as wide as those of a herbivore . The penis bone of males is about 10 cm ( 4 in ) long and strongly bent at the front end . Juvenile males are distinguished from mature males by the shape and <unk> of their penis bones . Seven of the thirteen identified vocal calls are used in communication between the mother and her kits , one of these being the birdlike twittering of newborns . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 The most important sense for the raccoon is its sense of touch . The " hyper sensitive " front paws are protected by a thin horny layer which becomes pliable when wet . The five digits of the paws have no webbing between them , which is unusual for a carnivoran . Almost two @-@ thirds of the area responsible for sensory perception in the raccoon 's cerebral cortex is specialized for the interpretation of tactile impulses , more than in any other studied animal . They are able to identify objects before touching them with vibrissae located above their sharp , <unk> claws . The raccoon 's paws lack an opposable thumb ; thus , it does not have the agility of the hands of primates . There is no observed negative effect on tactile perception when a raccoon stands in water below 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) for hours . 
 Raccoons are thought to be color blind or at least poorly able to distinguish color , though their eyes are well @-@ adapted for sensing green light . Although their accommodation of 11 <unk> is comparable to that of humans and they see well in twilight because of the tapetum lucidum behind the retina , visual perception is of subordinate importance to raccoons because of their poor long @-@ distance vision . In addition to being useful for orientation in the dark , their sense of smell is important for intraspecific communication . <unk> secretions ( usually from their anal glands ) , urine and feces are used for marking . With their broad auditory range , they can perceive tones up to 50 – 85 kHz as well as quiet noises , like those produced by earthworms underground . 
 = = = Intelligence = = = 
 Zoologist Clinton Hart Merriam described raccoons as " clever beasts " , and that " in certain directions their cunning surpasses that of the fox . " The animal 's intelligence gave rise to the epithet " sly coon " . Only a few studies have been undertaken to determine the mental abilities of raccoons , most of them based on the animal 's sense of touch . In a study by the ethologist H. B. Davis in 1908 , raccoons were able to open 11 of 13 complex locks in fewer than 10 tries and had no problems repeating the action when the locks were rearranged or turned upside down . Davis concluded they understood the abstract principles of the locking mechanisms and their learning speed was equivalent to that of rhesus macaques . Studies in 1963 , 1973 , 1975 and 1992 concentrated on raccoon memory showed they can remember the solutions to tasks for up to three years . In a study by B. Pohl in 1992 , raccoons were able to instantly differentiate between identical and different symbols three years after the short initial learning phase . Stanislas Dehaene reports in his book The Number Sense raccoons can distinguish boxes containing two or four grapes from those containing three . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 Studies in the 1990s by the ethologists Stanley D. <unk> and Ulf Hohmann suggest that raccoons engage in gender @-@ specific social behaviors and are not typically solitary , as was previously thought . Related females often live in a so @-@ called " fission @-@ fusion society " , that is , they share a common area and occasionally meet at feeding or resting grounds . Unrelated males often form loose male social groups to maintain their position against foreign males during the mating season — or against other potential invaders . Such a group does not usually consist of more than four individuals . Since some males show aggressive behavior towards unrelated kits , mothers will isolate themselves from other raccoons until their kits are big enough to defend themselves . With respect to these three different modes of life prevalent among raccoons , Hohmann called their social structure a " three class society " . Samuel I. <unk> , professor of zoology at Weber State University and author of the book Raccoons : A Natural History , is more cautious in his interpretation and concludes at least the females are solitary most of the time and , according to Erik K. Fritzell 's study in North Dakota in 1978 , males in areas with low population densities are solitary as well . 
 The shape and size of a raccoon 's home range varies depending on age , sex , and habitat , with adults claiming areas more than twice as large as juveniles . While the size of home ranges in the inhospitable habitat of North Dakota 's prairies lie between 7 and 50 km2 ( 3 and 20 sq mi ) for males and between 2 and 16 km2 ( 1 and 6 sq mi ) for females , the average size in a marsh at Lake Erie was 0 @.@ 5 km2 ( 0 @.@ 19 sq mi ) . Irrespective of whether the home ranges of adjacent groups overlap , they are most likely not actively defended outside the mating season if food supplies are sufficient . <unk> marks on prominent spots are assumed to establish home ranges and identify individuals . Urine and feces left at shared raccoon latrines may provide additional information about feeding grounds , since raccoons were observed to meet there later for collective eating , sleeping and playing . 
 Concerning the general behavior patterns of raccoons , <unk> points out that " typically you 'll find 10 to 15 percent that will do the opposite " of what is expected . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Though usually nocturnal , the raccoon is sometimes active in daylight to take advantage of available food sources . Its diet consists of about 40 % invertebrates , 33 % plant material and 27 % vertebrates . Since its diet consists of such a variety of different foods , <unk> argues the raccoon " may well be one of the world 's most omnivorous animals " . While its diet in spring and early summer consists mostly of insects , worms , and other animals already available early in the year , it prefers fruits and nuts , such as acorns and walnuts , which emerge in late summer and autumn , and represent a rich calorie source for building up fat needed for winter . Contrary to popular belief , raccoons only occasionally eat active or large prey , such as birds and mammals . They prefer prey that is easier to catch , specifically fish , amphibians and bird eggs . When food is plentiful , raccoons can develop strong individual preferences for specific foods . In the northern parts of their range , raccoons go into a winter rest , reducing their activity drastically as long as a permanent snow cover makes searching for food impossible . 
 = = = Dousing = = = 
 One aspect of raccoon behavior is so well known that it gives the animal part of its scientific name , Procyon lotor ; " lotor " is neo @-@ Latin for " washer " . In the wild , raccoons often dabble for underwater food near the shore @-@ line . They then often pick up the food item with their front paws to examine it and rub the item , sometimes to remove unwanted parts . This gives the appearance of the raccoon " washing " the food . The tactile sensitivity of raccoons ' paws is increased if this rubbing action is performed underwater , since the water softens the hard layer covering the paws . However , the behavior observed in captive raccoons in which they carry their food to water to " wash " or douse it before eating has not been observed in the wild . Naturalist Georges @-@ Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon , believed that raccoons do not have adequate saliva production to moisten food thereby necessitating dousing , but this hypothesis is now considered to be incorrect . Captive raccoons douse their food more frequently when a watering hole with a layout similar to a stream is not farther away than 3 m ( 10 ft ) . The widely accepted theory is that dousing in captive raccoons is a fixed action pattern from the dabbling behavior performed when foraging at shores for aquatic foods . This is supported by the observation that aquatic foods are doused more frequently . Cleaning dirty food does not seem to be a reason for " washing " . Experts have cast doubt on the veracity of observations of wild raccoons dousing food . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Raccoons usually mate in a period triggered by increasing daylight between late January and mid @-@ March . However , there are large regional differences which are not completely explicable by solar conditions . For example , while raccoons in southern states typically mate later than average , the mating season in Manitoba also peaks later than usual in March and extends until June . During the mating season , males restlessly roam their home ranges in search of females in an attempt to court them during the three- to four @-@ day period when conception is possible . These encounters will often occur at central meeting places . Copulation , including foreplay , can last over an hour and is repeated over several nights . The weaker members of a male social group also are assumed to get the opportunity to mate , since the stronger ones cannot mate with all available females . In a study in southern Texas during the mating seasons from 1990 to 1992 , about one third of all females mated with more than one male . If a female does not become pregnant or if she loses her kits early , she will sometimes become fertile again 80 to 140 days later . 
 After usually 63 to 65 days of gestation ( although anywhere from 54 to 70 days is possible ) , a litter of typically two to five young is born . The average litter size varies widely with habitat , ranging from 2 @.@ 5 in Alabama to 4 @.@ 8 in North Dakota . Larger litters are more common in areas with a high mortality rate , due , for example , to hunting or severe winters . While male yearlings usually reach their sexual maturity only after the main mating season , female yearlings can compensate for high mortality rates and may be responsible for about 50 % of all young born in a year . Males have no part in raising young . The kits ( also called " cubs " ) are blind and deaf at birth , but their mask is already visible against their light fur . The birth weight of the about 10 cm ( 4 in ) -long kits is between 60 and 75 g ( 2 @.@ 1 and 2 @.@ 6 oz ) . Their ear canals open after around 18 to 23 days , a few days before their eyes open for the first time . Once the kits weigh about 1 kg ( 2 lb ) , they begin to explore outside the den , consuming solid food for the first time after six to nine weeks . After this point , their mother suckles them with decreasing frequency ; they are usually weaned by 16 weeks . In the fall , after their mother has shown them dens and feeding grounds , the juvenile group splits up . While many females will stay close to the home range of their mother , males can sometimes move more than 20 km ( 12 mi ) away . This is considered an instinctive behavior , preventing inbreeding . However , mother and offspring may share a den during the first winter in cold areas . 
 = = = Life expectancy = = = 
 Captive raccoons have been known to live for more than 20 years . However , the species ' life expectancy in the wild is only 1 @.@ 8 to 3 @.@ 1 years , depending on the local conditions in terms of traffic volume , hunting , and weather severity . It is not unusual for only half of the young born in one year to survive a full year . After this point , the annual mortality rate drops to between 10 % and 30 % . Young raccoons are vulnerable to losing their mother and to starvation , particularly in long and cold winters . The most frequent natural cause of death in the North American raccoon population is distemper , which can reach epidemic proportions and kill most of a local raccoon population . In areas with heavy vehicular traffic and extensive hunting , these factors can account for up to 90 % of all deaths of adult raccoons . Due to a broad range of range overlap with these predators , the most important natural predators of the raccoon are bobcats , coyotes , and great horned owls , the latter mainly preying on young raccoons but capable of killing adults in some cases . In Florida , they have been reported to fall victim to larger carnivores like American black bear and cougars and these species may also be a threat on occasion in other areas . Also in the southeast , they are among the favored prey for adult American alligators . On occasion , both bald and golden eagles will prey on raccoons . In rare cases of overlap , they may fall victim from carnivores ranging from species averaging smaller than themselves such as fishers to those as large and formidable as jaguars in Mexico . In their introduced range in the former Soviet Union , their main predators are wolves , lynxes and eagle owls . However , predation is not a significant cause of death , especially because larger predators have been exterminated in many areas inhabited by raccoons . 
 = = Range = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Although they have thrived in sparsely wooded areas in the last decades , raccoons depend on vertical structures to climb when they feel threatened . Therefore , they avoid open terrain and areas with high concentrations of beech trees , as beech bark is too smooth to climb . Tree hollows in old oaks or other trees and rock crevices are preferred by raccoons as sleeping , winter and litter dens . If such dens are unavailable or accessing them is inconvenient , raccoons use burrows dug by other mammals , dense undergrowth or tree crotches . In a study in the <unk> range of hills in Germany , more than 60 % of all sleeping places were used only once , but those used at least ten times accounted for about 70 % of all uses . Since amphibians , crustaceans , and other animals found around the shore of lakes and rivers are an important part of the raccoon 's diet , lowland deciduous or mixed forests abundant with water and marshes sustain the highest population densities . While population densities range from 0 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 2 animals per square kilometer ( 1 @.@ 3 to 8 @.@ 3 animals per square mile ) in prairies and do not usually exceed 6 animals per square kilometer ( 15 @.@ 5 animals per square mile ) in upland hardwood forests , more than 20 raccoons per square kilometer ( 51 @.@ 8 animals per square mile ) can live in lowland forests and marshes . 
 = = = Distribution in North America = = = 
 Raccoons are common throughout North America from Canada to Panama , where the subspecies Procyon lotor <unk> coexists with the crab @-@ eating raccoon ( Procyon <unk> ) . The population on Hispaniola was exterminated as early as 1513 by Spanish colonists who hunted them for their meat . Raccoons were also exterminated in Cuba and Jamaica , where the last sightings were reported in 1687 . When they were still considered separate species , the Bahamas raccoon , Guadeloupe raccoon and Tres Marias raccoon were classified as endangered by the IUCN in 1996 . 
 There is evidence that in pre @-@ Columbian times raccoons were numerous only along rivers and in the woodlands of the Southeastern United States . As raccoons were not mentioned in earlier reports of pioneers exploring the central and north @-@ central parts of the United States , their initial spread may have begun a few decades before the 20th century . Since the 1950s , raccoons have expanded their range from Vancouver Island — formerly the northernmost limit of their range — far into the northern portions of the four south @-@ central Canadian provinces . New habitats which have recently been occupied by raccoons ( aside from urban areas ) include mountain ranges , such as the Western Rocky Mountains , prairies and coastal marshes . After a population explosion starting in the 1940s , the estimated number of raccoons in North America in the late 1980s was 15 to 20 times higher than in the 1930s , when raccoons were comparatively rare . Urbanization , the expansion of agriculture , deliberate introductions , and the extermination of natural predators of the raccoon have probably caused this increase in abundance and distribution . 
 = = = Distribution outside North America = = = 
 As a result of escapes and deliberate introductions in the mid @-@ 20th century , the raccoon is now distributed in several European and Asian countries . Sightings have occurred in all the countries bordering Germany , which hosts the largest population outside of North America . Another stable population exists in northern France , where several pet raccoons were released by members of the U.S. Air Force near the Laon @-@ <unk> Air Base in 1966 . Furthermore , raccoons have been known to be in the area around Madrid since the early 1970s . In 2013 the city authorized " the capture and death of any specimen " found . It is also present in Italy , with one reproductive population in Lombardy . 
 About 1 @,@ 240 animals were released in nine regions of the former Soviet Union between 1936 and 1958 for the purpose of establishing a population to be hunted for their fur . Two of these introductions were successful — one in the south of Belarus between 1954 and 1958 , and another in Azerbaijan between 1941 and 1957 . With a seasonal harvest of between 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 500 animals , in 1974 the estimated size of the population distributed in the Caucasus region was around 20 @,@ 000 animals and the density was four animals per square kilometer ( 10 animals per square mile ) . 
 = = = = Distribution in Japan = = = = 
 In Japan , up to 1 @,@ 500 raccoons were imported as pets each year after the success of the anime series Rascal the Raccoon ( 1977 ) . In 2004 , the descendants of discarded or escaped animals lived in 42 of 47 prefectures . The population of raccoons in Japan grew from 17 prefectures in 2000 to all 47 prefectures in 2008 . 
 = = = = Distribution in Germany = = = = 
 In Germany — where the raccoon is called the <unk> ( literally , " wash @-@ bear " or " washing bear " ) due to its habit of " dousing " food in water — two pairs of pet raccoons were released into the German countryside at the <unk> reservoir in the north of Hesse in April 1934 by a forester upon request of their owner , a poultry farmer . He released them two weeks before receiving permission from the Prussian hunting office to " enrich the fauna . " Several prior attempts to introduce raccoons in Germany were not successful . A second population was established in eastern Germany in 1945 when 25 raccoons escaped from a fur farm at <unk> , east of Berlin , after an air strike . The two populations are <unk> distinguishable : 70 % of the raccoons of the Hessian population are infected with the roundworm Baylisascaris <unk> , but none of the Brandenburgian population has the parasite . The estimated number of raccoons was 285 animals in the Hessian region in 1956 , over 20 @,@ 000 animals in the Hessian region in 1970 and between 200 @,@ 000 and 400 @,@ 000 animals in the whole of Germany in 2008 . By 2012 it was estimated that Germany now had more than a million raccoons . 
 The raccoon was a protected species in Germany , but has been declared a game animal in 14 states since 1954 . Hunters and environmentalists argue the raccoon spreads uncontrollably , threatens protected bird species and supersedes domestic carnivorans . This view is opposed by the zoologist Frank @-@ Uwe <unk> , who finds no evidence a high population density of raccoons has negative effects on the biodiversity of an area . Hohmann holds that extensive hunting cannot be justified by the absence of natural predators , because predation is not a significant cause of death in the North American raccoon population . 
 = = = = Distribution in the former USSR = = = = 
 Experiments in <unk> raccoons into the USSR began in 1936 , and were repeated a further 25 times until 1962 . Overall , 1 @,@ 222 individuals were released , 64 of which came from zoos and fur farms ( 38 of them having been imports from western Europe ) . The remainder originated from a population previously established in Transcaucasia . The range of Soviet raccoons was never single or continuous , as they were often introduced to different locations far from each other . All introductions into the Russian Far East failed ; melanistic raccoons were released on Petrov Island near Vladivostok and some areas of southern Primorsky Krai , but died . In Middle Asia , raccoons were released in Kyrgyzstan 's Jalal @-@ Abad Province , though they were later recorded as " practically absent " there in January 1963 . A large and stable raccoon population ( yielding 1000 – 1500 catches a year ) was established in Azerbaijan after an introduction to the area in 1937 . Raccoons apparently survived an introduction near Terek , along the <unk> River into the <unk> lowlands . Attempts to settle raccoons on the Kuban River 's left tributary and <unk> @-@ <unk> were unsuccessful . A successful acclimatization occurred in Belarus , where three introductions ( consisting of 52 , 37 and 38 individuals in 1954 and 1958 ) took place . By January 1 , 1963 , 700 individuals were recorded in the country . 
 = = = Urban raccoons = = = 
 Due to its adaptability , the raccoon has been able to use urban areas as a habitat . The first sightings were recorded in a suburb of Cincinnati in the 1920s . Since the 1950s , raccoons have been present in metropolitan areas like Washington , DC , Chicago , and Toronto . Since the 2010s , a nuisance population of raccoons has been present in Albuquerque , New Mexico . Since the 1960s , Kassel has hosted Europe 's first and densest population in a large urban area , with about 50 to 150 animals per square kilometer ( 130 to 390 animals per square mile ) , a figure comparable to those of urban habitats in North America . Home range sizes of urban raccoons are only 3 to 40 hectares ( 7 @.@ 5 to 100 acres ) for females and 8 to 80 hectares ( 20 to 200 acres ) for males . In small towns and suburbs , many raccoons sleep in a nearby forest after foraging in the settlement area . Fruit and insects in gardens and leftovers in municipal waste are easily available food sources . Furthermore , a large number of additional sleeping areas exist in these areas , such as hollows in old garden trees , cottages , garages , abandoned houses , and attics . The percentage of urban raccoons sleeping in abandoned or occupied houses varies from 15 % in Washington , DC ( 1991 ) to 43 % in Kassel ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Health = = 
 Raccoons can carry rabies , a lethal disease caused by the neurotropic rabies virus carried in the saliva and transmitted by bites . Its spread began in Florida and Georgia in the 1950s and was facilitated by the introduction of infected individuals to Virginia and North Dakota in the late 1970s . Of the 6 @,@ 940 documented rabies cases reported in the United States in 2006 , 2 @,@ 615 ( 37 @.@ 7 % ) were in raccoons . The U.S. Department of Agriculture , as well as local authorities in several U.S. states and Canadian provinces , has developed oral vaccination programs to fight the spread of the disease in endangered populations . Only one human fatality has been reported after transmission of the rabies virus strain commonly known as " raccoon rabies " . Among the main symptoms for rabies in raccoons are a generally sickly appearance , impaired mobility , abnormal vocalization , and aggressiveness . There may be no visible signs at all , however , and most individuals do not show the aggressive behavior seen in infected canids ; rabid raccoons will often retire to their dens instead . Organizations like the U.S. Forest Service encourage people to stay away from animals with unusual behavior or appearance , and to notify the proper authorities , such as an animal control officer from the local health department . Since healthy animals , especially nursing mothers , will occasionally forage during the day , daylight activity is not a reliable indicator of illness in raccoons . 
 Unlike rabies and at least a dozen other pathogens carried by raccoons , distemper , an epizootic virus , does not affect humans . This disease is the most frequent natural cause of death in the North American raccoon population and affects individuals of all age groups . For example , 94 of 145 raccoons died during an outbreak in Clifton , Ohio , in 1968 . It may occur along with a following inflammation of the brain ( encephalitis ) , causing the animal to display rabies @-@ like symptoms . In Germany , the first eight cases of distemper were reported in 2007 . 
 Some of the most important bacterial diseases which affect raccoons are leptospirosis , listeriosis , tetanus , and tularemia . Although internal parasites weaken their immune systems , well @-@ fed individuals can carry a great many roundworms in their digestive tracts without showing symptoms . The larvae of the Baylisascaris <unk> roundworm , which can be contained in the feces and seldom causes a severe illness in humans , can be ingested when cleaning raccoon latrines without wearing breathing protection . 
 While not endemic , the Trichinella worm does infect raccoons , and undercooked raccoon meat has caused trichinosis in humans . 
 Trematode Metorchis conjunctus can also infect raccoons . 
 = = Raccoons and humans = = 
 = = = Conflicts = = = 
 The increasing number of raccoons in urban areas has resulted in diverse reactions in humans , ranging from outrage at their presence to deliberate feeding . Some wildlife experts and most public authorities caution against feeding wild animals because they might become increasingly obtrusive and dependent on humans as a food source . Other experts challenge such arguments and give advice on feeding raccoons and other wildlife in their books . Raccoons without a fear of humans are a concern to those who attribute this trait to rabies , but scientists point out this behavior is much more likely to be a behavioral adjustment to living in habitats with regular contact to humans for many generations . Raccoons usually do not prey on domestic cats and dogs , but individual cases of killings have been reported . Attacks on pets may also target their owners . 
 While overturned waste containers and raided fruit trees are just a nuisance to homeowners , it can cost several thousand dollars to repair damage caused by the use of attic space as dens . Relocating or killing raccoons without a permit is forbidden in many urban areas on grounds of animal welfare . These methods usually only solve problems with particularly wild or aggressive individuals , since adequate dens are either known to several raccoons or will quickly be rediscovered . Loud noises , flashing lights and unpleasant odors have proven particularly effective in driving away a mother and her kits before they would normally leave the nesting place ( when the kits are about eight weeks old ) . Typically , though , only precautionary measures to restrict access to food waste and den sites are effective in the long term . 
 Among all fruits and crops cultivated in agricultural areas , sweet corn in its milk stage is particularly popular among raccoons . In a two @-@ year study by Purdue University researchers , published in 2004 , raccoons were responsible for 87 % of the damage to corn plants . Like other predators , raccoons searching for food can break into poultry houses to feed on chickens , ducks , their eggs , or feed . 
 Since raccoons in high mortality areas have a higher rate of reproduction , extensive hunting may not solve problems with raccoon populations . Older males also claim larger home ranges than younger ones , resulting in a lower population density . 
 = = = Mythology , arts , and entertainment = = = 
 In the mythology of the indigenous peoples of the Americas , the raccoon is the subject of folk tales . Stories such as " How raccoons catch so many crayfish " from the Tuscarora centered on its skills at foraging . In other tales , the raccoon played the role of the trickster which outsmarts other animals , like coyotes and wolves . Among others , the Dakota Sioux believe the raccoon has natural spirit powers , since its mask resembled the facial paintings , two @-@ fingered <unk> of black and white , used during rituals to connect to spirit beings . The Aztecs linked supernatural abilities especially to females , whose commitment to their young was associated with the role of wise women in their society . 
 The raccoon also appears in Native American art across a wide geographic range . Petroglyphs with engraved raccoon tracks were found in Lewis Canyon , Texas ; at the Crow Hollow petroglyph site in Grayson County , Kentucky ; and in river drainages near Tularosa , New Mexico and San Francisco , California . A true @-@ to @-@ detail figurine made of quartz , the Ohio Mound Builders ' Stone Pipe , was found near the Scioto River . The meaning and significance of the Raccoon Priests <unk> , which features a stylized carving of a raccoon and was found at the Spiro Mounds , Oklahoma , remains unknown . 
 In Western culture , several autobiographical novels about living with a raccoon have been written , mostly for children . The best @-@ known is Sterling North 's Rascal , which recounts how he raised a kit during World War I. In recent years , anthropomorphic raccoons played main roles in the animated television series The Raccoons , the computer @-@ animated film Over the Hedge , the live action film Guardians of the Galaxy and the video game series Sly Cooper . 
 = = = Hunting and fur trade = = = 
 The fur of raccoons is used for clothing , especially for coats and coonskin caps . At present , it is the material used for the inaccurately named " sealskin " cap worn by the Royal Fusiliers of Great Britain . Historically , Native American tribes not only used the fur for winter clothing , but also used the tails for ornament . The famous Sioux leader Spotted Tail took his name from a raccoon skin hat with the tail attached he acquired from a fur trader . Since the late 18th century , various types of scent hounds , called " <unk> " , which are able to tree animals have been bred in the United States . In the 19th century , when <unk> occasionally even served as means of payment , several thousand raccoons were killed each year in the United States . This number rose quickly when automobile coats became popular after the turn of the 20th century . In the 1920s , wearing a raccoon coat was regarded as status symbol among college students . Attempts to breed raccoons in fur farms in the 1920s and 1930s in North America and Europe turned out not to be profitable , and farming was abandoned after prices for long @-@ haired pelts dropped in the 1940s . Although raccoons had become rare in the 1930s , at least 388 @,@ 000 were killed during the hunting season of 1934 / 35 . 
 After persistent population increases began in the 1940s , the seasonal hunt reached about one million animals in 1946 / 47 and two million in 1962 / 63 . The broadcast of three television episodes about the frontiersman Davy Crockett and the film Davy Crockett , King of the Wild Frontier in 1954 and 1955 led to a high demand for coonskin caps in the United States , although it is unlikely either Crockett or the actor who played him , Fess Parker , actually wore a cap made from raccoon fur . The seasonal hunt reached an all @-@ time high with 5 @.@ 2 million animals in 1976 / 77 and ranged between 3 @.@ 2 and 4 @.@ 7 million for most of the 1980s . In 1982 , the average pelt price was $ 20 . As of 1987 , the raccoon was identified as the most important wild furbearer in North America in terms of revenue . In the first half of the 1990s , the seasonal hunt dropped to 0 @.@ 9 from 1 @.@ 9 million due to decreasing pelt prices . 
 While primarily hunted for their fur , raccoons were also a source of food for Native Americans and early American settlers . According to Ernest Thompson Seton , young specimens killed without a fight are palatable , whereas old raccoons caught after a lengthy battle are inedible . Raccoon meat was extensively eaten during the early years of California , where it was sold in the San Francisco market for $ 1 – 3 apiece . American slaves occasionally ate raccoon at Christmas , but it was not necessarily a dish of the poor or rural . The first edition of The Joy of Cooking , released in 1931 , contained a recipe for preparing raccoon , and US President Calvin Coolidge 's pet raccoon Rebecca was originally sent to be served at the White House Thanksgiving Dinner . Although the idea of eating raccoons seems repulsive to most mainstream consumers since they see them as endearing , cute , and / or vermin , several thousand raccoons are still eaten each year in the United States . 
 = = = Pet raccoons = = = 
 Raccoons are sometimes kept as pets , which is discouraged by many experts because the raccoon is not a domesticated species . Raccoons may act unpredictably and aggressively and it is usually impossible to teach them to obey commands . In places where keeping raccoons as pets is not forbidden , such as in Wisconsin and other U.S. states , an exotic pet permit may be required . 
 Their propensity for unruly behavior exceeds that of captive skunks , and are even less trustworthy when allowed to roam freely . Because of their intelligence and nimble forelimbs , even inexperienced raccoons are easily capable of <unk> jars , <unk> bottles and opening door latches , with more experienced specimens having been recorded to open door knobs . Sexually mature raccoons often show aggressive natural behaviors such as biting during the mating season . Neutering them at around five or six months of age decreases the chances of aggressive behavior developing . Raccoons can become obese and suffer from other disorders due to poor diet and lack of exercise . When fed with cat food over a long time period , raccoons can develop gout . With respect to the research results regarding their social behavior , it is now required by law in Austria and Germany to keep at least two individuals to prevent loneliness . Raccoons are usually kept in a pen ( indoor or outdoor ) , also a legal requirement in Austria and Germany , rather than in the apartment where their natural curiosity may result in damage to property . 
 When orphaned , it is possible for kits to be rehabilitated and reintroduced to the wild . However , it is uncertain whether they readapt well to life in the wild . Feeding <unk> kits with cow 's milk rather than a kitten replacement milk or a similar product can be dangerous to their health . 
 = = = Local and indigenous names = = = 
 = Vince 's Devils = 
 Vince 's Devils ( originally known as Ladies in Pink ) was a villainous alliance of female professional wrestlers in World Wrestling Entertainment on its Raw brand . It consisted of Divas Candice Michelle , Torrie Wilson , and Victoria . The women formed their alliance in August 2005 after Wilson and Michelle were traded to Raw from SmackDown ! . Vince 's Devils , named after WWE Chairman Vince McMahon , helped each other in their matches and rivalries until tension began growing between Wilson and Candice Michelle over the latter 's April 2006 Playboy pictorial . The group had officially split by March 2006 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Debut = = = 
 In August 2005 , in a trade un @-@ aired on television , SmackDown ! Divas Torrie Wilson and Candice Michelle were traded to Raw for Raw Divas Stacy Keibler and Christy Hemme , who were moved to SmackDown ! . During their debut , the duo of Torrie and Candice began a new storyline when they called Diva Search 2005 winner Ashley Massaro to ringside to congratulate her for winning the competition , but instead they taunted and attacked her , becoming villains in the process . The next week , Torrie and Candice recruited the evil Victoria to join them , and the three began harassing Massaro on a regular basis . They also taunted and embarrassed her during matches . 
 = = = Feuds = = = 
 When Trish Stratus made her return from a legitimate back injury on September 12 , she became a fan favorite by joining forces with Massaro . At Unforgiven , Victoria and Wilson lost a match against Stratus and Massaro . At WWE Homecoming , they lost again in a Bra and Panties Handicap match when they were stripped by their opponents . 
 For several weeks afterward , Wilson was absent from television due to personal issues she had to attend to off @-@ screen . On November 28 , Wilson returned to the group to participate in a six @-@ woman tag team match . Wilson 's dog Chloe became an official member of the group on December 26 when she interfered in one of Victoria 's matches and became the first dog to have her own WWE.com profile . At Taboo Tuesday in November , Candice Michelle was eliminated from the Fulfill Your Fantasy Battle Royal for the WWE Women 's Championship by former rival Ashley Massaro . 
 On the January 2 episode of Raw , the Ladies in Pink turned their attention to backstage announcer Maria Kanellis , blaming her for Victoria 's loss in a match . Victoria announced to Maria that they had a match scheduled that night and proceeded to attack her before the bell . Although Victoria seemed to have the advantage in the match , which included interference from Wilson and Chloe , Victoria was pinned after she attempted an offensive maneuver but missed and ran into the turnbuckle , allowing Maria to pin her . After the match , Candice Michelle , Wilson , and Victoria attacked Maria until Ashley Massaro ran down to the ring to assist Maria . The conflict between the Divas caused the Chairman , Vince McMahon , to make a Bra and Panties Gauntlet match at New Year 's Revolution , which Massaro won when she eliminated Victoria by removing her shorts . The next night on Raw , the Ladies in Pink announced that they had changed the name of their alliance to Vince 's Devils . The storyline rivalry with Massaro continued on the January 23 episode of Raw , when Victoria and Candice Michelle were defeated by Trish Stratus and Massaro in a tag team match . At the Royal Rumble on January 30 , the three women were shown in backstage segments flirting with McMahon . 
 = = = Split = = = 
 By February , Candice Michelle had announced that she was going to be on the cover of the April edition of Playboy magazine , and tension began to grow between Candice Michelle and Torrie Wilson . After winning a number one contender 's Diva battle royal on Raw in which she first eliminated Wilson and then Mickie James and Ashley at the same time , Candice Michelle received her first singles WWE Women 's Championship match , but she lost to champion Trish Stratus on February 27 . After the match , Candice Michelle slapped Wilson , blaming her , in storyline , for the loss . As a result of the tension between the women , Wilson became a fan favorite , while Candice Michelle and Victoria continued to act as villains on @-@ screen . 
 On March 13 , during Victoria 's Women 's Championship match , Wilson ran down and gave Victoria a facebuster costing her the victory . Later in the broadcast , it had appeared that Candice Michelle and Victoria may have gotten their revenge as Trish Stratus found an unconscious Wilson laid out in the Divas ' Locker room with Candice 's Playboy magazine lying across Wilson . At WrestleMania 22 , Wilson gained revenge by defeating the evil Candice Michelle in a Playboy Pillow Fight match . On the June 12 episode of Raw , Wilson defeated Candice Michelle in the first ever Wet and Wild match , a wrestling match involving water balloons and squirt guns , in which the winner of the match would be on the cover of the WWE 2006 Summer Special magazine . After the match , the feuds and alliances between the women ended , and they continued to appear together in television segments with no mention of their time as former allies and enemies . On the July 17 episode of Raw , Candice was the Special Guest Referee during a tag team match of Stratus and Wilson against Victoria and Mickie . James entered the match without being tagged in , so Candice threw her out of the ring . Afterwards , Victoria tried to clothesline Candice , but she ducked out of the way , allowing Stratus to perform a Stratusfaction for the victory . As a result of her participation in the match , Candice became a face . Their allies between Candice and Victoria came to an end . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Double team finishing moves 
 Wilson and Michelle 
 Double DDT – performed by Torrie Wilson and Candice Michelle 
 Wilson 's finishing moves 
 Nose Job ( Sitout facebuster ) 
 Victoria 's finishing moves 
 Widow 's Peak ( Gory neckbreaker ) 
 Michelle 's finishing moves 
 Forward Russian legsweep 
 Michelle 's signature moves 
 <unk> ( Hanging figure four necklock ) – performed by Candice Michelle 
 Chloe 's signature moves 
 Chloe Tush Push ( Stinkface ) 
 = John Berry ( administrator ) = 
 Morrell John Berry ( born February 10 , 1959 ) is the United States Ambassador to Australia . He used to be director of the United States Office of Personnel Management . 
 Berry was born in Montgomery County , Maryland , to parents who worked for the federal government . He completed degrees at the University of Maryland , College Park and Syracuse University and worked in local government and as a legislative aide in state government from 1982 to 1985 . From 1985 to 1994 , he worked as legislative director for U.S. Representative Steny Hoyer . He held posts in the U.S. Treasury Department , the Smithsonian Institution , and the U.S. Department of the Interior until 2000 , and worked as director of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation and the National Zoological Park until 2009 , when he was nominated by President Barack Obama as director of the United States Office of Personnel Management . Berry took office after being confirmed by the United States Senate in April 2009 . 
 In June 2013 , President Obama nominated Berry to replace Jeff <unk> as US ambassador to Australia . He was confirmed by unanimous consent of the US Senate in August 2013 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Berry was born February 10 , 1959 , in Rockville , Montgomery County , Maryland , United States . His father served in the U.S. Marine Corps , his mother worked for the U.S. Census Bureau , and he has a brother and a sister . Berry graduated from high school in 1977 and finished a Bachelor of Arts in government and politics from the University of Maryland , College Park in 1980 . In 1981 , Berry graduated from Syracuse University with a Master of Public Administration . 
 = = Career = = 
 Berry served in management for the Montgomery County government from 1982 to 1984 and as staff director of the Maryland Senate Finance Committee from 1984 to 1985 . From 1985 to 1994 , he was legislative director for U.S. Representative Steny Hoyer , and associate staffer on the House Appropriations Committee . Berry assisted Hoyer on employment issues of the federal government , and played a leading role in negotiations that led to the Federal Employees Pay <unk> Act of 1990 , which established the locality pay system . From 1994 to 1995 , Berry served as Deputy Assistant Secretary and acting Assistant Secretary for Law Enforcement in the U.S. Treasury Department . From 1995 to 1997 , Berry worked as director of government relations and as senior policy advisor at the Smithsonian Institution . 
 = = Department of the Interior = = 
 Berry was appointed Assistant Secretary for Policy , Management and Budget at the U.S. Department of the Interior during the Clinton administration , serving from 1997 to 2001 . At the Interior Department , Berry improved credit union and continuing education options , oversaw the expansion of department programs to improve employees ' work @-@ life balance , and held town hall meetings with Interior employees and used their suggestions to upgrade a cafeteria and health center . These changes were partly funded through partnerships with federal employees , unions and other agencies to reduce costs for the department . Berry worked to create a complaint procedure for employees who experience discrimination because of their sexual orientation , to expand relocation benefits and counseling services to domestic partners of employees , to establish a liaison to gay and lesbian workers , and to eliminate discriminatory provisions of the National Park Service 's law enforcement standards . He helped establish an office supply store for Interior employees , which he staffed with disabled workers . Berry oversaw one of the largest budgetary increases in the department 's history . 
 In 2000 , Berry became director of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation , where he worked with Interior Inspector General Earl <unk> to reconcile twenty years of financial records , improve management , and conserve wildlife habitat through public @-@ private partnerships . Berry was appointed from October 1 , 2005 , to serve as director of the National Zoo , which had been found to have shortcomings in record keeping and maintenance . Berry created a strategic planning and modernization process for the zoo . This included a twenty @-@ year capital plan , securing $ 35 million in funding to provide for fire protection , and beginning renovations to animal houses . 
 The Berry Bastion , an Antarctic mountain , was named in his honor . 
 = = Office of Personnel Management = = 
 In 2008 , Berry was mentioned as a possible nominee for U.S. Secretary of the Interior , a position obtained by Ken Salazar . President Barack Obama announced his intention to nominate Berry as director of the Office of Personnel Management on March 3 , 2009 , and did so on March 4 . The nomination hearing before the Senate Homeland Security Committee on March 26 , 2009 , led to expectation of easy confirmation for Berry , despite opposition from conservative activists based on Berry 's homosexuality . In the hearing Berry stated he supported any effective employee compensation system , but that the federal government had the obligation to give employees with comparable job performances similar pay and treatment . He pledged to preserve veterans preference and supplement it with training programs to prepare veterans for federal jobs , and promised reviews of proposals to improve the security clearance and hiring processes . Berry emphasized the importance for agencies to use all recruitment tools , citing relocation benefits that could keep agencies competitive with the private sector , and stated he would create a strategic plan and set performance goals for the Office of Personnel Management . Berry had stated support for benefits for same @-@ sex partners of federal employees and a repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act . 
 The Senate confirmed Berry on April 3 , 2009 , and he was sworn in April 13 as the first agency director in the Obama administration with all senior staff in place . The ceremonial swearing in on April 23 was attended by First Lady Michelle Obama . Berry has been , according to the Human Rights Campaign , the highest @-@ ranking openly gay official to serve in the executive branch in any U.S. administration . 
 = = U.S. Ambassador to Australia = = 
 In June 2013 , President Obama nominated Berry to be the US ambassador to Australia , the first openly gay U.S. ambassador to a G @-@ 20 nation . On August 1 , 2013 , the United States Senate confirmed Berry by unanimous consent . Australian media coverage of Berry 's appointment has been overwhelmingly positive with a video he posted to the US Embassy website being described as the " friendliest introduction video in diplomatic history " while Berry himself was described as " modest " , with an " impressive record " . Federal News Radio , in the US , reported that , " more than 200 people had posted responses " to the video , " most of which were warm and cordial " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Before being appointed as ambassador to Australia Berry lived in Washington , D.C. Berry is openly gay . On August 10 , 2013 , he married Curtis Yee , his partner for 17 years , at St Margaret 's Episcopal Church in Washington . 
 = The Iron Giant = 
 The Iron Giant is a 1999 American animated science fiction comedy @-@ drama film using both traditional animation and computer animation , produced by Warner Bros. Feature Animation and directed by Brad Bird in his directorial debut . It is based on the 1968 novel The Iron Man by Ted Hughes ( which was published in the United States as The Iron Giant ) and is scripted by Tim McCanlies . The film stars Eli Marienthal , Christopher McDonald , Jennifer Aniston , Harry Connick , Jr . , John Mahoney , and Vin Diesel . Set during the Cold War in 1957 , the film is about a young boy named Hogarth Hughes who discovers a giant metallic robot who fell from space . With the help of a beatnik artist named Dean McCoppin , they have to stop the U.S. military and a paranoid federal agent named Kent Mansley from finding and destroying the Giant . 
 The film 's development phase began in 1994 as a musical with the involvement of The Who 's Pete Townshend , though the project took root once Bird signed on as director and hired McCanlies to write the screenplay in 1996 . The film was created traditionally , with computer @-@ generated imagery used to animate the title character and other effects . The understaffed crew of the film completed it with half of the time and budget of other animated features . Michael Kamen produced the film 's score , recorded with the Czech Philharmonic . 
 Upon its release , the film saw wide critical acclaim from critics and audiences . It was nominated for several awards , winning nine Annie Awards . Despite this acclaim , the film significantly under @-@ performed at the box office , making $ 31 @.@ 3 million worldwide against a budget of $ 70 – 80 million , which was blamed on an unusually poor marketing campaign . Through home video releases and television syndication , the film gathered a cult following and is now widely regarded as a modern animated classic . In 2015 , an extended , remastered version of the film was re @-@ released theatrically . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In October 1957 , shortly after the Russian satellite Sputnik is put into orbit , an enormous robot from outer space crashes into the ocean near Rockwell , Maine . The robot makes its way inland and wanders into the forest . Nine @-@ year @-@ old Hogarth Hughes discovers the robot one night as it begins eating the powerlines of an electrical substation and electrocutes itself . Hogarth shuts down the power , saving the robot , and returns home . Several days later , Hogarth makes it his mission to find the robot and take a picture . After hours of waiting , the robot surprises Hogarth , who soon befriends him . Suffering amnesia , the Iron Giant accompanies Hogarth wherever he goes . When they come across a railroad , the Giant starts eating the rails . Hearing an oncoming train , Hogarth tells the Giant to repair the tracks . As he does , the train collides , breaking him into pieces . The Giant 's parts start to reassemble , and Hogarth hides the damaged robot in his house 's barn , where the parts can repair themselves . 
 Later , after dinner with his widowed mother Annie , Hogarth reads comic books to the Giant . The Giant is impressed with Superman , but discovers the comic ' <unk> the Metal Menace . ' Hogarth reassures the Giant , " you are who you choose to be " . In the meantime , U.S. government agent Kent Mansley arrives , discovering possible evidence of the Giant . Finding Hogarth 's BB gun near the substation , Mansley takes a room for rent at Hogarth 's home and follows the boy around , hoping to learn more . Hogarth evades Mansley and takes the Giant to the junkyard of Dean McCoppin , a beatnik who had earlier befriended Hogarth , for shelter . Hogarth soon had to discuss " death " with the Giant after they witness hunters shoot a stag in the forest . Paranoid about alien invasion , Mansley alerts the U.S. Army to the presence of the Giant . When he and General Kenneth Rogard , backed by Army troops , force the investigation , Dean reveals the robot disguised as his scrap @-@ metal artwork . Rogard admonishes Mansley and leaves . Later , Hogarth plays with the Giant using a toy gun , which automatically activates the Giant 's weaponry . Dean saves Hogarth and demands the Giant to leave . Thinking the Giant never meant any harm , Hogarth runs after him . Dean finds the toy gun and realizes the Giant was only reacting defensively . He catches Hogarth with his motorbike as the Giant reaches town . 
 In Rockwell , the Giant saves two boys from falling to their death , to the amazement of witnesses . The Army troops see the Giant , return , and attack while requesting Navy and Air Force support . The Giant flies away with Hogarth and even though being attacked by a USAF F @-@ 86 , the Giant kept his original programming from taking over . However , after he was shot down , the Giant mistakenly believes the unconscious Hogarth is dead . The Giant becomes both saddened and enraged over Hogarth 's death . He activates his energy weapons and battles the completely outmatched Army . Mansley lies to Rogard that the Giant killed Hogarth and suggests he can be destroyed at sea with a nuclear missile from the USS Nautilus . Hogarth wakes up and calms the Giant , causing him to deactivate his weapons . As Mansley keeps telling Rogard to attack , Dean says the Giant never harmed anyone . Seeing Hogarth alive , Rogard has the Army stand down , but before he can tell the Nautilus the same thing , a panicked Mansley grabs the walkie talkie and orders the missile launch without thinking . Furious , Rogard reminds Mansley that the missile , currently targeted on the Giant , will also kill them and everyone in Rockwell . When Mansley cowardly attempts to flee , the Giant stops him and the Army forces Mansley to stay and die with them . Hogarth tells the Giant of Rockwell 's impending fate and the Giant makes the decision to fly off , smiling to himself that he chooses to be Superman . The Giant intercepts the missile , causing a massive explosion high in the atmosphere . The townspeople and soldiers are all very relieved to have survived , but are saddened by the Giant 's apparent selfless sacrifice . 
 Sometime later , Annie and Dean are dating and Dean has built a statue in the park to honor the Giant . Hogarth receives a package from Rogard , a small bolt , the only piece of the Giant ever found . That night , Hogarth hears a familiar beeping coming from the bolt , which is trying to get out of the window . He opens the window to let the bolt out . Somewhere on the <unk> Glacier in Iceland , parts of the Giant approach where his head rests . The Giant wakes up and smiles . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Eli Marienthal as Hogarth Hughes , an energetic and curious boy with an active imagination . Marienthal 's performances were videotaped and given to animators to work with , which helped develop expressions and acting for the character . 
 Christopher McDonald as Kent Mansley , a government agent sent to investigate sightings of the Iron Giant . The logo on his official government car says he is from the " Bureau of Unexplained Phenomena " . 
 Harry Connick , Jr. as Dean McCoppin , a beatnik artist and junkyard owner . Bird felt it appropriate to make the character a member of the beat generation , as they were viewed as mildly threatening to small @-@ town values during that time . An outsider himself , he is among the first to recognize the Giant as no threat . 
 Jennifer Aniston as Annie Hughes , the widow of a military pilot and Hogarth 's widow mother . 
 Vin Diesel as The Iron Giant , a fifty @-@ foot , metal @-@ eating robot . Created for an unknown purpose , the Giant involuntarily reacts defensively if he recognizes anything as a weapon , immediately attempting to destroy it . The Giant 's voice was originally to be electronically modulated but the filmmakers decided they " needed a deep , resonant and expressive voice to start with , " and were about to hire Peter Cullen , due to his history with voice acting robot characters , but due to Cullen 's unavailability at the time , Vin Diesel was hired instead . 
 John Mahoney as General Kenneth Rogard , the military leader in Washington , D.C. who strongly dislikes Mansley . 
 M. Emmet Walsh as Earl Stutz , a sailor and the first man to see the robot . 
 James Gammon as Marv Loach , a foreman who follows the robot 's trail after it destroys the power station . 
 Cloris Leachman as Mrs. <unk> , Hogarth 's schoolteacher . 
 Ollie Johnston and Frank Thomas as the train engineers . Johnston and Thomas were animators and members of Disney 's Nine Old Men . Bird cited them as inspirations for his career and incorporated their voices and likenesses into the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The origins of the film lie in the book The Iron Man ( 1968 ) , by poet Ted Hughes , who wrote the novel for his children . In the 1980s , rock musician Pete Townshend chose to adopt the book for a concept album ; it was released as The Iron Man : A Musical in 1989 . In 1991 , Richard Bazley , who later became the film 's lead animator , pitched a version of The Iron Man to Don Bluth while working at his studio in Ireland . He created a story outline and character designs but Bluth passed on the project . After a stage musical was mounted in London , Des McAnuff , who had adapted Tommy with Townshend for the stage , believed that The Iron Man could translate to the screen , and the project was ultimately acquired by Warner Bros. Entertainment . 
 In late 1996 , while developing the project on its way through , the studio saw the film as a perfect vehicle for Brad Bird , who at the time was working for Turner Feature Animation developing Ray Gunn . Turner Entertainment had recently merged with Warner Bros. parent company Time Warner , and Bird was allowed to transfer to the Warner Bros. Animation studio to direct The Iron Giant . After reading the original Iron Man book by Hughes , Bird was impressed with the mythology of the story and in addition , was given an unusual amount of creative control by Warner Bros. This creative control involved introducing two new characters not present in the original book , Dean and Kent , setting the film in America , and discarding Townshend 's musical ambitions ( who did not care either way , reportedly remarking , " Well , whatever , I got paid " ) . Bird 's pitch to Warner Bros. was based around the idea " What if a gun had a soul ? " He expanded upon his desire to set the film in America in the 1950s in a later interview : 
 Ted Hughes , the original story 's author , died before the film 's release . His daughter , Frieda Hughes , did see the finished film on his behalf and loved it . Pete Townshend , who this project originally started with , enjoyed the final film as well . 
 = = = Writing and direction = = = 
 Tim McCanlies was hired to write the script , though Bird was somewhat displeased with having another writer on board , as he wanted to write the screenplay himself . He later changed his mind after reading McCanlies ' then @-@ unproduced screenplay for Secondhand Lions . In Bird 's original story treatment , America and the USSR were at war at the end , with the Giant dying . McCanlies decided to have a brief scene displaying his survival , stating , " You can 't kill E.T. and then not bring him back . " McCanlies finished the script within two months . McCanlies was given a three @-@ month schedule to complete a script , and it was by way of the film 's tight schedule that Warner Bros. " didn 't have time to mess with us " as McCanlies said . The question of the Giant 's backstory was purposefully ignored as to keep the story focused on his relationship with Hogarth . Bird considered the story difficult to develop due to its combination of unusual elements , such as " paranoid fifties sci @-@ fi movies with the innocence of something like The Yearling . " Hughes himself was sent a copy of McCanlies ' script and sent a letter back , saying how pleased he was with the version . In the letter , Hughes stated , " I want to tell you how much I like what Brad Bird has done . He ’ s made something all of a piece , with terrific sinister gathering momentum and the ending came to me as a glorious piece of amazement . He ’ s made a terrific dramatic situation out of the way he ’ s developed The Iron Giant . I can ’ t stop thinking about it . " 
 Bird combined his knowledge from his years in television to direct his first feature . He credited his time working on Family Dog as essential to team @-@ building , and his tenure on The Simpsons as an example of working under strict deadlines . He was open to others on his staff to help develop the film ; he would often ask crew members their opinions on scenes and change things accordingly . One of his priorities was to emphasize softer , character @-@ based moments , as opposed to more frenetic scenes — something Bird thought was a problem with modern filmmaking . " There has to be activity or sound effects or cuts or music blaring . It 's almost as if the audience has the remote and they 're going to change channels , " he commented at the time . Storyboard artist Teddy Newton played an important role in shaping the film 's story . Newton 's first assignment on staff involved being asked by Bird to create a film within a film to reflect the " hygiene @-@ type movies that everyone saw when the bomb scare was happening . " Newton came to the conclusion that a musical number would be the catchiest alternative , and the " Duck and Cover sequence " came to become one of the crew members ' favorites of the film . Nicknamed " The X @-@ Factor " by story department head Jeffery Lynch , the producers gave him artistic freedom on various pieces of the film 's script . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 The financial failure of Warner 's previous animated effort , Quest for Camelot , which made the studio reconsider animated films , helped shape The Iron Giant 's production considerably . " Three @-@ quarters " of the animation team on that team helped craft The Iron Giant . By the time it entered production , Warner Bros. informed the staff that there would be a smaller budget as well as time @-@ frame to get the film completed . Although the production was watched closely , Bird commented " They did leave us alone if we kept it in control and showed them we were producing the film responsibly and getting it done on time and doing stuff that was good . " Bird regarded the trade @-@ off as having " one @-@ third of the money of a Disney or DreamWorks film , and half of the production schedule , " but the payoff as having more creative freedom , describing the film as " fully @-@ made by the animation team ; I don 't think any other studio can say that to the level that we can . " A small part of the team took a weeklong research trip to Maine , where they photographed and videotaped five small cities . They hoped to accurately reflect its culture down to the minutiae ; " we shot store fronts , barns , forests , homes , home interiors , diners , every detail we could , including the bark on trees , " said production designer Mark Whiting . 
 Bird stuck to elaborate scene planning , such as detailed animatics , to make sure there were no budgetary concerns . The team initially worked with Macromedia 's Director software , before switching to Adobe After Effects full @-@ time . Bird was eager to use the then @-@ nascent software , as it allowed for storyboard to contain indications of camera moves . The software became essential to that team — dubbed " Macro " early on — to help the studio grasp story reels for the film . These also allowed Bird to better understand what the film required from an editing perspective . In the end , he was proud of the way the film was developed , noting that " We could imagine the pace and the unfolding of our film accurately with a relatively small expenditure of resources . " The group would gather in a screening room to view completed sequences , with Bird offering suggestions by drawing onto the screen with a marker . Lead animator Bazley suggested this led to a sense of camaraderie among the crew , who were unified in their mission to create a good film . Bird cited his favorite moment of the film 's production as occurring in the editing room , when the crew gathered to test a sequence in which the Giant learns what a soul is . " People in the room were spontaneously crying . It was pivotal ; there was an undeniable feeling that we were really tapping into something , " he recalled . 
 He opted to give the film 's animators portions to animate entirely , rather than the standard process of animating one character , in a throwback to the way Disney 's first features were created . The exception were those responsible for creating the Giant himself , who was created using computer @-@ generated imagery due to the difficulty of creating a metal object " in a fluid @-@ like manner . " They had additional trouble with using the computer model to express emotion . The Giant was designed by filmmaker Joe Johnston ( best known for designing the Star Wars trilogy ) , which was refined by production designer Mark Whiting and Steve Markowski , head animator for the Giant . Using software , the team would animate the Giant " on twos " ( every other frame , or twelve frames per second ) when interacting with other characters , to make it less obvious it was a computer model . Bird brought in students from CalArts to assist in minor animation work due to the film 's busy schedule . He made sure to spread out the work on scenes between experienced and younger animators , noting , " You overburden your strongest people and <unk> the others [ if you let your top talent monopolize the best assignments ] . " Hiroki <unk> designed all of the film 's CGI props and vehicles , which were created in a variety of software , including Alias Systems Corporation 's Maya , Alias ' PowerAnimator , a modified version of Pixar 's RenderMan , Cambridge Animation 's Animo ( now part of Toon Boom Animation ) , Avid Elastic Reality , and Adobe Photoshop . 
 The art of Norman Rockwell , Edward Hopper and N.C. Wyeth inspired the design . Whiting strove for colors both evocative of the time period in which the film is set but also representative of its emotional tone ; for example , Hogarth 's room is designed to reflect his " youth and sense of wonder . " That was blended with a style reminiscent of 1950s illustration . Animators studied Chuck Jones , Hank Ketcham , Al Hirschfeld and Disney films from that era , such as 101 Dalmatians , for inspiration in the film 's animation . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score for the film was composed and conducted by Michael Kamen . Bird 's original temp score , " a collection of Bernard Hermann cues from 50 's and 60 's sci @-@ fi films , " initially scared Kamen . Believing the sound of the orchestra is important to the feeling of the film , Kamen " decided to comb eastern Europe for an " old @-@ fashioned " sounding orchestra and went to Prague to hear Vladimir Ashkenazy conduct the Czech Philharmonic in Strauss 's An Alpine Symphony . " Eventually , the Czech Philharmonic was the orchestra used for the film 's score , with Bird describing the symphony orchestra as " an amazing collection of musicians . " The score for The Iron Giant was recorded in a rather unconventional manner , compared to most films : recorded over one week at the <unk> in Prague , the music was recorded without conventional uses of syncing the music , in a method Kamen described in a 1999 interview as " [ being able to ] play the music as if it were a piece of classical repertoire . " Kamen 's score for The Iron Giant won the Annie Award for Music in an Animated Feature Production on November 6 , 1999 . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 Bird opted to produce The Iron Giant in widescreen — specifically the wide 2 @.@ 39 : 1 CinemaScope aspect ratio — but was warned against doing so by his advisers . He felt it was appropriate to use the format , as many films from the late 1950s were produced in such widescreen formats . He hoped to include the CinemaScope logo on a poster , partially as a joke , but 20th Century Fox , owner of the trademark , refused . 
 Bird later recalled that he clashed with executives who wished to add characters , such as a sidekick dog , set the film in the present day , and include a soundtrack of hip hop . This was due to concerns that the film was not <unk> , to which Bird responded , " If they were interested in telling the story , they should let it be what it wants to be . " The film was also initially going to feature the Warner Bros. Family Entertainment logo at the beginning of the movie , featuring mascot Bugs Bunny in a tuxedo . Bird was against this for a multitude of reasons , and eventually got confirmation that executives Bob Daley and Terry Semel agreed . Instead , Bird and his team developed another version of the logo to resemble the classic studio logo in a circle , famously employed in Looney Tunes shorts . He credited executives Lorenzo di Bonaventura and Courtney <unk> with helping him achieve his vision , noting that they were open to his opinion . 
 According to a report from the time of its release , The Iron Giant cost $ 50 million to produce with an additional $ 30 million going towards marketing , though Box Office Mojo later calculated its budget as $ 70 million . It was regarded as a lower @-@ budget film , in comparison to the films distributed by Walt Disney Pictures . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The film is set in 1957 during a period of the Cold War characterized by escalation in tension between the United States and the Soviet Union . In 1957 , Sputnik was launched , raising the possibility of nuclear attack from space . Anti @-@ communism and the potential threat of nuclear destruction cultivated an atmosphere of fear and paranoia which also led to a proliferation of films about alien invasion . In one scene , Hogarth 's class is seen watching an animated film named Atomic Holocaust , based on Duck and Cover , an actual film that offered advice on how to survive if the USSR bombed the USA . 
 The film also deals with the concepts of nonviolence and individualism . When the Iron Giant sees a deer get killed by hunters , the Iron Giant notices two rifles discarded by the deer 's body . The Iron Giant 's eyes turn red showing hostility to any gun . It is repeated throughout the film , " Guns kill . " and " You 're not a gun . " Despite the anti @-@ war and anti @-@ gun themes , the film avoids demonizing the military ( one scene depicts Hogarth next to a picture of his late father , a fighter pilot , while wearing his father 's flight helmet ) , and presents General Rogard as an essentially rational and sympathetic figure , in contrast to the power @-@ hungry civilian Mansley . Hogarth 's message to the giant , " You are who you choose to be " , played a pivotal role in the film . In a deleted scene , the robot dreams of seeing many robots like it marching through a war zone on an alien world , suggesting that the robot was created to be a weapon in a long @-@ ago war . 
 Writer McCanlies commented that " At a certain point , there are deciding moments when we pick who we want to be . And that plays out for the rest of your life . " McCanlies said that movies can provide viewers with a sense of right and wrong , and expressed a wish that the movie would " make us feel like we 're all part of humanity [ which ] is something we need to feel . " Some film critics compared the film to E.T. : The Extra @-@ Terrestrial ( 1982 ) , including Roger Ebert . In response to the E.T. parallels , Bird said , " E.T. doesn 't go kicking ass . He doesn 't make the Army pay . Certainly you risk having your hip credentials taken away if you want to evoke anything sad or genuinely heartfelt . " 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The Iron Giant was largely a theatrical failure due in part to poor promotion from Warner Bros. This was largely attributable to the reception of Quest for Camelot ; after its release , Warner would not give Bird and his team a release date for their film until April 1999 . After wildly successful test screenings , the studio were shocked by the response : the test scores were their highest for a film in 15 years , according to Bird . They had neglected to prepare a successful marketing strategy for the film — such as cereal and fast food tie @-@ ins — with little time left before its scheduled release . Bird remembered that the studio only produced one teaser poster for the film , which became its eventual poster . Brad Ball , who had been assigned the role of marketing the film , was candid after its release , noting that the studio did not commit to a planned Burger King toy plan . In an interview with IGN , Bird stated that it was " a mis @-@ marketing campaign of epic proportions at the hands of Warner Bros. , they simply didn 't realize what they had on their hands . " 
 The studio needed an $ 8 million opening to ensure success , but they were unable to properly promote it preceding the release . They nearly delayed the film by several months to better prepare . " They said , ' we should delay it and properly lead up to its release , ' and I said ' you guys have had two and a half years to get ready for this , ' " recalled Bird . Press outlets took note of its absence of marketing , with some reporting that the studio had spent more money on marketing intended summer blockbuster Wild , Wild West instead . To perhaps soften the potential blow , Warner Bros. scheduled Sunday sneak preview screenings for the film prior to its release , as well as a preview of the film on the online platform <unk> . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The Iron Giant premiered at Mann 's Chinese Theater in Los Angeles on July 31 , 1999 , with a special ceremony preceding the screening in which a concrete slab bearing the title character 's footprint was commemorated . The film opened in Los Angeles and New York on August 4 , 1999 , with a wider national release occurring on August 6 in the United States . It opened in 2 @,@ 179 theaters in the U.S. , ranking at number nine at the box office accumulating $ 5 @,@ 732 @,@ 614 over its opening weekend . It was quick to drop out of the top ten ; by its fourth week , it had only accumulated $ 18 @.@ 9 million — far under its reported $ 70 million budget . According to Dave McNary of the Los Angeles Daily News , " Its weekend per @-@ theater average was only $ 2 @,@ 631 , an average of $ 145 or perhaps 30 tickets per showing " — leading theater owners to quickly discard the film . At the time , Warner Bros. was shaken by the resignations of executives Bob Daly and Terry Semel , making the failure much worse . T.L. Stanley of Brandweek cited it as an example of how media tie @-@ ins were now essential to guaranteeing a film 's success . 
 The film went on to gross $ 23 @,@ 159 @,@ 305 domestically and $ 8 @,@ 174 @,@ 612 internationally for a total of $ 31 @,@ 333 @,@ 917 worldwide . Analysts deemed it a victim of poor timing and " a severe miscalculation of how to attract an audience . " Lorenzo di Bonaventura , president of Warner Bros. at the time , explained , " People always say to me , ' Why don 't you make smarter family movies ? ' The lesson is , Every time you do , you get slaughtered . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Iron Giant received widespread critical acclaim from both critics and audiences . Based on 132 reviews collected by the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , The Iron Giant received an overall 96 % approval rating ; the average score is 8 @.@ 2 / 10 . The consensus reads : " Engaging , endearing , affecting and charmingly retro , The Iron Giant tackles touchy subjects and complex relationships with a steady hand and beautiful animation direction from Brad Bird . " On Metacritic , the film achieved an average score of 85 out of 100 based on 27 reviews , signifying " universal acclaim " . In addition to its response from film critics , CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film an " A " grade . The Reel Source forecasting service calculated that " 96 – 97 % " of audiences that attended recommended the film . As of 2015 , Rotten Tomatoes ranks it the third most @-@ acclaimed animated film made in the 1990s . 
 Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times called it " straight @-@ arrow and subversive , [ and ] made with simplicity as well as sophistication , " writing , " it feels like a classic even though it 's just out of the box . " Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times compared it , both in story and animation , to the works of Japanese director Hayao Miyazaki , summarizing the film as " not just a cute romp but an involving story that has something to say . " The New Yorker reviewer Michael Sragow dubbed it a " modern fairy tale , " writing , " The movie provides a master class in the use of scale and perspective — and in its power to open up a viewer ’ s heart and mind . " Time 's Richard Schickel deemed it " a smart live @-@ and @-@ let @-@ live parable , full of glancing , acute observations on all kinds of big subjects — life , death , the military @-@ industrial complex . " Lawrence Van Gelder , writing for the New York Times , deemed it a " smooth , skilled example of animated filmmaking . " Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal felt it " beautiful , oh so beautiful , as a work of coherent art , " noting , " be assured that the film is , before anything else , deliciously funny and deeply affecting . " 
 Both Hollywood trade publications were positive : David Hunter of The Hollywood Reporter predicted it to be a sleeper hit and called it " outstanding , " while Lael Loewenstein of Variety called it " a visually appealing , well @-@ crafted film [ ... ] an unalloyed success . " Bruce Fretts of Entertainment Weekly commented , " I have long thought that I was born without the gene that would allow me to be emotionally drawn in by drawings . That is , until I saw The Iron Giant . " Peter Stack of the San Francisco Chronicle agreed that the storytelling was far superior to other animated films , and cited the characters as plausible and noted the richness of moral themes . Jeff Millar of the Houston Chronicle agreed with the basic techniques as well , and concluded the voice cast excelled with a great script by Tim McCanlies . Amid the positive reviews , a negative review came from The Washington Post 's Stephen Hunter , who opined , " The movie — as beautifully drawn , as sleek and engaging as it is — has the annoyance of incredible smugness . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The Hugo Awards nominated The Iron Giant for Best Dramatic Presentation , while the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America honored Brad Bird and Tim McCanlies with the Nebula Award nomination . The British Academy of Film and Television Arts gave the film a Children 's Award as Best Feature Film . In addition The Iron Giant won nine Annie Awards and was nominated for another six categories , with another nomination for Best Home Video Release at The Saturn Awards . IGN ranked The Iron Giant as the fifth favorite animated film of all time in a list published in 2010 . 
 The American Film Institute nominated The Iron Giant for its Top 10 Animated Films list . 
 = = = Home media and television syndication = = = 
 Stung by criticism that it mounted an ineffective marketing campaign for its theatrical release , Warner Bros. revamped its advertising strategy for the video release of the film , including tie @-@ ins with Honey Nut Cheerios , AOL and General Motors and secured the backing of three U.S. congressmen ( Ed Markey , Mark Foley and Howard Berman ) . Awareness of the film was increased by its February 2000 release as a pay @-@ per @-@ view title , which also increased traffic to the film 's web site . 
 The Iron Giant was released on VHS and DVD on November 23 , 1999 , with a laserdisc release following on December 6 . The VHS edition came in three versions — pan and scan , pan and scan with an affixed Giant toy to the clamshell case , and a widescreen version . All of the initial widescreen home video releases were in 1 @.@ 85 : 1 , the incorrect aspect ratio for the film . In 2000 , television rights to the film were sold to Cartoon Network and TNT for three million dollars . The networks marketed the film as an overlooked but acclaimed film . Cartoon Network showed the film continuously for 24 consecutive hours in the early 2000s for such holidays as the Fourth of July and Thanksgiving . 
 The Special Edition DVD was released on November 16 , 2004 . In 2014 , Brad Bird went to Warner Bros. to talk about the possibility of releasing The Iron Giant on Blu @-@ ray . " WB & I have been talking . But they want a bare bones disc . I want better , " Bird said on his Twitter account . He also said that fans can log on to their Twitter accounts and post a tweet on the Twitter homepage of Warner Bros. Home Entertainment , demanding a Collector 's Edition Blu @-@ ray for the film . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The film has since then gathered a cult following . 
 = = = Signature Edition = = = 
 A remastered and extended cut of the film , named the Signature Edition , was released for a limited time on September 30 , 2015 , and later October 4 , 2015 . The edition is approximately two minutes longer than the original cut , and features a brief scene with Annie and Dean and the sequence of the Giant 's dream . Aside from the additional scene , it also showcases other ideas that weren 't able to be used , like a nod to Disney via Tomorrowland commercial and a joke of the film being shot on CinemaScope cameras . Both scenes were storyboarded by Bird during the production on the original film but never finished due to time and budget constraints . Before they were fully completed for this new version , they were available as deleted storyboards on the 2004 DVD bonus features . They were animated in 2015 by Duncan Studio , which employed several animators that worked on the original film . The film 's Signature Edition was released on DVD and for digital download on February 16 , 2016 . An official Blu @-@ ray release will be available on September 6 , 2016 . 
 = Alto 's Adventure = 
 Alto 's Adventure is a 2015 endless runner snowboarding video game by Snowman . The player @-@ character automatically moves to the right of the screen through procedurally generated landscapes . The player taps the screen to jump and perform tricks , and works towards goals , competitive high scores , and upgrades . Snowman , a Toronto @-@ based , three @-@ person indie development team , previously worked on productivity apps before Alto 's Adventure . The game was made to emulate the ethereal atmosphere of snowboarding , and was inspired by Journey ( 2012 ) , Monument Valley ( 2014 ) , Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 2 ( 2000 ) , and Windosill ( 2009 ) . 
 The game was released in February 19 , 2015 initially in iOS devices . In September that year , Snowman announced that Alto 's Adventure will be launched in Android and Kindle Fire . The game was finally released in Android on February 11 , 2016 . On July 8 , 2016 the game was also released for the Windows platform . 
 The game received what was described on review score aggregator Metacritic as universal acclaim . Reviewers praised its art style and sense of atmosphere , but criticized its gameplay as unoriginal . Pocket Gamer awarded the game their Gold Award . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Alto 's Adventure is a side @-@ scrolling endless runner snowboarding game . The player character moves automatically through procedurally generated landscapes towards the right side of the screen and the player can only control when to jump . The player taps the screen once to jump and holds the screen midair to perform tricks . While the character moves across the landscape , the player can complete some of the game 's 180 goals , though they are given only three at a time . Goals include such things as traveling a set distance , rescuing runaway llamas , crossing dangerous gaps , grinding across the rooftops of villages , and outsmarting the mountain elders . The player receives awards from completing goals , and can also collect coins , which can be used to purchase upgrades . Players perform tricks in quick succession , or combos , to earn points towards a competitive high score . The game also tracks distance traveled and trick combos . Later in the game , players can use a wingsuit , which changes some elements of the game . The environments of Alto 's Adventure change in lighting as time passes through the cycle of the day , and also incorporate weather effects . Player progress syncs between iPads and iPhones over iCloud , and the game uses Game Center leaderboards . 
 = = Development = = 
 Alto 's Adventure was built in collaboration between Snowman , an indie development studio based in Toronto , and lead artist and programmer Harry Nesbitt , based in Devon , England . The developers intended the game to " capture the flow and feeling of snowboarding " and the way " everything else sort of just disappears " when " in rhythm with the mountain " , unlike other snowboarding games . Snowman also sought to address how other mobile games emphasize video game console @-@ type elements with on @-@ screen controls , which co @-@ founder Ryan Cash felt were largely not designed with the mobile platform in mind . 
 Alto 's Adventure was inspired by Journey ( 2012 ) , Tony Hawk 's Pro Skater 2 ( 2000 ) , and Windosill ( 2009 ) . Snowman 's co @-@ founders , Ryan Cash and Jordan Rosenberg , wanted to bring the essence of the Tony Hawk games of their youth into Alto 's Adventure , including " fun , positive goals " and an " easy to learn , hard to master " trick system . They avoided goals from other endless runners that they considered negative , uninteresting , or repetitive . As inspired by Monument Valley ( 2014 ) , the developers chose to charge above average for the game as a trade @-@ off for not including offsets like in @-@ game advertisements or in @-@ app purchases . Snowman has said any new content would be as an expansion along the lines of Monument Valley 's " Forgotten Shores " . The game was released for iOS on February 19 , 2015 . 
 A port for Android and Kindle Fire was announced on September later that year . However , it was not until February the following year that a definite release date was announced , and the app was finally released for those platforms on February 11 . Snowman collaborated with <unk> Studios to make an Android port . Additionally , unlike the iOS version , which is launched as a " premium app " ( which requires user to pay $ 2 @.@ 99 to download ) , the Android version will be free to download . In an exclusive interview with The Verge , Ryan Cash of Snowman explained that their decision to make the Android Alto 's is due to iOS and Android being on a " completely different ecosystem " , and mainly because of the bigger piracy issues on Android apps . Additionally , he said that those using the Android port will have the same experience as those playing Alto 's in the iOS . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " universal acclaim " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers had high praise for its art style and aesthetics but criticized its gameplay as unoriginal . Pocket Gamer awarded the game their Gold Award . 
 The Verge 's Andrew Webster wrote that the game was a " supremely laid back " and " incredibly relaxing experience " . He wrote that this " next great iPad game " was already one of his mobile favorites , and is set apart from others by its " style " and " achingly beautiful " mountain landscape . Webster found Alto 's Adventure to be part art game and part " fun little time waster " , and compared it to a combination of Sword & Sworcery and Tiny Wings . TouchArcade 's Jared Nelson likened its art style to Journey and its gameplay to Ski Safari . While he didn 't find the game challenging , he enjoyed the " incredible " visuals : " tons of tiny details " , like the character animations and changes in lighting and weather , contributed . Nelson also characterized TouchArcade readers ' impressions as " highly positive " . 
 Eric Ford , also of TouchArcade , found the gameplay " basic " as well — " not much here that truly innovates within the genre " — but felt that the game was worth experiencing for its " excellent visual style and soundtrack " . He also compared the gameplay to Ski Safari and additionally wrote that while the game 's power @-@ ups , quest objectives , currency , and score were " pretty standard " , the trick system was praiseworthy and gave even easy tricks a sense of " accomplishment " . Ford was not enticed by the available upgrades and wrote that he played not for the upgrades but for the game 's " whole look and feel " that was made to feel like more than a game with its " awesome " , " mellow " , and " soothing " soundtrack . Ford added that the game earned " its hype " from its " amazing art style and visual effects " rather than from its gameplay . He was impressed with how much the dynamic weather changed the feel of the game even while the gameplay went unchanged . Ford predicted that players would respond to Alto 's Adventure either in appreciation of its " sheer amount of artistic integrity and nuanced visuals " , or in disappointment by its similarity to previous endless runners . 
 Harry Slater of Pocket Gamer thought the game was " pretty special " and " among the best on the App Store " . He thought its " stunningly simple " gameplay to be a " compulsive and engaging experience " and " bloody good fun " , though he found its core mechanics unoriginal . Eli <unk> of <unk> said he wanted to live in the game 's world and praised its " total , uncompromising dedication to atmosphere " and how every choice felt " made to preserve experiential authenticity " . 
 = Battle of Long Khanh = 
 The Battle of Long Khanh ( 6 – 7 June 1971 ) was fought during the Vietnam War between elements of 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) and the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese Army during Operation Overlord . The fighting saw Australian infantry from 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( 3 RAR ) attack a heavily fortified communist base camp in Long Khanh Province , while Centurion tanks providing close support crushed many bunkers and their occupants . Regardless , the Viet Cong fought hard to delay the Australian advance and although the bunker system was subsequently captured , along with a second system further south , the Australians suffered a number of casualties and the loss of a UH @-@ 1 Iroquois helicopter . With the Australians unable to concentrate sufficient combat power to achieve a decisive result , the bulk of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese force successfully withdrew intact , although they likely sustained heavy casualties in the process . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a consequence of the overall allied strategy of Vietnamization and with the Australian government keen to reduce its own commitment to the war , 8 RAR was not replaced at the end of its tour of duty in December 1970 . 1 ATF was again reduced to just two infantry battalions , albeit with significant armour , artillery and aviation support remaining . The Australian area of operations ( AO ) remained the same however , with the reduction in forces only adding further to the burden on the remaining battalions . Regardless , following a sustained effort by 1 ATF in Phuoc Tuy Province between September 1969 and April 1970 , the bulk of communist forces had become inactive and had left the province to recuperate . 
 Accordingly , the Australians shifted focus , turning their attention to denying the Viet Cong the chance to resupply by close ambushing around villages and towns , such as Dat Do and Hoa Long . Although not always successful , such operations yielded significant results and by the end of 1970 South Vietnamese forces were increasingly responsible for the security of major population centres . Indeed , the major battles of earlier years were now seen as a thing of the past in Phuoc Tuy . However , in May 1971 , following a request from Brigadier Bruce McDonald — the task force commander — the Australian AO was extended a further 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) north across the border into Long Khanh Province . Several reconnaissance patrols from the Special Air Service Regiment ( SASR ) were subsequently inserted in the vicinity of the Courtenay rubber plantation , and later on the other side of Route 2 . These patrols were highly successful , detecting the presence of a substantial communist force , while a number of Viet Cong were also killed . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Intelligence reports in June , in conjunction with the invaluable information gathered by the SASR , located D445 VC Battalion and 3 / 33 NVA Regiment east of Route 2 along the border between Phuoc Tuy and Long Khanh in an area 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) north of the Australian base at Nui Dat . These reports indicated that the communists were attempting to disrupt the continuing pacification program , and were also using the area to rest , retrain and refit . In response the 1 ATF commander , McDonald , launched a brigade @-@ sized ' search and clear ' operation , known as Operation Overlord . Named after the D @-@ Day landings during the Allied invasion of Normandy in 1944 , the operation was scheduled to begin on the same day , 27 years later . Notably , there was some trepidation among the Australian sub @-@ unit commanders with the use of this name for operational security reasons , as it was felt that it might telegraph their intentions . 
 The concept of operations called for a significant blocking force to be inserted , with 4 RAR / NZ ( ANZAC ) deployed along the line of Suoi Ran river , A Squadron , 3rd Cavalry Regiment to their west and 2 / 8th Battalion , 3rd US Cavalry Regiment to the north @-@ east . Meanwhile , 3 RAR — under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Peter Scott — and the Centurion tanks from C Squadron , 1st Armoured Regiment were tasked with driving the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese into these positions . A number of fire support bases would be established , with A Field Battery and 104 Field Battery , Royal Australian Artillery providing indirect fire support in conjunction with American gunners , while 3 RAR would search its AO — belatedly designated as AO Gwenda — with three rifle companies ( A , B , and C ) , while D Company would be held in reserve . The plan envisioned movement by road of both troops and equipment using Route 2 , as well as air insertion . The terrain in the new AO was thickly wooded with some areas of secondary growth beneath the 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high canopy , as well as numerous water courses , spurs and re @-@ entrants . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The operation commenced on 5 June with the insertion of blocking forces consisting of Australian , New Zealand and US troops , followed by the aerial insertion of 3 RAR . The Landing Zone ( LZ ) was clear of large trees to about 200 metres ( 220 yd ) and was secured by the APCs from A Squadron . As A Company landed it was suddenly engaged by intense fire , which also targeted the unsecured B Company LZ 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 1 @,@ 400 yd ) to the south @-@ west . The firing eased after a few minutes however , thereby allowing the insertion of the remaining companies . The Australians subsequently began patrolling and it soon became apparent that they had been dropped within 500 metres ( 550 yd ) of an extensive bunker system . 
 Signs of a strong Viet Cong and North Vietnamese presence were detected almost as soon as 3 RAR began its sweep , while the blocking elements also had a number of sightings , and a few contacts with small parties moving north . Possibly alerted by allied air and road movements , the communists seemed to be avoiding open combat . Late on the afternoon of 6 June 5 Platoon , B Company located what was thought to be the main communist position , however with nightfall approaching , it was decided not to press the attack that night . During the evening a few shots were exchanged between the Australians and Viet Cong , and the Australian platoon subsequently withdrew into a night harbour . 
 At 06 : 00 artillery commenced bombarding the position , and following a half @-@ hour of preparation , 5 Platoon resumed its advance expecting the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese to have vacated the position during the night , as they had done numerous times in the past . However , after having proceeded only 90 metres ( 98 yd ) the Australians came under heavy fire from the front and both flanks , suffering several casualties in the initial volleys . It soon became apparent that the platoon was pinned down on the edge of a strongly defended and well @-@ concealed bunker system , with the platoon commander calling for assistance from helicopter gunships , as well as indirect mortar fire rather than risking further casualties by withdrawing . 
 Moving to support the platoon in contact , Scott ordered D Company to conduct an assault against the flank and rear of the bunker complex , mounted in APCs with tanks in support . Two troops of Centurions spearheaded the assault through the jungle from the north , and they soon began receiving heavy small arms fire and rocket @-@ propelled grenades , one of which subsequently suffered external damage . Realising that the bunker system was larger than previously estimated , the tanks were forced to halt while the infantry were brought up to begin the assault . 
 Meanwhile , 5 Platoon was in dire straits and was beginning to run low of ammunition , while a number of its M60 machine @-@ guns were also beginning to fail because of the prolonged firing . Moving to outflank the heavily outnumbered Australians , Viet Cong were observed emerging from their bunkers . Indeed , only heavy indirect fire and effective suppressing fire from helicopter gunships prevented them from being overrun . Attempting to gain a better position to direct the fire , the B Company Forward Observer , Lieutenant Ian Mathers , moved forward to 5 Platoon , and was killed almost immediately . However , by 09 : 15 the remainder of B Company was able to link up with the beleaguered platoon , and after an aerial resupply of ammunition , stabilised the situation temporarily . 
 At 11 : 00 , however , a second attempt to resupply B Company resulted in an Australian Iroquois helicopter being shot down by heavy ground fire , and exploding on impact . Two crew members were killed and another two injured , while another soldier was injured on the ground . With ammunition exploding among the burning wreckage a number of Australians rushed to aid the injured , scrambling through the debris and removing the unexploded ammunition and pulling the survivors to safety . Subsequently , another winch point was established to the rear of the Australian positions for casualty evacuation and resupply . 
 By mid @-@ afternoon , D Company had finally moved into position and commenced an assault , pushing through the bunker system from the north @-@ east with the Centurion tanks in close support crushing many bunkers and their occupants with their tracks . The progress of the Australian assault was slowed by thick vegetation and the size of the position , even as the resistance slackened and volume of fire diminished . Indeed , the bunker system was later found to cover nearly a square kilometre and was wider than the front of the assaulting company . <unk> the Australians searched each bunker systematically . With the action now over , D Company and the tanks subsequently linked up with B Company and established a night defensive position . 
 During the final assault , C Company , located to the south , had uncovered a second bunker system which was subsequently captured by the Australians after being hastily abandoned . More than 16 @,@ 000 rounds of M60 ammunition had been fired during the fighting , along with 6 @,@ 000 rounds of M16 ammunition . The artillery had fired over 1 @,@ 453 rounds of 105 mm and 200 rounds of 155 mm high explosive in support . Over the next six days Australian pioneer and engineer demolition teams proceeded to destroy the remaining bunkers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite significantly underestimating the size of the position they faced , the Australians had succeeded in the pushing D445 VC Battalion and 3 / 33 NVA Regiment out of a valuable base area intended for long @-@ term use . Regardless , there were few other tangible results to show for the casualties they had incurred as , although numerous blood trails and body parts scattered around the battlefield indicated that communist casualties had been heavy , the majority of their dead had either been removed from the battlefield or were entombed in the bunkers that had been crushed by the Australian tanks . The battle had cost the Australians three killed and six wounded , while only five Viet Cong bodies were recovered . 
 The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese had defended strongly in order to allow an orderly evacuation of personnel and stores , and with the Australians unable to concentrate sufficient combat power rapidly enough to ensure a decisive result , they were largely able to achieve this objective . Unfazed by the loss of their base @-@ camps , the bulk of the communist force remained intact and later carried out a highly successful ambush by 274 VC Main Force Regiment on 12 June . Seven Australians were killed and three wounded from the HQ 1 ATF Defence and Employment Platoon in this subsequent action , with the bulk of the casualties occurring when an RPG @-@ 7 exploded on a box of <unk> Claymores sitting atop an M113 Armoured Personnel Carrier , igniting them with catastrophic consequences . Operations in Long Khanh continued however , and the Australians established a number of ambushes on possible withdrawal routes , although little contact subsequently occurred . 
 Operation Overlord finally ended on 14 June and 1 ATF returned to Nui Dat . Overall , despite the heavy contact experienced early on , it had yielded little for the Australians although neither D445 or 33 NVA Regiment were encountered in Phuoc Tuy again . Overlord was one of the larger task force operations of the war , while it was also the last joint US @-@ Australian battalion @-@ sized operation . Indeed , although the fighting continued , Australian operations began to wind down . On 18 August 1971 , Prime Minister William McMahon announced that 1 ATF would cease operations in October , commencing a phased withdrawal . Ultimately , the last Australian forces were withdrawn from Vietnam by 1973 . 
 = Grand Guignol Orchestra = 
 Grand Guignol Orchestra ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Guignol <unk> <unk> ) is a gothic horror shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) manga series written and illustrated by Kaori Yuki . Appearing as a monthly serial in the Japanese manga magazine Bessatsu Hana to Yume from the August 2008 issue to the June 2010 issue , the eighteen chapters of Grand Guignol Orchestra were collected into five bound volumes by Hakusensha — together with Yuki 's romantic one @-@ shot manga " <unk> Garden " , which had appeared in the April 2008 issue — and published from February 2009 to August 2010 . Set in a world where a worldwide epidemic of a virus has turned part of the population into guignols ( zombies which resemble marionettes ) , Grand Guignol Orchestra focuses on singer Lucille and his orchestra , which destroys the guignols through music . 
 At the 2009 New York Anime Festival , Viz Media announced that it had licensed the series for an English @-@ language translation . It published the series under its Shojo Beat imprint , from October 2010 to December 2011 . The series has also been translated into other languages , such as German and Mandarin . Grand Guignol Orchestra has been positively received by English @-@ language readers , with three volumes placing on the list of the top 300 bestselling graphic novels . The series has received a range of reviews from English @-@ language critics . Yuki 's illustrations and premise were generally well @-@ received , with criticism of the series focused on the narrative and page layouts . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Manga artist Kaori Yuki has described the setting of Grand Guignol Orchestra as the " Middle Ages ( sort of ) with a French air . " The series takes place in a fictional universe , where an worldwide epidemic of a virus , the Galatea Syndrome ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , has turned part of the population into guignols ( <unk> , <unk> ) , zombies which resemble marionettes . Certain types of music can restore humanity and memories to the guignols while speeding up their destruction ; the queen 's Grand Orchestra destroys guignols through music , as does the much smaller , unofficial Grand Orchestra . If an area becomes more than seventy percent infected by the virus , the queen sends her Divine Lightning ( <unk> , Kami <unk> ) to destroy the area and keep the virus from spreading . The virus , however , originates from the first queen , whose father transformed her into a guignol ; subsequent queens and their potential successors are grown from her cells . Opposed to the queen 's rule is Le Sénat : consuls Richter ( <unk> , <unk> ) and Valentine ( <unk> , <unk> ) , chancellor <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , and regent Jasper ( <unk> , <unk> ) , all of whom have been governing for a century . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The plot follows the unofficial Grand Orchestra led by singer Lucille ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who searches for a way to rescue his younger sister <unk> " <unk> " ( <unk> , <unk> ) — who now despises him as the cold @-@ hearted Queen Gemsilica , convinced that he tricked her into becoming queen in his place . The other members include the violence @-@ prone violinist Kohaku ( <unk> ) , who was bitten by a guignol ; and cellist <unk> " Gwin " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a former sculptor of guignols who keeps his daughter 's hedgehog with him . They are soon joined by pianist <unk> " Celes " ( <unk> , <unk> ) , who has lived under the identity of her twin brother , <unk> " Eles " ( <unk> , <unk> ) after a guignol attack left her the only surviving child in her town . They periodically encounter Berthier ( <unk> , <unk> ) , the unofficial orchestra 's former pianist whose violence drove his beloved , Lucille , away and who was resurrected by Le Sénat after his suicide . Other reoccurring characters include <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) , a spy for the queen who can manipulate her voice and whom Lucille befriended when she snuck into the all @-@ male monastery as a child . 
 The unofficial orchestra visits infected towns and destroys the guignols there for a fee . Eventually , they obtain the Black Oratorio ( <unk> , Kuro no Hijiri Tan <unk> ) , rumoured to be able to destroy the queen and neutralize the virus when performed . Having left Eles behind for her own protection and unaware that she took the Black Oratorio out of fear of its effects on the orchestra , Lucille and his orchestra confront Queen Gemsilica , and find Berthier with a kidnapped Eles and the Black Oratorio . Queen Gemsilica is fatally wounded by their servant <unk> " Cook " ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Secretly the host of the original king , Cook is responsible for the manipulation that caused her to become queen instead of Lucille . Berthier , persuaded to return the Black Oratorio , kills Cook as he attempts to escape , and the music of the Black Oratorio is broadcast throughout the world by the satellites formerly used for Divine Lightning . Upon hearing the music , the guignols sing along and are destroyed . Separated from Lucille and the orchestra , Eles realizes that she can live as herself now . Later , she joyfully reunites with Lucille , and rejoins the unofficial orchestra , all of whom have been affected by the neutralization of the virus . 
 = = Development = = 
 Yuki noted that the title of the series was potentially misleading , as the orchestra is not composed of guignols ; she chose the word " guignol " — which describes hand puppets , not marionettes — for its sound . Page limitations affected the roles of Kohaku and <unk> , Lucille 's castrato rival , although she felt that the story still ended as she had planned it . She also faced difficulty with Berthier 's character design . Initially , she planned to have him appear in a " full @-@ body animal suit " costume , but decided against the idea as " too comical . " One of his early character designs was used for a minor character , an assassin for Le Sénat . 
 Included with the bound @-@ volume release of Grand Guignol Orchestra is " <unk> Garden " , Yuki 's 92 @-@ page romantic one @-@ shot manga originally published in the April 2008 issue of the monthly shōjo ( targeted towards girls ) manga magazine Bessatsu Hana to Yume . It focuses on Ryū , who finds himself in a boys ' dormitory , where its inhabitants have ranks corresponding to a deck of playing cards . He struggles to solve the mystery of the boys ' dormitory , closed off from the outside world and where death only results in rebirth . In it , Yuki made allusions to the Victorian poem " The Lady of Shalott " by the English poet Alfred , Lord Tennyson . In retrospective , she felt that its setting was " not really the best , " and the many characters presented some difficulty in remembering . 
 = = Release = = 
 Written and illustrated by Kaori Yuki , Grand Guignol Orchestra appeared as a serial in Bessatsu Hana to Yume from the August 2008 issue , to the June 2010 issue . Hakusensha collected the eighteen chapters into five bound volumes , and released them from 19 February 2009 , to 19 August 2010 . 
 At the 2009 New York Anime Festival , Viz Media announced that it had licensed the series and would publish the series under its Shojo Beat imprint . Viz Media published the series from 5 October 2010 , to 6 December 2011 . It also released a digital version of the series . The series is distributed by Madman Entertainment in Australasia ( Australia and New Zealand ) . It has also been translated into other languages , among them German , Italian , French , and Mandarin . 
 = = = Volume list = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 Grand Guignol Orchestra was positively received by English @-@ language readers . Three volumes appeared on the list of the 300 bestselling graphic novels . The first volume sold 464 copies and appeared at the 256th spot on October 2010 ; it reached the fifteenth spot in BookScan 's list of the twenty bestselling graphic novels for September 2011 . The second volume sold an estimated 334 copies , and appeared at the 265th spot for February 2011 . The fifth volume sold an estimated 297 copies , and appeared at the 267th spot . 
 Writing for School Library Journal 's blog Good Comics for Kids , Snow <unk> reviewed the first volume positively , and wrote , " The elements her fans adore are all there : beautiful characters , gender ambiguity , horror themes , blood and gore , and , of course , gorgeous costumes . " According to <unk> , the unexplained aspects of the plot helped to create interest for the readers . David Welsh of Comic World News had more mixed feelings about the first volume ; although he praised the aesthetic , premise , translation , and guignols , he wrote that Yuki 's work would be more appealing " if she could just strike that balance between creative focus and intellectual abandon and emotional shamelessness . " About.com 's Deb Aoki reviewed it negatively , criticizing its plot . Aoki wrote that it would only appeal to fans of Yuki . While finding aspects of the setting and costume design historically confusing and trying on the reader 's suspension of disbelief , Rebecca Silverman of Anime News Network wrote that the Gwin 's backstory , the quick pacing , Yuki 's detailed art , and her frightening portrayal of zombies made the third volume " a winning entry in an already fascinating series . " Silverman had mixed feelings about the dense page layouts : according to her , they contributed to the narrative suspense , although they affected the reader 's ability to easily read the volume in places . In her review of the fourth volume , Silverman praised the character development and Yuki 's ability to create mysteries , although she wrote that not all readers would enjoy the numerous plot twists . She also suggested the possibility of a metaphor for the French Revolution in the series . Another reviewer for Anime News Network , Carlo Santos gave the third volume a C- ; while he praised Yuki 's illustrations and ability to create " dramatic revelations , " he wrote that it was overshadowed by the confusing and cluttered narrative . 
 Sequential Tart 's Sheena McNeil reviewed the series positively , with Yuki 's art , characterization , and storytelling a source of praise . She , however , expressed her feelings of annoyance and frustration with the conclusion of the fourth volume , which saw the female characters left behind on purpose by the male members of the orchestra and then Eles ' kidnapping by Berthier . She also wrote that Yuki 's inclusion of a happy ending felt surprising compared to the rest of the story . Reviewing " Camelot Garden " , she enjoyed it less than Grand Guignol Orchestra , and wrote that the short story contained an implicit reference to Lewis Carroll 's children 's novel Through the Looking Glass ( 1871 ) and its character , the ever @-@ sleeping Red King . 
 = 2015 Tour of Oman = 
 The 2015 Tour of Oman was the sixth edition of the Tour of Oman cycling stage race . It was rated as a <unk> event on the UCI Asia Tour , and was held from 17 to 22 February 2015 , in Oman . The race was organised by the municipality of Muscat , in collaboration with ASO ( the organisers of the Tour de France ) and <unk> . Chris Froome , the defending champion from 2013 and 2014 , was not present to defend his title . 
 The decisive stage in this as in past editions was the climb of Jebel Akhdar . That stage was won by Rafael Valls of Lampre – Merida , who went on to defend his overall race lead to the finish in Muscat . This was aided by the controversial events of stage 5 , which was eventually cancelled due to extreme weather conditions . Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) finished second ( as he had in 2014 ) and Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) finished third . 
 The points competition was won by Andrea Guardini ( Astana ) , who won the first stage of the race . Louis Meintjes ( MTN – Qhubeka ) was the best young rider , while Jef Van Meirhaeghe ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) won the combativity prize after participating in the breakaway on every stage of the race . BMC Racing Team was the winner of the teams classification . 
 = = Teams = = 
 18 teams were selected to take part in the event , including 12 UCI Pro Tour teams . 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 The Tour of Oman is the third of a trio of stage races in the Middle East that come early in the road cycling season , following the Dubai Tour and the Tour of Qatar , in 2015 won by Mark Cavendish and Niki Terpstra respectively . The distinctive feature of the Tour of Oman is the annual inclusion of the climb of Jebel Akhdar , the Green Mountain , which means the general classification is generally won by climbers . Many Grand Tour contenders start their seasons racing in Oman for this reason . 
 In 2013 and 2014 , the race was won by Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) as the beginning of his preparation for the Tour de France . In 2015 , however , Froome opted to begin his season at the Vuelta a Andalucía and so missed the Tour of Oman . The race was therefore expected to be contested between other Grand Tour riders , such as Tour de France champion Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) , Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Thibault Pinot ( FDJ ) , Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , Rigoberto Urán ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Leopold König ( Team Sky ) . 
 Although the general classification was expected to be contested by climbers , many riders ride the Tour of Oman with other aims . Spring classics riders use them as a last block of racing before the European classics season starts with the Omloop Het Nieuwsblad , while sprinters aim to win stages . Notable sprinters at the 2015 race included Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) , who won three stages in the 2014 Tour of Qatar , Nacer Bouhanni ( Cofidis ) and Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) . Stages 1 , 3 and 6 were predicted to be suited for the pure sprinters , while stages 2 and 5 were expected to suit riders who could cope with some climbing . 
 = = Route = = 
 The 2015 event was scheduled to have six stages , including four flat stages , one medium @-@ mountain stage and one mountain stage . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 The first stage was a 161 km ( 100 mi ) route from Bayt al Naman Castle to Al <unk> on the outskirts of Muscat . It was a fairly flat course , with an uphill finish . Temperatures exceeded 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) . 
 The early breakaway was formed by Johan van Zyl ( MTN – Qhubeka ) , Patrick Konrad ( Bora – Argon 18 ) , Simone <unk> ( Bardiani – CSF ) and Jef van Meirhaeghe ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) , who built a lead of up to five minutes . The chasing peloton was led for most of the day by Team Katusha , in support of their leader Alexander Kristoff , for whom the uphill finish was ideal . Movistar Team and Trek Factory Racing aided in the chase . 
 Van Zyl put in an attack with 85 km ( 53 mi ) remaining , leaving his breakaway companions behind . This group was soon caught by the peloton after Konrad suffered a puncture ; Van Zyl was caught with 32 km ( 20 mi ) remaining . Team Katusha continued to lead the peloton until the final kilometres . At this point , Etixx – Quick @-@ Step led out the sprint in support of Tom Boonen . However , they misjudged the difficulty towards the finish line : there was a 2 @-@ 3 % incline and a headwind . This caused the team to <unk> the sprint : Boonen 's lead @-@ out man Matteo Trentin was only able to support him until there were 200 m ( 660 ft ) remaining . Andrea Guardini ( Astana ) was supported by his teammate Borut Božič and was then able to follow Boonen and come past him in the final 50 m ( 160 ft ) to take his first victory of 2015 . Matteo Pelucchi ( Lampre – Merida ) took third place . 
 Guardini therefore took over the red jersey of overall leader . Van Zyl , Konrad and <unk> all finished on the same time as Guardini and so moved into the top ten thanks to bonus seconds won at intermediate sprints . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 Stage 2 was a 195 km ( 121 mi ) route ( the longest of the race ) from Al Hazm Castle to Al Bustan . It was classified as a flat stage , but there were two notable climbs within the last 25 km ( 16 mi ) , presenting the opportunity for riders to attack close to the finish . 
 The early breakaway was formed by <unk> Smukulis ( Team Katusha ) , Preben Van Hecke , Jef Van Meirhaeghe ( both Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) , and Enrico Barbin ( Bardiani – CSF ) . The chase was led by Astana , defending the red jersey of Andrea Guardini . After about 50 km ( 31 mi ) , Barbin suffered a puncture ; he was dropped by the remaining three riders and was then caught by the peloton . As the stage progressed , Tinkoff – Saxo took control of the peloton in support of Peter Sagan . Their strong pace meant that the main group was soon catching the breakaway , but the peloton itself began to split , with riders including Edvald Boasson Hagen ( MTN – Qhubeka ) and Arnaud Démare ( FDJ ) among the riders temporarily distanced from the front of the race . 
 The breakaway had a two @-@ minute lead with 25 km ( 16 mi ) remaining , as they approached the climbs at the end of the stage . Smukulis attacked on the first climb , Al <unk> , and had a 30 @-@ second lead at the summit , with the peloton a little over a minute behind . Guardini was among the riders who were dropped from the peloton , with Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) and Thibault Pinot ( FDJ ) also in difficulty . Smukulis was caught soon afterwards , with 16 @.@ 5 km ( 10 mi ) remaining , under continued impetus from Tinkoff – Saxo . 
 On the second climb , Al Jissah , there was an attack from Jakob Fuglsang ( Astana ) , Ben Hermans ( BMC Racing Team ) , Julián Arredondo ( Trek Factory Racing ) , and Louis Meintjes ( MTN – Qhubeka ) . Pinot , Rodriguez and Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) were all dropped by the peloton , now reduced to a small group . This group , made up of 14 riders , was able to catch the breakaway soon after the climb . Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) and Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) all made attacks in the final 5 kilometres ( 3 mi ) , but were unable to stay away and the race came down to a sprint . 
 Movistar Team did much of the pace @-@ setting in support of Valverde , before BMC Racing Team attempted to set up Greg Van Avermaet for the uphill sprint at the finish . Despite these efforts , Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) was able to sprint to victory . Valverde was second , with Van Avermaet in third place . This victory meant that Cancellara took over the lead of both the general classification and the points competition . It was his first race victory since the 2014 Tour of Flanders the previous spring . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 Stage 3 was a 158 @.@ 5 km ( 98 mi ) route that started and ended at Al <unk> Sports City . The route was mostly flat with no significant climbs and the roads at the finish were wide and straight , so the stage was likely to end in a bunch sprint . 
 Jef Van Meirhaeghe ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) was again in the breakaway , along with his teammate Preben Van Hecke and Alessandro Tonelli ( Bardiani – CSF ) . Initially there was a lack of agreement in the peloton about who should lead the chase . Trek Factory Racing were supporting race leader Fabian Cancellara , but they wanted the sprinters ' teams to support the chase . The breakaway was therefore allowed a lead that reached nine minutes , but eventually agreement between the chasing teams brought control and the lead was reduced to six minutes . The breakaway was eventually caught with 15 km ( 9 mi ) remaining . 
 In the final 10 km ( 6 mi ) many teams , including Astana , Movistar Team , MTN – Qhubeka and Tinkoff – Saxo , sought to lead out their sprinters . In the confusion , Matteo Trentin ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) crashed and was forced to abandon the race . Team Katusha moved up in the final 5 km ( 3 mi ) in support of Alexander Kristoff . Kristoff 's lead out train was strong and positioned him well for the final sprint . 
 In the finishing straight , there was a significant headwind , and , when Danny van Poppel ( Trek Factory Racing ) opened his sprint too early , Kristoff was able to follow him and come round to take his fourth victory of the season , just ahead of Andrea Guardini ( Astana ) . Cancellara retained his overall lead in the race . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 Stage 4 was the queen stage of the race , with a summit finish at the climb of Jabal al Akhdar ( the Green Mountain ) . The stage was a 189 km ( 117 mi ) route from the Sultan Qaboos Grand Mosque to Jabal al Akhdar . There were no significant climbs in the route until the final 5 @.@ 7 km ( 4 mi ) , which had an average gradient of 10 @.@ 5 % . 
 An early breakaway was formed of Jef Van Meirhaeghe ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) ( the leader of the combativity award and in the breakaway for the fourth consecutive stage ) , his teammate Gijs Van Hoecke , Stijn Vandenbergh ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and points classification leader Andrea Guardini ( Astana ) . Guardini and Van Meirhaeghe contested the intermediate sprint after 18 @.@ 5 km ( 11 mi ) , taking points for their respective classifications , then sat up and were caught by the peloton . Vandenbergh and Van Hoecke were allowed to build a lead of nearly 15 minutes , before the peloton increased its speed . The breakaway was caught with less than 10 km ( 10 mi ) to go . 
 BMC Racing Team led the peloton hard into the early slopes of Jabal al Akhdar . This caused many riders , including race leader Fabian Cancellara , to be dropped , and a group of 20 riders formed . Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) put in two attacks , causing the group to be reduced further , in support of Jakob Fuglsang . More riders , including Alejandro Valverde ( Movistar Team ) were dropped , leaving a group of three riders in the lead with 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) to go : Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) and Rafael Valls ( Lampre – Merida ) . Majka unable to follow Van Garderen 's attacks , but Valls was able to stay in his wheel . Valls was then able to put in his own attack and pass Van Garderen in the final part of the stage , going on to win by five seconds . It was his first victory in five years and gave him a 19 @-@ second lead in the overall standings . Van Garderen was frustrated after the stage , having also finished second on the same stage in the 2014 race behind Chris Froome . He said afterwards that he had " underestimated " Valls , who had not been considered among the favourites for stage victory . 
 Louis Meintjes ( MTN – Qhubeka ) was eighth on the stage and moved into the white jersey as the best young rider . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 Stage 5 was scheduled to be a 151 @.@ 5 km ( 94 mi ) route , beginning at Al <unk> Beach . The planned route then went along the coast and included four laps of a circuit before finishing at the Ministry of Housing . Each lap of the circuit included the climb of <unk> al <unk> , a difficult climb . Equivalent stages in the 2013 and 2014 editions had been highly selective , and the stage was considered an opportunity for Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) to attempt to attack race leader Rafael Valls ( Lampre – Merida ) . 
 Extreme weather conditions , however , made the stage impossible . There was a sandstorm at the starting point on Al <unk> Beach , so the decision was taken to transport the riders to the finishing circuit , shortening the stage to 95 km ( 59 mi ) . When the riders arrived at the finishing circuit , however , they were now faced with very high temperatures , approximately 41 ° C ( 106 ° F ) . They started racing , but found themselves with problems due to the extreme heat . Several riders suffered punctures , especially during the fast descents , and problems with their brakes and the riders took the decision to neutralise the stage and took shelter under a bridge . The race organisers , led by race director Eddy Merckx , tried to persuade the riders to carry on , and at one point it was suggested that the cancellation of the stage could mean the end of the Tour of Oman altogether . It was eventually agreed , however , that the riders would take a short flat route to the stage finish . 
 With the stage cancelled , the standings in all the classifications remained unchanged . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 Stage 6 was a 133 @.@ 5 km ( 83 @.@ 0 mi ) route starting at the headquarters of Oman Air on the edge of Muscat International Airport . The route first followed the coast west , before turning inland and heading east . The race crossed two classified climbs on the edge of Muscat , before finishing on the corniche at <unk> with three laps of a finishing circuit . The weather conditions were much more suitable for racing , with grey skies and the temperature approximately 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) lower than the previous day . 
 The first riders to break away , were Iljo Keisse ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Jef Van Meirhaeghe ( Topsport Vlaanderen – Baloise ) . Van Meirhaeghe was in the breakaway for the fifth time in the race : he had participated in the breakaway on every stage except the aborted stage 5 . After his efforts earlier in the week , he struggled initially to stay with Keisse . The pair were joined , however , by Danny Pate ( Team Sky ) and Matthias Brändle ( IAM Cycling ) , and Van Meirhaeghe was able to stay with the group . Jelle Wallays , Van Meirhaeghe 's team mate , attempted to bridge across to the leading riders , but he was not able to make it across in the crosswinds and was caught by the main peloton . Lampre – Merida were happy to allow the breakaway a large lead as none of the riders posed any threat to Rafael Valls in the general classification , and they had a nine @-@ minute lead with approximately 65 km ( 40 mi ) remaining . 
 The sprinters ' teams attempted to chase the breakaway down . Principally this was led by Cofidis , who were hoping to set up Nacer Bouhanni for the stage win . However , the hills close to the finish made this difficult , as the breakaway were able to maintain their advantage on the technical descents . Andrea Guardini ( Astana ) was dropped on the last of these climbs . 
 In the leading group , Pate made the first attack on the unclassified climb on the finishing circuit , but Brändle covered the move and passed him . Brändle was then able to hold off the chase of Keisse – the faster sprinter – and finished the stage with a four @-@ second advantage . Van Meirhaeghe finished third with Pate fourth . In the peloton , Peter Sagan won the bunch sprint , over a minute behind Brändle . 
 Rafael Valls was therefore able to secure the overall win , nine seconds ahead of Van Garderen , to take the first professional stage race win of his career . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 There were five principal classifications in the 2015 Tour of Oman . 
 The first and most important was the general classification ; the winner of this is considered the overall winner of the race . It is calculated by adding together each rider 's times on each stage , then applying bonuses . Bonuses are awarded for coming in the top three on a stage ( 10 seconds for the winner , 6 seconds for the second placed rider and 4 seconds for the rider in third ) or at intermediate sprints ( 3 seconds , 2 seconds and 1 second for the top three riders ) . The rider in the lead of the general classification wears a red jersey . 
 The second competition is the points classification . This is calculated by awarding points for the top 10 riders at the finish of each stage ( 15 points to the winner down to 1 point for the rider in tenth place ) and to the top three at intermediate sprints ( 3 points , 2 points and 1 point ) . The rider with the highest points total is the leader of the classification and wears a green jersey . 
 The young rider classification is open to those born on or after 1 January 1990 . The young rider ranked highest in the general classification is the leader of the young rider classification and wears a white jersey . 
 The combativity classification is based on points won at intermediate sprints and classified climbs along the route . Points are awarded to the top three riders across each sprint or climb ( 3 points , 2 points and 1 point ) . The rider with the most accumulated points is the leader of the classification and wears a white jersey with red and green sections . 
 The final competition is the team classification . On each stage , each team is awarded a time based on the cumulative time of its top three riders . The times for each stage are then added together and the team with the lowest total time is the leader of the team classification . There is no jersey awarded for this classification . 
 = = Classification standings = = 
 = = = Team classification = = = 
 = = Controversy over stage 5 = = 
 The 2015 race included one significant controversy : the conditions on stage 5 that led to the stage 's cancellation . After a sandstorm had caused the start of the race to be relocated , very high temperatures ( somewhere between 38 ° C ( 100 ° F ) and 49 ° C ( 120 ° F ) ) caused several riders ' tyres to puncture . This was especially the case on the neutralised descents , as the slow speeds and consequent frequent braking led to higher tyre temperatures and more punctures . Many riders had concerns for their safety on the descents , and a rider protest brought the race to a halt . 
 Riders engaged in a lengthy discussion with the race organisers , who were represented by Eddy Merckx , considered one of the greatest cyclists ever , who was part @-@ owner of the race . The Omani organisers , led by Salim bin Mubarak Al Hassani , put pressure on the riders to continue racing , but they refused to do so . The riders were led by Tom Boonen ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) and Fabian Cancellara ( Trek Factory Racing ) , who cited the danger of continuing to race in the conditions , suggesting that their lives were at risk . The stage was eventually neutralised and the riders returned to the finish line by a flat route . 
 After the race , Merckx publicly dismissed the riders ' complaints . In particular , he made comparisons with the dangers that are accepted by the riders , such as those faced when riding Paris – Roubaix or descending on wet days in the Tour de France . Merckx also said that he was worried about the future of the race , as the local organisers were angry at the cancellation of the stage and had wanted to cancel stage 6 as well . He was also concerned about the renewal of the contract to run the Tour of Oman , after it expired in 2016 . Before the final stage – which did go ahead – he had agreed with the local authorities that the race would continue in 2016 . It was suggested , however , that the local organisers may refuse to invite certain teams back to future editions of the race . These teams possibly included Etixx – Quick @-@ Step and Trek Factory Racing since their riders were central to the rider protest . 
 = Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well = 
 Oh Pray My Wings Are Gonna Fit Me Well is a book of poems by American author Maya Angelou , published by Random House in 1975 . It is Angelou 's second volume of poetry , written after her first two autobiographies and first volume of poetry were published . Angelou considers herself a poet and a playwright , but is best known for her seven autobiographies , especially her first , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , although her poetry has also been successful . She began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Although her poetry collections have been best @-@ sellers , they have not received serious critical attention . 
 Oh Pray is divided into five parts and consists of 36 poems . The volume is dedicated to " Paul " . Like many of Angelou 's poems , the poetry in the volume has been characterized as light verse . They contain identifications with ordinary objects and universal identifications . Oh Pray has received mixed reviews from critics ; one critic states that the poems in it are best if read aloud . They focus on themes of love , insight , and tension , and on overcoming difficulties . Angelou writes about ordinary objects and experiences , and with deep feelings , about a variety of racial themes and concerns . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oh Pray My Wings are Gonna Fit Me Well is Maya Angelou 's second volume of poetry . She studied and began writing poetry at a young age . After her rape at the age of eight , as recounted in her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings ( 1969 ) , she dealt with her trauma by memorizing and reciting great works of literature , including poetry , which helped bring her out of her self @-@ imposed muteness . Angelou 's film Georgia , Georgia , produced by a Swedish film company and filmed in Sweden , was the first screenplay written by a Black woman , and was released in 1972 . Angelou married Welsh carpenter and ex @-@ husband of Germaine Greer , Paul du Feu , in San Francisco in 1973 . 
 Although Angelou considered herself a playwright and poet when her editor Robert Loomis challenged her to write Caged Bird , she has been best known for her autobiographies . Many of Angelou 's readers identify her as a poet first and an autobiographer second , but like Lynn Z. Bloom , many critics consider her autobiographies more important than her poetry . Critic William Sylvester agrees , and states that although her books have been best @-@ sellers , her poetry has " received little serious critical attention " . Bloom also believes that Angelou 's poetry is more interesting when she recites it . Bloom calls Angelou 's performances " characteristically dynamic " , and says that she " moves exuberantly , vigorously to reinforce the rhythms of the lines , the tone of the words . Her singing and dancing and electrifying stage presence transcend the predictable words and phrases " . 
 Angelou began , early in her writing career , alternating the publication of an autobiography and a volume of poetry . Her first volume of poetry , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) , which was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize , followed her first autobiography , and Oh Pray followed the publication of her second autobiography , Gather Together in My Name ( 1974 ) . Her publisher , Random House , placed the poems in Oh Pray in her first collection of poetry , The Complete Collected Poems of Maya Angelou ( 1994 ) , perhaps to capitalize on her popularity following her reading of her poem " On the Pulse of Morning " at President Bill Clinton 's inauguration in 1993 . Also in the 1994 collection was Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie and two more published after Oh Pray , And Still I Rise ( 1978 ) and Shaker , Why Don 't You Sing ? ( 1983 ) . Angelou 's publisher placed four more poems in a smaller volume , entitled Phenomenal Woman , in 1995 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Many of Angelou 's poems can be characterized as light verse . For example , Hagen characterizes " On Reaching Forty " as a light rumination about growing older . Angelou expresses sadness about having already reaching milestones in her youth , and ends the poem unexpectedly by humorously and ironically expressing admiration for those who die early . In this volume and in others , Angelou pairs poems together ( " America " and " Africa " ; " Communication I " and Communication II " ) to strengthen her themes . 
 The poems in this volume , like her poems in other volumes and contexts , contain universal identifications with ordinary objects . For example , " The Telephone " describes her relationship with an object , and how it has intruded upon the silence and solitude of her life . In this poem , which is three structured stanzas long , Angelou demands that the telephone ring , despite her resentment of its intrusion and her dependency upon it . She uses familiar and feminine metaphors , and themes also found in blues songs , such as the colors black and blue and weekend loneliness . In the poem " Poor Girl " , Angelou uses the vernacular to express universal themes , in the voice of a teenage girl who has lost her boyfriend . 
 Scholar Yasmin Y. DeGout cites " The Couple " as an example of Angelou 's practice of subtly including more than one level of meaning in her poems , of her ability to translate her personal experience into political discourse , and her placement of themes of racism and liberation . Angelou combines liberation ideology and poetic technique to challenge society 's concepts of gender identity , especially in how it affects women . She varies the length of the poem 's lines , beginning in the first stanza and continuing throughout the poem , to convey ambiguity and doubt , and to demand that the reader question their perceptions of gender and power . " The Couple " , starting in its second stanza , attacks class @-@ based ideals of masculinity in society . The poem ends by demanding that the social constructs surrounding gender and class end , and insists that human survival depends upon recognizing shared emotions and experience , regardless of one 's gender or position in society . 
 = = Poems = = 
 Oh Pray My Wings are Gonna Fit Me Well is divided into five parts , and consists of 36 poems . The volume is dedicated to " Paul " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Kathryn Gibbs Harris , in her review in Library Journal , states that the poems in Oh Pray , like " Child Dead in Old Seas " , are good heritage ballads with excellent lyrics . She calls " This Winter Day " colorful and pleasant , and states that it reminds her of a genre painting . She , like many critics about much of Angelou 's poetry , says , " The poems work best read aloud " . The critic in Booklist considers the way in which the poems are organized distracting , but says that it " does not diminish the street @-@ wise soundings infused with a particular pain and pride " . According to the review , the rhyme in " Here 's to Adhering " is simple , but its structure is deceptively complex . The critic also says , " The sardonic quality of ' On Reaching Forty ' reduces age to a minor milestone ; nationhood is elevated to a higher yet deeper plane in ' Africa ' and in ' America . ' ' The Pusher ' is a typical Angelou acceleration , but it is ' Chicken @-@ <unk> ' that causes a dead halt " . Poetry critic Sandra Gilbert says that Angelou 's poems , " when they 're not awkward or stilted , are corny " . 
 According to a reviewer in Choice , the poems in Oh Pray focus on themes of love , insight , and tension . They also focus on " the black condition celebrated triumphant over difficulties " . The reviewer finds some poems uneven , sometimes banal , also best if read aloud , and meant to " be reread and laughed over and thought about " . Reviewer James Finn Cotter states that this volume suffers from " the dangers of success " that happen when poets gain too much fame too soon . Gilbert blames Angelou 's publishers for capitalizing on her success as an autobiographer , stating that Oh Pray " ... is such a painfully untalented collection of poems that I can 't think of any reason other than the Maya myth for it to be in print " . Writer Lyman B. Hagen responds to Gilbert 's criticism by stating that Angelou had been a poet long before she began writing prose and that Angelou 's audience is comfortable with her sparse lines . He insists that Angelou 's critics have missed the power of her poems ' message in her apparently simple lines . Hagen calls Angelou 's poetry light verse . He states that she writes about ordinary objects and experiences , and with deep feelings , about a variety of racial themes and concerns . 
 = Islands ( The xx song ) = 
 " Islands " is a song recorded by English indie pop band The xx for their self @-@ titled debut studio album . Written by band @-@ members Jamie Smith , Oliver Sim , Romy Madley Croft and then @-@ member Baria Qureshi , " Islands " is a dark and simple indie pop track . It also contains influences from house music and features instrumentation from guitars and synthesizers . Croft and Sim , who provided vocals in the track , sing about themes related to loyalty and love . " Islands " was released on 26 October 2009 as the third single from the album by Young Turks in 7 @-@ inch single and digital download formats . In March 2010 , the song was re @-@ released as a 12 @-@ inch single . 
 Upon its release , " Islands " received critical acclaim from music critics , many of whom praised Croft and Sim 's vocal delivery . It was ranked at number 28 by music publication NME on their list of " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . The song became the band 's highest peaking single in the United Kingdom after it reached number 34 on the UK Singles Chart . It also peaked at number three on the UK Indie Chart . An accompanying music video for " Islands " was directed by Saam Farahmand , and consists of numerous tracking shots that show six dancers performing a dance routine around the members of the band . Every different shot features a slight change in the expression , gestures , and movement of the dancers and band @-@ members . Critics complimented the concept of the video , and felt it was representative of The xx 's musical style . The band performed the song live at the iTunes Festival in 2010 and it was also included on the setlist of their 2010 and 2013 tour . 
 A cover version of " Islands " was recorded by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira for inclusion in her ninth studio album Sale el Sol ( 2010 ) . The cover followed a very similar instrumentation to the original version , but featured a faster tempo and more house elements . Shakira performed the cover live at the 2010 Glastonbury Festival in Pilton , Somerset . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Islands " was written by The xx band @-@ members Jamie Smith , Oliver Sim , Romy Madley Croft and then @-@ member Baria Qureshi , for the English indie pop band 's self @-@ titled debut album ( 2009 ) . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , the song is composed in the key of C # minor and has a metronome of 123 beats per minute . Sim and Croft provide vocals in the track , and their range spans from G # 3 to E4 . Similar to the band 's usual style of production , " Islands " is dark and " nocturnal " in nature and follows a " simple , effective " beat . It features instrumentation from guitars which " twirl like dance floor partners in the background " and synthesisers that " play like a musical shadow " . According to BBC Music 's Lou Thomas , the song features house rhythms and a melody similar to that of Tom Petty 's 1989 song " I Won 't Back Down " . Lyrically , " Islands " is a " psycho @-@ geographical love song " and contains themes of loyalty , which are heard in lines like " I am yours now , so I don ’ t ever have to leave " . The duo 's vocals were described as " girl @-@ boy " , with Croft 's vocal delivery taking on a " pleasant soft @-@ pop vibe " . Sim momentarily interrupts the verses with " four short <unk> " . A " typically heartfelt and bed @-@ cuddly " refrain " I am yours now " is repeated throughout the song , and UK @-@ based online publication Muso 's Guide regarded it as " the closest thing The xx has produced to a hook " . 
 The song was released as the third single from xx on 26 October 2009 by Young Turks in 7 @-@ inch single and digital download formats . A minimalistic and " sexy " track named " Do You Mind ? " was included as the B @-@ side to " Islands " , and is composed of " <unk> brash drums " . On 15 March 2010 , Young Turks released a 12 @-@ inch single version " Islands " , which contained various remixes of the song . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The song received critical acclaim . Lou Thomas from BBC Music said there is a " sense of quiet triumph " in what he felt was a musical reference to " I Won 't Back Down " by Tom Petty in the song 's melody , " despite the incongruity " . The Muso 's Guide review of " Islands " approved of the song 's release as a single and complimented Croft and Sim 's vocal delivery , saying they " provide a superb introduction to what the band is all about " . They particularly appreciated its " I am yours now " refrain , naming it " a typically heartfelt and bed @-@ cuddly line that makes The xx the perfect alternative lovers band " . Emily Mackay from NME called the song " gorgeous " and felt it was " the perfect soundtrack for wandering aimlessly along rainy London streets " . Andrew Gaerig from Pitchfork Media chose " Islands " as one of the highlights from the album and complimented Croft 's vocals and Sim 's involvement . In 2011 , NME ranked " Islands " at number 28 on their list of " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " , naming it the band 's " finest moment thus far " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United Kingdom , " Islands " reached number 34 on the singles chart and is The xx 's highest @-@ peaking single in the region to date . Its total stay inside the top 40 of the chart lasted for eight weeks . " Islands " was more successful on the UK Indie chart and peaked at number three . The song also peaked at number 16 on Ultratop chart of the Dutch @-@ speaking Flanders region of Belgium , and stayed on the chart for a total of two weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Islands " was directed by Saam Farahmand , who had previously worked with artists like Simian Mobile Disco and Klaxons . It premiered on MTV on 21 April 2010 . Composed of a series of tracking shots , the video shows Croft , Sim , and Smith " listlessly " sitting on a couch with six dancers performing a choreographed dance routine behind them . The dancers carry out the same routine with every next tracking shot , but a slight change in their expressions , gestures , and movement takes place . Similarly , the band @-@ members repeatedly change their positions and facial expressions " with differing fervour " . Near to the end of the video , the pattern begins modifying and " the comfortable habits get broken up / break up " as the dancers and band @-@ members leave one by one . The backdrop , which consists of several small " X " letters , also catches fire . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received positive reviews from critics . Katie Hasty from HitFix praised the choreography , calling it " eye @-@ popping " , and labelled the video as " classy , contained , and borderline claustrophobic " . She complimented Farahmand for directing a risky concept and commented that the tracking shots were like " an inhale and exhale with each new take " . Furthermore , she felt that the video was representative of The xx 's sound , calling it " morose and hypnotic , just like the band , the aural equivalent of a <unk> movie " , and opined that the end of the video showed how " love goes " . Chris Ryan from MTV also found the video similar to the band 's musical style , and commented that the slight changes in its pattern " suggest unrest under the surface -- much like the band 's pristine , subtly menacing sound " . He also noted that while " it 's often hard to imagine what visuals would go well " with The xx 's songs , the music video for " Islands " " trumps anything we could have ever imagined " . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 On 2 October 2009 , The xx performed " Islands " live on British music television show Later ... with Jools Holland , along with " Night Time " . The song was included on the setlist of their 2010 tour , and was also performed at the ITunes Festival held at The Roundhouse in London in the same year ; the band later released a digital EP of their performance . " Islands " was also included on the setlist of the band 's 2013 tour , and a more rock @-@ oriented version of the song was performed . 
 " Islands " was played during the closing monologue of the fourteenth episode of the sixth season of American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , entitled " Valentine 's Day Massacre " . It was also a part of the soundtrack of the tenth episode of the second season of comedy @-@ drama television series Parenthood , entitled " Happy Thanksgiving " . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Shakira cover = = 
 Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira recorded a cover version of " Islands " for inclusion in her ninth studio album Sale el Sol , which was released on October 19 , 2010 . Although there was initial speculation that the cover would be entitled " Explore " , it appeared on the final tracklist of the album using its original name . In comparison to the original version , Shakira 's cover of " Islands " follows a largely similar and " fairly faithful " instrumentation , but features a faster tempo , " hopeful @-@ sounding " vocals , and " pseudo @-@ house " elements . Prior to Shakira recording the cover of " Islands " , Croft had briefly met her at the London BBC Studios ; the former talked about her meeting , saying " We were sitting on a wall outside the BBC and she came up and her bodyguards parted and it was little Shakira , and she says , " Hi ! " And I was like , Wow ! I found out recently that she ’ s a big fan of The Cure and stuff " . 
 Shakira 's cover of " Islands " drew generally favourable reception from critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic felt it was a highlight on the album , and commented that Shakira " finds warmth within the art pop of The xx , whose " Islands " is a shimmering peak here " . Mikael Wood from Entertainment Weekly appreciated the cover , and opined that " [ Shakira ] discovers the beating heart inside that band 's subdued electro @-@ goth jam " . Becky Bain from Idolator called Shakira 's version of " Islands " " sunnier than the original " and regarded it as " brilliantly subdued " , complimenting the singer 's overall reworking of the original track . In 2011 , Stereogum included the cover on their list of " The 10 Best xx Covers " . Shakira 's cover of " Islands " appeared on the US Billboard Latin Digital Songs chart , peaking at number 39 for one week . 
 In June 2010 , Shakira performed the cover live at the Glastonbury Festival in Pilton , Somerset . Alex Needham from The Guardian called the performance " a slinky cover " that " is a nod to the indie kids " . Maria <unk> from PopMatters felt the performance was " less intimate than the original " , but " managed to amplify the tremendous pop sensibilities embedded beneath Romy Madley Croft " s and Oliver Sim 's hushed coos " . She concluded by saying that " as great as The xx are , it ’ s probably safe to say that Shakira can cut a rug better " . 
 = Ascall mac Ragnaill = 
 Ascall mac Ragnaill meic Torcaill ( died 1171 ) , also known as Ascall Mac Torcaill , was the last Norse @-@ Gaelic King of Dublin . He was a member of the Meic Torcaill , a Dublin family of significance since the early twelfth century . 
 Control of the wealthy coastal kingdom was bitterly contested during Ascall 's floruit , with members of his immediate family , as well as Islesmen and Irishmen , all securing power for brief periods of time . Throughout much of this period , however , the overlord of Dublin was Diarmait Mac Murchada , King of Leinster . In 1166 , after the death of his close ally Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn , High King of Ireland , Mac Murchada was beset by his enemies . At this critical point of his reign , Mac Murchada lost the support of the Dubliners , which contributed to his expulsion from Ireland that year . Not long afterwards , however , he made his return with significant military assistance from mercenary English adventurers . In the latter half of 1170 , Dublin itself fell to the combined forces of Mac Murchada and the powerful English magnate Richard de Clare , Earl of Pembroke . 
 With the collapse of the Norse @-@ Gaelic kingdom , Ascall and the Dublin elite were forced to flee into what one source calls the " northern islands " , a reference to either the Kingdom of the Isles or the Earldom of Orkney . About a year later , not long after Mac Murchada 's death , Ascall attempted to regain his patrimony from the English . Unfortunately for himself , his invasion of Dublin ended in utter failure , and he was executed by the English governor of the town . Immediately following his fall , Dublin was besieged by a combined force of Irishmen and Islesmen . The town , however , remained firmly in the hands of the English ; and before the end of the year , Dublin passed into the direct control of Henry II , King of England , who converted it into an English royal town . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ascall 's father was Ragnall mac Torcaill ( died 1146 ) , a man who may well have ruled as King of Dublin . The men were members of the Meic Torcaill , a substantial landholding kindred in the kingdom . Several members of this Norse @-@ Gaelic family held the kingship in the twelfth century . One such man was Ascall 's uncle , Brodar mac Torcaill , King of Dublin , who was slain in 1160 . 
 At the midpoint of the twelfth century , the kingdom was under the overlordship of Diarmait Mac Murchada , King of Leinster ( died 1171 ) . The latter 's ultimate overking , however , was Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn , King of Cenél nEógain ( died 1166 ) . The year after Brodar 's death , numerous sources indicate that Mac Murchada , with a force of Dubliners in tow , formally rendered submission to Mac Lochlainn . In 1162 , the Annals of Ulster reveals that Mac Murchada gained an almost @-@ unprecedented authority over Dublin . There is reason to suspect that his success stemmed from assistance received from Mac Lochlainn . The latter , for example , is recorded by the same source to have laid siege to the town within the year . In fact , this military campaign may have been undertaken to counter the Dubliners ' attempt to install Gofraid mac Amlaíb , King of the Isles ( died 1187 ) to the kingship of Dublin , as recounted by the Chronicle of Mann . 
 The record of events during the mid part of the twelfth century suggests that Leinster @-@ based overkings of Dublin enjoyed the cooperation of the indigenous leaders of Dublin , and the emergence of the Meic Torcaill during this period may well fit into such a context . When an indigenous ruler was not to be found , however , the Dubliners seem to have sought leadership from the Isles , rather than endure a non @-@ Leinster overking , as evidenced by the aforesaid episode concerning Gofraid . Mac Murchada 's considerable authority in Dublin at this point is apparent through several ecclesiastical grants , foundations , and appointments . Furthermore , two major military operations undertaken by Dublin 's forces in 1164 and 1165 were almost certainly conducted under Mac Murchada 's authority . The former campaign , recorded by Brut y Tywysogion and <unk> y <unk> , concerned naval manoeuvres off Wales , in the service of Henry II , King of England ( died 1189 ) . The latter campaign , recorded by the Annals of Ulster , consisted of involvement in the ill @-@ fated invasion of mainland Scotland , launched by Somairle mac Gilla Brigte , King of the Isles ( died 1164 ) . 
 = = Fall of Mac Murchada and rise of Ua Conchobair = = 
 Mac Lochlainn was slain in 1166 , leaving Mac Murchada to fend off his own enemies alone . Other than Mac Murchada himself , another man making a bid for the high @-@ kingship was Ruaidrí Ua Conchobair , King of Connacht ( died 1198 ) . Within the same year as Mac Lochlainn 's demise , Ua Conchobair and his allies <unk> Mac Murchada from not only Dublin , but Ireland altogether ; and Ua Conchobair himself was duly recognised as High King of Ireland . 
 According to the Annals of the Four Masters , he had secured the cooperation of Dublin , and perhaps gained the kingship of the town itself , through a stipend of 4 @,@ 000 cows . In consequence , Dubliners formed part of Ua Conchobair 's forces when he marched to Drogheda and Leinster , where he forced the submissions of the kings of <unk> and Leinster respectively . In fact , Dublin appears to have formed a key part of Ua Conchobair 's arsenal , and it is apparent that Mac Murchada was doomed without the support of this coastal @-@ kingdom . Certainly , the Song of Dermot and the Earl relates that Ascall ( " <unk> de <unk> " ) had abandoned his former overlord , and the Annals of Inisfallen specify that Mac Murchada was only <unk> from Ireland after the Leinstermen and Dubliners had turned against him . Although Ua Conchobair appears to have allowed Mac Murchada to retain his patrimonial lordship of Uí Chennselaig , the Annals of the Four Masters reveals that the Leinstermen and Dubliners assisted <unk> Ua Ruairc , King of <unk> ( died 1172 ) in forcing Mac Murchada from this final vestige of authority and into exile . 
 The following year , Ua Conchobair convened a great assembly at <unk> . The Annals of the Four Masters states that 13 @,@ 000 horsemen attended the meeting — 1 @,@ 000 of which were supplied from Dublin . One of the many rulers recorded to have attended this gathering is a certain Ragnall mac Ragnaill , styled <unk> Gall ( " lord of the foreigners " ) . The latter 's name and title suggest that he was either an otherwise unattested brother of Ascall , or else an annalist 's mistake for Ascall himself . Meanwhile , after his expulsion from Ireland , Mac Murchada sought out Henry on the Continent , and gained permission to recruit military aid from the latter 's subjects . In the autumn of 1167 , Mac Murchada and his English allies arrived in Ireland , where they established themselves at Ferns . Ua Conchobair responded by penetrating Uí Chennselaig in a campaign , recounted by the Annals of Tigernach , that included military support from Dublin . With Mac Murchada temporally kept in check , a preoccupied Ua Conchobair allowed him to hold onto at least part of his patrimony . 
 = = Arrival of the English and Dublin 's fall = = 
 The situation in Ireland remained relatively unchanged until the arrival of a significant force of mercenaries in the summer of 1169 , after which some of Mac Murchada 's former vassals began to come over to his side . According to the Song of Dermot and the Earl , however , the kings of Uí <unk> and <unk> , and Ascall — described by this source as the " lord " of Dublin — stubbornly refused to support Mac Murchada 's cause . In an apparent show of force that may have been designed to keep the Dubliners onside , the Annals of the Four Masters states that Ua Conchobair led an army to Tara , where he was joined by the forces of the kings of Ulaid and <unk> , after which the combined army marched upon Dublin . The following year , however , saw the arrival of even more English support for Mac Murchada ; and in August 1170 , Richard de Clare , Earl of Pembroke ( died 1176 ) landed in Ireland and took Waterford by storm . Soon after , Clare married Mac Murchada 's daughter , Aífe , and effectively became heir to kingship of Leinster and the overlordship of Dublin . Unsurprisingly , later in September , the combined forces of Mac Murchada and Clare marched on Dublin , where they confronted Ua Conchobair and his forces . 
 If the account of the Annals of the Four Masters is to be believed , the Dubliners switched sides at this point , deserted the cause of Ua Conchobair , and further suffered an act of divine justice as their town went up in flames . On the other hand , Expugnatio Hibernica specifies that , whilst negotiations were under way between the forces of Ua Conchobair and the coalition of Mac Murchada and Clare , an English force under the command of Miles de Cogan and Raymond le Gros ( died 1189 × 1192 ) successfully assaulted the town , and caused considerable carnage amongst the inhabitants . Although the Annals of the Four Masters specifies that the Dubliners were slaughtered in their fortress , after which the English carried off their cattle and goods , Expugnatio Hibernica instead states that the majority of the Dubliners escaped the massacre and retained most of their possessions . The same source states that Ascall and the Dubliners managed to escape into the " northern islands " . This term could well refer to Orkney . On the other hand , it is also possible that the term refers to the Hebrides or Mann ; if so , this source would appear to be evidence that the Dubliners had retained close links with the Isles . According to the version of events preserved by the Song of Dermot and the Earl , the coalition 's conquest of Dublin took place on 21 September . 
 = = Final defeat and death = = 
 Within weeks of Mac Murchada 's death at the beginning of May , Expugnatio Hibernica reveals that Ascall made his return to Dublin . The account of events recorded by Expugnatio Hibernica and the Song of Dermot and the Earl indicate that Ascall 's forces consisted of heavily armoured Islesmen and Norwegians . The former source numbers Ascall 's forces at sixty ships , whilst the latter gives one hundred . According to both sources , Ascall 's followers included a notable warrior named " John the Mad " , a figure who may or may not be identical to the Orcadian saga @-@ character Sveinn Ásleifarson . 
 According to the Song of Dermot and the Earl , the invaders made landfall at the " Steine " , located on the southern bank of the River Liffey , and proceeded to encamp themselves outside the town 's walls . Expugnatio Hibernica relates that they assaulted the walls of the eastern gate , a location that corresponds to St Mary 's Gate , the focus of assault identified by the Song of Dermot and the Earl . Unfortunately for Ascall , the operation was an utter failure that resulted in his capture and death . Both sources relate that the town 's defenders , led by Cogan and his brother Richard , successfully repulsed the invaders , slew John , and captured Ascall as he fled to his fleet . Although Expugnatio Hibernica reveals that Ascall 's life had originally been reserved for ransom , both this source , and the Song of Dermot and the Earl , report that he was soon beheaded on account of his recalcitrance . 
 The successive deaths of Mac Murchada and Ascall appear to have left a power vacuum in Dublin that others strived to fill . Immediately after Ascall 's fall , Ua Conchobair had the English @-@ controlled town besieged . Expugnatio Hibernica records that he and Lorcán Ua Tuathail , Archbishop of Dublin ( died 1180 ) sent for Gofraid and others in the Isles , asking them to blockade Dublin by sea . According to the aforesaid source , " the threat of English domination , inspired by the successes of the English , made the men of the Isles act all the more quickly , and with the wind in the north @-@ west they immediately sailed about thirty ships full of warriors into the harbour of the Liffey " . Unfortunately for the Irish , Islesmen , and Dubliners , the blockade was ultimately a failure , and Dublin remained firmly in the hands of the English . Ascall was the last Norse @-@ Gaelic King of Dublin ; and before the end of the year , Clare relinquished possession to his own liege lord , Henry , who converted it into an English royal town . 
 = Leonid Brezhnev = 
 Leonid Ilyich Brezhnev ( / <unk> / ; Russian : <unk> ́ д <unk> ́ ч <unk> ́ <unk> ; IPA : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Ukrainian : <unk> ́ д <unk> ́ ч <unk> ́ <unk> , 19 December 1906 ( O.S. 6 December ) – 10 November 1982 ) was the General Secretary of the Central Committee ( CC ) of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) , presiding over the country from 1964 until his death in 1982 . His eighteen @-@ year term as General Secretary was second only to that of Joseph Stalin in duration . During Brezhnev 's rule , the global influence of the Soviet Union grew dramatically , in part because of the expansion of the Soviet military during this time . His tenure as leader was marked by the beginning of an era of economic and social stagnation in the Soviet Union . 
 Brezhnev was born in <unk> into a Russian worker 's family . After graduating from the Dniprodzerzhynsk Metallurgical Technicum , he became a metallurgical engineer in the iron and steel industry , in Ukraine . He joined Komsomol in 1923 , and in 1929 became an active member of the CPSU . He was drafted into immediate military service during World War II and left the army in 1946 with the rank of major general . In 1952 Brezhnev became a member of the Central Committee , and during 1964 , Brezhnev succeeded Nikita Khrushchev as First Secretary , while Alexei Kosygin succeeded Khrushchev in his post as Soviet premier . 
 As a leader , Brezhnev took care to consult his colleagues before acting , but his attempt to govern without meaningful economic reforms led to a national decline by the mid @-@ 1970s , a period referred to as the Era of Stagnation . A significant increase in military expenditure , which by the time of Brezhnev 's death stood at approximately 12 @.@ 5 % of the country 's GNP , and an aging and ineffective leadership set the stage for a dwindling GNP compared to Western nations . While at the helm of the USSR , Brezhnev pushed for détente between the Eastern and Western countries . At the same time he presided over the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia to stop the Prague Spring , and he sent the Soviet military to Afghanistan in an attempt to save the fragile regime , which was fighting a war against the mujahideen . However , in December 1981 he decided not to militarily intervene in Poland , instead allowing the country 's government to impose martial law , and effectively marking the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine . 
 After years of declining health , Brezhnev died on 10 November 1982 and was quickly succeeded in his post as General Secretary by Yuri Andropov . Brezhnev had fostered a cult of personality , although not nearly to the same degree as Stalin . Mikhail Gorbachev , who would lead the USSR from 1985 to 1991 , denounced his legacy and drove the process of liberalisation of the Soviet Union . In spite of this , opinion polls in Russia show Brezhnev to be the most popular Russian leader of the 20th century . 
