 = = Early life and career = = 
 = = = Origins and education = = = 
 Brezhnev was born on 19 December 1906 in <unk> ( now Dniprodzerzhynsk in Ukraine ) , to metalworker Ilya <unk> Brezhnev and his wife , Natalia <unk> <unk> . His parents used to live in <unk> ( <unk> District , Kursk Oblast , Russia ) before moving to <unk> . Brezhnev 's ethnicity was specified as Ukrainian in some documents , including his passport , and Russian in others . Like many youths in the years after the Russian Revolution of 1917 , he received a technical education , at first in land management where he started as a land surveyor and then in metallurgy . He graduated from the Dniprodzerzhynsk Metallurgical Technicum in 1935 and became a metallurgical engineer in the iron and steel industries of eastern Ukraine . 
 = = = Political development = = = 
 Brezhnev joined the Communist Party youth organisation , the Komsomol , in 1923 , and the Party itself in 1929 . In 1935 and 1936 , Brezhnev served his compulsory military service , and after taking courses at a tank school , he served as a political commissar in a tank factory . Later in 1936 , he became director of the Dniprodzerzhynsk Metallurgical Technicum ( technical college ) . In 1936 , he was transferred to the regional center of Dnipropetrovsk and , in 1939 , he became Party Secretary in Dnipropetrovsk , in charge of the city 's important defence industries . As a survivor of Stalin 's Great Purge of 1937 – 39 , he was able to advance quickly as the purges created numerous openings in the senior and middle ranks of the Party and state governments . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 When Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union on 22 June 1941 , Brezhnev was , like most middle @-@ ranking Party officials , immediately drafted . He worked to evacuate Dnipropetrovsk 's industries to the east of the Soviet Union before the city fell to the Germans on 26 August , and then was assigned as a political commissar . In October , Brezhnev was made deputy of political administration for the Southern Front , with the rank of Brigade @-@ Commissar ( Colonel ) . 
 When Ukraine was occupied by the Germans in 1942 , Brezhnev was sent to the Caucasus as deputy head of political administration of the Transcaucasian Front . In April 1943 , he became head of the Political Department of the 18th Army . Later that year , the 18th Army became part of the 1st Ukrainian Front , as the Red Army regained the initiative and advanced westward through Ukraine . The Front 's senior political commissar was Nikita Khrushchev , who had supported Brezhnev 's career since the pre @-@ war years . Brezhnev had met Khrushchev in 1931 , shortly after joining the Party , and before long , as he continued his rise through the ranks , he became Khrushchev 's protégé . At the end of the war in Europe , Brezhnev was chief political commissar of the 4th Ukrainian Front , which entered Prague in May 1945 , after the German surrender . 
 = = = Immediate post war = = = 
 Brezhnev temporarily left the Soviet Army with the rank of Major General in August 1946 . He had spent the entire war as a political commissar rather than a military commander . After working on reconstruction projects in Ukraine , he again became General Secretary in Dnipropetrovsk . In 1950 , he became a deputy of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union , the Soviet Union 's highest legislative body . Later that year he was appointed Party First Secretary in Moldavia . In 1952 , he had a meeting with Stalin after which Stalin promoted Brezhnev to the Communist Party 's Central Committee as a candidate member of the Presidium ( formerly the Politburo ) . 
 Stalin died in March 1953 , and in the reorganisation that followed , the Presidium was abolished and a smaller Politburo reconstituted . Although Brezhnev was not made a Politburo member , he was appointed head of the Political Directorate of the Army and the Navy with the rank of Lieutenant @-@ General , a very senior position . Brezhnev 's patron Khrushchev succeeded Stalin as General Secretary , while Khrushchev 's opponent Malenkov succeeded Stalin as Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet . Brezhnev sided with Khrushchev against Malenkov , but only for several years . On 7 May 1955 , Brezhnev was made General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Kazakh SSR . On the surface , his brief was simple : to make the new lands agriculturally productive . In reality , Brezhnev became involved in the development of the Soviet missile and nuclear arms programs , including the <unk> Cosmodrome . The initially successful Virgin Lands Campaign soon became unproductive and failed to solve the growing Soviet food crisis . Brezhnev was recalled to Moscow in 1956 . The harvest in the years following the Virgin Lands Campaign was disappointing , which would have hurt his political career had he remained in Kazakhstan . 
 In February 1956 , Brezhnev returned to Moscow , was made candidate member of the Politburo assigned in control of the defense industry , the space program including the <unk> Cosmodrome , heavy industry , and capital construction . He was now a senior member of Khrushchev 's entourage , and in June 1957 , he backed Khrushchev in his struggle with Malenkov 's Stalinist old guard in the Party leadership , the so @-@ called " Anti @-@ Party Group " . Following the defeat of the Stalinists , Brezhnev became a full member of the Politburo . Brezhnev became Second Secretary of the Central Committee in 1959 , and in May 1960 was promoted to the post of Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet , making him the nominal head of state , although the real power resided with Khrushchev as First Secretary of the Soviet Communist Party . In 1962 , Brezhnev became an honorary citizen of Belgrade . 
 = = = Removal of Khrushchev = = = 
 Until about 1962 , Khrushchev 's position as Party leader was secure ; but as the leader aged , he grew more erratic and his performance undermined the confidence of his fellow leaders . The Soviet Union 's mounting economic problems also increased the pressure on Khrushchev 's leadership . Outwardly , Brezhnev remained loyal to Khrushchev , but became involved in a 1963 plot to remove the leader from power , possibly playing a leading role . Also in 1963 , Brezhnev succeeded <unk> Kozlov , another Khrushchev protégé , as Secretary of the Central Committee , positioning him as Khrushchev 's likely successor . Khrushchev made him Second Secretary , literally deputy party leader , in 1964 . 
 After returning from Scandinavia and Czechoslovakia in October 1964 , Khrushchev , unaware of the plot , went on holiday in <unk> resort on the Black Sea . Upon his return , his Presidium officers congratulated him for his work in office . Anastas Mikoyan visited Khrushchev , hinting that he should not be too complacent about his present situation . Vladimir Semichastny , head of the KGB , was a crucial part of the conspiracy , as it was his duty to inform Khrushchev if anyone was plotting against his leadership . Nikolay <unk> , who had been sacked by Khrushchev , discreetly requested the opinion of several Central Committee members . After some false starts , fellow conspirator Mikhail Suslov phoned Khrushchev on 12 October and requested that he return to Moscow to discuss the state of Soviet agriculture . Finally Khrushchev understood what was happening , and said to Mikoyan , " If it 's me who is the question , I will not make a fight of it . " While a minority headed by Mikoyan wanted to remove Khrushchev from the office of First Secretary but retain him as the Chairman of the Council of Ministers , the majority , headed by Brezhnev , wanted to remove him from active politics altogether . 
 Brezhnev and Nikolai Podgorny appealed to the Central Committee , blaming Khrushchev for economic failures , and accusing him of voluntarism and immodest behavior . Influenced by the Brezhnev allies , Politburo members voted to remove Khrushchev from office . In addition , some members of the Central Committee wanted him to undergo punishment of some kind . But Brezhnev , who had already been assured the office of the General Secretary , saw little reason to punish his old mentor further . Brezhnev was appointed First Secretary , but at the time was believed to be a transition leader of sorts , who would only " keep the shop " until another leader was appointed . Alexei Kosygin was appointed head of government , and Mikoyan was retained as head of state . Brezhnev and his companions supported the general party line taken after Joseph Stalin 's death , but felt that Khrushchev 's reforms had removed much of the Soviet Union 's stability . One reason for Khrushchev 's ousting was that he continually overruled other party members , and was , according to the plotters , " in contempt of the party 's collective ideals " . Pravda , a newspaper in the Soviet Union , wrote of new enduring themes such as collective leadership , scientific planning , consultation with experts , organisational regularity and the ending of schemes . When Khrushchev left the public spotlight , there was no popular commotion , as most Soviet citizens , including the intelligentsia , anticipated a period of stabilisation , steady development of Soviet society and continuing economic growth in the years ahead . 
 = = Leader ( 1964 – 1982 ) = = 
 = = = Consolidation of power = = = 
 As Brezhnev replaced Khrushchev as the new General Secretary of the Communist Party , he held ultimate political authority as the leader of the Soviet Union . However , he shared collective leadership with Nikolai Podgorny ( the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet and nominal head of state ) and <unk> Kosygin , the Premier . Brezhnev soon would maximize his grip on power and would be the dominating authority in the collective leadership . Early policy reforms were seen as predictable . In 1964 , a plenum of the Central Committee forbade any single individual to hold the two most powerful posts of the country ( the office of the General Secretary and the Premier ) . Former Chairman of the State Committee for State Security ( KGB ) Alexander Shelepin disliked the new collective leadership and its reforms . He made a bid for the supreme leadership in 1965 by calling for restoration of " obedience and order " . Shelepin failed to gather support in the Presidium and Brezhnev 's position was fairly secure ; he was able to remove Shelepin from office in 1967 . 
 Khrushchev was removed mainly because of his disregard of many high @-@ ranking organisations within the CPSU and the Soviet government . Throughout the Brezhnev era , the Soviet Union was controlled by a collective leadership ( officially coined " <unk> of leadership " ) at least through the late 1960s and 1970s . The consensus within the party was that the collective leadership prevailed over the supreme leadership of one individual . T.H. Rigby argued that by the end of the 1960s , a stable oligarchic system had emerged in the Soviet Union , with most power vested around Brezhnev , Kosygin and Podgorny . While the assessment was true at the time , it coincided with Brezhnev 's strengthening of power by means of an apparent clash with Central Committee Secretariat Mikhail Suslov . American Henry A. Kissinger , in the 1960s , mistakenly believed Kosygin to be the dominant leader of Soviet foreign policy in the Politburo . During this period , Brezhnev was gathering enough support to strengthen his position within Soviet politics . In the meantime , Kosygin was in charge of economic administration in his role as Chairman of the Council of Ministers . Kosygin 's position was weakened when he proposed an economic reform in 1965 , which was widely referred to as the " Kosygin reform " within the Communist Party . The reform led to a backlash , and party conservatives continued to oppose Kosygin after witnessing the results of reforms leading up to the Prague Spring . His opponents then flocked to Brezhnev , and they helped him in his task of strengthening his position within the Soviet system . 
 Brezhnev was adept at the politics within the Soviet power structure . He was a team player and never acted rashly or hastily ; unlike Khrushchev , he did not make decisions without substantial consultation from his colleagues , and was always willing to hear their opinions . During the early 1970s , Brezhnev consolidated his domestic position . In 1977 , he forced the retirement of Podgorny and became once again Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union , making this position equivalent to that of an executive president . While Kosygin remained Premier until shortly before his death in 1980 ( replaced by Nikolai Tikhonov as Premier ) , Brezhnev was the dominant driving force of the Soviet Union from the mid @-@ 1970s to his death in 1982 . 
 = = = Domestic policies = = = 
 = = = = Repression = = = = 
 Brezhnev 's stabilisation policy included ending the liberalising reforms of Khrushchev , and clamping down on cultural freedom . During the Khrushchev years , Brezhnev had supported the leader 's denunciations of Stalin 's arbitrary rule , the rehabilitation of many of the victims of Stalin 's purges , and the cautious liberalisation of Soviet intellectual and cultural policy . But as soon as he became leader , Brezhnev began to reverse this process , and developed an increasingly conservative and regressive attitude . 
 The trial of the writers Yuli Daniel and Andrei <unk> in 1966 — the first such public trials since Stalin 's day — marked the reversion to a repressive cultural policy . Under Yuri Andropov the state security service ( in the form of the KGB ) regained some of the powers it had enjoyed under Stalin , although there was no return to the purges of the 1930s and 1940s , and Stalin 's legacy remained largely discredited among the Soviet intelligentsia . 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , there were an estimated 1 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 political and religious prisoners across the Soviet Union , living in grievous conditions and suffering from malnutrition . Many of these prisoners were considered by the Soviet state to be mentally unfit and were hospitalised in mental asylums across the Soviet Union . Under Brezhnev 's rule , the KGB infiltrated most , if not all , anti @-@ government organisations , which ensured that there was little to no opposition against him or his power base . However , Brezhnev refrained from the all @-@ out violence seen under the rule of Stalin . 
 = = = = Economics = = = = 
 = = = = = Economic growth until 1973 = = = = = 
 Between 1960 and 1970 , Soviet agriculture output increased by 3 % annually . Industry also improved ; during the Eighth Five @-@ Year Plan ( 1966 – 1970 ) , the output of factories and mines increased by 138 % , compared to 1960 . While the Politburo became aggressively anti @-@ reformist , Kosygin was able to convince both Brezhnev and the politburo to leave the reformist communist leader János Kádár of the People 's Republic of Hungary alone because of an economic reform entitled New Economic Mechanism ( <unk> ) , which granted limited permission for the establishment of retail markets . In the People 's Republic of Poland , another approach was taken in 1970 under the leadership of Edward Gierek ; he believed that the government needed Western loans to facilitate the rapid growth of heavy industry . The Soviet leadership gave its approval for this , as the Soviet Union could not afford to maintain its massive subsidy for the Eastern Bloc in the form of cheap oil and gas exports . The Soviet Union did not accept all kinds of reforms , an example being the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 in response to Alexander Dubček 's reforms . Under Brezhnev , the Politburo abandoned Khrushchev 's decentralisation experiments . By 1966 , two years after taking power , Brezhnev abolished the Regional Economic Councils , which were organized to manage the regional economies of the Soviet Union . 
 The Ninth Five @-@ Year Plan delivered a change : for the first time industrial consumer products out @-@ produced industrial capital goods . Consumer goods such as watches , furniture and radios were produced in abundance . The plan still left the bulk of the state 's investment in industrial capital @-@ goods production . This outcome was not seen as a positive sign for the future of the Soviet state by the majority of top party functionaries within the government ; by 1975 consumer goods were expanding 9 % slower than industrial capital @-@ goods . The policy continued despite Brezhnev 's commitment to make a rapid shift of investment to satisfy Soviet consumers and lead to an even higher standard of living . This did not happen . 
 During 1928 – 1973 , the Soviet Union was growing economically at a pace that would eventually catch up with the United States and Western Europe . This was true despite the advantage the United States had — the USSR was hampered by the effects of World War II , which had left most of Western USSR in ruins . In 1973 , the process of catching up with the rest of the West came to an abrupt end , and 1973 was seen by some scholars as the start of the Era of Stagnation . The beginning of the stagnation coincided with a financial crisis in Western Europe and the U.S. By the early 1970s , the Soviet Union had the world 's second largest industrial capacity , and produced more steel , oil , pig @-@ iron , cement and tractors than any other country . Before 1973 , the Soviet economy was expanding at a rate faster , by a small margin , than that of the United States . The USSR also kept a steady pace with the economies of Western Europe . Between 1964 and 1973 , the Soviet economy stood at roughly half the output per head of Western Europe and a little more than one third that of the U.S. 
 = = = = = Agricultural policy = = = = = 
 Brezhnev 's agricultural policy reinforced the conventional methods for organising the collective farms . Output quotas continued to be imposed centrally . Khrushchev 's policy of amalgamating farms was continued by Brezhnev , because he shared Khrushchev 's belief that bigger kolkhozes would increase productivity . Brezhnev pushed for an increase in state investments in farming , which mounted to an all @-@ time high in the 1970s of 27 % of all state investment – this figure did not include investments in farm equipment . In 1981 alone , 33 billion U.S. dollars ( by contemporary exchange rate ) was invested into agriculture . 
 Agricultural output in 1980 was 21 % higher than the average production rate between 1966 and 1970 . Cereal crop output increased by 18 % . These improved results were not encouraging . In the Soviet Union the criterion for assessing agricultural output was the grain harvest . The import of cereal , which began under Khrushchev , had in fact become a normal phenomenon by Soviet standards . When Brezhnev had difficulties sealing commercial trade agreements with the United States , he went elsewhere , such as to Argentina . Trade was necessary because the Soviet Union 's domestic production of fodder crops was severely deficient . Another sector that was hitting the wall was the sugar beet harvest , which had declined by 2 % in the 1970s . Brezhnev 's way of resolving these issues was to increase state investment . Politburo member Gennady Voronov advocated for the division of each farm 's work @-@ force into what he called " links " . These " links " would be entrusted with specific functions , such as to run a farm 's dairy unit . His argument was that the larger the work force , the less responsible they felt . This program had been proposed to Joseph Stalin by Andrey Andreyev in the 1940s , and had been opposed by Khrushchev before and after Stalin 's death . Voronov was also unsuccessful ; Brezhnev turned him down , and in 1973 he was removed from the Politburo . 
 Experimentation with " links " was not disallowed on a local basis , with Mikhail Gorbachev , the then First Secretary of the Stavropol Regional Committee , experimenting with links in his region . In the meantime , the Soviet government 's involvement in agriculture was , according to Robert Service , otherwise " unimaginative " and " incompetent " . Facing mounting problems with agriculture , the Politburo issued a resolution titled ; " On the Further Development of <unk> and Concentration of Agricultural Production on the Basis of Inter @-@ Farm Co @-@ operation and Agro @-@ Industrial Integration " . The resolution ordered kolkhozes close to each other to collaborate in their efforts to increase production . In the meantime , the state 's subsidies to the food @-@ and @-@ agriculture sector did not prevent bankrupt farms from operating : rises in the price of produce were offset by rises in the cost of oil and other resources . By 1977 , oil cost 84 % more than it did in the late 1960s . The cost of other resources had also climbed by the late 1970s . 
 Brezhnev 's answer to these problems was to issue two decrees , one in 1977 and one in 1981 , which called for an increase in the maximum size of privately owned plots within the Soviet Union to half a hectare . These measures removed important obstacles for the expansion of agricultural output , but did not solve the problem . Under Brezhnev , private plots yielded 30 % of the national agricultural production when they only cultivated 4 % of the land . This was seen by some as proof that de @-@ collectivisation was necessary to prevent Soviet agriculture from collapsing , but leading Soviet politicians shrank from supporting such drastic measures due to ideological and political interests . The underlying problems were the growing shortage of skilled workers , a wrecked rural culture , the payment of workers in proportion to the quantity rather than the quality of their work , too large farm machinery for the small collective farms and the roadless countryside . In the face of this , Brezhnev 's only options were schemes such as large land reclamation and irrigation projects , or of course , radical reform . 
 = = = = = Economic stagnation = = = = = 
 The Era of Stagnation , a term coined by Mikhail Gorbachev , was seen as the result of a compilation of factors , including the ongoing " arms race " between the two superpowers , the Soviet Union and the United States ; the decision of the Soviet Union to participate in international trade ( thus abandoning the idea of economic isolation ) while ignoring the changes occurring in Western societies ; the increasing harshness of its policies , such as sending Soviet tanks to crush the Prague Spring in 1968 ; the intervention in Afghanistan ; the stifling domestic bureaucracy overseen by a cadre of elderly men ; the lack of economic reform ; the political corruption , supply bottlenecks , and other unaddressed structural problems with the economy under Brezhnev 's rule . Social stagnation domestically was stimulated by the growing demands of unskilled workers , labour shortages and a decline in productivity and labour discipline . While Brezhnev , albeit " sporadically " , through Alexei Kosygin , attempted to reform the economy in the late 1960s and 1970s , he ultimately failed to produce any positive results . One of these reforms was the economic reform of 1965 , initiated by Kosygin , though its origins are often traced back to the Khrushchev Era . The reform was cancelled by the Central Committee , though the Committee admitted that economic problems did exist . 
 In 1973 , the Soviet economy slowed , and began to lag behind that of the West due to the high level of expenditure on the armed forces and too little spending on light industry and consumer goods . Soviet agriculture could not feed the urban population , let alone provide for the rising standard of living , which the government promised as the fruits of " mature socialism " , and on which industrial productivity depended . One of the most prominent critics of Brezhnev 's economical policies was Mikhail Gorbachev who , when leader , called the economy under Brezhnev 's rule " the lowest stage of socialism " . Soviet GNP growth rates began to decrease in the 1970s from the level it held in the 1950s and 1960s ; its growth rates began to lag behind Western Europe and the United States . The GNP growth rate was slowing to 1 % to 2 % per year , and with Soviet technology falling ever farther behind that of the West , the Soviet Union was facing economic stagnation by the early 1980s . During Brezhnev 's last years in power , the CIA monitored the Soviet Union 's economic growth , and reported that the Soviet economy peaked in the 1970s , calculating that it had then reached 57 % of the American GNP . The development gap between the two nations widened , with the United States growing an average of 1 % per year above the growth rate of the Soviet Union . 
 The last significant reform undertaken by the Kosygin government , and some believe the pre @-@ perestroika era , was a joint decision of the Central Committee and the Council of Ministers named " Improving planning and reinforcing the effects of the economic mechanism on raising the effectiveness in production and improving the quality of work " , more commonly known as the 1979 reform . The reform , in contrast to the 1965 reform , sought to increase the central government 's economic involvement by enhancing the duties and responsibilities of the ministries . With Kosygin 's death in 1980 , and due to his successor Nikolai Tikhonov 's conservative approach to economics , very little of the reform was actually carried out . 
 The Eleventh Five @-@ Year Plan of the Soviet Union delivered a disappointing result : a change in growth from 5 to 4 % . During the earlier Tenth Five @-@ Year Plan , they had tried to meet the target of 6 @.@ 1 % growth , but failed . Brezhnev was able to defer economic collapse by trading with Western Europe and the Arab World . The Soviet Union still out @-@ produced the United States in the heavy industry sector during the Brezhnev era . Another dramatic result of Brezhnev 's rule was that certain Eastern Bloc countries became more economically advanced than the Soviet Union . 
 = = = = Society = = = = 
 Over the eighteen years that Brezhnev ruled the Soviet Union , average income per head increased by half ; three @-@ quarters of this growth came in the 1960s and early 1970s . During the second half of Brezhnev 's reign , average income per head grew by one @-@ quarter . In the first half of the Brezhnev period , income per head increased by 3 @.@ 5 % per annum ; slightly less growth than what it had been the previous years . This can be explained by Brezhnev 's reversal of most of Khrushchev 's policies . Consumption per head rose by an estimated 70 % under Brezhnev , but with three @-@ quarters of this growth happening before 1973 and only one @-@ quarter in the second half of his rule . Most of the increase in consumer production in the early Brezhnev era can be attributed to the Kosygin reform . 
 When the USSR 's economic growth stalled in the 1970s , the standard of living and housing quality improved significantly . Instead of paying more attention to the economy , the Soviet leadership under Brezhnev tried to improve the living standard in the Soviet Union by extending social benefits . This led to an increase , though a minor one , in public support . The standard of living in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic ( RSFSR ) had fallen behind that of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic ( <unk> ) and the Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic ( <unk> ) under Brezhnev ; this led many Russians to believe that the policies of the Soviet Government were hurting the Russian population . The state usually moved workers from one job to another , which ultimately became an <unk> feature in Soviet industry . Government industries such as factories , mines and offices were staffed by undisciplined personnel who put a great effort into not doing their jobs ; this ultimately led , according to Robert Service , to a " work @-@ shy workforce " . The Soviet Government had no effective counter @-@ measure because of the country 's lack of unemployment . 
 While some areas improved during the Brezhnev era , the majority of civilian services deteriorated and living conditions for Soviet citizens fell rapidly . Diseases were on the rise because of the decaying healthcare system . The living space remained rather small by First World standards , with the average Soviet person living on 13 @.@ 4 square metres . Thousands of Moscow inhabitants became homeless , most of them living in shacks , doorways and parked trams . Nutrition ceased to improve in the late 1970s , while rationing of staple food products returned to Sverdlovsk for instance . 
 The state provided recreation facilities and annual holidays for hard @-@ working citizens . Soviet trade unions rewarded hard @-@ working members and their families with beach vacations in Crimea and Georgia . 
 Social <unk> became a common feature of Soviet society . During the Stalin era in the 1930s and 1940s , a common labourer could expect promotion to a white @-@ collar job if he studied and obeyed Soviet authorities . In Brezhnev 's Soviet Union this was not the case . Holders of attractive positions clung to them as long as possible ; mere incompetence was not seen as a good reason to dismiss anyone . In this way , too , the Soviet society Brezhnev passed on had become static . 
 = = = Foreign and defence policies = = = 
 = = = = Soviet – U.S. relations = = = = 
 During his eighteen years as Leader of the USSR , Brezhnev 's only major foreign policy innovation was détente . This did not differ much from the Khrushchev Thaw , a domestic and foreign policy relaxation started by Nikita Khrushchev . Historian Robert Service sees détente simply as a continuation of Khrushchev 's foreign policy . Despite some increased tension under Khrushchev , East – West relations had generally improved , as evidenced by the Partial Test Ban Treaty , and the installation of the red telephone line between the White House and the Kremlin . But Brezhnev 's détente policy differed from that of Khrushchev in two ways . The first was that it was more comprehensive and wide @-@ ranging in its aims , and included signing agreements on arms control , crisis prevention , East – West trade , European security and human rights . The second part of the policy was based on the importance of equalising the military strength of the United States and the Soviet Union . Defence spending under Brezhnev between 1965 and 1970 increased by 40 % , and annual increases continued thereafter . In the year of Brezhnev 's death in 1982 , 15 % of GNP was spent on the military . 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , it had become clear that Henry Kissinger 's policy of détente towards the Soviet Union had failed . The détente had rested on the assumption that a " linkage " of some type could be found between the two countries , with the U.S. hoping that the signing of SALT I and an increase in Soviet – U.S. trade would stop the aggressive growth of communism in the third world . This did not happen , and the Soviet Union started funding the communist guerillas who fought actively against the U.S. during the Vietnam War . The U.S. ended the Vietnam War in a stalemate and lost Cambodia , Laos and Vietnam to communism . After Gerald Ford lost the presidential election to Jimmy Carter , American foreign policies became more hostile towards the Soviet Union and the communist world , though attempts were also made to stop funding for some repressive anti @-@ communist governments the United States supported . While at first standing for a decrease in all defense initiatives , the later years of Carter 's presidency would increase spending on the U.S. military . 
 In the 1970s , the Soviet Union reached the peak of its political and strategic power in relation to the United States . The first SALT Treaty effectively established parity in nuclear weapons between the two superpowers , the Helsinki Treaty legitimised Soviet hegemony over Eastern Europe , and the United States defeat in Vietnam and the Watergate scandal weakened the prestige of the United States . Brezhnev and Nixon also agreed to pass the Anti @-@ Ballistic Missile Treaty , which banned both countries from designing systems that would intercept incoming missiles so that neither the U.S. or the Soviet Union would be tempted to strike the other without the fear of retaliation . The Soviet Union extended its diplomatic and political influence in the Middle East and Africa . 
 = = = = = The Vietnam War = = = = = 
 Nikita Khrushchev had initially supported North Vietnam out of " fraternal solidarity " , but as the war escalated he had urged the North Vietnamese leadership to give up the quest of liberating South Vietnam . He continued by rejecting an offer of assistance made by the North Vietnamese government , and instead told them to enter negotiations in the United Nations Security Council . After Khrushchev 's ousting , Brezhnev resumed aiding the communist resistance in Vietnam . In February 1965 , Kosygin travelled to Hanoi with a dozen Soviet air force generals and economic experts . During the Soviet visit , President Lyndon B. Johnson had authorised U.S. bombing raids on North Vietnamese soil in retaliation for a recent attack by the Viet Cong . Johnson privately suggested to Brezhnev that he would guarantee an end to South Vietnamese hostility if Brezhnev would guarantee a North Vietnamese one . Brezhnev was interested in this offer initially , but after being told by Andrei Gromyko that the North Vietnamese government was not interested in a diplomatic solution to the war , Brezhnev rejected the offer . The Johnson administration responded to this rejection by expanding the American presence in Vietnam , but later invited the USSR to negotiate a treaty concerning arms control . The USSR simply did not respond , initially because Brezhnev and Kosygin were fighting over which of them had the right to represent the USSR abroad , but later because of the escalation of the " dirty war " in Vietnam . In early 1967 , Johnson offered to make a deal with Ho Chi Minh , and said he was prepared to end U.S. bombing raids in North Vietnam if Ho ended his infiltration of South Vietnam . The U.S. bombing raids halted for a few days and Kosygin publicly announced his support for this offer . The North Vietnamese government failed to respond , and because of this , the U.S. continued its raids in North Vietnam . The Brezhnev leadership concluded from this event that seeking diplomatic solutions to the ongoing war in Vietnam was hopeless . Later in 1968 , Johnson invited Kosygin to the United States to discuss ongoing problems in Vietnam and the arms race . The summit was marked by a friendly atmosphere , but there were no concrete breakthroughs by either side . 
 In the aftermath of the Sino – Soviet border conflict , the Chinese continued to aid the North Vietnamese regime , but with the death of Ho Chi Minh in 1969 , China 's strongest link to Vietnam was gone . In the meantime , Richard Nixon had been elected President of the United States . While having been known for his anti @-@ communist rhetoric , Nixon said in 1971 that the U.S. " must have relations with Communist China " . His plan was for a slow withdrawal of U.S. troops from Vietnam , while still retaining the government of South Vietnam . The only way he thought this was possible was by improving relations with both Communist China and the USSR . He later made a visit to Moscow to negotiate a treaty on arms control and the Vietnam war , but on Vietnam nothing could be agreed . On his visit to Moscow , Nixon and Brezhnev signed the SALT I , marking the beginning of the " détente " era , which would be proclaimed a " new era of peaceful coexistence " that would replace the hostility that existed during the Cold War . 
 = = = = Sino – Soviet relations = = = = 
 Soviet foreign relations with the People 's Republic of China quickly deteriorated after Nikita Khrushchev 's attempts to reach a rapprochement with more liberal Eastern European states such as Yugoslavia and the west . When Brezhnev consolidated his power base in the 1960s , China was descending into crisis because of Mao Zedong 's Cultural Revolution , which led to the decimation of the Communist Party of China and other ruling offices . The Brezhnev leadership who promoted the idea of " stabilisation " , could not comprehend why Mao would start such a " self @-@ destructive " drive to finish the socialist revolution , according to himself . At the same time , Brezhnev had problems of his own , the Czechoslovakian leadership were also deviating from the Soviet model . In the aftermath of the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia , the Soviet leadership proclaimed the Brezhnev doctrine , which said the USSR had the right to intervene in any fraternal communist state that did not follow the Soviet model . This doctrine increased tension not only with the Eastern Bloc , but also the Asian communist states . By 1969 relations with other communist countries had deteriorated to a level where Brezhnev was not even able to gather five of the fourteen ruling communist parties to attend an international conference in Moscow . In the aftermath of the failed conference , the Soviets concluded , " there were no leading center of the international communist movement . " 
 Later in 1969 , Chinese forces started the Sino – Soviet border conflict . The Sino – Soviet split had chagrined Premier Alexei Kosygin a great deal , and for a while he refused to accept its <unk> ; he briefly visited Beijing in 1969 due to the increase of tension between the USSR and China . By the early 1980s , both the Chinese and the Soviets were issuing statements calling for a normalisation of relations between the two states . The conditions given to the Soviets by the Chinese were the reduction of Soviet military presence in the Sino – Soviet border and the withdrawal of Soviets troops in Afghanistan and the Mongolian People 's Republic and to end their support for the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia . Brezhnev responded in his March 1982 speech in Tashkent where he called for the normalisation of relations . Full Sino – Soviet <unk> of relations would prove to take years , until the last Soviet ruler , Mikhail Gorbachev came to power . 
 = = = = Intervention in Afghanistan = = = = 
 After the communist revolution in Afghanistan in 1978 , authoritarian actions forced upon the populace by the Communist regime led to the Afghan civil war , with the mujahideen leading the popular backlash against the regime . The Soviet Union was worried that they were losing their influence in Central Asia , so after a KGB report claimed that Afghanistan could be taken in a matter of weeks , Brezhnev and several top party officials agreed to a full intervention in Afghanistan . 
 Parts of the Soviet military establishment were opposed to any sort of active Soviet military presence in Afghanistan , believing that the Soviet Union should leave Afghan politics alone . President Carter , following the advice of his National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski , denounced the intervention , describing it as the " most serious danger to peace since 1945 " . The U.S. stopped all grain exports to the Soviet Union and boycotted the 1980 Summer Olympics held in Moscow . The Soviet Union responded by boycotting the 1984 Summer Olympics held in Los Angeles . 
 = = = = Eastern Europe = = = = 
 The first crisis for Brezhnev 's regime came in 1968 , with the attempt by the Communist leadership in Czechoslovakia , under Alexander Dubček , to liberalise the Communist system ( Prague Spring ) . In July , Brezhnev publicly criticised the Czechoslovak leadership as " revisionist " and " anti @-@ Soviet " , and in August he orchestrated the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia , and Dubček 's removal . The invasion led to public protests by dissidents in various Eastern Bloc countries . Brezhnev 's assertion that the Soviet Union had the right to interfere in the internal affairs of its satellites to " safeguard socialism " became known as the Brezhnev Doctrine , although it was really a restatement of existing Soviet policy , as enacted by Khrushchev in Hungary in 1956 . In the aftermath of the invasion , Brezhnev reiterated it in a speech at the Fifth Congress of the Polish United Workers ' Party on 13 November 1968 : 
 When forces that are hostile to socialism try to turn the development of some socialist country towards capitalism , it becomes not only a problem of the country concerned , but a common problem and concern of all socialist countries . 
 When the situation in Czechoslovakia was discussed with the Politburo , Brezhnev was not the one pushing hardest for the use of military force . Brezhnev was aware of the dire situation he was in , and if he had abstained or voted against Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia he may have been faced with growing turmoil — domestically and in the Eastern Bloc . Archival evidence suggests that Brezhnev was one of the few who was looking for a temporary compromise with the reform @-@ friendly Czechoslovak government when their relationship was at the brink . Significant voices in the Soviet leadership demanded the re @-@ installation of a so @-@ called ' revolutionary government ' . After the military intervention in 1968 , Brezhnev met with Czechoslovak reformer Bohumil Simon , then a member of the Politburo of the Czechoslovak Communist Party , and said , " If I had not voted for Soviet armed assistance to Czechoslovakia you would not be sitting here today , but quite possibly I wouldn 't either . " 
 In 1980 a political crisis emerged in Poland with the emergence of the Solidarity mass movement . By the end of October , Solidarity had 3 million members , and by December , had 9 million . In a public opinion poll organised by the Polish government , 89 % of the respondents supported Solidarity . With the Polish leadership split on what to do , the majority did not want to impose martial law , as suggested by Wojciech Jaruzelski . The Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc was unsure how to handle the situation , but Erich Honecker of East Germany pressed for military action . In a formal letter to Brezhnev , Honecker proposed a joint military measure to control the escalating problems in Poland . A CIA report suggested the Soviet military were mobilising for an invasion . 
 In 1980 @-@ 81 representatives from the Eastern Bloc nations met at the Kremlin to discuss the Polish situation . Brezhnev eventually concluded on 10 December 1981 that it would be better to leave the domestic matters of Poland alone , reassuring the Polish delegates that the USSR would intervene only if asked to . This effectively marked the end of the Brezhnev Doctrine . With domestic matters escalating out of control in Poland , Wojciech Jaruzelski imposed a state of war , the Polish version of martial law , on 12 December 1981 . 
 = = = Cult of personality = = = 
 The last years of Brezhnev 's rule were marked by a growing personality cult . His love of medals ( he received over 100 ) , was well known , so in December 1966 , on his 60th birthday , he was awarded the Hero of the Soviet Union . Brezhnev received the award , which came with the Order of Lenin and the Gold Star , three more times in celebration of his birthdays . On his 70th birthday he was awarded the rank of Marshal of the Soviet Union – the highest military honour in the Soviet Union . After being awarded the medal , he attended an 18th Army Veterans meeting , dressed in a long coat and saying ; " Attention , Marshal 's coming ! " He also conferred upon himself the rare Order of Victory in 1978 — the only time the decoration was ever awarded outside of World War II . ( This medal was posthumously revoked in 1989 for not meeting the criteria for citation . ) 
 Brezhnev 's weakness for undeserved medals was proven by his poorly written memoirs recalling his military service during World War II , which treated the little @-@ known and minor Battle of Novorossiysk as the decisive military theatre . Despite the apparent weaknesses of his memoirs , they were awarded the Lenin Prize for Literature and were met with critical acclaim by the Soviet press . The book was followed by two other books , one on the Virgin Lands Campaign . Brezhnev 's vanity made him the victim of many political jokes . Nikolai Podgorny warned him of this , but Brezhnev replied , " If they are poking fun at me , it means they like me . " It is now believed by Western historians and political analysts that the books were written by some of his " court writers " . 
 In keeping with traditional socialist greetings , Brezhnev kissed many politicians during his career , the most memorable instance being the Erich Honecker kiss . 
 = = = Health problems = = = 
 Brezhnev 's personality cult was growing outrageously at a time when his health was in rapid decline . His physical condition was deteriorating ; he was a lifelong heavy smoker , he had become addicted to sleeping pills , and had begun drinking to excess . Over the years he had become overweight . From 1973 until his death , Brezhnev 's central nervous system underwent chronic deterioration and he had several minor strokes as well as insomnia . In 1975 he suffered his first heart attack . When receiving the Order of Lenin , Brezhnev walked shakily and fumbled his words . According to one American intelligence expert , United States officials knew for several years that Brezhnev had suffered from severe arteriosclerosis and believed he had suffered from other unspecified ailments as well . In 1977 American intelligence officials publicly suggested that Brezhnev had also been suffering from gout , leukemia and emphysema . He was reported to have been fitted with a pacemaker to control his heart rhythm abnormalities . Yevgeniy <unk> , the Chief of the Fourth Directorate of the Ministry of Health , had to keep doctors by Brezhnev 's side at all times , and Brezhnev was brought back from near @-@ death on several occasions . At this time , most senior officers of the CPSU wanted to keep Brezhnev alive , even if such men as Mikhail Suslov , Dmitriy Ustinov and Andrei Gromyko , among others , were growing increasingly frustrated with his policies . They did not want to risk a new period of domestic turmoil that might be caused by his death . At about this time First World commentators started guessing Brezhnev 's heirs apparent . The most notable candidates were Suslov and Andrei Kirilenko , who were both older than Brezhnev , and Fyodor Kulakov and Konstantin Chernenko , who were younger ; Kulakov died of natural causes in 1978 . 
 = = = Last years and death = = = 
 For the last two years Brezhnev was only a figurehead . His health worsened in the winter of 1981 – 82 . In the meantime , the country was governed by Andrei Gromyko , Dmitriy Ustinov , Mikhail Suslov and Yuri Andropov while crucial Politburo decisions were made in his absence . While the Politburo was pondering the question of who would succeed , all signs indicated that the ailing leader was dying . The choice of the successor would have been influenced by Suslov , but he died at the age of 79 in January 1982 . Andropov took Suslov 's seat in the Central Committee Secretariat ; by May , it became obvious that Andropov would try to make a bid for the office of the General Secretary . He , with the help of fellow KGB associates , started circulating rumours that political corruption had become worse during Brezhnev 's tenure as leader , in an attempt to create an environment hostile to Brezhnev in the Politburo . Andropov 's actions showed that he was not afraid of Brezhnev 's wrath . 
 Brezhnev rarely appeared in public during 1982 . The Soviet government claimed that Brezhnev was not seriously ill , but admitted that he was surrounded by doctors . He suffered a severe stroke in May 1982 , but refused to relinquish office . On 7 November 1982 , despite his failing health , Brezhnev was present standing on Lenin 's Mausoleum during the annual military parade and demonstration of workers commemorating the anniversary of the October Revolution . The event would also mark Brezhnev 's final public appearance before dying three days later after suffering a heart attack . He was honoured with a state funeral , which was followed with a five @-@ day period of nationwide mourning . He was buried in the Kremlin Wall Necropolis in Red Square . National and international statesmen from around the globe attended his funeral . His wife and family attended ; his daughter Galina Brezhneva outraged spectators by not showing up in sombre garb . Brezhnev on the other hand was dressed for burial in his Marshal 's uniform , along with all his medals . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Brezhnev presided over the Soviet Union for longer than any other person except Joseph Stalin . He is often criticised for the prolonged Era of Stagnation , in which fundamental economic problems were ignored and the Soviet political system was allowed to decline . During Mikhail Gorbachev 's tenure as leader there was an increase in criticism of the Brezhnev years , such as claims that Brezhnev followed " a fierce neo @-@ Stalinist line " . The <unk> discourse blamed Brezhnev for failing to modernise the country and to change with the times , although in a later statement Gorbachev made assurances that Brezhnev was not as bad as he was made out to be , saying , " Brezhnev was nothing like the cartoon figure that is made of him now . " The intervention in Afghanistan , which was one of the major decisions of his career , also significantly undermined both the international standing and the internal strength of the Soviet Union . In Brezhnev 's defence , it can be said that the Soviet Union reached unprecedented and never @-@ repeated levels of power , prestige , and internal calm under his rule . 
 Brezhnev has fared well in opinion polls when compared to his successors and predecessors in Russia . In the West he is most commonly remembered for starting the economic stagnation that triggered the dissolution of the Soviet Union . In an opinion poll by VTsIOM in 2007 the majority of Russians chose to live during the Brezhnev era rather than any other period of 20th century Soviet history . In a Levada Center poll conducted in 2013 , Brezhnev beat Vladimir Lenin as Russia 's favourite leader in the 20th century with 56 % approval . In another poll in 2013 , Brezhnev was voted the best Russian leader of the 20th century . 
 = = Personality traits and family = = 
 Brezhnev 's vanity became a problem during his reign . For instance , when Moscow City Party Secretary Nikolay <unk> refused to sing his praises , he was shunned , forced out of local politics and given only an obscure ambassadorship . Brezhnev 's main passion was driving foreign cars given to him by leaders of state from across the world . He usually drove these between his dacha and the Kremlin with , according to historian Robert Service , flagrant disregard for public safety . 
 Brezhnev lived at 26 <unk> Prospekt , Moscow . During vacations , he lived in his <unk> in <unk> . He was married to Viktoria Brezhneva ( 1908 – 1995 ) . During her final four years she lived virtually alone , abandoned by everybody . She had suffered for a long time from diabetes and was nearly blind in her last years . He had a daughter , Galina , and a son , Yuri . Galina in her later life became an alcoholic who together with a circus director started a gold @-@ bullion fraud gang in the later years of the Soviet Union . 
 = Special Air Service Regiment = 
 The Special Air Service Regiment , officially abbreviated SASR though commonly known as the SAS , is an elite special operations force of the Australian Army . Formed in 1957 , it was originally modelled on the British SAS sharing the motto , " Who Dares Wins " , and draws on the experiences of Australian Services Reconnaissance Department , independent companies , Coastwatchers and M and Z Special Units during World War II . Based at Campbell Barracks , in Swanbourne , a suburb of Perth , Western Australia , the regiment is a direct command unit of the Special Operations Command . It has been involved in operations in Borneo during the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation , the Vietnam War , Somalia , Kuwait , East Timor , Iraq and Afghanistan , as well as many other peacekeeping missions . It also provides a counter @-@ terrorist capability , and has been involved in a number of domestic security operations . 
 = = Role = = 
 = = = Tasks and capabilities = = = 
 A direct command unit of Special Operations Command , the Special Air Service Regiment ( SASR ) is a special forces unit of the Australian Army and " is tasked to provide special @-@ operations capabilities in support of the Australian Defence Force . This includes providing unique capabilities to support sensitive strategic operations , special recovery operations , advisory and training assistance , special reconnaissance , precision strike and direct action " . The SASR is primarily structured to conduct covert long @-@ range reconnaissance and surveillance in small teams in enemy @-@ controlled territory , while commando units are utilised to conduct raids in larger groups . In addition to warfighting during conventional conflicts , the regiment is also tasked with maintaining a specialist counter @-@ terrorist capability . Other capabilities include training local or indigenous forces , recovery of Australian citizens and humanitarian assistance . The SASR is also trained in counter @-@ insurgency operations . 
 = = = Warfighting and special reconnaissance = = = 
 In the long @-@ range reconnaissance role , the SASR typically operates in small patrols of between five and six operators with the task of infiltrating enemy @-@ held territory and providing intelligence on enemy activities and capabilities . During such tasks the SASR seeks to evade rather than confront the enemy . SASR soldiers also direct fire support including air strikes to destroy enemy installations and disrupt or kill enemy forces whenever possible . SASR reconnaissance patrols can be inserted by air ( either by helicopter , standard parachute or HALO ) , land ( on foot or by vehicle ) or sea ( including by submarine , small boats , canoes or closed @-@ circuit breathing apparatus ) and have proven capable of covering large distances and staying concealed in jungle , desert and mountain terrain . SASR patrols may also conduct sabotage and short @-@ duration raids on high @-@ value targets , including headquarters , airfields and communications nodes . 
 = = = Counter @-@ terrorism and special recovery = = = 
 One of the primary roles of the regiment is to provide a counter @-@ terrorist capability , with an element of the SASR forming Australia 's domestic Tactical Assault Group ( West ) , while the 2nd Commando Regiment provides Tactical Assault Group ( East ) . TAG West maintains a short @-@ notice capability to conduct military operations beyond the scope of state and federal police tactical groups . Offensive counter @-@ terrorist operations may include direct action and hostage recovery . A capability to board ships whilst underway and off @-@ shore oil platforms is also maintained . The TAG is kept at high readiness for a period of 12 months , before being replaced by another squadron in this role . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The SASR draws on the experiences of the Australian Services Reconnaissance Department , independent companies , Coastwatchers and M and Z Special Units which operated in the South West Pacific Area against the Japanese during World War II . These units had been disbanded soon after the war as part of the demobilisation of the Australian military ; however , after observing the operations of the British Special Air Service during the Malayan Emergency in the 1950s the Australian Army decided to raise its own SAS unit . The 1st Special Air Service Company was established on 25 July 1957 at Swanbourne , a suburb of Perth , Western Australia , with a strength of 16 officers and 144 other ranks . In 1960 , the company became part of the Royal Australian Regiment ( RAR ) and was given the responsibility for commando and special forces operations . As part of the pentropic organisation adopted by the Australian Army at the time , the regiment 's primary wartime role was divisional @-@ level reconnaissance . On 20 August 1964 , the SAS gained regimental status and was expanded to two sabre squadrons and a headquarters , severing the link with the RAR . The raising of a third squadron was approved on 30 April 1965 as part of an overall expansion of the Australian Army . 
 = = = Borneo = = = 
 The SASR first saw action in 1965 as part of the British Commonwealth force stationed in north Borneo during the Indonesian Confrontation . The Australian SASR troopers operated alongside their British and New Zealand counterparts in operations aimed at stopping Indonesian infiltration into Malaysia , taking part in Operation Claret . 1 Squadron conducted reconnaissance patrols in Sarawak from February to July 1965 , and conducted cross @-@ border operations between May and July . They suffered their first fatality on 2 June when a soldier was gored by an elephant . 1 Squadron completed operations on 1 August and returned to Australia . 2 Squadron arrived in Borneo in January 1966 for a four @-@ month deployment , and despite the suspension of Claret operations it also conducted reconnaissance patrols and cross @-@ border operations , undertaking a total of 45 patrols on both sides of the border . On 19 March two soldiers drowned during a river crossing . On 21 July , 2 Squadron was relieved by a British SAS squadron and returned to Australia in August . Despite often being deployed in the reconnaissance role , the SASR killed at least 20 Indonesian soldiers in a series of ambushes and contacts . Three SASR soldiers were killed during these operations . 
 = = = Vietnam = = = 
 Based in Nui Dat the SASR was responsible for providing intelligence to both the 1st Australian Task Force ( 1 ATF ) and US forces , operating throughout Phuoc Tuy Province as well as Bien Hoa , Long Khanh and Binh Tuy provinces . From 1966 SASR squadrons rotated through Vietnam on year @-@ long deployments , with each of the three Sabre Squadrons completing two tours before the last squadron was withdrawn in 1971 . Missions included medium range reconnaissance patrols , observation of enemy troop movements , and long range offensive operations and ambushing in enemy dominated territory . Operating in small groups of four to six men they moved slower than conventional infantry through jungle or bushland and were heavily armed , employing a high rate of fire to simulate a larger force on contact and to support their withdrawal . The primary method of deployment was by helicopter , with the SASR working closely with No. 9 Squadron RAAF which regularly provided rapid and precise insertion and extraction of patrols into jungle landing zones at tree top height . On occasion SAS patrols would also be deployed by M @-@ 113 armored personnel carriers ( APCs ) with a method devised to deceive the Viet Cong as to their insertion and the location of their drop @-@ off point despite the noise they made moving through the jungle . An operational parachute jump was also undertaken . 
 A fourth squadron was raised in mid @-@ 1966 , but was later disbanded in April 1967 . The SASR operated closely with the New Zealand SAS , with a troop being attached to each Australian squadron from late 1968 . Completing its final tour in October 1971 , 2 Squadron was disbanded on return to Australia , with Training Squadron raised in its place . During its time in Vietnam the SASR proved highly successful , with members of the regiment known to the Viet Cong as Ma Rung or " phantoms of the jungle " due to their stealth . In a six @-@ year period the Australian and New Zealand SAS in Vietnam conducted nearly 1 @,@ 200 patrols and inflicted heavy casualties on the Viet Cong , including 492 killed , 106 possibly killed , 47 wounded , 10 possibly wounded and 11 prisoners captured . Their own losses totalled one killed in action , one died of wounds , three accidentally killed , one missing and one death from illness . Twenty @-@ eight men were wounded . During the period of its deployment 580 men served in the SASR in Vietnam . The remains of the last Australian soldier who went missing in action in 1969 after falling into the jungle during a suspended rope extraction were found in August 2008 . Australian SASR personnel also worked with US Army Special Forces in Vietnam , and provided instructors to the MACV <unk> School , and then to the <unk> Training Wing at the AATTV @-@ operated Van Kiep Training Centre from 1967 . Some members of the regiment also served with MACV @-@ SOG units , with soldiers often serving on exchange with American Special Forces . 
 = = = Defence of Australia and counter @-@ terrorism = = = 
 The Australian withdrawal from Vietnam brought to an end the doctrine of ' forward defence ' through involvement in Southeast Asian wars . Instead , the Australian military 's new focus was on the defence of continental Australia against external attack . In line with this change , the SASR took the lead in developing the Australian Army 's capability to conduct patrol operations in Northern Australia , although this role was later taken over by the Army 's three Regional Force Surveillance Units following their formation in the early 1980s . During this time the SASR also continued to train overseas with other special forces units . On one such exercise in the Philippines , a US special forces C @-@ 130 Hercules crashed into the South China Sea shortly after take @-@ off from Subic Bay on 26 February 1981 , killing 23 passengers including three Australians from the SASR , as well as a number of Americans , Filipinos , and New Zealanders . Meanwhile , following the Sydney Hilton bombing in February 1978 , the SASR was given responsibility for providing Australia 's military counter @-@ terrorism response force , for which 2 Squadron was raised again in 1982 . In addition to being able to respond to terrorist attacks in Australian cities , the SASR counter @-@ terrorism unit was required to develop a capability to board ships underway and off @-@ shore oil platforms . In May 1987 a squadron from the SASR was alerted for a possible deployment to Fiji as part of Operation Morris Dance , but did not leave Australia . The regiment was not involved in operations during the Gulf War in 1991 although two troops were again placed on standby for deployment at short notice , while other elements remained on high alert to respond to a terrorist incident in Australia if required . 
 = = = Peacekeeping = = = 
 The first SASR units to deploy on active service after the Vietnam War did so as part of Australian peacekeeping deployments . Small numbers of SAS personnel were involved in Operation Habitat in Turkey and Northern Iraq as medics to assist Kurdish refugees between May and June 1991 . Personnel were also provided by the regiment as part of the Australian contribution to the UN Special Commission established to oversee the destruction of Iraq 's weapons of mass destruction between 1991 and 2000 . SASR medics deployed with some of the weapons inspection teams , and at times were also employed as drivers and for " personal protection " tasks . Several SAS signallers from 152 Signal Squadron also deployed to the Western Sahara between September 1991 and May 1994 as part of the Australian contingent there . Contrary to some reports , the SASR did not provide a security team for service in Cambodia although some SASR @-@ qualified signals sergeants from 152 Signal Squadron were deployed as part of the Australian military contribution to the United Nations Advance Mission in Cambodia ( <unk> ) and Force Communications Unit between 1991 and 1993 . A small number of members of the regiment served on exchange with the British SAS and Special Boat Service ( SBS ) in Bosnia in the early 1990s , including a sergeant who commanded an SBS detachment in April 1993 . 
 In April 1994 , a 10 @-@ man SASR team from J Troop was attached to Australian forces in Somalia to provide an elite response , VIP protection and force protection to the Australian Service Contingent in Mogadishu . Known as " the Gerbils " , the small team operated from Toyota <unk> and <unk> utility vehicles and two M @-@ 113 APCs . They were subsequently involved in a number of actions , including an incident on 21 May when they were flown to the scene of a downed Canadian civilian helicopter 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) north of Mogadishu to protect the crew , and another on 16 August when they were involved in a skirmish during a convoy which resulted in two Somalis being killed after one of them aimed an AK @-@ 47 at the Australians . They returned to Australia in November 1994 . SASR @-@ qualified medical sergeants were also deployed as part of the contribution to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda , some of whom were present during the Kibeho Massacre in April 1995 , for which one SAS soldier and two other Australians were awarded the Medal of Gallantry for their actions . In addition , individual members of the SASR have been attached to a wide range of Australian peacekeeping deployments as observers , including in Kashmir , Lebanon and in the Sinai . 
 = = = Blackhawk accident = = = 
 Deaths during training accidents make up the majority of the SASR 's fatalities . The worst accident in the regiment 's history occurred on the evening of 12 June 1996 when two S @-@ 70 @-@ A9 Blackhawk helicopters from the 5th Aviation Regiment carrying SASR troopers collided during a live @-@ fire counter @-@ terrorism / special @-@ recovery operation exercise at Fire Support Base Barbara in the High Range Training Area near Townsville , Queensland . This activity was part of Exercise Day Rotor 96 and took place on the second day of the exercise , sometime after 18 : 30 , requiring the pilots to use night vision goggles . Six aircraft had been approaching the target area when , 30 seconds from the landing zone , one of the helicopters veered to the right , clipping the tail rotor of another helicopter . One Blackhawk crashed immediately killing 12 personnel on board , while the other was able to make a crash landing but burst into flames , killing six . Crash survivors , soldiers from the other helicopters and exercise staff risked the flames and exploding ammunition to rescue their comrades and retrieve the bodies of the dead . Fifteen members of the SASR and three from the 5th Aviation Regiment lost their lives in the accident . Fourteen personnel were later officially recognised for their part in the rescue and evacuation operation . 
 = = = Cambodia and Bougainville = = = 
 In July 1997 an eight @-@ man SASR team deployed at short notice to Butterworth in Malaysia to provide close protection and communications to the Australian ambassador and embassy staff in Cambodia if required , in preparation for the evacuation of Australian nationals in the wake of civil unrest which occurred following a coup in that country . The evacuation operation was subsequently completed successfully , with RAAF C @-@ 130s supported by Airfield Defence Guards and other military personnel evacuating 455 Australians and other nationals from Cambodia as part of Operation Vista . Later , following the agreement of a truce in October 1997 which ended the conflict in Bougainville , Australian personnel were deployed as part of the New Zealand @-@ led Truce Monitoring Group , with an SASR officer being included in the reconnaissance party and later serving on its headquarters . In April 1998 , Australia took over leadership of the mission , which was renamed the Peace Monitoring Group . Numerous SASR personnel served in Bougainville over a four @-@ year period as part of Operation Bel <unk> , both in headquarters positions and as part of the monitoring teams . 
 = = = Kuwait = = = 
 In 1998 , the SASR made its first squadron @-@ strength deployment since Vietnam when 1 Squadron , with an attached New Zealand SAS troop , was deployed to Kuwait in February as part of the American @-@ led Operation Desert Thunder . The force , known as Anzac Special Operations Force ( ANZAC SOF ) , was fully integrated , with the New Zealanders providing the squadron 's third troop . While the crisis was resolved peacefully , if military action had been taken the SASR would have been used in the Combat Search and Rescue ( CSAR ) role to recover aircrew shot down by Iraqi air defences . The force returned to Australia in June 1998 . Regardless , the operation represented the first time that SASR tactical headquarters had been deployed outside of Australia . 
 = = = East Timor = = = 
 The SASR played a key role in the Australian @-@ led international peacekeeping force ( INTERFET ) in East Timor between September 1999 and February 2000 . Initially involved in the operation to evacuate Australian and UN personnel from East Timor as a result of violence in the lead up to the referendum for independence , the SASR was subsequently involved in intelligence gathering tasks prior to the landings , and provided the initial forces to secure the point of entry at Dili airport . 3 Squadron , along with Allied Special Forces elements from the NZ SAS and British SBS , then made up INTERFET 's special forces element , known as Response Force ( <unk> ) . The SASR spearheaded most operations conducted by the international force during the early days of the intervention in East Timor and , as in Vietnam , served as the eyes and ears of the force , patrolling extensively through militia @-@ controlled areas in vehicles and on foot as INTERFET expanded to take control of the rest of East Timor . During operations in East Timor the SASR was involved in a number of significant contacts with pro @-@ Indonesian militia , including at <unk> on 6 October 1999 during which two SASR soldiers were wounded , and later at <unk> on 16 October 1999 . Other tasks included VIP protection and other special forces tasks as required by the task force commander . 3 Squadron was later awarded a Meritorious Unit Citation on 25 March 2000 . 1 Squadron replaced 3 Squadron in December 1999 , and completed its tour in February 2000 . 
 = = = Domestic security and controversy = = = 
 The regiment formed a key element of the security force in place for the Sydney Olympic Games in 2000 , and in the lead @-@ up to the event the regiment underwent a period of modernisation , acquiring new equipment and capabilities , including the ability to respond to chemical , biological and radiological threats , as well as developing techniques for the clandestine boarding of moving ships at night . During the Games two SASR squadrons were available for counter @-@ terrorist operations , with one designated to respond to incidents in Sydney and Canberra , while the other was on standby for incidents elsewhere . The domestic security role increased in prominence after the terrorist attacks in the United States on 11 September 2001 , and the SASR has since formed part of the security force for events such as the 2003 Rugby World Cup , 2006 Commonwealth Games , and other international events . The SASR currently provides one of Australia 's two elite Tactical Assault Groups , designated TAG ( West ) , the other TAG being provided by the 2nd Commando Regiment . 
 In April 2001 the fishing vessel South Tomi was detected poaching Patagonian toothfish near Heard and McDonald Islands in the Southern Ocean . Following a 6 @,@ 100 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @,@ 800 mi ) pursuit , the Togo @-@ flagged vessel was boarded by an SASR troop off the southern tip of Africa . In August 2001 , the SASR was involved in the Tampa affair when its counter @-@ terrorist squadron was ordered to Christmas Island and to board the MV Tampa once it illegally entered Australian waters . While the members of the SASR involved did what they could to improve conditions on the Tampa , the use of an elite military unit to prevent asylum seekers landing in Australia was not supported by all members of the regiment and remains controversial . Less controversial was the SASR 's involvement in the boarding of a North Korean freighter , the MV Pong Su — which was suspected of drug smuggling — off Newcastle on 20 April 2003 . 
 = = = Afghanistan = = = 
 In October 2001 , the Australian government announced that it was sending a special forces task group built around an SASR squadron to participate in the campaign against al @-@ Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan designated Operation Slipper . After staging through Kuwait , 1 Squadron arrived in Afghanistan in December 2001 with the other SASR squadrons rotating in at approximately six @-@ monthly intervals . The SASR 's main role in Afghanistan was to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance of al @-@ Qaeda and Taliban positions , activities and capabilities . SASR force elements also conducted some offensive operations . After arriving at FOB Rhino , the SASR initially operated in southern Afghanistan with US Marines from Task Force 58 , conducting long @-@ range vehicle mounted patrols over several hundred kilometres around Kandahar and into the Helmand Valley near the Iranian @-@ border . On 16 February 2002 Sergeant Andrew Russell was killed when the Long Range Patrol Vehicle ( LRPV ) he was travelling in hit a land mine during an operation in the Helmand Valley . Two other soldiers were wounded in the incident . Later the SASR operated under command of Task Force 64 . 
 The SASR then moved to eastern Afghanistan where it played a key role in Operation Anaconda in March 2002 . During the operation SASR teams were to provide on @-@ location , in @-@ depth operational intelligence and reconnaissance after they infiltrated the Shahi @-@ Kot Valley ten days prior to the operation , and also saved the lives of 24 soldiers of the US 75th Ranger Regiment after their helicopter was shot down , by providing sniper overwatch and guiding in precise air strikes to end the enemy advance as they attempted to overrun the isolated Americans . Up to 300 al Qaeda fighters were later estimated to have been killed as a result of the airstrikes they called @-@ in . Two SASR advisory and liaison officers were attached with the US 10th Mountain Division to help plan the division 's air assault operations , and were subsequently involved in heavy fighting after the unit they were with became pinned down and took a number of casualties . Supported by heavy close air support they were evacuated by helicopter that evening . 
 Four days into the operation , SASR elements identified a potential escape route for the al @-@ Qaeda leadership . Other coalition special forces had attempted to establish observation posts , but had quickly been discovered by shepherds or villagers . The Australians inserted a patrol undetected to monitor the escape route . From more than 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 yd ) high on a mountain , the patrol spotted a group of al @-@ Qaeda figures dressed in Russian camouflage and wearing black balaclavas . They carried more advanced weapons than normal insurgents , and appeared to be guarding a white @-@ robed older man with a cane as they fled the battlefield . US intelligence at first believed it was Osama bin Laden but later revised the identification to his second @-@ in @-@ command , Ayman al @-@ Zawahiri . An airstrike was called in ; however , there was later doubt about whether it was successful . Australian forces later uncovered a number of arms caches and destroyed an anti @-@ aircraft piece , while other elements were tasked with screening possible escape routes to the south and killed a number of fighters as they attempted to withdraw . The initial task group was replaced by another squadron in March and April 2002 , while a third squadron rotated into Afghanistan in August 2002 . The SASR withdrew from Afghanistan in November 2002 after all three sabre squadrons had served in the country . 
 A Special Forces Task Group ( SFTG ) was deployed to Afghanistan in August or September 2005 , operating in the southern province of Uruzgan . The SFTG consisted of elements from the SASR , 4 RAR ( Commando ) , the Incident Response Regiment ( IRR ) and logistic support personnel . Two CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopters from the 5th Aviation Regiment were deployed to Afghanistan in March 2006 to support the SFTG . A forward operating base was subsequently established at Tarin Kowt . This task group was withdrawn in September 2006 , after a year of operations working closely with special forces from the United Kingdom and the Netherlands . During this period the task group was on patrol for 306 days , involved in 139 contacts , and sustained 11 soldiers wounded . The SFTG was replaced by a Reconstruction Taskforce made up of engineers and conventional infantry . 
 A 300 @-@ strong Special Operations Task Group ( SOTG ) was redeployed to Afghanistan to support the Reconstruction Taskforce in April 2007 , including an SASR squadron , commando company group , and an integral combat service support team . The commando element was mostly used to conduct direct action tasks , with the SASR returning to conducting strategic reconnaissance . On 16 January 2009 , Trooper Mark Donaldson was awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia , the highest award for gallantry in the Australian honours system , for gallant acts performed whilst serving with the SASR in Afghanistan on 2 September 2008 when his patrol was ambushed , resulting in the wounding of nine Australians . In addition to the SASR 's contribution to the SOTG , the regiment also provided " Defence Support Teams " to protect Australian Secret Intelligence Service ( ASIS ) agents in Afghanistan . 
 On 23 January 2011 , Corporal Ben Roberts @-@ Smith was awarded the Victoria Cross for single @-@ handedly neutralising two machine @-@ gun positions during an operation in <unk> on 11 June 2010 . On 26 March 2013 , it was announced that Special Operations Command would receive the Australian Army 's first battle honour since the end of the Vietnam War for outstanding performance during the Shah Wali Kot Offensive in Afghanistan from May to June 2010 . The battle honour , titled " Eastern Shah Wali Kot " , was awarded in recognition of the operational actions of the SASR and 2nd Commando Regiment from the Australian Special Operations Task Group Rotation XII . The SASR has also been collectively awarded the Meritorious Unit Citation and Unit Citation for Gallantry for its actions in Afghanistan . 
 During an operation in April 2013 an SASR corporal cut the right hands from the corpses of three insurgents after being told by a military lawyer that this would be an acceptable way of obtaining fingerprints . After this incident was reported to the senior Australian command at Tarin Kowt the SOTG was withdrawn from operations for a week @-@ long " operational pause " . One soldier remained under investigation for this incident in August 2015 . The bulk of SOTG was withdrawn from Afghanistan in late 2013 as part of the Australian drawdown , although some special forces remain as part of the small Australian force in the country . SASR casualties in Afghanistan include five soldiers killed in action . 
 = = = Iraq = = = 
 The SASR provided the majority of the ground @-@ force element of the Australian contribution to the 2003 invasion of Iraq , known as Operation Falconer , moving in quickly and successfully , thus enhancing Australia 's standing amongst its allies . The Australian Special Forces Task Group was built around 1 Squadron , with a platoon from the 4 RAR ( Commando ) and a troop from the IRR available to support the SASR . 1 Squadron operated in western Iraq where it was successful in securing its area of operations . Elements of the SAS Squadron crossed the Iraqi border on the night of 19 March by vehicle , penetrating 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) before being engaged in one of the first actions of the war . Other patrols were inserted by helicopter more 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) from their staging areas and subsequently fought a number of actions over the following month . Australian patrols were the closest coalition elements to Baghdad for a number of days , observing key roads and facilities . Towards the conclusion of the 42 @-@ day campaign the SAS secured the huge but undefended Al Asad air base , approximately 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) west of Baghdad , capturing more than 50 aircraft . 1 Squadron was withdrawn from Iraq without replacement shortly after the end of the war , and was subsequently awarded a Unit Citation for Gallantry . 
 Yet some members of the SASR continued to operate in Iraq over the next few years in a number of roles . In 2004 claims appeared in the media that Australian special forces were involved in counter @-@ insurgency operations inside Iraq , although this was denied by the government . An SASR team was deployed to Iraq in May and June 2005 as part the effort to free Douglas Wood , an Australian engineer kidnapped in Baghdad ; however , he was later recovered alive by US and Iraqi forces . In 2007 , British media reports suggested that SASR elements were still operating in Iraq , along the southern border with Iran , targeting arms smugglers . Later , a small number of SASR personnel were deployed to Iraq in June 2014 to protect the Australian embassy when the security of Baghdad was threatened by the 2014 Northern Iraq offensive , while others were reported to have been tasked with providing security to Royal Australian Air Force aircrew aboard transport aircraft delivering arms and munitions to forces in Kurdish @-@ controlled northern Iraq during September 2014 . 
 = = = Timor Leste , the Philippines and Fiji = = = 
 An SASR troop was deployed to Timor Leste in May 2006 as part of Operation Astute , operating alongside a Commando Company Group as part of the Special Forces Component following renewed unrest there . On 4 March 2007 , along with the commandos , SASR personnel took part in the Battle of Same during which five rebels were killed during an unsuccessful attempt to apprehend the rebel leader , Alfredo Reinado . It was reported in October 2006 that 20 SASR operators were in the southern Philippines , supporting Filipino operations against the Abu Sayyaf and Jemaah <unk> terrorist groups , but this was denied by the Department of Defence . Meanwhile , following tensions in Fiji between the military and the government the Australian Government dispatched three naval vessels in November and December 2006 as part of Operation Quickstep , in preparation for a potential evacuation of Australian citizens . On 29 November 2006 , a Blackhawk helicopter from the 171st Aviation Squadron carrying four crew and six soldiers from the SASR crashed while attempting to land on HMAS Kanimbla and sank in international waters off Fiji . The helicopter 's pilot and a soldier from SASR were killed in the crash . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 In March 2012 , the Sydney Morning Herald claimed that operators from 4 Squadron — reportedly reformed in 2005 and based at Swan Island in Victoria — had been operating in Africa , specifically Zimbabwe , Nigeria and Kenya , gathering intelligence on terrorism and developing plans to rescue kidnapped Australian civilians . Professor Hugh White from the Australian National University was quoted as saying that , as soldiers , they would not have the legal cover ASIS would have if caught . The Herald also reported that the then Minister for Foreign Affairs Kevin Rudd had argued for 4 Squadron to be used in Libya during the civil war , but was overruled by the Minister for Defence , Stephen Smith , and the Chief of the Defence Force , General David Hurley . Smith denied SASR personnel were operating " at the outer reaches of Australian and international law " but did not confirm or deny the operation in Africa . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The size of the SASR is classified and its reported strength varies , with figures of between 500 and 700 personnel appearing in different sources . Based at Campbell Barracks in Swanbourne , it is a battalion @-@ sized element and is known to be made up of a regimental headquarters , four sabre squadrons , an operational support squadron , a base squadron and a signals squadron . Two sabre squadrons maintain the regiment 's warfighting capability and train for operational contingencies , while a third squadron is maintained on rotation for counter terrorist or recovery operations in support of State or Federal police forces . The existence of the SASR 's fourth sabre squadron has been reported in the media but has never been officially acknowledged . The regiment is currently believed to be organised as follows : 
 Regimental headquarters 
 1 Squadron 
 2 Squadron 
 3 Squadron 
 4 Squadron 
 Base Squadron 
 Operation Support Squadron 
 152 Signal Squadron 
 Each sabre squadron is approximately 90 @-@ strong and is divided into three troops ( Water Troop , Free @-@ Fall Troop and Land Troop ) . A troop comprises four patrols with five or six operators in each patrol , and is commanded by a captain with each patrol commanded by a sergeant . For surveillance operations the SASR usually operates in patrols ; however , for CT operations it usually employs larger force elements . Support personnel include signallers , mechanics and technicians , medical staff , <unk> , drivers , caterers and various specialists . It was reported in 2012 that six female soldiers were being trained in the United States for their work with 4 Squadron . As of 2003 , 152 Signal Squadron comprised four troops . Military dogs , designated Special Operations Military Working Dog ( <unk> ) , are new members of the SASR since 2005 , seeing service in Afghanistan and have their own memorial . 
 While the SASR is a regular army unit , it also has a pool of Army Reserve personnel . These soldiers are former regular Army members of the SASR or specialists . 
 = = Uniform and equipment = = 
 The standard dress of the regiment is the new <unk> @-@ design camouflage which became standard issue to special forces troops in 2012 , and is now being introduced to all other Australian Army soldiers in Afghanistan and will eventually become the standard Operational Combat Uniform ( OCU ) . Although SASR parade , working and field uniforms are generally the same as those used by the rest of the Australian Army , special uniforms — including black coveralls — are used depending on the tactical situation . Qualified SASR members wear a sandy @-@ coloured beret with a metal , gold and silver badge , depicting the sword Excalibur , with flames issuing upwards from below the hilt , with a scroll across the front of blade inscribed with the regimental motto " Who Dares Wins " , on a black shield . This differs from the British Special Air Service , which wears a woven cloth cap badge of the same design . SAS ' Ibis ' -style parachute wings ( rounded at the bottom and straight on top ) are worn on the right shoulder on general duty , ceremonial and mess dress uniforms only . A garter blue lanyard is worn . Members of the regiment often dispense with rank , use first names , and wear long hair and beards on operations or when in the field . 
 Soldiers are armed with a variety of weapons systems depending on what the mission dictates . These include the M4A1 carbine ( designated as the <unk> in Australia ) , which is used as their primary weapon . The shortened version of the M4 , known as the Mk 18 <unk> , is also used . Primary weapons are complemented with the two issued sidearms , the Hk USP Tactical and the Glock 19 . For medium to long range engagements the Heckler & Koch <unk> , SR @-@ 25 marksman rifle , and Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle are also used . Support weapons used include the <unk> <unk> Modular , MAG 58 and the Para Minimi . The regiment also uses a number of direct and indirect fire support weapons including the 66 mm <unk> rockets , 84 mm M3 <unk> , FGM @-@ 148 Javelin , M2 @-@ <unk> Browning .50 calibre machine guns , Mk 19 grenade launcher , and mortars . 
 A range of different vehicles are used , including the <unk> High Mobility Transporter ( HMT ) <unk> purchased in 2008 designated the Special Operations Vehicle @-@ Special Reconnaissance ( SOV @-@ SR ) , named " <unk> " after a SASR warrant officer killed during pre @-@ deployment training in 2005 , which due to technical problems did not enter service until 2011 replacing the Long Range Patrol Vehicle ( LRPV ) which had seen extensive service in Afghanistan and Iraq . New SOV @-@ Logistics trucks are being acquired to replace the Mercedes @-@ Benz Unimog for supply , support and recovery of the SOV @-@ SR . A lighter , less protected vehicle , more akin to the LRPV — the Polaris Defense <unk> ( Deployable Advanced Ground Off @-@ road ) — was being trialled in 2015 . Motorcycles are also used for long range strategic reconnaissance seeing service in Afghanistan . Polaris six @-@ wheel all @-@ terrain vehicles are also used , seeing service in Afghanistan . Heavily modified up @-@ armoured Toyota Land Cruiser four wheel drive vehicles designated SOV @-@ Support are used for domestic counter @-@ terrorism and special recovery . 
 = = Selection and training = = 
 The SASR regiment has high personnel standards , and selection into the regiment is considered the most demanding of any entry test in the Australian Army . Members of the SASR are required to work in small teams for extended periods and often without support , and are specially selected for their ability to work in this environment , rather than as individuals . Selection is open to all serving Australian Defence Force personnel . After initial screening candidates must complete the " Special Forces Barrier Test " , which tests their physical fitness . About 80 to 85 percent of applicants pass this phase . Successful candidates then continue on to the 21 @-@ day SASR selection course conducted at Bindoon , Western Australia which assesses both the individual 's strength and endurance ( mental and physical ) , as well as overall fitness , ability to remain calm in combat , and to work effectively in small teams . The course is conducted by staff from the Special Forces Training Centre , which was established in 1998 . Only 25 to 30 percent pass selection . These candidates then progress onto the 18 month reinforcement cycle , during which they will complete a range of courses including weapons , basic patrolling , parachuting , combat survival , signaller / medic , heavy weapons , demolitions , method of entry , and urban combat , before posting to a sabre squadron if successful . Officers must complete additional courses to qualify as an officer in the regiment , with requisite expertise in operations , administration and command . Most candidates are generally in their late @-@ 20s and are on average older than most soldiers . Despite a possible reduction in rank , SASR operators receive significant allowances , which make them among the highest @-@ paid soldiers in the Australian Defence Force , with a trooper ( equivalent to a private ) earning about $ 100 @,@ 000 per annum . 
 All members of the SASR are parachute qualified , and each member of a patrol has at least one specialisation , including medic , signaller , explosive expert or linguist . Each of the three sabre squadrons works on a three @-@ year training and operational cycle , although the system is flexible and can be accelerated or varied depending on operational requirements and deployments . In the first year new members of the regiment develop their individual skills and practice the new techniques they have been taught , while more experienced members undertake advanced courses . In the second year mission skill sets for conventional warfare are trained , while in the third year clandestine tasks are practiced and the squadron becomes the online counter terrorist squadron . Counter terrorist training includes close quarters battle ( CQB ) , explosive entry , tubular assault ( in vehicles such as in buses , trains and aircraft ) and in high rise buildings , as well as room and building clearance . This training is conducted in a range of advanced facilities , including electronic indoor and outdoor CQB ranges , outdoor sniper range , and urban training facilities at Swanbourne . Additional facilities include a special urban complex , vertical plunging range , method of entry house , and simulated oil rig and aircraft mock @-@ ups in order to provide realistic training environments for potential operational scenarios . SASR personnel also provide training in weapons handling and the use of explosives to intelligence agents and members of elite police units at Swan Island in Victoria . 
 The SASR maintains close links with special forces from the United States , United Kingdom and New Zealand , regularly participating in joint exercises and individual personnel exchange programs with the British SAS and SBS , as well as the New Zealand SAS , US Navy SEALs and United States Special Forces . The regiment also regularly conducts exercises with and trains soldiers from South East Asian nations , and participates in exercises with regional special forces . From 1992 this has included close links with the Indonesian Kopassus , a relationship which has at times been politically controversial . Since its formation the SASR has lost more men in training than in combat , due to the nature of the training regime . In 2014 , the regiment celebrated its 50th anniversary . During this period 48 soldiers have been killed during operations or in training accidents , while another 20 died in " other circumstances " . More than 200 have been wounded . The names of those killed are recorded on a plaque on a memorial made of a large piece of granite outside the SASR headquarters at Campbell Barracks , known as " The Rock " . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 United Kingdom – Special Air Service 
 = Mountaineer ( train ) = 
 The Mountaineer was a passenger train operated by Amtrak between Norfolk , Virginia , and Chicago , Illinois , via Cincinnati , Ohio . It was the first train to use the Norfolk and Western Railway 's tracks since the creation of Amtrak in 1971 and followed the route of the Pocahontas , the N & W 's last passenger train . Service began in 1975 and ended in 1977 . A new train , the Hilltopper , operated over much of the Mountaineer 's route but was itself discontinued in 1979 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Norfolk and Western Railway was one of the twenty railroads which joined Amtrak in 1971 but in the first four years hosted no passenger service over its route , the centerpiece of which was its main line between Norfolk and Cincinnati which passed through the state of West Virginia . The main driving force behind the establishment of the Mountaineer was then @-@ United States Senator Robert Byrd ( D @-@ West Virginia ) , who wanted additional rail service for his constituents and pressured the Department of Transportation to add the route . 
 The Mountaineer operated in conjunction with the Chicago – Washington / Newport News James Whitcomb Riley between Chicago and Cincinnati . Beyond Cincinnati , at a Chesapeake & Ohio Railway ( C & O ) yard in Ashland , Kentucky , the two trains were decoupled and then proceeded separately to Catlettsburg , Kentucky and points east , with the Mountaineer roughly twenty @-@ five minutes behind the Riley . Westbound the procedure was reversed . 
 The first trains ran on March 24 , 1975 , marking the return of rail passenger service to the Norfolk & Western . Amtrak guaranteed two years of operation , while warning that the train would " habitually lose money . " Amtrak president Paul <unk> projected costs of $ 4 @.@ 5 million / year while taking in $ 900 @,@ 000 in the first year . To make the run viable the Mountaineer would need to carry 150 – 300 people daily between Norfolk and Cincinnati . 
 In 1976 Amtrak announced several possible changes to the Mountaineer , including a later schedule through West Virginia and combined operation west of Cincinnati with both the Riley and an unnamed ( and never implemented ) Washington – Denver train . Under this plan the Mountaineer would receive new Amfleet equipment but lose its sleeping car . The schedule changes never took place , but Amtrak was forced to re @-@ equip the Mountaineer after a harsh winter damaged many of its old steam @-@ heated coaches and locomotives . The Mountaineer was one of eight routes suspended in January 1977 , and it returned with an all @-@ Amfleet consist , minus the sleeping car . 
 Ridership on the Mountaineer over its two @-@ year probationary period was disappointing : 58 @,@ 991 in 1975 and 53 @,@ 400 in 1976 . Averaged over a 365 @-@ day year , this was 161 passengers per day in 1975 and 146 in 1976 . By 1977 daily ridership had dwindled to 35 . Monetary losses were far higher than expected : $ 5 @.@ 7 million in <unk> and $ 14 @.@ 9 million in <unk> . After a brief respite , Amtrak discontinued the Mountaineer on May 31 , 1977 . A new train , the Hilltopper , operated over much of the same route until 1979 . 
 = = Stations = = 
 None of the fourteen stations east of Cincinnati had seen Amtrak service before . Catlettsburg , also known as " Tri @-@ State Station " ( for the states of Kentucky , Ohio and West Virginia ) , replaced an existing stop at Ashland , Kentucky . Amtrak built new stations at Roanoke and Bluefield . The remaining stops all used existing Norfolk & Western stations , with varying degrees of refurbishment and renovation . Two cities , Petersburg and Lynchburg , Virginia , had additional rail service at different stations . Amtrak 's Florida @-@ bound trains used the ex @-@ Atlantic Coast Line Railroad Petersburg station , while the Southern Railway 's remaining trains used Kemper Street station in Lynchburg . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The Mountaineer 's typical consist ( at first ) was five cars : a baggage @-@ dormitory , two coaches , a grill diner and a 10 @-@ roomette 6 @-@ bedroom ( 10 @-@ 6 ) sleeping car . When available , one of the coaches was a dome car . Starting in January 1977 Amtrak ran a consist of three new Amfleet cars , typically two coaches and a cafe . 
 = Christ Church , Newton = 
 Christ Church , Newton , also known as Christ Episcopal Church , is a Christian house of worship located on the corner of Church Street and Main Street ( U.S. Route 206 ) in Newton , New Jersey . It is a parish overseen by the Episcopal Diocese of Newark , a diocese of the Episcopal Church in the United States of America . The congregation first met on 28 December 1769 and was granted a charter by New Jersey 's last Royal Governor William Franklin on behalf of Britain 's King George III . Christ Church is the oldest church in Newton and the third oldest parish in the Diocese of Newark . 
 The current church building , erected in 1868 – 1869 , is the second structure built at the site , and is an example of the Broken Ashlar or Rustic mode of Gothic Revival architecture patterned after medieval English parish churches . The interior nave features several stained @-@ glass windows depicting scenes from the life of Jesus of Nazareth fabricated by J & R Lamb Studios . On 24 September 1992 , Christ Church , Newton was included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places as part of the Newton Town Plot Historic District which was approved and entered on the National Register of Historic Places on 12 November 1992 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 In a 1770 letter , the Rev 'd Dr Thomas B. Chandler , rector of St John 's Church in the provincial capital Elizabethtown ( now Elizabeth ) , reported that he had visited Sussex County in the northwestern part of the province of New Jersey in November 1769 and found that there were 50 families belonging to the Church of England in the region . Chandler reported that " they frequently assemble in private houses and read the Liturgy " and that an Anglican clergyman " had never been in those parts before . " Many of these families met at Newton , the county seat of Sussex County , on 28 December 1769 , to establish an Anglican parish . 
 On 15 August 1774 , Christ Church was formally incorporated as The Rector , Church Wardens , and <unk> of Christ 's Church at New Town , in the county of Sussex and province of New Jersey . The colony 's last royal governor , William Franklin , granted and signed a charter on behalf of Britain 's King George III . The congregation petitioned the East Jersey Board of Proprietors , a colonial land agency , asking for their assistance to establish a church . The board granted a warrant for 200 acres ( 81 ha ) of land yet <unk> in Sussex County to serve as an income @-@ generating glebe to support the church . The tract chosen by the congregation was located approximately 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) south of Newton ( in present @-@ day <unk> Township , then part of Hardwick Township ) and conveyed to the church on 16 December 1774 by the colony 's last royal attorney general , Cortlandt Skinner , and John Johnston . Jonathan Hampton ( 1716 – 1777 ) , a landowner , <unk> , and merchant from Elizabethtown , deeded lands from his surveyed town plot to the congregation on 14 December 1774 " for the encouragement of the Episcopal religion ... and toward the maintenance & support of a parson officiating in said church " . 
 = = = Early history ( 1769 – 1869 ) = = = 
 The congregation called for a clergyman , and the Rev 'd Uzal Ogden , Jr . ( 1744 – 1822 ) was sent as a missionary lay reader and catechist in 1770 to the area on behalf of the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel . He would become rector in 1773 after his ordination . According to local historian Kevin Wright , the parsonage was built circa 1770 by local land agent John Pettit . During his tenure , Ogden held services at Newton on the third Sunday each month as he served an area of roughly 2 @,@ 000 square miles ( 5 @,@ 200 km2 ) and divided other Sundays among congregations in Roxbury , Knowlton , and Hackettstown . Services were held in the County Court House ( built 1762 – 1765 ) , which he described in 1771 as " very commodious and serves us to perform Divine Service in " . During the Revolution , Ogden supported the cause of American independence , and according to tradition quartered sheep in the parsonage basement for the use of the Continental Army . Ogden left Christ Church in 1784 to become an assistant at Trinity Church in New York City , and later served as rector of Trinity Church , Newark , where his father served as warden . 
 Although Ogden was listed as Christ Church 's rector until as late as 1792 and preached infrequently in the area , the rectorate in Newton remained without a clergyman until the appointment of the Rev 'd Clarkson Dunn in 1820 . During the 36 years , services were held irregularly , at the court house ; this was an era described as " a long period of discouragement , almost of dissolution . " The congregation reported only six communicants during this time . Dunn would operate a school at the rectory beginning in December 1823 . Assisted by William Rankin , an English teacher , Dunn taught Classics . Dunn remained in this charge until 1857 when his son @-@ in @-@ law , the Rev 'd Nathaniel Pettit , assumed the pulpit . 
 The congregation 's first church building was erected beginning in May 1823 and consecrated a few months later on 19 November 1823 by the Rt Rev 'd John Croes , Bishop of New Jersey . This building was located at the corner of Church and Main streets , on a tract of land conveyed to the congregation by William T. Anderson , a local attorney . The Gothic structure was described as small ; it accommodated 250 worshipers . Toward the end of Pettit 's tenure , the congregation was compelled to build a new church building as their current building had become unstable and unsafe . During the construction , the congregation met at the county courthouse and at Rinker 's Hall , a building located near the courthouse on the Newton Town Green . 
 = = = Current church ( 1869 – present ) = = = 
 According to Snell , during the forty @-@ five @-@ year tenures of Dunn and Pettit as rectors , " parochial statistics from 1820 to 1867 show an aggregate of 510 baptisms , 241 confirmations , 334 marriages , and 468 funerals " . The growth in membership necessitated a new , larger edifice . To fund the construction of a new church building , the congregation sought the permission of the state legislature to sell the lands granted to it by warrant . Permission was given in 1867 . The congregation sold this property on 10 May 1868 for $ 15 @,@ 579 . The congregation also sold its parsonage and accompanying lands for $ 17 @,@ 600 to prominent lawyer , Levi Shepherd in October . A loan to support the construction was provided by Robert Hamilton ( 1809 – 1878 ) , a vestryman and warden and generous financial contributor to the parish . Hamilton was a prominent political figure , serving in the New Jersey General Assembly in 1863 and 1864 , the latter year as Speaker , and from 1873 to 1877 , he represented the New Jersey 's 4th congressional district ( covering northwestern New Jersey ) in the United States House of Representatives . In 1879 , a year after Hamilton 's death , his widow Sarah forgave the loan , which left the church debt free after the construction . 
 Local historian Frank <unk> writes that " the Episcopal church formalized its adherence to the English Gothic style in the late 1840s under the influence of a powerful bishop , George Washington Doane " , and that the parish at Newton among many in the state adhere to that style . The vestry and diocese contracted " for the building of a new church ... for $ 23 @,@ 000 " on the site of the old church building by contractor Isaac L. Overton of Newark , New Jersey from a design by architect Jonathan V. Nichols . The first service was held on 11 July 1869 , and the building was consecrated by the Bishop of New Jersey , the Rt Rev 'd , William Henry <unk> ( 1817 – 1879 ) on 20 October 1869 . Today the structure boasts a three @-@ story bell tower , but previously the tower was topped by a 108 @-@ foot high spire surmounted by a 12 @-@ foot high cross . This spire was removed after being struck by lightning on three occasions . 
 A rectory , built in 1868 – 1869 , was used for that purpose for thirty years before being renovated for activity space for church organizations and fellowship . In October 1901 , the Vestry of Christ Church authorised purchase of a new rectory located on Liberty Street . Holley Hall , the central facility for parish activities , was constructed with a 1965 bequest from the estate of Alice Herbert Holley , daughter @-@ in @-@ law of the Rev 'd William Welles Holley , fourth rector , who was the first to reside in the former rectory after its completion in 1869 . 
 = = Architecture , furnishings and fittings = = 
 On 24 September 1992 , Christ Church , Newton was placed on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places as part of the Newton Town Plot Historic District which was approved and entered on the National Register of Historic Places on 12 November 1992 . The 17 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 7 @.@ 0 ha ) historic district comprises 56 contributing structures which were built on Jonathan Hampton 's surveyed town plot for the town of Newton ( then Sussex Court House ) . 
 Designed by architect Jonathan V. Nichols , the current church building was erected 1868 – 1869 and is an example of the Broken Ashlar or Rustic mode of Gothic Revival architecture . It was designed in a " simple basilican style of nave flanked by shed aisles ( no clerestory ) " , that was " patterned upon medieval English parish churches " . The cornerstone was laid on 21 August 1868 and the building was constructed of native blue limestone , with trimmings in Newark sandstone , with a roof of patterned or traceried black slate that was quarried in Newton . 
 Christ Church 's contribution to the historic district includes the church building and a Gothic Revival style rectory , built in 1868 . The site also includes an eighteenth @-@ century Federal @-@ style townhouse that was the home of Colonel Thomas Anderson ( <unk> – 1805 ) , deputy assistant quartermaster general of the Continental Army during the American Revolution , one of the parish 's original vestrymen ( elected in 1769 ) and warden of Christ Church from 1784 to 1794 . A Newton attorney with statewide prominence , Anderson was the first Surrogate of Sussex County ( appointed in 1768 ) and also served as County Clerk from 1770 to 1777 . His home , built about 1785 , was originally located on Park Place one @-@ half block to the north of the church property and faced Newton 's town green before being relocated adjacent to the church property at 62 Main Street in 1896 . In 1965 , it was purchased by Christ Church and serves as the parish office . The Anderson House in 1958 was marked with an historical plaque by the Society of Daughters of Colonial Wars in New Jersey . 
 When completed in 1869 , the church 's interior could accommodate 400 parishioners , and featured a tint @-@ glass chancel window by Fredericks of Brooklyn . Today , the interior is adorned with a Tiffany @-@ style window above the altar , dedicated in 1919 , and several pictorial stained @-@ glass windows ( dedicated in 1968 ) around the nave featuring scenes associated with the life of Jesus of Nazareth . The nave windows are the works of the United States ' oldest continuously @-@ run decorative arts firm , J & R. Lamb Studios , and include work designed by stained @-@ glass artist Heinrich Jan Van de Burgh . They including depictions of : 
 = = Rectors = = 
 Eighteen clergymen have served as rector of Christ Church , Newton . The first , Uzal Ogden , Jr . , was the son of Newark merchant and churchwarden . Ogden began to serve in northwestern New Jersey in 1770 and , in addition to Newton , covered an area of 2 @,@ 000 square miles including St James Episcopal Church in Knowlton Township , New Jersey ( founded in 1769 ) . Because of the lack of a bishop in Britain 's North American colonies , Ogden traveled to England to be ordained by the Rt Rev 'd Richard Terrick , the Bishop of London , who had jurisdiction over all parishes of the Church of England in North America . After his departure in 1784 , the pulpit remained unfilled until 1823 . During this time , several clergymen , including the Reverend John Croes ( 1762 – 1832 ) , later the first Bishop of New Jersey , officiated on occasion . 
 The second rector , Clarkson Dunn , served both the Newton congregation and St James in Knowlton . Dunn , who died in 1870 , was honored by the town of Newton with the naming of two streets , Clarkson Street and Dunn Place , which frame the property of the parish 's old parsonage . After a ten @-@ year tenure , Dunn 's son @-@ in @-@ law , Nathaniel Pettit , resigned in 1867 to become Sussex County 's first Superintendent of Schools . Moffett , who served as rector for fifteen years , resigned from the pulpit to accept an appointment from President Grover Cleveland to become the American minister ( essentially ambassador ) to Greece in 1885 . 
 The current rector , Robert T. Griner , received a bachelor 's degree in Psychology from Drew University and studied at the University of Oxford before completing a Master of Divinity degree at Yale University . 
 = Bridgeport Harbor Light = 
 The Bridgeport Harbor Light , later the Bridgeport Harbor Lighthouse , was a lighthouse in Bridgeport , Connecticut , United States . It is located on the west side of the Bridgeport Harbor entrance and the north side of Long Island Sound . Originally constructed in 1851 and rebuilt in 1871 with a dwelling , it had a red @-@ fixed light throughout its service life . The builder and first keeper of the light was Abraham A. McNeil who is also credited as improvising the first light for the Bridgeport Harbor in 1844 . By 1953 , the lighthouse was in poor condition and the United States Coast Guard opted to build a skeleton tower in its place . In the 2014 edition of the Light List Volume 1 , the skeleton tower is marked as " Light 13A " with a height of 57 feet ( 17 m ) and a visual marker of a square green <unk> with a green reflective border . The lighthouse was sold and an attempt was made to move it to serve as a monument for Connecticut 's maritime history , but it was later decided to scrap the structure . The lighthouse caught fire and was destroyed during the dismantling in 1953 . 
 = = 1851 light = = 
 According to Waldo 's History of Bridgeport and Vicinity , Volume 1 , Abraham A. McNeil first set a light atop a mast to mark the Bridgeport Harbor in 1844 . The next day Captain John Brooks Jr. set up his own improvised light with another boat . Constructed in 1851 , the first Bridgeport Harbor Light was an octagonal tower on a box @-@ like structure stood on iron piles . The exact details of its construction are not recorded and there is no complete description , but it is known to have had a fixed red light . Waldo identifies Abraham A. McNeil as the builder of the light . The light had no keeper 's quarters and was only accessible by boat . By 1870 , a new lighthouse was needed , partly because of the increased maritime traffic . 
 = = 1871 lighthouse = = 
 Completed in 1871 , the rebuilt light had a dwelling with the attached tower containing a fourth @-@ order Fresnel lens . It retained the original fixed red light , but also included a fog bell . In 1900 , the lighthouse was identified in the Light List as having a red screw @-@ pile structure , a white tower and dwelling with a slate @-@ gray Mansard roof topped with a black lantern . The lighthouse had a fog signal that sounded every 15 seconds and was operated by machinery . Although the focal height of the light is unlisted , the center of the light stood 34 ft ( 10 m ) above the ground . 
 In 1873 , a request for $ 5 @,@ 500 , equivalent to $ 109 @,@ 000 in 2015 was submitted to Congress for the " additional protection " of the " screw @-@ pile light house " . During the first session of the 43rd Congress , the $ 5 @,@ 500 was appropriated for the lighthouse . In 1898 , during the Spanish – American War the lighthouse was equipped with 10 @-@ inch guns to ward off enemy attacks , making it one of the few armed American lighthouses in history . These guns never saw action as there was no attack on the coast . In 1920 , $ <unk> was estimated to be needed for riprap protection . 
 By 1953 , the lighthouse was in poor condition and the U.S. Coast Guard opted to replace it with a skeleton tower . The lighthouse was sold to the Fairfield Dock Company , which initially planned to move it ashore , but it was later decided to dismantle and scrap it . A plan existed to move the lighthouse ashore to a city park as a monument to Connecticut 's maritime heritage , but the location could not be agreed upon . 
 = = Skeleton tower = = 
 The skeleton tower constructed from 1953 continues to serve Bridgeport Harbor . In the 2014 edition of the Light List Volume 1 , the skeleton tower is marked as " Light 13A " with a height of 57 feet ( 17 m ) and a visual marker of a square green <unk> with a green reflective border . 
 = = List of keepers = = 
 = Chartjackers = 
 Chartjackers is a British documentary series , produced by Hat Trick Productions and commissioned by BBC Switch . It documents the lives of four teenage video bloggers over the course of ten weeks , as they attempt to write , record and release a pop song for charity , with the goal to " sell an estimated 25 @,@ 000 singles to achieve their dream of a number one single " . It premiered in the UK on 12 September 2009 on BBC Two , and ran for a single series of eleven weekly episodes . When first broadcast , the programme ran in real time : its first ten episodes documented the events of the previous seven days , while the final episode was an extended compilation that summarised all ten weeks . 
 The Chartjackers single was written entirely through crowdsourcing , with the song 's title , lyrics , melody , singers , band , production , cover art and music video all being solicited from the global online community . The crowdsourcing took the format of the four bloggers — Alex Day , Johnny <unk> , Jimmy Hill and Charlie McDonnell — posting videos to a dedicated YouTube channel named ChartJackersProject , where they invited viewers to suggest various ideas for the final song . After receiving advice from industry experts such as Charlie Simpson and David and Carrie Grant , the completed Chartjackers single , entitled " I 've Got Nothing " , was released through the iTunes Store at the end of the ten @-@ week period on 9 November . The track received mainly negative reviews from music critics and sold approximately 8 @,@ 400 copies in the UK , earning it a peak position of number 36 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 Chartjackers garnered a viewing figures peak of almost half a million with its final episode and was critically panned by reviewers . Some commentators felt that the programme 's concept was ridiculous and doomed from the start , others felt that the series showed a contempt for music and the general public , and other critics questioned whether the point of the project was to raise money for charity or for the four bloggers to promote themselves . The show was nominated for a 2010 Broadcast Digital Award in the Best Multi @-@ Platform Project category , but lost out to The Operation ... Surgery Live . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Chartjackers was devised in 2009 by Jonathan Davenport and Andy <unk> of the British production company Hat Trick Productions . It was commissioned by Geoffrey Goodwin and Jo Twist of the television brand BBC Switch , and was featured as part of a season of multi @-@ platform content intended to appeal to teenagers . The show was billed as a " YouTube X Factor " , with its main focus being its direct link to the 2009 annual appeal for the British charity Children in Need – profits from sales of the completed single were donated to the charity . Chartjackers was executively produced by Davenport , Hat Trick 's digital department head , who had previously worked on similar cross @-@ platform projects that incorporated both television and online media , such as the video podcast of Have I Got News For You and the YouTube @-@ based series Bryony Makes a Zombie Movie . Digital agency Fish in a bottle were commissioned to provide creative content for the online platforms , such as the YouTube channel and Twitter account . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 As a cross @-@ platform project that incorporated YouTube , it was important that the video bloggers cast for the leading team already had a large fanbase – the four bloggers chosen had a combined YouTube subscriber total of over 200 @,@ 000 . They were selected for their familiarity to young British YouTube viewers and to " act as Pied Pipers to the teen audience " . Miranda Chartrand and Adam Nichols , the vocalists who sang on the completed Chartjackers single , were cast halfway through the programme 's series as part of an audition process and were featured in the remainder of the episodes . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 Although much of Chartjackers was filmed in and around London — such as a gathering at music venue 93 Feet East during episode nine and the music video for " I 've Got Nothing " during episode seven — various locations were featured throughout the series . Vocalist auditions in episode five took place at the Wellfield Working Men 's Club in Rochdale , and the single itself was recorded at the University of Wales in Newport . During episode nine , some of the team visited the Three Ways School in Bath , Somerset . 
 = = Series overview = = 
 Chartjackers documented the lives of Day , <unk> , Hill and McDonnell as they attempted to write , record and release a charity single through crowdsourcing . The series was shown in real time , with each of the first ten episodes detailing the events of the previous seven days . On 5 September 2009 , one week before the programme 's first episode aired , the group announced on the YouTube channel ChartJackersProject their intention to release a number one single within their ten @-@ week time frame . A different task would be undertaken each week , so that , by the end of the project , the song would be completed . 
 The first episode of Chartjackers documented the events of the first week of the project and explained what its ultimate goal was . To generate potential lyrics , viewers were asked each to post one line as a comment to a video on ChartJackersProject . Viewers posted more than 4 @,@ 000 comments , from which were selected the winning lines . These lyrics were posted to the Internet the following episode , with the chorus having been composed by YouTube user <unk> and the repeated phrase " I 've Got Nothing " chosen for the song 's title . ChartJackersProject viewers were then asked to create a melody for the lyrics and submit it in a video response , so that one could be selected for the single . 
 Out of a total of 51 melodies that had been sent in , the winning entry by Jonny Dark was chosen from them during episode three . It was also revealed that a band would be put together to perform the Chartjackers single and that any potential members should apply by submitting video auditions . Episode four documented some of the hundreds of auditions that had been sent in – the group reviewed these auditions and selected from them their ten favourites to go through as finalists . These ten finalists performed for the four boys during episode five , where Chartrand , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old au pair from Stroud , Gloucestershire , and Nichols , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old musician from Essex , were selected to sing on the official release . During episode six , " I 've Got Nothing " was recorded in Newport by record producer Marc Dowding , and the group received advice from video director Corin Hardy on how to film the official music video . 
 Taking Hardy 's advice , the music video for " I 've Got Nothing " was filmed during the seventh episode of Chartjackers . To begin promoting its release , the team also petitioned 95 @.@ 8 Capital FM and BBC Radio 1 to try to get the radio coverage for the single , but it was not playlisted and received no airplay . The boys feared that the song would not chart at all , so , during episode eight , they urged viewers to spam the Twitter feeds of radio DJs who could play the single on their shows . In the next episode , a gathering took place at 93 Feet East in London on 4 November , where the single was performed live for the first time by Chartrand and Nichols . During the tenth episode , " I 've Got Nothing " was released online . The midweek charts placed the single at Number 39 , but its sales increased after comedian Stephen Fry — who provides an outro for McDonnell 's YouTube videos — was convinced to promote it on his Twitter profile . Episode eleven , the final compilation episode , revealed on The Radio 1 Chart Show that " I 've Got Nothing " had reached number 36 on the UK Singles Chart , which disappointed the boys . 
 = = = Celebrity guests = = = 
 Over the course of the series , several figures from both the music and entertainment industry made an appearance on Chartjackers , usually to offer advice or encouragement to the four boys . The first celebrity to feature on the show was former pop star Chesney Hawkes , who remarked that he felt that the team had " every experience between [ them ] to actually pull [ their aim of reaching number one ] off " . During the fourth episode , vocal coaches David and Carrie Grant offered advice to the group on what criteria to use when judging the submitted video auditions , and indie rock band The Young Knives sent in a video message , wishing the team success . The following episode , Charlie Simpson of Fightstar explained to the boys the differences between releasing music through major and independent labels . During episode six , the team met with Peter Oakley , who spoke about his own chart success as part of The Zimmers , and Hardy , who advised ways in which the music video could be filmed . The next episode , the group received advice from celebrity stylist Hannah <unk> , who suggested how Chartrand and Nichols should be styled for the video , and entertainment journalist Rav Singh , who discussed how to get airplay for " I 've Got Nothing " through publicity stunts . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Critical reaction to Chartjackers was overwhelmingly negative . Although radio stations , newspapers and magazines were all canvassed , the show was largely ignored by the mainstream media and received generally negative reviews . It was misrepresented in an article on The Times 's website , which mistook the four boys for a new boy band . Fraser McAlpine of BBC Radio 1 's Chart Blog said that the project showed a basic " contempt for music " and " the public at large " . James Masterton of Yahoo ! Music called Chartjackers " something of a failure " and its charting " lacklustre " . He did not mention it at all in his weekly chart podcast . Neither Reggie Yates nor Scott Mills , two of the DJs whose Twitter feeds were <unk> during episode eight , were impressed by the way that the Chartjackers team had tried to get their attention . 
 Similarly negative reviews came from <unk> Forde of Music Week , who said the decision to release the single without management was " ridiculous " and that the campaign was " doomed " , and Pocket @-@ lint , who described the show as a " car crash " . In the week of the single 's release , Irish television personality Stephen Byrne questioned on his Twitter profile whether the main motivation for the project really was " charity " – British comedian David Bass agreed with him . The project was quickly overshadowed by a similar , more successful campaign to get " Killing in the Name " by American metal band Rage Against the Machine to top the UK Singles Chart for Christmas 2009 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Chartjackers received one nomination at the 2010 Broadcast Digital Awards , a British awards event commemorating success and creativity in digital television . The show was submitted in the Best Multi @-@ Platform Project category , but was beaten by The Operation : Surgery Live . It was not nominated for any further awards . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Chartjackers was distributed both on television and online . It ran for a single series of eleven episodes : the first ten episodes lasted for five minutes each , with the final compilation episode running for half an hour and gaining a viewership peak of half a million . Chartjackers premiered on BBC Two on 12 September 2009 at 12 : 50 p.m. , as part of the channel 's two @-@ hour @-@ long BBC Switch segment – it was uploaded to the YouTube channel <unk> the same day . This practice of broadcasting an episode on BBC Two and uploading it to the <unk> channel the same day continued throughout the series . Episodes were also streamed online through BBC iPlayer to UK residents for seven days after their initial broadcast . The show was not broadcast outside of the UK and , as of 20 September 2013 , is not available on DVD . 
 = = I 've Got Nothing = = 
 The completed Chartjackers single was released worldwide exclusively through the iTunes Store at midnight on 9 November 2009 . Each copy was sold for £ 0 @.@ 79 in the UK and $ 0 @.@ 99 in the US . Just under 8 @,@ 400 copies were downloaded in the UK , giving " I 've Got Nothing " a chart placing of number 36 in the UK Singles Chart . The song sold approximately 20 @,@ 000 copies worldwide , but did not make the singles chart in any other country . 
 Like the series from which it originated , " I 've Got Nothing " was poorly received by critics . Some called the effort " very bad " and others predicted that it was " unlikely to make much of a top 40 impact " . The music video for " I 've Got Nothing " featured footage of Chartrand and Nichols singing the song in a London park , along with an actor dressed as Children in Need mascot Pudsey Bear . This footage , along with clips of viewers miming to the song , was then used to construct the final music video for the single , which McDonnell edited . 
 " I 've Got Nothing " was performed live twice . The first occasion was at the 93 Feet East gathering on 4 November 2009 , during the promotion of the single 's release . The gathering featured performances from other YouTube users and was headlined by Hawkes . The second occurrence was four days later at Switch Live 2009 , an awards show organised by BBC Switch at the HMV Hammersmith Apollo , where a performance of " I 've Got Nothing " opened the event . 
 = Clackline Bridge = 
 Clackline Bridge is a road bridge in Clackline , Western Australia , 77 kilometres ( 48 mi ) east of Perth in the Shire of Northam , that carried the Great Eastern Highway until 2008 . It is the only bridge in Western Australia to have spanned both a waterway and railway , the Clackline Brook and the former Eastern Railway alignment . The mainly timber bridge has a unique curved and sloped design , due to the difficult topography and the route of the former railway . The bridge was designed in 1934 to replace two dangerous rail crossings and a rudimentary water crossing . Construction began in January 1935 , and was completed relatively quickly , with the opening ceremony held in August 1935 . The bridge has undergone various improvement and maintenance works since then , including widening by three metres ( 10 ft ) in 1959 – 60 , but remained a safety hazard , with increasing severity and numbers of accidents through the 1970s and 1980s . Planning for a highway bypass of Clackline and the Clackline Bridge began in the 1990s , and it was constructed between January 2007 and February 2008 . The local community had been concerned that the historic bridge would be lost , but it remains in use as part of the local road network , and has been listed on both the Northam Municipal Heritage Inventory and the Heritage Council of Western Australia 's Register of Heritage Places . 
 = = Description = = 
 Clackline Bridge is a timber bridge spanning the Clackline Brook and the former Eastern Railway alignment , in the Shire of Northam , 77 kilometres ( 48 mi ) east of Perth . Constrained by the topography of the site , the route of the Eastern Railway tracks , and the previous alignment of Great Eastern Highway , the bridge has a unique curved and sloping design . It has 18 spans over a 126 @-@ metre ( 413 ft ) length , with a 1 in 20 slope and a horizontal curve radius of 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) . There are 18 numbered piers , starting from pier 1 at the eastern end . The double tracks of the Eastern Railway , which linked Perth and Northam until its removal in 1981 , passed between piers 16 and 17 . Piers 14 to 17 are parallel to that former railway , at an angle of approximately 40 degrees to the bridge . This resulted in spans of various lengths : 7 @.@ 6 metres ( 25 ft ) heading out from the western abutment , then a 14 @-@ metre ( 46 ft ) span between piers 16 and 17 , followed by a 4 @.@ 8 @-@ metre ( 16 ft ) length , two 5 @.@ 2 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 17 ft ) spans , and 13 spans of 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . 
 The bridge has undergone multiple alterations , but the original piers remain . They were constructed as " four rounded braced wandoo piles supported from horizontal <unk> timber sills , <unk> to <unk> , fixed to concrete footings " , with the footings designed to bear on foundation rocks one and a half metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) beneath the surface . The bridge 's original spans were made up of seven rounded timber wandoo stringers , of at least 400 millimetres ( 16 in ) diameter , bearing on jarrah corbels , supported by jarrah half caps 600 by 150 millimetres ( 23 @.@ 6 by 5 @.@ 9 in ) in size . The 14 @-@ metre ( 46 ft ) span over the railway alignment was originally supported on four 610 @-@ by @-@ 190 @-@ millimetre ( 24 @.@ 0 by 7 @.@ 5 in ) steel beams , weighing 41 kilograms ( 90 lb ) each . 
 Various aspects of Clackline Bridge have since been modified . Originally five and a half metres ( 18 ft ) wide , with a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 3 @.@ 5 ft ) footpath , the bridge was widened by three metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) , with two additional piles installed at each pier . At the same time the railway span was strengthened , with eight additional steel beams installed , and steel plates welded to the flanges of the existing girders . The approaches to the bridge were also widened , over a length of 150 metres ( 490 ft ) to the west , and 60 metres ( 200 ft ) to the east . The timber decking was upgraded to a concrete slab that has been repaired a number of times , especially around pier 13 . Some of the connecting bolts in the structure have been replaced , and a concrete approach slab was installed at the western end . In 2008 , the bridge was assessed as being in a well @-@ maintained condition . 
 Main Roads Western Australia identifies Clackline Bridge as Structure Number <unk> . As of 2014 , the bridge dimensions are recorded as 133 @.@ 6 metres ( 438 ft ) in length and 8 @.@ 98 metres ( 29 @.@ 5 ft ) in width , with a distance of 8 @.@ 75 metres ( 28 @.@ 7 ft ) between kerbs , a deck area of 119 @.@ 73 square metres ( 1 @,@ 288 @.@ 8 sq ft ) , and maximum span length of 14 @.@ 2 metres ( 47 ft ) . As of 2008 , it is the only bridge in Western Australia to have crossed both a railway line and a waterway . 
 = = History = = 
 The settlement of Clackline began as a stopping point on the Spencers Brook to Northam section of the Eastern Railway line , which opened on 13 October 1886 . It was also the point where the road to Newcastle ( now Toodyay ) departed the Perth to Kalgoorlie road . Both the road and railway crossed the adjacent Clackline Brook . In 1926 , the newly formed Main Roads Department 's Engineer for Roads and Bridges , A. Fotheringham , described the majority of the Wooroloo to Clackline road as " simply a bush track widened out from time to time by the traffic " . The road crossed the railway line twice , and Clackline Brook via a small <unk> bridge , in the vicinity of the town , but the rail crossings were " awkwardly and dangerously situated in regard to road traffic , owing to limited visibility " , and the water crossing was described in 1935 as " a primitive and inadequate culvert " . 
 Though the need to improve this section of road was recognised in 1926 , funding was limited . Only part of the required improvement work was undertaken , and included rerouting the highway along Lockyer Road , resuming several town lots , and resurfacing the road , at a cost of ₤ 8000 . In March 1934 , torrential rain caused widespread flooding in the Wheatbelt , affecting Northam , Toodyay , York , Beverley , and surrounding areas . Rail services were disrupted , and main roads were cut off at many points , including at Clackline . Some cars managed to bypass the flooded road by driving along the railway line , but such practice was described by the Royal Automobile Club as " highly dangerous " and " against the railway regulations " . The Main Roads Department had been considering completing the remaining improvements in November 1933 , but the flooding made the situation more urgent . It prompted Albert Hawke , MLA for Northam , to write to the Commissioner for Main Roads , E. W. Tindale , urging that the Clackline works commence , especially since works at nearby Northam had almost been finished . 
 = = = Design and construction = = = 
 Main Roads engineer Ernest Godfrey completed a design for the Clackline Deviation , a single bridge over the waterway and railway , in August 1934 . Godfrey was the first bridge engineer for Main Roads , and is credited with introducing concrete and steel bridges into Western Australia ; however , for Clackline Bridge , he proposed using timber – the standard material for the preceding hundred years – with steel construction only for the longer span over the railway . He also suggested that a footpath be included on the bridge , so that schoolchildren and other pedestrians would have a safer railway crossing . The cost was estimated at ₤ 8500 , plus an additional ₤ 700 for the footpath . The initial design was moved 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) south , to satisfy the Railways Department 's requirement that the route not be too close to the Toodyay railway line ( a spur line off the Eastern Railway ) that ran parallel to the highway . This shift increased the curve radius , but required " the destruction of some well developed pine trees inside the old boundary fence of the [ Clackline School ] playground " . 
 Construction was undertaken by Main Roads Department day labourers , starting in January 1935 , as part of an unemployment relief works program . The Western Australian Government Railways ( <unk> ) was involved in various aspects of the project – some railway land acquisition was required , and <unk> supplied and supervised a five @-@ ton crane , used to erect the railway span girders . The bridge was completed less than one year after construction began , which would later be described as " a considerable achievement of the management and workforce for such a complex structure " . Clackline Bridge was opened on 30 August 1935 by Acting Minister for Works H. Millington , having cost £ 9000 . The first vehicle to cross the bridge was Millington 's car , carrying himself and Albert Hawke on the front bumper , and a small boy who decided to take a ride on the rear bumper . Afterwards , there was an official lunchtime party in Northam , hosted by the Northam Roads Board . 
 = = = Safety concerns and upgrades = = = 
 Within two decades the bridge was considered a safety hazard , due to increased traffic volume , speed , and truck sizes . The primary concerns were deficiency in the width and curve radius . The bridge was strengthened as well as widened in 1959 – 60 . Removing the footpath and using that space for the road had been suggested , but instead the structure itself was widened by ten feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , leaving the footpath intact . The approaches to the bridges were widened , new piers were erected either side of the railway span , and eight new girders were installed – six of which were part of the previous Causeway structure . The work was undertaken from a suspended platform , which had to be quickly pulled up when trains went past . The widening , designed by Main Road 's second bridge engineer Gilbert Marsh , cost approximately ₤ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 Clackline Bridge continued to be a safety concern , with several accidents occurring in the 1970s . The narrow road and small curve radius were considered major factors in the accidents , and there was roughness in the road surface between the original and widened sections . A reinforced concrete overlay was installed on the bridge in 1978 , initially with a single coat surface , but then upgraded to a 40 @-@ millimetre @-@ thick ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) bituminous concrete surface in 1987 . The 1980s saw the closure and removal of the Perth – Northam railway line , as well a number of major and sometimes fatal accidents involving prime movers . There were also several car accidents , and the " screaming brakes of cars and hiss of airbrakes " were often heard at night in Clackline . After each accident , damaged sections of the bridge – usually the guardrails , handrails , or bridge entry section – needed to be repaired . A 1989 prime mover accident severely damaged the footpath . Rather than repair the narrow footpath , and given that the railway had been removed , a new pedestrian path was constructed on the ground below the bridge . 
 A bushfire burnt through the area in December 1993 , destroying the former railway 's bridge over Clackline Brook . Clackline Bridge survived , weakened but in a reasonable condition . The damage included internal expansion joints that had failed , split <unk> , and other deteriorated timbers . Steel props were installed to support the bridge , and the substructure was repaired in 1995 , which mainly involved replacing connecting bolts . A concrete approach slab was installed adjacent to the western abutment in 1998 , and in 2013 the concrete deck near pier 13 was repaired . Clackline Bridge was the crossing point for Great Eastern Highway until the highway 's bypass of Clackline opened in February 2008 . The bridge remains open to traffic , as part of the local road network . In July 2012 it once more carried highway traffic , excluding heavy vehicles , when an accident temporarily closed Great Eastern Highway at Spencers Brook Road . 
 = = Replacement = = 
 In the wake of the accidents of the 1970s and 1980s , replacement of Clackline Bridge seemed inevitable ; however , both Main Roads and the Shire of Northam received letters from residents asking for the bridge to be kept . In 1988 , the Shire requested that Main Roads note the preservation value of the bridge , and retain it in any plans for road realignment . A decade later , in 1998 , the bridge was placed on the Northam Municipal Heritage Inventory , in category C – " conserve if possible " . In that same year , it was included in an Institute of Engineers survey of the state 's large timber structures , as a current structure with " very high heritage value " . By this time Great Eastern Highway 's bypass of Clackline was being planned , but maintenance works continued to be undertaken as needed . The bypass was eventually constructed , with works beginning in January 2007 , and the project completed in February 2008 . The Clackline community welcomed the bypass , but there were still concerns that the historic Clackline Bridge would be lost . The bridge has since received a permanent entry on the Heritage Council of Western Australia 's Register of Heritage Places , in November 2008 . The new highway alignment crosses Clackline Brook on a large box culvert , giving vehicles a safer crossing than Clackline Bridge . 
 = 1973 CECAFA Cup = 
 The 1973 CECAFA Cup was the inaugural edition of the CECAFA Cup , and was held in Uganda . The CECAFA Cup is considered Africa 's oldest football tournament , and involves teams from Central and Southern Africa . The matches in the 1973 tournament were played from 22 September 1973 until 29 September 1973 . The tournament was originally the Gossage Cup , contested by the four nations of Kenya , Uganda , Tanzania , and Zanzibar , running from 1929 until 1965 . In 1967 , this became the East and Central African Senior Challenge Cup , often shortened to simply the Challenge Cup , which was competed for five years , until 1971 , before the CECAFA Cup was introduced in 1973 . Uganda , the hosts , won the Cup , beating Tanzania 2 – 1 in the final . The tournament lacked a third @-@ place play @-@ off , so the runners @-@ up in the group stages , Kenya and Zambia , shared third place . After Uganda and Zambia drew in the group stages with the same number of points , goals conceded and goals scored , a play @-@ off occurred , which Uganda won . The tournament has been expanded , and the modern @-@ day tournament consists of 12 different teams ( Ethiopia , South Sudan , Burundi , Rwanda , Sudan , and Eritrea have joined since 1973 ) . 
 = = Participants = = 
 Six nations competed : the original four teams from the Gossage Cup , plus two more teams : 
 = = Group stages = = 
 The group stage began on 22 September and ended on 28 September with Group A 's play @-@ off . The matchdays alternated between group A and group B throughout the week , finishing with the group A play @-@ off . After the end of the scheduled matches in group A , Uganda and Zanzibar were level on the traditional <unk> listed below , so to decide which team qualified for the final a play @-@ off was arranged , won by Uganda . 
 = Release ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Release " is the seventeenth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode originally aired on the Fox network on May 5 , 2002 . The teleplay for the episode was written by David Amann , from a story by John Shiban and Amann , and was directed by Kim Manners . The episode helps to explore one of the show 's story arc involving John Doggett finding the truth behind his son 's murder . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 1 , being watched by 5 @.@ 38 million households , and 7 @.@ 8 million viewers in its initial broadcast . The episode received largely positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Doggett stumbles upon a case that may hold a connection to the murder of his son . With the help of an FBI cadet named Rudolph Hayes ( Jared Poe ) , Doggett acquires information to help his current case as well as establish the link between the present , his Jane Does , and the past — his son , Luke . The link is a man named Nicholas Regali , an organized crime participant who has an association with Bob Harvey , the only suspect in Luke 's case . Though the cadet , Hayes , is not who he says he is , his information proves invaluable in Doggett 's search for release from his son 's death . 
 The idea for " Release " was developed by Shiban , who handed the script over to Amann . The character of Rudolph Hayes was crafted to be an ambiguous character : either he was a genius who was adept at solving crime , comparable to Sherlock Holmes , or he was a criminal mastermind , like Professor Moriarty . The final scene , featuring Doggett scattering his son 's ashes , was difficult for Patrick to film , but thanks to Manners ' help , he was able to achieve the desired effect . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Mendota , Minnesota , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) arrives at an abandoned apartment building after getting a tip , and sees a figure bolt out of one of the rooms during the night . He hears a scratching sound and claws away at the fresh plaster wall until blood begin streaming downward . Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) performs an autopsy on the body Doggett found and one of her FBI cadets , Rudolph Hayes , accurately guesses that the victim hooked up with a psychotic killer at a bar . Hayes 's suggestions lead Scully to connect this murder to another killing two weeks earlier . In the meantime , Doggett wonders why anyone tipped him of the murder , since it is not an X @-@ File . 
 Doggett and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) try to get more help from Hayes . He tells them that the killer they are looking for is a criminal linked to organized crime . The two agents later meet up with Nicholas Regali , a former mobster who claims he is looking for a job in the area . They later find out that Hayes 's intuition about Regali was correct . Meanwhile , Hayes returns to his apartment complex where walls are covered with crime scene photos related to the death of Luke Doggett . Eventually , Doggett asks Hayes for help solving the case about his son 's death . Hayes tells Doggett that he believes that Robert Harvey was behind the kidnapping of Luke , but that Regali killed him . 
 Looking for help , Doggett approaches FBI Assistant Director Brad Follmer ( Cary Elwes ) for help on the case . Doggett 's ex @-@ wife , Barbara Doggett , meets up for a lineup at a police station . Barbara does not recognize Regali or anyone else on the lineup . Scully finds some similarities between Luke and the two dead bodies , but no forensic proof . Doggett comes to realize that Regali has had help from someone within the FBI all along . Follmer informs Reyes and Doggett that Cadet Hayes is really Stuart Mimms , a former mental patient . He also informs them that Mimms lived in New York City during the year of Luke 's murder , hinting that Mimms is the murderer and not Regali . Doggett and Reyes assemble a SWAT team to raid Mimms apartment . Mimms is taken into police custody and at a new lineup , Barbara recognizes Mimms . 
 At a meeting between Follmer and Regali , Follmer says he is finished consorting with him , but Regali reminds him he was being bribed , and threatens to blackmail him . In the meantime , Mimms tells Scully that he first noticed the case of Luke Doggett when he read it in a newspaper . He further stated that he lied about his name so that he could help solve the case . At the end , he still pushes that Regali is the real murderer of Doggett 's son , and not him . Later on , Doggett approaches Regali . Regali tells him a " hypothetical " story about how a pedophile took a young boy to his home . A " businessman " then walked in on the incident , realized that the boy has seen his face , and feared that the boy might associate him with the crime . The businessman then found a solution to the boy seeing his face : he murdered him . Regali then walks away and Doggett , filled with rage , <unk> his gun and follows . But a gunshot rings out and when Doggett gets outside , he sees Regali has been killed by Follmer . Later , Doggett and Barbara scatter Luke 's ashes into the ocean , finally achieving the release he has sought . 
 = = Production = = 
 The story for " Release " was developed by John Shiban and David Amman ; the teleplay was written by Amann . Kim Manners helmed the directing of the episode . " Release " was originally going to be written by Shiban alone , but he later turned the script over to Amann because he was needed elsewhere at the time . Shiban had been desiring to write a story like " Release " for a while . The character of Hayes was crafted as an ambitious character , inspired by the works of Arthur Conan Doyle : he was written to be either a " brilliant guy who 's solving crimes with his amazing intuition " , comparable to Sherlock Holmes , or " a guy who 's actually doing those crimes and playing a game " , like Professor Moriarty . Shiban and Amman came up with a story wherein Scully encounters a " genius " from her classes at the FBI Academy at Quantico . Later on , they extrapolated on the story , allowing the " genius " crime solver to help John Doggett find out what happened to his son , Luke Doggett . 
 The final scene wherein Doggett and his ex @-@ wife scatter Luke 's remains was called " difficult " by Robert Patrick . He later noted that Manners " was there to guide us along ; I can think of no worst [ sic ] nightmare for a parent than to lose their child . " The episode was written to create closure to Doggett 's story . Patrick later said that , if the series had continued for a tenth season , he would have liked to see his character develop a relationship with Reyes , because " I think Doggett was very attracted to Reyes [ … ] I would have liked to see the relationship with Reyes explored more . " Gish agreed , noting that the show 's ending never allowed the idea to be fleshed out , but that Reyes " would have definitely gone further with their relationship . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Release " first aired in the United States on May 5 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on March 9 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 38 million households , and 7 @.@ 8 million viewers . It ranked as the fifty @-@ fifth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending May 5 . " Release " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households . 
 Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode an A – grade . In a season review , Michelle Kung from Entertainment Weekly called the episode " worthy " , but noted that it was overshadowed by the show 's " ludicrous conspiracy plots " . Jeffrey Robinson from DVD Talk concluded that " Release " was a " good episode " because it " presented conclusions to [ one of the ] long running stories in the series [ in that it ] featured the conclusion to John Doggett 's personal trial , his quest for closure with his son 's murder . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , gave the episode a glowing review and rated it five stars out of five . The two argued that , because of the " minimal emphasis " Doggett 's son 's murder was given in the show , the episode " packs [ a ] punch " . Shearman and Pearson saw similarities between Doggett 's trials and those of Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) . They noted that while " Mulder was always identified by his quest for his sister [ Samantha ] " , Doggett " carried the loss of his son as a private grief . " They concluded that this structuring made the entry " emotionally powerful " and " moving " . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , complimented the " lyrical style " of the episode , calling it " gorgeously shot " and " well acted " . Other reviews were not as glowing . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a negative review and awarded it a 4 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this episode made about as much sense as ' Underneath ' or ' Jump the Shark ' . It was entirely inappropriate for John Doggett ’ s struggle to end with someone else ’ s actions . If this is the way the series is going to end , then I have to say , my hopes for a rousing finale are dwindling . " 
 = Community of Royalist People 's Party = 
 The Community of Royalist People 's Party ( Khmer : <unk> ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ្ រ ្ <unk> ្ <unk> ; CRPP ) was a Cambodian political party that lasted from March 2014 until January 2015 . It was founded and led by Norodom Ranariddh , who had been ousted from FUNCINPEC back in 2006 . Ideologically a royalist party , the CRPP drew its inspiration from the political legacy of the former King of Cambodia , Norodom Sihanouk , and competed for its voter base with both FUNCINPEC and the Cambodia National Rescue Party ( CNRP ) . In January 2015 , the CRPP was dissolved when Ranariddh returned to FUNCINPEC . 
 = = History = = 
 On 25 February 2014 , former First Prime Minister of Cambodia Norodom Ranariddh , who was ousted from FUNCINPEC in 2006 , announced plans to return to politics and lead the formation the Community of Royalist People 's Party . The Cambodian Interior Ministry reportedly received a request from the party to be formally registered as a political party . In March 2014 , Ranariddh hosted the party 's official launching ceremony at the Phnom Penh Sunway Hotel , where he revealed the party logo and signed registration papers for the party . In April 2014 , the CRPP 's registration was officially approved by the Interior Ministry . A month later , CRPP appointed a new chief @-@ of @-@ cabinet <unk> <unk> , and the party also made an in @-@ advance registration with the Interior Ministry to run for general elections scheduled to be held in 2018 . In June 2014 , the CRPP held a party to mark its official launch , and opened its headquarters at the <unk> Keo District in Phnom Penh . 
 In October 2014 , a public spate arose between Ranariddh and his personal secretary , <unk> <unk> . Ranariddh accused <unk> of <unk> him , which prompted the latter to resign from the CRPP . Two months later , in December 2014 , the Phnom Penh Post reported that several high @-@ ranking FUNCINPEC officials defected to the CRPP , which included a former secretary of state , former provincial governor and former deputy national police chief . On 2 January 2015 , Ranariddh announced his plan to return to FUNCINPEC , after being ousted from the party in 2006 . The announcement was made after a private meeting with Prime Minister Hun Sen who had urged Ranariddh to rejoin his former party . The CRPP was subsequently dissolved when Ranariddh returned to FUNCINPEC later in the latter part of January 2015 . 
 = = Ideology and political positions = = 
 The CRPP was a royalist party , and Ranariddh stated in February 2015 that the party aligns itself to the political legacy of Norodom Sihanouk . The CRPP also stated that it directly competed for the voter base from the CNRP and FUNCINPEC , but not with the Cambodian People 's Party ( CPP ) . At the party 's launching ceremony in March 2014 , Ranariddh added that the CRPP would not seek to align itself with the CPP or CNRP . Ranariddh also expressed interest to resolve socioeconomic problems such as poverty , low wages and corruption , which he claimed were worsened by the effects of the political protests as a result of political differences between the CPP and CNRP . In June 2014 , Ranariddh outlined several reform proposals at a party meeting for youths , such as reviewing 99 @-@ year land leases to identify illegal land concessions and helping more youths to seek employment locally . 
 The CRPP maintained frosty relations with FUNCINPEC , which had earlier ousted Ranariddh as its president in 2006 . When Ranariddh announced plans to form the party in February 2014 , several FUNCINPEC leaders including Nhek Bun Chhay , Keo <unk> <unk> and Sisowath <unk> questioned Ranariddh 's leadership abilities and past political track record . Ranariddh was particularly critical of the CNRP and in March 2014 , he denied accusations by CNRP leader Sam Rainsy that the CRPP was formed with the aim of splitting the opposition voter base . Ranariddh also charged that the Rainsy would end Cambodia 's status as a constitutional monarchy if they were elected to power . In May 2014 , Ranariddh called on the CPP and CNRP to form a unity government and proposed that the CRPP was keen to act as a mediator between the two parties . 
 = = Logo = = 
 The CRPP 's party logo had a circular design , and bears Ranariddh 's initials in the Khmer language . The logo also includes the number " 9 " , which represents power according to brahmin tradition . Around the logo were three circles ; one was yellow , representing the monarchy , another was white , representing peace , and the third was green , representing water . On Ranariddh 's return to the party in January 2015 , FUNCINPEC adopted a new logo that was inspired by that of the defunct CRPP 's party logo . 
 = Iron Man ( 2008 film ) = 
 Iron Man is a 2008 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character of the same name , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Paramount Pictures.1 It is the first film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . The film was directed by Jon Favreau , with a screenplay by Mark Fergus & Hawk Ostby and Art Marcum & Matt Holloway . It stars Robert Downey Jr . , Terrence Howard , Jeff Bridges , Shaun Toub and Gwyneth Paltrow . In Iron Man , Tony Stark , an industrialist and master engineer , builds a powered exoskeleton and becomes the technologically advanced superhero Iron Man . 
 The film had been in development since 1990 at Universal Pictures , 20th Century Fox , or New Line Cinema at various times , before Marvel Studios reacquired the rights in 2006 . Marvel put the project in production as its first self @-@ financed film , with Paramount Pictures as its distributor . Favreau signed on as director , aiming for a naturalistic feel , and he chose to shoot the film primarily in California , rejecting the East Coast setting of the comics to differentiate the film from numerous superhero films set in New York City @-@ esque environments . During filming , the actors were free to create their own dialogue because pre @-@ production was focused on the story and action . Rubber and metal versions of the armors , created by Stan Winston 's company , were mixed with computer @-@ generated imagery to create the title character . 
 Iron Man premiered in Sydney on April 14 , 2008 , and was released in theaters on May 2 , 2008 . The film was a critical and commercial success , grossing over $ 585 million and garnering widespread critical acclaim , with Downey 's performance as Tony Stark particularly praised . The American Film Institute selected the film as one of the ten best of the year , it was also nominated for two Academy Awards for the Best Sound Editing and the Best Visual Effects . A sequel , Iron Man 2 , was released on May 7 , 2010 , and another sequel , Iron Man 3 , was released on May 3 , 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Genius , billionaire , and playboy Tony Stark , who has inherited the defense contractor Stark Industries from his father , is in war @-@ torn Afghanistan with his friend and military liaison , Lieutenant Colonel James Rhodes to demonstrate the new " Jericho " missile . The convoy is ambushed and Stark is critically wounded by one of his own rocket @-@ propelled grenades . He is captured and imprisoned in a cave by a terrorist group , the Ten Rings , and an electromagnet is grafted into his chest by fellow captive Yinsen to keep the shrapnel shards that wounded him from reaching his heart and killing him . Ten Rings leader Raza offers Stark freedom in exchange for building a Jericho missile for the group , but Tony and Yinsen agree Raza will not keep his word . 
 Stark and Yinsen quietly build a powerful electric generator called an arc reactor to power Stark 's electromagnet and a suit of powered armor to aid in their escape . Although they keep the suit hidden almost to completion , the Ten Rings attack the workshop when they discover their hostages ' intentions . Yinsen sacrifices himself to divert them while the suit powers up . The armored Stark battles his way out of the cave to find the dying Yinsen , then in anger burns the Ten Rings weapons and flies away , crashing in the desert and destroying the suit . After being rescued by Rhodes , Stark returns home and announces that his company will no longer manufacture weapons . Obadiah Stane , his father 's old partner and the company 's manager , advises Stark that this may ruin Stark Industries and his father 's legacy . In his home workshop , Stark builds a sleeker , more powerful version of his improvised armor suit , as well as a more powerful arc reactor for his chest . Personal assistant Pepper Potts places the original reactor inside a small glass showcase . Though Stane requests details , Stark keeps his work to himself . 
 At a charity event held by Stark Industries , reporter Christine Everhart informs Stark that his company 's weapons , including the Jericho , were recently delivered to the Ten Rings and are being used to attack Yinsen 's home village , <unk> . Stark also learns Stane is trying to replace him as head of the company . Enraged by these revelations , Stark dons his new armor and flies to Afghanistan , where he saves Yinsen 's village . While flying home , Stark is shot at by two F @-@ 22 Raptor fighter jets . He reveals his secret identity to Rhodes over the phone in an attempt to end the attack . Meanwhile , the Ten Rings gather the pieces of Stark 's prototype suit and meet with Stane , who subdues Raza and has the rest of the group killed . Stane has a massive new suit reverse engineered from the wreckage . Seeking to find any other weapons delivered to the Ten Rings , Stark sends Pepper to hack into the company computer system from Stane 's office . She discovers Stane has been supplying the terrorists and hired the Ten Rings to kill Stark , but the group reneged . Potts meets with Agent Phil Coulson of S.H.I.E.L.D. , a counter @-@ terrorism agency , to inform him of Stane 's activities . 
 Stane 's scientists cannot duplicate Stark 's arc reactor , so Stane ambushes Stark at his home and takes the one from his chest . Stark manages to get to his original reactor to replace the taken one . Potts and several S.H.I.E.L.D. agents attempt to arrest Stane , but he dons his suit and attacks them . Stark fights Stane , but is outmatched without his new reactor to run his suit at full capacity . The fight carries Stark and Stane to the top of the Stark Industries building , and Stark instructs Potts to overload the large arc reactor powering the building . This unleashes a massive electrical surge that causes Stane and his armor to fall into the exploding reactor , killing him . The next day , at a press conference , Stark defies suggestions from S.H.I.E.L.D. and publicly admits to being the superhero the press has dubbed " Iron Man " . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , S.H.I.E.L.D. Director Nick Fury visits Stark at home , telling him that Iron Man is not " the only superhero in the world " , and explaining that he wants to discuss the " Avenger Initiative " . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man : 
 An industrialist , genius inventor , and consummate playboy , he is CEO of Stark Industries and a chief weapons manufacturer for the U.S. military . Favreau had planned to cast a newcomer in the role , but ultimately chose Downey , a fan of the comic , because he felt the actor 's past made him an appropriate choice for the part , explaining " The best and worst moments of Robert 's life have been in the public eye . He had to find an inner balance to overcome obstacles that went far beyond his career . That 's Tony Stark . Robert brings a depth that goes beyond a comic book character who is having trouble in high school , or can 't get the girl . " Favreau felt Downey could make Stark a " likable asshole , " but also depict an authentic emotional journey once he won over the audience . Downey had an office next to Favreau during pre @-@ production , which allowed him greater involvement in the screenwriting process . He brought a deeper sense of humor to the film not present in previous drafts of the script . Downey explained , " What I usually hate about these [ superhero ] movies [ is ] when suddenly the guy that you were digging turns into Dudley Do @-@ Right , and then you 're supposed to buy into all his ' Let 's go do some good ! ' That Eliot Ness @-@ in @-@ a @-@ cape @-@ type thing . What was really important to me was to not have him change so much that he 's unrecognizable . When someone used to be a <unk> and they 're not anymore , hopefully they still have a sense of humor . " To prepare , Downey spent five days a week weight training and practiced martial arts to get into shape , which he said benefited him because " it 's hard not to have a personality meltdown [ ... ] after about several hours in that suit . I 'm calling up every therapeutic moment I can think of to just get through the day . " 
 Terrence Howard as Lt. Colonel James " Rhodey " Rhodes : 
 A friend of Stark 's , and the liaison between Stark Industries and the United States Air Force in the department of acquisitions , specifically weapons development . Favreau cast Howard because he felt he could play War Machine in a sequel . Howard prepared for the role by visiting Nellis Air Force Base on March 16 , 2007 , where he ate with the pilots and observed HH @-@ 60 Pave Hawk rescue helicopters and F @-@ 22 Raptors . While Rhodes is roguish in the comics after he met Stark , his earlier disciplinarian character forms a dynamic with Stark , and he is unsure whether or not Stark 's actions are acceptable . " Rhodey is completely disgusted with the way Tony has lived his life , but at a certain point he realizes that perhaps there is a different way , " Howard said . " Whose life is the right way ; is it the strict military life , or the life of an independent ? " Howard and his father are Iron Man fans , partly because Rhodes was one of the few black superheroes when he was a child . He was a Downey fan since he saw him in Weird Science , and the two competed physically on set . 
 Jeff Bridges as Obadiah Stane : 
 Stark 's business second @-@ in @-@ command , mentor and friend who turns on him to overtake the company , eventually building a giant <unk> to fight Stark . Bridges read the comics as a boy and liked Favreau 's modern , realistic approach . He shaved his head , something he had wanted to do for some time , and grew a beard for the role . Bridges googled the Book of Obadiah , and was surprised to learn retribution is a major theme in that particular book of the Bible , something which Stane represents . Many of Stane 's scenes were cut to focus more on Stark , but the writers felt Bridges 's performance allowed the application of " less is more " . 
 Shaun Toub as Yinsen : 
 Stark 's fellow captive , who grafts an electromagnet to Stark 's chest " to keep the shrapnel shell shards that wounded him from reaching his heart and killing him " , and who helps Stark build the first Iron Man suit . 
 Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts : 
 Stark 's personal assistant and budding love interest . Paltrow asked Marvel to send her any comics they would consider relevant to her understanding of the character , who she considered to be very smart , levelheaded , and grounded . She said she liked " the fact that there 's a sexuality that 's not blatant . " Favreau wanted Potts ' and Stark 's relationship to be reminiscent of a 1940s comedy , something which Paltrow considered to be fun in a sexy , yet innocent way . 
 Additionally , Faran Tahir appears as Raza , the leader of the Ten Rings ; Paul Bettany voices J.A.R.V.I.S. , Stark 's personal AI system ; Leslie Bibb portrays Christine Everhart , a reporter for Vanity Fair ; and Clark Gregg appears as Phil Coulson , an agent of S.H.I.E.L.D .. Will Lyman provides the voiceover during the opening award ceremony . Samuel L. Jackson cameos as Nick Fury , director of S.H.I.E.L.D. , in a post @-@ credits scene . Jackson 's face was previously used as the model for the Ultimate Marvel imprint version of Nick Fury . Other cameos in the film include : Stan Lee as himself , being mistaken for Hugh Hefner by Stark at a party ; director Jon Favreau as Happy Hogan , Stark 's bodyguard and chauffeur ; Tom Morello , who also provides additional guitar music for the film , as a terrorist guard ; and Jim Cramer as himself . Ghostface Killah had a cameo in a scene where Stark briefly stays in Dubai , but the scene was cut from the theatrical release for pacing reasons . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In April 1990 , Universal Studios bought the rights to develop Iron Man for the big screen , with Stuart Gordon to direct a low @-@ budget film based on the property , but by February 1996 , 20th Century Fox had acquired the rights from Universal . In January 1997 , Nicolas Cage expressed interest in portraying the character , while in September 1998 , Tom Cruise expressed interest in producing as well as starring in an Iron Man film . Jeff Vintar and Iron Man co @-@ creator Stan Lee co @-@ wrote a story for Fox , which Vintar adapted into a screenplay . It included a new science @-@ fiction origin for the character , and featured <unk> as the villain . Tom Rothman , President of Production at Fox , credited the screenplay with finally making him understand the character . In May 1999 , Jeffrey Caine was hired to rewrite Vintar and Lee 's script . That October , Quentin Tarantino was approached to write and direct the film . Fox sold the rights to New Line Cinema the following December , reasoning that although the Vintar / Lee script was strong , the studio had too many Marvel superheroes in development , and " we can 't make them all . " 
 By July 2000 , the film was being written for New Line by Ted Elliott , Terry Rossio , and Tim McCanlies . McCanlies ' script used the idea of a Nick Fury cameo to set up his own film . In June 2001 , New Line entered talks with Joss Whedon , a fan of the character , to direct , and in December 2002 , McCanlies had turned in a completed script . In December 2004 , the studio attached director Nick Cassavetes to the project for a target 2006 release . Screenplay drafts were written by Alfred Gough , Miles Millar , and David Hayter , and pitted Iron Man against his father Howard Stark , who becomes War Machine . After two years of unsuccessful development , and the deal with Cassavetes falling through , New Line Cinema returned the film rights to Marvel . 
 In November 2005 , Marvel Studios worked to start development from scratch , and announced Iron Man as their first independent feature , as the character was their only major one not already depicted in live action . According to associate producer Jeremy Latcham , " we went after about 30 writers and they all passed " , saying they were uninterested in the project due to both the relative obscurity of the character and it being a solely Marvel production . Even the rewrites when the film had a script led to many refusals . In order to gain more awareness for Iron Man to the general public , and put him on the same level of popularity as Spider @-@ Man or Hulk , Marvel conducted focus groups to help remove the general thought that the character was a robot , despite a man being inside the armor . After the groups proved successful , the information Marvel received helped them formulate a plan to " build awareness ahead of the movie 's release " , which included three animated short films called " Iron Man <unk> " , which were produced by Tim Miller and Blur Studio . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Jon Favreau was hired in April 2006 to direct the film . Favreau had wanted to work with Marvel producer Avi Arad on another film after they both worked on Daredevil . Favreau celebrated getting the job by going on a diet , and lost seventy pounds . The director found the opportunity to create a politically ambitious " ultimate spy movie " in Iron Man , citing inspiration from Tom Clancy , James Bond , and RoboCop . Favreau described his approach as similar to an independent film — " [ i ] f Robert Altman had directed Superman " — and also cited Batman Begins as an inspiration . He wanted to make Iron Man a story of an adult man literally reinventing himself after discovering the world is far more complex than he originally believed . Favreau changed the Vietnam War origin of the character to Afghanistan , as he did not want to do a period piece . Art Marcum & Matt Holloway were hired to write the script , while Mark Fergus & Hawk Ostby wrote another version , with Favreau compiling both team 's scripts , and John August then ' polishing ' the combined version . Comic book staff Mark Millar , Brian Michael Bendis , Joe Quesada , Tom Brevoort , Axel Alonso , and Ralph Macchio were also called upon by Favreau to give advice on the script . Favreau , as he prepared to film Iron Man in a complex that once belonged to Hughes Aircraft , got a tour with Robert Downey Jr. of SpaceX from Elon Musk , Downey said " Elon was someone Tony probably hung out with and partied with , or more likely they went on some weird jungle trek together to drink concoctions with the shamans . " 
 Choosing a villain was difficult , because Favreau felt Iron Man 's archnemesis , the Mandarin , would not feel realistic , especially after Mark Millar gave his opinion on the script . He felt only in a sequel , with an altered tone , would the fantasy of the Mandarin 's rings be appropriate . The decision to push him into the background is comparable to Sauron in The Lord of the Rings , or Palpatine in Star Wars . Favreau also wanted Iron Man to face a giant enemy . The switch from Mandarin to Obadiah Stane was done after Bridges was cast , with Stane originally intended to become a villain in the sequel . The Crimson Dynamo was also a villain in early drafts of the script . Favreau felt it was important to include intentional inside references for fans of the comics , such as giving the two fighter jets that attack Iron Man the call signs of " Whiplash 1 " and " Whiplash 2 , " a reference to the comic book villain Whiplash , and including Captain America 's shield in Stark 's workshop . The post @-@ credits sequence that introduces Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury was written by comics writer Brian Michael Bendis . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production was based in the former Hughes Company soundstages in Playa Vista , Los Angeles , California . Howard Hughes was one of the inspirations for the comic book , and the filmmakers acknowledged the coincidence that they would film Iron Man creating the flying Mark III where the Hughes H @-@ 4 Hercules was built . Favreau rejected the East Coast setting of the comic books because many superhero films had already been set there . Filming began on March 12 , 2007 , with the first few weeks spent on Stark 's captivity in Afghanistan . The cave where Stark is imprisoned was a <unk> to 200 @-@ yard ( 150 – 200 m ) long set , which had movable forks in the caverns to allow greater freedom for the film 's crew . Production designer J. Michael Riva saw footage of a Taliban fighter in Afghanistan , and saw the cold breath as he spoke : realizing remote caves are actually very cold , Riva placed an air conditioning system in the set . He also sought Downey 's advice about makeshift objects in prison , such as a sock being used to make tea . Afterwards , Stark 's capture was filmed at Lone Pine , and other exterior scenes in Afghanistan were filmed at Olancha Sand Dunes , where the crew endured two days of 40 to 60 @-@ mile per hour ( 60 to 100 km / h ) winds . Filming at Edwards Air Force Base began in mid @-@ April , and ended on May 2 . Exterior shots of Stark 's home were digitally added to footage of Point Dume in Malibu , while the interior was built at Playa Vista , where Favreau and Riva aimed to make Stark 's home look less futuristic and more " grease monkey " . Filming concluded on June 25 , 2007 , at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas , Nevada . Favreau , a newcomer to action films , remarked , " I 'm shocked that I [ was ] on schedule . I thought that there were going to be many curveballs " . He hired " people who are good at creating action " , so " the human story [ felt ] like it belongs to the comic book genre " . 
 There was much improvisation in dialogue scenes , because the script was not completed when filming began ( the filmmakers had focused on the story making sense and planning the action ) . Favreau acknowledged that improvisation would make the film feel more natural . Some scenes were shot with two cameras to capture lines said on the spot . Multiple takes were done , as Downey wanted to try something new each time . It was Downey 's idea to have Stark hold a news conference on the floor , and he created the speech Stark makes when demonstrating the Jericho weapon . Brian Michael Bendis wrote three pages of dialogue for the Nick Fury cameo scene , with the filmmakers choosing the best lines for filming . The cameo was filmed with a skeleton crew in order to keep it a secret , but rumors appeared on the Internet only days later . Marvel Studios 's Kevin Feige subsequently had the scene removed from all preview prints in order to maintain the surprise and keep fans guessing . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Favreau wanted the film to be believable by showing the construction of the suit in its three stages . Stan Winston , a fan of the comic book , and his company built metal and rubber versions of the armors . They had previously worked on Favreau 's Zathura . Favreau 's main concern with the effects was whether the transition between the computer @-@ generated and practical costumes would be too obvious . Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) was hired to create the bulk of the visual effects , with additional work being completed by The Orphanage and The Embassy ; Favreau trusted ILM after seeing Pirates of the Caribbean : At World 's End and Transformers . The Mark I design was intended to look like it was built from spare parts . The back is less armored than the front , because Stark would use his resources for a forward attack . It also foreshadows the design of Stane 's armor . A single 90 @-@ pound ( 41 kg ) version was built , causing concern when a stuntman fell over inside it , though both the stuntman and the suit were unscathed . The armor was also designed to only have its top half worn at times . The Embassy created a digital version of the Mark I. Stan Winston Studios built a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) , 800 @-@ pound ( 360 kg ) animatronic version of " Iron Monger " ( Obadiah Stane ) , a name which Obadiah Stane calls Tony Stark and himself earlier in the film as a reference , but is never actually used for the suit itself in the film . The animatronic required five operators for the arm , and was built on a gimbal to simulate walking . A scale model was used for the shots of it being built . 
 The Mark II resembles an airplane prototype , with visible flaps . Iron Man comic book artist Adi Granov designed the Mark III with illustrator Phil Saunders . Granov 's designs were the primary inspiration for the film 's , and he came on board the film after he recognized his work on Jon Favreau 's MySpace page . Saunders streamlined Granov 's concept art , making it stealthier and less cartoonish in its proportions . Sometimes , Downey would only wear the helmet , sleeves and chest of the costume over a motion capture suit . For shots of the Mark III flying , it was animated to look realistic by taking off slowly , and landing quickly . To generate shots of Iron Man and the F @-@ 22 Raptors battling , cameras were flown in the air to provide reference for physics , wind and frost on the lenses . For further study of the physics of flying , skydivers were filmed in a vertical wind tunnel . Phil Saunders created concept art for the War Machine armor and said that it was originally intended to be used in the film but was " cut from the script about halfway through pre @-@ production . " Saunders said that the War Machine armor " was going to be called the Mark IV armor and would have had weaponized swap @-@ out parts that would be worn over the original Mark III armor , " and that it " would have been worn by Tony Stark in the final battle sequence . " 
 = = Music = = 
 Composer Ramin Djawadi , an Iron Man fan who still has issues of the comic from the late 1970s , has also been into heavy metal music since the early 1990s . While he normally composes after watching an assembly cut , Djawadi began work after seeing the teaser trailer . Favreau clearly envisioned a focus on " heavy " guitar in the score , and Djawadi composed the music on that instrument before arranging it for orchestra . The composer said Downey 's performance inspired the several Iron Man themes ( for his different moods ) , as well as Stark 's playboy leitmotif . Djawadi 's favorite of the Iron Man themes is the " kickass " because of its " rhythmic pattern that is a hook on its own . Very much like a machine . " The other themes are " not so much character based but rather plot based that carry you through the movie " . Tom Morello of Rage Against the Machine and Audioslave contributed additional guitar work to the film 's soundtrack . 
 = = Release = = 
 The premiere was held at the Greater Union theater at George Street , Sydney , on April 14 , 2008 . The film was released in the United States on May 2 , 2008 , while the international release was pushed up to April 30 , 2008 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 Marvel and Paramount modeled their marketing campaign for Iron Man on that of Transformers . In May 2008 , Sega released an official tie @-@ in video game based on the film on multiple gaming platforms . Downey , Howard and Taub reprise their roles from the film . A 30 @-@ second spot for the film aired during a Super Bowl XLII break . 6 @,@ 400 7 @-@ Eleven stores in the United States helped promote the film , and LG Group also made a deal with Paramount . Hasbro created figures of armors from the film , as well as Titanium Man ( who appears in the video game ) and the armor from the World War Hulk comics . Worldwide , Burger King and Audi promoted the film . Jon Favreau was set to direct a commercial for the fast @-@ food chain , as Michael Bay did for Transformers . In the film , Tony Stark drives an Audi R8 , and also has an " American cheeseburger " from Burger King after his rescue from Afghanistan , as part of the studio 's product placement deal with the respective companies . Three other vehicles , the Audi S6 sedan , Audi S5 sports coupe and the Audi <unk> SUV , also appear in the film . Audi created a tie @-@ in website , as General Motors did for Transformers . Oracle Corporation also promoted the film on its site . Several tie @-@ in comics were released for the film . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on September 30 , 2008 , in North America , and October 27 , 2008 in Europe . DVD sales were very successful , selling over 4 million copies the first week and generating a gross of over US $ 93 million . There were a total of 9 million copies sold and an accumulated total sales of over $ 160 million ( not including Blu @-@ ray ) . For the home releases of the film , the image on the newspaper Stark reads before he announces he is Iron Man had to be altered because of amateur photographer Ronnie Adams filing a lawsuit against Paramount and Marvel for using his on @-@ location spy photo in the scene . A Wal @-@ Mart @-@ exclusive release included a preview of Iron Man : Armored Adventures . 
 The film was also collected in a 10 @-@ disc box set titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase One – Avengers Assembled " which includes all of the Phase One films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on April 2 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Iron Man earned $ 318 @.@ 4 million in North America and $ 266 @.@ 8 million in other territories , for a worldwide gross of $ 585 @.@ 1 million . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 In its opening weekend , Iron Man grossed $ 98 @,@ 618 @,@ 668 in 4 @,@ 105 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking No. 1 at the box office , giving it the eleventh biggest @-@ opening weekend at the time , ninth @-@ widest release in terms of theaters , and the third highest @-@ grossing opening weekend of 2008 behind Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull and The Dark Knight . It grossed $ 35 @.@ 2 million on its first day , giving it the thirteenth biggest @-@ opening day at the time . Iron Man had the second @-@ best premiere for a non @-@ sequel , behind Spider @-@ Man , and the fourth biggest @-@ opening for a superhero film . Iron Man was also the No. 1 film in the U.S. and Canada in its second weekend , grossing $ 51 @.@ 1 million , giving it the twelfth @-@ best second weekend and the fifth @-@ best for a non @-@ sequel . On June 18 , 2008 , Iron Man became that year 's first film to pass the $ 300 million mark for the domestic box office . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In May 2008 , Iron Man was identified as the " best @-@ reviewed film of the year so far " by Jen Yamato of review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , with the site reporting that at that time the film had received a rating of 95 % based on 107 reviews , a rating that held its place to January 2010 . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 94 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 7 / 10 based on 266 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " Director Jon Favreau and star Robert Downey make this smart , high impact superhero movie one that even non @-@ comics fans can enjoy . " On Metacritic , the film achieved an average score of 79 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , signifying " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Among the major trade journals , Todd McCarthy of Variety called the film an " expansively entertaining special effects extravaganza " with " fresh energy and stylistic polish " , while Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter praised the film , while nonetheless finding " disappointment [ in ] a climatic [ sic ] battle between different Iron Man prototypes [ ... ] how did Tony 's nemesis learn how to use the suit ? " In one of the first major @-@ daily newspaper reviews , Frank Lovece of Newsday lauded the film 's " emotional truth [ ... ] pitch @-@ perfect casting and plausibly rendered super @-@ science " that made it " faithful to the source material while updating it – and recognizing what 's made that material so enduring isn 't just the high @-@ tech cool of a man in a metal suit , but the human condition that got him there " . A. O. Scott of The New York Times called the film " an unusually good superhero picture . Or at least – since it certainly has its problems – a superhero movie that 's good in unusual ways . " Among the specialty press , Garth Franklin of Dark Horizons commended the " impressive sets and mechanics that combine smoothly with relatively seamless CG " , and said , " Robert Downey Jr . , along with director Jon Favreau [ ... ] help this rise above formula . The result is something that , whilst hardly original or groundbreaking , is nevertheless refreshing in its earnestness to avoid dark dramatic stylings in favor of an easy @-@ going , crowd @-@ pleasing action movie with a sprinkle of anti @-@ war and redemption themes " . 
 Among major metropolitan weeklies , David Edelstein of New York magazine called the film " a shapely piece of mythmaking [ ... ] Favreau doesn 't go in for stylized comic @-@ book frames , at least in the first half . He gets real with it – you 'd think you were watching a military thriller " , while conversely , David Denby of The New Yorker put forth a negative review , claiming " a slightly depressed , going @-@ through @-@ the @-@ motions feel to the entire show [ ... ] Gwyneth Paltrow , widening her eyes and palpitating , can 't do much with an antique role as Stark 's girl Friday , who loves him but can 't say so ; Terrence Howard , playing a military man who chases around after Stark , looks dispirited and taken for granted " . IGN 's Todd Gilchrist recognized Downey as " the best thing " in a film that " functions on autopilot , providing requisite story developments and character details to fill in this default ' origin story ' while the actors successfully breathe life into their otherwise conventional roles " . Noting the cultural elements of the film , Cristobal <unk> Catalan of Bright Lights Film Journal wrote , " Iron Man is far more than playboy fantasy ; it is American foreign policy realized without context [ ... and ] with narrative and directorial precision , once again provides the high @-@ fidelity misogyny and anti @-@ Muslim rhetoric Hollywood is known for . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Roger Ebert and Richard Corliss named Iron Man as among their favorite films of 2008 . It was selected by the American Film Institute as one of the ten best films of the year , and by Empire magazine as one of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time . Tony Stark was also selected by Empire as one of The 100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time , and on their list of the 100 Greatest Fictional Characters , <unk> ranked him at number 37 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 = = = Iron Man 2 = = = 
 The sequel , Iron Man 2 , was released in the United States on May 7 , 2010 with Jon Favreau and Robert Downey Jr. returning as director and lead , respectively , with a screenplay by Justin Theroux . Don Cheadle replaces Terrence Howard in the role of Colonel Rhodes , who is also seen as War Machine . Also starring is Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts ; Mickey Rourke as villain Ivan Vanko ; Sam Rockwell as Justin Hammer ; Scarlett Johansson as S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Natasha Romanoff ; and Samuel L. Jackson as S.H.I.E.L.D. director Nick Fury . 
 = = = Iron Man 3 = = = 
 Disney , Marvel Studios , and Paramount Pictures announced a May 3 , 2013 release date for Iron Man 3 . Favreau said in December 2010 that he would not direct Iron Man 3 , opting to direct Magic Kingdom , but reprised his role as Happy Hogan . Shane Black directed Iron Man 3 , from a screenplay by Drew Pearce . Robert Downey Jr. returned as Tony Stark , as did Gwyneth Paltrow as Pepper Potts and Don Cheadle as Colonel Rhodes , who uses the moniker Iron Patriot . Guy Pearce starred as Aldrich Killian and Ben Kingsley as Trevor Slattery . 
 = Kepler @-@ 6b = 
 Kepler @-@ 6b is an extrasolar planet in the orbit of the unusually metal @-@ rich Kepler @-@ 6 , a star in the field of view of the NASA @-@ operated Kepler spacecraft , which searches for planets that cross directly in front of , or transit , their host stars . It was the third planet to be discovered by Kepler . Kepler @-@ 6 orbits its host star every three days from a distance of <unk> AU . Its proximity to Kepler @-@ 6 inflated the planet , about two @-@ thirds the mass of Jupiter , to slightly larger than Jupiter 's size and greatly heated its atmosphere . 
 Follow @-@ up observations led to the planet 's confirmation , which was announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society on January 4 , 2010 along with four other Kepler @-@ discovered planets . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 NASA 's Kepler satellite trails the Earth and continually observes a portion of the sky between the constellations Cygnus and Lyra . It is devised to search for and discover planets that transit , or cross in front of , their host stars with respect to Earth by measuring small and generally periodic variations in a star 's brightness . Kepler recognized a potential transit event around a star that was designated KOI @-@ 017 , which was named Kepler @-@ 6 after the confirmation of Kepler @-@ 6b . The star was designated " 6 " because it was the sixth planet to be observed ( but the third planet to be discovered ) by the Kepler satellite . 
 After the initial detection of a transit signal by Kepler , follow @-@ up observations were taken to confirm the planetary nature of the candidate . <unk> imaging by the WIYN Telescope was used to determine the amount of light from nearby , background stars that was present . If not accounted for , this light would have made Kepler @-@ 6 appear brighter than it actually was . Consequently , the size of Kepler @-@ 6b would have been underestimated . Radial velocity data was taken by HIRES at the Keck I telescope in order to determine the mass of the planet . Independently , observations were made with the Spitzer Space Telescope at infrared wavelengths of 3 @.@ 6 and 4 @.@ 5 micrometres . Along with additional data taken by Kepler , these observations detected the occultation and phase curves of Kepler @-@ 6b behind its star . 
 The confirmation of Kepler @-@ 6b was announced at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society with the discoveries of planets Kepler @-@ 4b , Kepler @-@ 5b , Kepler @-@ 7b , and Kepler @-@ 8b on January 4 , 2010 . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 6 is a sunlike star in the Cygnus constellation . It is approximately 20 @.@ 9 % more massive than and 39 @.@ 1 % larger than the Sun . With an effective temperature of 5647 K , Kepler @-@ 6 is cooler than the Sun . It is predicted to be 3 @.@ 8 billion years old , compared to the Sun 's age of 4 @.@ 6 billion years . It is most notable for its unusually high metallicity for an exoplanet @-@ bearing star ; with an [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 34 , Kepler @-@ 6 has 2 @.@ 18 times more iron than the Sun does . Kepler @-@ 6b is the only planet that has been discovered in the orbit of Kepler @-@ 6 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 6b is a hot Jupiter , having a mass 0 @.@ 669 times that of Jupiter , but an average distance of only 0 @.@ 046 AU from its star and , thus , an orbital period of 3 @.@ 23 days . It is almost 10 times closer to its star than Mercury is from our Sun . As a result , Kepler @-@ 6b is strongly irradiated by its star , heating its atmosphere to a temperature of 1660 K and puffing it up to a size 1 @.@ 3 times that of Jupiter . It may also be the case that Kepler @-@ 6b has a thermal inversion of its atmosphere , where temperature increases with increasing distance from the center of the planet . However , additional observations are required to confirm or refute this possibility . 
 = Tennessee Walking Horse = 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse or Tennessee Walker is a breed of gaited horse known for its unique four @-@ beat running @-@ walk and flashy movement . It was originally developed in the southern United States for use on farms and plantations . It is a popular riding horse due to its calm disposition , smooth gaits and sure @-@ footedness . The Tennessee Walking Horse is often seen in the show ring , but is also popular as a pleasure and trail riding horse using both English and Western equipment . Tennessee Walkers are also seen in movies , television shows and other performances . 
 The breed first developed in the late 18th century when Narragansett Pacers and Canadian Pacers from the eastern United States crossed with gaited Spanish Mustangs from Texas . Other breeds were later added , and in 1886 a foal named Black Allan , now considered the foundation sire of the breed , was born . In 1935 the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders ' Association was formed , and the studbook closed in 1947 . In 1939 , the first Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration was held , an annual event that in recent years has attracted considerable attention and controversy . 
 The two basic categories of Tennessee Walking Horse show competition are called " flat @-@ shod " and " performance " , differentiated by desired leg action . Flat @-@ shod horses , wearing regular horseshoes , exhibit less exaggerated movement , while performance horses wear built @-@ up pads or " stacks " along with other weighted action devices , creating the so @-@ called " Big Lick " style . Stacks and action devices are prohibited at shows sanctioned by the United States Equestrian Federation and some breed organizations . The Tennessee Walking Horse is the breed most affected by the Horse Protection Act of 1970 , which prohibits the practice of soring , abusive practices used to enhance the Big Lick movement prized in the show ring , which still occur today despite the law . The controversy over continuing soring practices has led to a split within the breed community , criminal charges against a number of individuals , and the creation of several separate breed organizations . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The modern Tennessee Walking Horse is described as " refined and elegant , yet solidly built " . It is a tall horse with a long neck . The head is well @-@ defined , with small , well @-@ placed ears . The breed averages 14 @.@ 3 to 17 hands ( 59 to 68 inches , 150 to 173 cm ) high and 900 to 1 @,@ 200 pounds ( 410 to 540 kg ) . The shoulders and hip are long and sloping , with a short back and strong coupling . The hindquarters are of " moderate thickness and depth " , well @-@ muscled , and it is acceptable for the hind legs to be slightly over @-@ <unk> , cow @-@ hocked or sickle @-@ hocked . 
 They are found in all solid colors , and several pinto patterns . Common colors such as bay , black and chestnut are found , as are colors caused by dilution genes such as the dun , champagne , cream and silver dapple genes . Pinto patterns include overo , sabino and tobiano . The Tennessee Walking Horse has a reputation for having a calm disposition and a naturally smooth riding gait . While the horses are famous for flashy movement , they are popular for trail and pleasure riding as well as show . 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse is best known for its running @-@ walk . This is a four @-@ beat gait with the same footfall pattern as a regular , or flat , walk , but significantly faster . While a horse performing a flat walk moves at 4 to 8 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 to 12 @.@ 9 kilometres per hour ) , the running walk allows the same horse to travel at 10 to 20 miles per hour ( 16 to 32 kilometres per hour ) . In the running walk , the horse 's rear feet overstep the prints of its front feet by 6 to 18 inches ( 15 to 46 centimetres ) , with a longer overstep being more prized in the Tennessee Walking Horse breed . While performing the running walk , the horse nods its head in rhythm with its gait . Besides the flat and running walks , the third main gait performed by Tennessee Walking Horses is the canter . Some members of the breed perform other variations of lateral ambling gaits , including the rack , stepping pace , fox trot and single @-@ foot , which are allowable for pleasure riding but penalized in the show ring . A few Tennessee Walking Horses can trot , and have a long , reaching stride . 
 = = History = = 
 The Tennessee Walker originated from Narragansett Pacer and Canadian Pacer horses brought to Kentucky starting in 1790 , crossed with gaited Spanish Mustangs imported from Texas . These horses were bred on the limestone pastures of central Tennessee , and originally known as " Tennessee Pacers " . Originally used as all @-@ purpose horses on farms and plantations , they were used for riding , pulling and racing . They were known for their smooth gaits and sure @-@ footedness on the rocky Tennessee terrain . Morgan , Standardbred , Thoroughbred and American Saddlebred blood was also added to the breed . 
 In 1886 , Black Allan ( later known as Allan F @-@ 1 ) was born . By the stallion <unk> ( from the Hambletonian family of Standardbreds ) and out of a Morgan mare named Maggie Marshall , he became the foundation sire of the Tennessee Walking Horse breed . A failure as a trotting horse , due to his insistence on pacing , he was instead used for breeding . From his line , a foal named Roan Allen was born in 1904 . Able to perform several ambling gaits , Roan Allen became a successful show horse , and in turn sired several famous Tennessee Walking Horses . 
 The Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders ' Association was formed in 1935 , with the name changed to the current Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders ' and Exhibitors ' Association ( TWHBEA ) in 1974 . The stud book was closed in 1947 , meaning that since that date every Tennessee Walker must have both parents registered to be eligible for registration . In 1950 , the United States Department of Agriculture recognized the Tennessee Walking Horse as a distinct breed . In 2000 , the Tennessee Walking Horse was named the official state horse of the US state of Tennessee . It is the third most common breed in Kentucky , behind the Thoroughbred and the American Quarter Horse . As of 2005 , 450 @,@ 000 horses have been registered over the life of the TWHBEA , with annual registrations of 13 @,@ 000 – 15 @,@ 000 new foals . While the Tennessee Walking Horse is most common in the southern and southeastern US , it is found throughout the country . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Tennessee Walker is noted for its appearance in horse show events , particularly performances in saddle seat @-@ style English riding equipment , but is also a very popular trail riding horse . Some are used for endurance riding , and to promote this use the TWHBEA maintains an awards program in conjunction with the American Endurance Ride Conference . The breed has also been seen in television , movies and other performing events . The Lone Ranger 's horse " Silver " was at times played by a Tennessee Walker , and " Trigger , Jr . " , the successor to the original " Trigger " made famous by Roy Rogers , was played by a Tennessee Walker named Allen 's Gold Zephyr . The position of mascot of the University of Southern California Trojans , Traveler , was held at various times by a purebred Tennessee Walking Horse , and by a Tennessee Walker / Arabian cross . In the 20th century , the Tennessee Walking Horse was crossed with Welsh ponies to create the American Walking Pony , a gaited pony breed . 
 = = Horse shows = = 
 The two basic categories of Tennessee Walking Horse show competition are called " flat @-@ shod " and " performance " . Flat @-@ shod horses compete in many different disciplines under both western and English tack . At shows where both divisions are offered , the flat @-@ shod " plantation pleasure " division is judged on brilliance and show presence of the horses while still being well mannered , balanced , and manageable . " Park pleasure " is the most animated of the flat @-@ shod divisions . Flat @-@ shod horses are shown in ordinary horseshoes , and are not allowed to use pads or action devices , though their hooves are sometimes trimmed to a slightly lower angle with more natural toe than seen on stock horse breeds . Performance horses , sometimes called " padded " or " built up " , exhibit a very flashy and animated gaits , lifting their forelegs high off the ground with each step . This exaggerated action is sometimes called the " Big Lick " . Horses and riders show in saddle seat attire and tack . Horses are shod in double and triple @-@ nailed pads , which are sometimes called " stacks " . This form of shoeing is prohibited at shows governed by the National Walking Horse Association ( NWHA ) , and the United States Equestrian Federation ( USEF ) . 
 Horses in western classes wear equipment similar to that used by other breeds in western pleasure classes , and exhibitors may not mix English and Western @-@ style equipment . Riders must wear a hat or helmet in western classes . Tennessee Walkers are also shown in both pleasure and fine harness driving classes , with grooming similar to the saddle seat horses . Tennessee Walking Horses are typically shown with a long mane and tail . Artificially set tails are seen in " performance " classes , on full @-@ grown horses in halter classes , and in some harness classes , but generally are not allowed in pleasure or flat @-@ shod competition . 
 In classes where horses are turned out in saddle seat equipment , it is typical for the horse to be shown in a single curb bit with a bit shank under 9 @.@ 5 inches ( 24 cm ) , rather than the double bridle more common to other saddle seat breeds . Riders wear typical saddle seat attire . Hats are not always mandatory , but use of safety helmets is allowed and ranges from strongly encouraged to required in some pleasure division classes . 
 = = = Horse Protection Act = = = 
 The showing , exhibition and sale of Tennessee Walking Horses and some other horse breeds is governed by the Horse Protection Act of 1970 ( HPA ) due to concerns about the practice of soring , which developed during the 1950s and became widespread in the 1960s , resulting in a public outcry . Congress passed the Horse Protection Act in 1970 , declaring the practice " cruel and inhumane " . The Act prohibits anyone from entering a sored horse into a show , sale , auction or exhibition , and prohibits drivers from transporting sored horses to a sale or show . Congress delegated statutory responsibility for enforcement to the management of sales and horse shows , but placed administration of the act with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service ( APHIS ) of the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) . Violations of the HPA may result in criminal charges , fines and prison sentences . The USDA certifies certain Horse Industry Organizations ( HIOs ) to train and license Designated Qualified Persons ( DQPs ) to complete inspections . APHIS inspection teams , which include inspectors , investigators , and veterinary medical officers , also conduct unannounced inspections of some horse shows , and have the authority to revoke the license of a DQP who does not follow the standards of the Act . 
 Soring is defined by the HPA with four meanings : " ( 3 ) ( A ) an irritating or blistering agent has been applied , internally or externally , by a person to any limb of a horse , ( B ) any burn , cut , or laceration has been inflicted by a person on any limb of a horse , ( C ) any tack , nail , screw , or chemical agent has been injected by a person into or used by a person on any limb of a horse , or ( D ) any other substance or device has been used by a person on any limb of a horse or a person has engaged in a practice involving a horse , and , as a result of such application , infliction , injection , use , or practice , such horse suffers , or can reasonably be expected to suffer , physical pain or distress , inflammation , or lameness when walking , " Action devices , which remain legal but are often used in conjunction with illegal soring practices , are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations as " any boot , collar , chain , roller , or other device which encircles or is placed upon the lower extremity of the leg of a horse in such a manner that it can either rotate around the leg , or slide up and down the leg so as to cause friction , or which can strike the hoof , coronet band or fetlock joint " . Between 1978 and 1982 , research was undertaken by Auburn University as to the effect of applications of chemical and physical irritants to the legs of Tennessee Walking Horses . The study found that chains of any weight used in combination with chemical soring produced lesions and pain in horses . However , chains of 6 ounces or lighter , used on their own , produced no pain , tissue damage or <unk> changes . 
 Soring can be detected by observing the horse for lameness , assessing its stance and <unk> the lower legs . Some trainers trick inspectors by training horses not to react to the pain that palpation may cause , often by severely punishing the horse for flinching when the sored area is touched . The practice is sometimes called " stewarding " , in reference to the horse show steward . Some trainers use topical anesthetics , which are timed to wear off before the horse goes into the show ring . Pressure shoeing is also used , eliminating use of chemicals altogether . Trainers who sore their horses have been observed leaving the show grounds when they find that the more stringent federal inspection teams are present . Although illegal under federal law for over 40 years , soring is still practiced and criminal charges have been filed against people who violate the Act . Enforcement of the HPA is difficult , due to limited inspection budgets and problems with lax enforcement by inspectors who are hired by the shows they were to police . As a result , while in 1999 there were eight certified HIOs , by 2010 , only three organizations remained certified as HIOs , all known to be actively working to end soring . 
 In 2013 , legislation to amend and strengthen the HPA was introduced in Congress . The President and executive committee of the TWHBEA voted to support this legislation , but the full board of directors chose not to . The bill , H.R. 1518 , was sponsored by Representative Ed Whitfield ( R @-@ KY ) , and Representative Steve Cohen ( D @-@ TN ) , with 216 co @-@ sponsors . On November 13 , 2013 a hearing was held . Supporters included the American Horse Council , the American Veterinary Medical Association , members of the TWHBEA , the International Walking Horse Association , and Friends of Sound Horses . Opponents included members of the Performance Horse Show Association , and the Tennessee Commissioner of Agriculture . 
 = = = Show rules and organizations = = = 
 Controversies over shoeing rules , concerns about soring and the breed industry 's compliance with the Horse Protection Act has resulted in the development of multiple governing organizations . The breed registry is kept by the TWHBEA which promotes all riding disciplines within the breed , but does not sanction horse shows . The USEF does not currently recognize or sanction any Tennessee Walking Horse shows . In 2013 it also banned the use of action devices and stacks at any time in any class . 
 Another organization , the Tennessee Walking Horse Heritage Society , is a group dedicated to the preservation of the original Tennessee Walker bloodlines , mainly for use as trail and pleasure horses , rather than for showing . Horses listed by the organization descend from the foundation bloodstock registered by the TWHBEA , and pedigrees may not include horses shown with stacks post @-@ 1976 . 
 Two organizations have formed to promote the exhibition of flat @-@ shod horses . The NWHA promotes only naturally @-@ gaited horses in its sanctioned horse shows , has its own rule book , and is the official USEF affiliate organization for the breed . The NWHA sanctions horse shows and licenses judges , and is an authorized HIO . The NWHA was in the process of building its own " tracking registry " to document both pedigree and performance achievements of horses recorded there . These included the Spotted Saddle Horse and Racking Horse breeds as well as the Tennessee Walker . However , the NWHA was sued by the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders & Exhibitors Association ( TWHBEA ) , which eventually won some concessions regarding the use of the TWHBEA ’ s copyrighted registry certificates by the NWHA . While the judgment did not prohibit the NWHA from continuing its registry service , it is no longer actively advertised on the NWHA website . 
 The other organization , Friends of Sound Horses ( <unk> ) , also promotes exhibition of flat @-@ shod and barefoot horses , licenses judges for both pleasure classes and gaited dressage , promotes use of gaited horses in distance riding and sport horse activities , and is an authorized HIO . 
 Two organizations promulgate rules for horse shows where action devices are allowed : the Walking Horse Owners Association ( <unk> ) and " <unk> " ( " Sound horses , Honest judging , Objective inspections , Winning fairly " ) which regulates the Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration . The Celebration , in Shelbyville , Tennessee , has been held each August since 1939 , and is considered the showcase competition for the breed . However , in recent years the Celebration has attracted large amounts of attention and controversy due to the concerns about violations of the Horse Protection Act . 
 = Marvel Cinematic Universe = 
 The Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) is an American media franchise and shared fictional universe that is centered on a series of superhero films , independently produced by Marvel Studios and based on characters that appear in publications by Marvel Comics . The franchise has expanded to include comic books , short films , and television series . The shared universe , much like the original Marvel Universe in comic books , was established by crossing over common plot elements , settings , cast , and characters . Clark Gregg has appeared the most in the franchise , portraying Phil Coulson , a character original to the MCU . 
 The first film released in the MCU was Iron Man ( 2008 ) , which began the first phase of films culminating in the crossover film Marvel 's The Avengers ( 2012 ) . Phase Two began with Iron Man 3 ( 2013 ) , and concluded with Ant @-@ Man ( 2015 ) . The films are currently in Phase Three , which began with the release of Captain America : Civil War ( 2016 ) . Marvel Television expanded the universe further , first to network television with Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. on ABC in the 2013 – 14 television season , followed by online streaming with Marvel 's Daredevil on Netflix in 2015 , and then to cable television with Marvel 's Cloak and Dagger , which is scheduled to air in 2017 on Freeform . The MCU also includes tie @-@ in comics published by Marvel Comics , while Marvel Studios has also produced a series of direct @-@ to @-@ video short films and a viral marketing campaign for its films and the universe with the faux news program WHIH Newsfront . 
 The franchise has been seen as an impressive and groundbreaking success in terms of a multimedia shared universe , though critics have found that some of its films and television series have suffered in service of the wider universe . It has inspired other film and television studios with comic book character adaptation rights to attempt to create similar shared universes . The MCU has also been the focus of other media , outside of the shared universe , including attractions at Disneyland and Discovery Times Square , two television specials , guidebooks for each film , a Lego video game , and a commercial with Coca @-@ Cola . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 By 2005 , Marvel Entertainment began planning to independently produce its own films and distribute them through Paramount Pictures . Previously , Marvel had co @-@ produced several superhero films with Sony Pictures Entertainment , New Line Cinema and others , including a seven @-@ year development deal with 20th Century Fox . Marvel made relatively little profit from its licensing deals with other studios and wanted to get more money out of its films while maintaining artistic control of the projects and distribution . Avi Arad , head of Marvel 's film division , was pleased with Sam Raimi 's Spider @-@ Man films at Sony , but was less pleased about others . As a result , they decided to form Marvel Studios , Hollywood 's first major independent movie studio since DreamWorks . 
 Arad 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Kevin Feige , realized that unlike Spider @-@ Man and the X @-@ Men , whose film rights were licensed to Sony and Fox respectively , Marvel still owned the rights to the core members of The Avengers . Feige , a self @-@ professed fanboy , envisioned creating a shared universe just as creators Stan Lee and Jack Kirby had done with their comic books in the early 1960s . To raise capital , the studio secured funding from a seven @-@ year , $ 525 million revolving credit facility with Merrill Lynch . Marvel 's plan was to release individual films for their main characters and then merge them together in a crossover film . Arad , who doubted the strategy yet insisted that it was his reputation that helped secure the initial financing , resigned the following year . 
 In 2007 , at 33 years old , Feige was named studio chief . In order to preserve its artistic integrity , Marvel Studios formed a six @-@ person creative committee with people familiar with its comic book lore that included Feige , Marvel Studios co @-@ president Louis D 'Esposito , Marvel Comics ' president of publishing Dan Buckley , Marvel 's chief creative officer Joe Quesada , writer Brian Michael Bendis , and Marvel Entertainment president Alan Fine , who oversaw the committee . Feige initially referred to the shared narrative continuity of these films as the " Marvel Cinema Universe " , but later used the term " Marvel Cinematic Universe " . Marvel has designated the Marvel Cinematic Universe as Earth @-@ <unk> within the continuity of the company 's multiverse , a collection of fictional alternate universes . 
 In November 2013 , Feige said that " in an ideal world " releases each year would include one film based on an existing character and one featuring a new character , saying it 's " a nice rhythm " in that format . While not always the case , as evident by the 2013 releases of Iron Man 3 and Thor : The Dark World , he said it is " certainly something to aim for . " Feige expanded on this in July 2014 , saying , " I don 't know that we 'll keep to [ that model ] every year , " but we 're doing that in 2014 and 2015 , " so I think it would be fun to continue that sort of thing . " In February 2014 , Feige stated that Marvel Studios wants to mimic the " rhythm " that the comic books have developed , by having the characters appear in their own films , and then come together , much like " a big event or crossover series , " with Avengers films acting as " big , giant linchpins . " After the reveal of multiple release dates for films through 2019 in July 2014 , Feige stated , " I think if you look at some of those dates that we 've announced , we 're going to three in a few of those years . Again , not because there 's a number <unk> telling us to go to three , do more than two pictures a year , but because of the very reason just laid out : It is about managing [ existing ] franchises , film to film , and when we have a team ready to go , why tell them to go away for four years just because we don 't have a slot ? We 'd rather find a way to keep that going . " After the titles were revealed in October 2014 , Feige said , " the studio ’ s firing on all cylinders right now ... which made us comfortable for the first time ... to increase to three films a year [ in 2017 and 2018 ] instead of just two , without changing our methods . " 
 On expanding the characters in the universe and letting individual films breathe and work on their own , as opposed to having Avenger team @-@ ups outside of Avengers films , Feige stated , it ’ s about " teaching the general movie going audience about the notion of the characters existing separately , coming together for specific events and going away and existing separately in their own worlds again . Just like comic readers have been doing for decades and decades ... People sort of are accepting that there 's just a time when they should be together and there ’ s a time when they ’ re not . " In April 2014 , Feige revealed that Edgar Wright 's pitch for Ant @-@ Man in 2006 helped shape the early films of the Marvel Cinematic Universe , saying , " We changed , frankly , some of the MCU to accommodate this version of Ant @-@ Man . Knowing what we wanted to do with Edgar and with Ant @-@ Man , going years and years back , helped to dictate what we did with the roster for Avengers the first time . It was a bit of both in terms of his idea for the Ant @-@ Man story influencing the birth of the MCU in the early films leading up to Avengers . " 
 In October 2014 , Marvel held a press event to announce the titles of their Phase Three films . The event , which drew comparisons to Apple 's Worldwide Developers Conference , was done because all the information was ready . As Feige explained , " We wanted to do this at [ San Diego ] Comic @-@ Con this year . Things were not set ... So the plan has been , since a few weeks before Comic @-@ Con when we realized we weren ’ t going to be able to do everything we wanted to do , is to decide ' let 's do either something we haven ’ t done in a long time , or something we 've never done . ' Which is a singular event , just to announce what we have when it 's ready . I thought that might be early August , or mid @-@ September , it ended up being [ at the end of October ] . " 
 In September 2015 , after Marvel Studios was integrated into The Walt Disney Studios with Feige reporting to Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn instead of Marvel Entertainment CEO Isaac Perlmutter , it was reported that the studios ' creative committee would have " nominal " input on the films moving forward , though would continue to consult on Marvel Television productions , which remained under Perlmutter 's control . All key film decisions going forward will be made by Feige , D 'Esposito and Victoria Alonso . At the end of the month , on how much story is developed for future films of the universe , Feige said there are " broad stroke " though sometime " super @-@ specific things . But for the most part , in broad strokes that are broad enough and loose enough that , if through the development of four of five movies before we get to the culmination ... we still have room to sway and to move and to go and to surprise ourselves in places that we end up . So that all the movies , hopefully when they 're finished , will feel like they 're all interconnected and meant to be and planned far ahead , but really can live and breathe enough as individual movies to be satisfying each and of themselves . " The studio also has various contingency plans for the direction of all of their films , in the event they are unable to secure a certain actor to reprise a role , or require the film rights to a character , such as was done in February 2015 with Spider @-@ Man . 
 In April 2016 , on moving the universe to Phase Four and reflecting on the first three , Feige said , " I think there will be a finality to moments of Phase Three , as well as new beginnings that will mark a different , a very different , a distinctively different chapter in what will someday be a complete first saga made up of three phases . " Joe Russo added , " You build things up and people enjoy the experiences you 've built up . But then you kind of reach an apex or you reach a climax , a moment where you go , ‘ This structure is really going to start to be repetitious if we do this again , so what do we do now ? ’ So now , you deconstruct it . We ’ re in the deconstruction phase with [ Captain America : ] Civil War and leading into [ Avengers : ] Infinity War , which are the culmination films . " On the potential for " superhero fatigue " , Feige stated , " This year , we ’ ve got Civil War and we ’ ve got Doctor Strange in November , two completely different movies . To me , and to all of Marvel Studios , that ’ s what keeps it going . As long as we ’ re surprising people , as long as we ’ re not falling into things becoming too similar ... next year , [ Guardians of the Galaxy Vol . 2 ] , [ Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming ] , Thor : Ragnarok . Those are three totally different movies ... as long as the only shared thing is they come from the same source material and they ’ ve got our Marvel logo in front of the movies . Other than that they can be very distinct . What other studios do , what other properties , nothing we can do about it . " 
 = = = = Distributors = = = = 
 Over time , the distribution rights to Marvel Studios ' films changed hands on multiple occasions . In November 2006 , Universal Pictures announced that it would distribute The Incredible Hulk , in an arrangement separate from Marvel 's 2005 deal with Paramount , which was distributing Marvel 's other films . In September 2008 , after the international success of Iron Man , Paramount signed a deal to have worldwide distribution rights for Iron Man 2 , Iron Man 3 , Thor , Captain America : The First Avenger , and The Avengers . 
 In late December 2009 , The Walt Disney Company purchased Marvel Entertainment for $ 4 billion . In October 2010 , Walt Disney Studios bought the distribution rights for Marvel 's The Avengers and Iron Man 3 from Paramount Pictures , with Paramount 's logo remaining on the films , as well as for promotional material and merchandise , although Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures is the only studio credited at the end of these films . Disney has distributed all subsequent Marvel Studios films . In July 2013 , Disney purchased the distribution rights to Iron Man , Iron Man 2 , Thor and Captain America : The First Avenger from Paramount . The Incredible Hulk was not part of the deal , due to an agreement between Marvel and Universal , where Marvel owns the film rights and Universal owns the distribution rights , for this film as well as the right of first refusal to distribute future Hulk films . According to The Hollywood Reporter , a potential reason why Marvel has not bought the film distribution rights to the Hulk as they did with Paramount for the Iron Man , Thor , and Captain America films is because Universal holds the theme park rights to several Marvel characters that Disney wants for its own theme parks . 
 In February 2015 , Sony Pictures Entertainment and Marvel Studios announced a licensing deal that would allow Spider @-@ Man to appear in the Marvel Cinematic Universe , with the character first appearing in Captain America : Civil War . Marvel Studios also explored opportunities to integrate other characters of the Marvel Cinematic Universe into future Spider @-@ Man films financed , distributed , and controlled by Sony Pictures , with Robert Downey , Jr. the first confirmed to reprise his role as Tony Stark / Iron Man in Spider @-@ Man : Homecoming . In June 2015 , Feige clarified that the initial Sony deal does not apply to the MCU television series , as it was " very specific ... with a certain amount of back and forth allowed . " 
 = = = Television = = = 
 In June 2010 , Marvel Television was launched with Jeph Loeb as head . By July 2012 , the division had entered into discussions with ABC to create a show set in the MCU , and in August , ABC ordered a pilot for a show called S.H.I.E.L.D. , with The Avengers writer / director Joss Whedon involved . Later renamed Marvel 's Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , the series was soon joined by several others at ABC . 
 Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. executive producer Jeffrey Bell stated at the show 's 2014 PaleyFest panel that the producers and the writers are able to read the screenplays for upcoming MCU films to know where the universe is heading , which allowed them to form a general plan for the show through the end of a third season . He noted that since the films have to be " big " and move " quickly through a lot of huge pieces " , it is beneficial for the films to have the television series fill in any " gaps " for them . His fellow executive producer Jed Whedon explained that each Marvel project is intended to standalone first before there is any interweaving , and noted that the series has to work with the film division and be aware of their plans so as not to interfere when introducing someone or something to the universe . Bell elaborated that this was preferable so that people who do not watch the films can still follow the series , and vice versa . Joss Whedon noted that this process " unfortunately just means the TV show gets , you know , leftovers . " He stated that , for example , the series ' creative team initially wanted to use Loki 's scepter from The Avengers but were unable due to Whedon 's plans for it in Avengers : Age of Ultron . 
 By October 2013 , Marvel was preparing four drama series and a miniseries , totaling 60 episodes , to present to video on demand services and cable providers , with Netflix , Amazon , and WGN America expressing interest . In November 2013 , it was announced that Disney would provide Netflix with live @-@ action series based on Daredevil , Jessica Jones , Iron Fist , and Luke Cage , leading up to a miniseries based on the Defenders . Disney CEO Bob Iger stated that Netflix was chosen to air the shows , " when Disney realized it could use the streaming service as a way to grow the popularity of the characters " . He added that , if the characters prove popular , they could become feature films . Quesada confirmed that the series are set within the MCU , and that , beyond connecting to themselves , would connect with the films and other television series . 
 In December 2014 , Loeb explained that " Within the Marvel universe there are thousands of heroes of all shapes and sizes , but the Avengers are here to save the universe and Daredevil is here to save the neighborhood ... It does take place in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It ’ s all connected . But that doesn 't necessarily mean that we would look up in the sky and see [ Iron Man ] . It ’ s just a different part of New York that we have not yet seen in the Marvel movies . " In April 2015 , Loeb explained that " In the world of Marvel Comics , Jessica Jones , and Matt Murdock , and Danny Rand , and Luke Cage all had a previous existing relationship and all grew up on the same kind of stoop in New York . So it lent itself to a world . Does that mean these shows are going to be the same ? No . They can 't be . The characters have different issues , different problems , different feelings about them . While I don 't think they 'll be as varied , the example that I continually give is that I cannot think of two films that are more different in tone than The Winter Soldier and Guardians of the Galaxy . And yet , if you watch them back to back , they feel very Marvel . They feel very much like , ' Oh , it is still the same universe that I 'm in . ' " 
 In October 2014 , Feige said the opportunity " certainly " exists for characters in the Netflix series to appear in Avengers : Infinity War . In March 2015 , Loeb spoke on the ability for the Netflix series to crossover with the films and the ABC series , saying , " As it is now , in the same way that our films started out as self @-@ contained and then by the time we got to The Avengers , it became more practical for Captain America to do a little crossover into Thor 2 and for Bruce Banner to appear at the end of Iron Man 3 . We have to earn that . The audience needs to understand who all of these characters are and what the world is before you then start co @-@ mingling " . In September 2015 , Feige elaborated on the films referencing the television series , saying " I think that 's inevitable at some point ... The schedules do not always quite match up to make that possible . It 's easier for [ the shows ] . They 're more nimble and faster and produce things quicker than we do , which is one of the main reasons you see the repercussions of Winter Soldier or [ Avengers : Age of Ultron ] in the show ... by the time we start doing a movie , they 'd be mid @-@ way through a season . By the time our movie comes out , they 'd be [ starting the next season ] . So finding the timing on that is not always easy . 
 While talking about Marvel potentially making comedy series , Loeb said in January 2016 that Marvel always feels humor should be a part of anything they produce , despite possibly fitting more within a darker genre , as Daredevil and Jessica Jones do , while also staying " grounded and real " . He added , " There are moments of levity that are in life that you need to bring to the table , or else it just becomes overwhelmingly oppressive ... If you 're going to [ explore comic book elements ] , it 's always a good idea to make sure that the audience is aware that , yeah , it 's funny [ too ] . " Also in January , Netflix CCO Ted Sarandos talked about the release schedule of the Marvel Netflix series , saying that they " are produced at the scale of a major film , so there are long production times and long post times . In some case , when we have character crossover , it makes it more difficult to manage production . It ’ s not the goal to put out more than one or two [ each ] year ... The complex one is really The Defenders . The Defenders ' production schedule will determine a lot of the season 2 and 3 output of those shows . " He also noted on potential spin @-@ offs that " all the characters in the universe could also spin out " into their own series at some point , with Netflix ordering Marvel 's The Punisher , a spin @-@ off from Daredevil , that April . 
 Also in April , the ABC @-@ owned cable network Freeform announced Marvel 's Cloak and Dagger , based on the characters of the same name , with a straight @-@ to @-@ series order for 2017 . The network confirmed that the series would be " its first venture into the Marvel Cinematic Universe " , and described the show as a " superhero love story " , a premise that Variety called " a seamless fit for Freeform " given the network 's target audience of " <unk> " ( the 14 @-@ 34 age demographic ) . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 In 2008 , the first official tie @-@ in comic was released . Quesada outlined his plan to expand the MCU into comic books , saying , " The MCU [ comics ] are going to be stories set within movie continuity . [ They are ] not necessarily direct adaptations of the movies , but maybe something that happened off screen and was mentioned in the movie ... Kevin Feige is involved with these and in some cases maybe the writers of the movies would be involved [ as well . ] " Marvel Comics worked with Brad Winderbaum , Jeremy Latcham , and Will Corona Pilgrim at Marvel Studios to decide which concepts should be carried over from the Marvel Comics Universe to the Marvel Cinematic Universe , what to show in the tie @-@ in comics , and what to leave for the films . Marvel has clarified which of the tie @-@ in comics are considered official canonical MCU stories , with the rest merely inspired by the MCU , " where we get to show off all the characters from the film in costume and in comic form . " 
 In August 2011 , Marvel announced a series of direct @-@ to @-@ video short films called Marvel One @-@ Shots , the name derived from the label used by Marvel Comics for their one @-@ shot comics . Co @-@ producer Brad Winderbaum said " It 's a fun way to experiment with new characters and ideas , but more importantly it 's a way for us to expand the Marvel Cinematic Universe and tell stories that live outside the plot of our features . " Each short film is designed to be a self @-@ contained story that provides more backstory for characters or events introduced in the films . In July 2012 , D 'Esposito stated that Marvel was considering the idea of introducing established characters who may not yet be ready to carry their own feature films in future One @-@ Shots , stating , " There ’ s always a potential to introduce a character . We have 8 @,@ 000 of them , and they can ’ t all be at the same level . So maybe there are some that are not so popular , and we introduce them [ with a short ] – and they take off . I could see that happening . " 
 In March 2015 , Marvel 's Vice President of Animation Development and Production , Cort Lane , stated that animated tie @-@ ins to the MCU were " in the works " . That July , Marvel Studios partnered with Google to produce the faux news program WHIH Newsfront with Christine Everhart , a series of in @-@ universe YouTube videos serving as the center of a viral marketing campaign to promote the films and universe . 
 = = = Business practices = = = 
 Marvel Studios developed specific business practices to create its shared universe , including choosing filmmakers that were considered " out @-@ of @-@ left @-@ field " , given their previous work . Feige remarked , " You don 't have to have directed a big , giant visual @-@ effects movie to do a big , giant visual @-@ effects movie for us . You just have to have done something singularly sort of awesome , " adding " It 's worked out well for us when we 've taken people [ such as Jon Favreau , Joss Whedon , Kenneth Branagh , and the Russo brothers , ] that have done very , very good things . Very rarely are one of those good things a big giant blockbuster superhero movie . " When hiring directors , the studio usually has " a kernel of an idea of what we want , " which is presented to potential directors over the course of several meetings to discuss and further expand . " And if over the course of three or four or five meetings they make it way better than what we initially were spewing to them , they usually get the job , " according to Feige . 
 Joe and Anthony Russo discussed the specific process they went through to join Marvel for Captain America : The Winter Soldier , explaining that they met with the studio four times over two months before they were hired , during which they " kept getting more and more specific about what our vision was " , putting together " reference videos , storyboards , script pages , you name it . We did like a 30 @-@ page book that had everything that we ’ d do with the character , from the theme of the movie to the tone of the film to the fighting style to what we liked about the character and what we didn ’ t like " . This meant that by the time they were hired they had already " figured the movie out " . 
 When the studio hired Kenneth Branagh and Joe Johnston to direct Thor and Captain America : The First Avenger , respectively , it made sure both directors were open to the idea of a shared universe , and that they would have to include Avengers set @-@ up scenes in their films . Joe Russo stated , " That 's the exciting component of [ incorporating references to the larger universe ] . ' What can we set up for the future ? ' You 're constantly pitching out ideas that not only affect your movie , but may have a ripple effect that affects other films ... It 's a weird sort of tapestry of writers and directors working together to create this universe that 's sort of organic . " Anthony added , " The great thing about the Marvel [ Cinematic Universe ] , just like the publishing [ arm ] , it ’ s a very vast , inter @-@ connected universe , where characters will have their rise and fall , so to speak , and hand off to other characters . As the cinematic universe moves forward , you may start to see the cinematic universe adopt that same pattern , as the publishing has , where there ’ s closure with some characters and new beginnings with other characters . How those hand @-@ offs are made is always part of the fun . ” Anthony also said , that in order for directors to " fit " in at Marvel , they must " understand how [ to ] take a larger story and wrangle in [ sic ] into a moment , yet keep [ it ] connected . " 
 On allowing directors and writers to work within Marvel 's shared universe concept , Joe Russo said , " I think the way Kevin [ Feige ] does it is there are big pieces that he knows he wants to build towards , but the way that you get there is open to interpretation and improv a little bit . That ’ s defined by who gets involved with the project , the writers and directors involved in the project . " For the Russos in The Winter Soldier , they had to deal with the idea of S.H.I.E.L.D. being infiltrated by Hydra and thus subsequently falling , with Joe saying , " how we get there is all up to us . And I think why Marvel has been so successful is because it ’ s been such a clear plan , that everything is interconnected and they ’ re building emotional capital with each movie that you can then trade off of in the next film . " Joe later elaborated that once each film 's creative team " come up with conceptually what we want to do " for a film , then we will ask questions about whether this would interfere with a storyline in another movie . Or , what ’ s going on in that film , can we pull some of that into this film ? That ’ s where you start looking for the interconnectedness , but it ’ s very important early on that the concept be created in a bubble because you have to protect the idea , it has to be driven by storytelling . Kevin ’ s very good about just attacking each movie as they come and then figuring out what the movies are after that . Because if you get ahead of yourself two things can happen . One is you take your eye off the ball and you make a mess of a movie , and then the second thing that would happen is then you don ’ t get to make any more movies . So he ’ s always in the mindset of “ let ’ s just make this movie now and worry about the next movie when it comes . " 
 Marvel Studios also began contracting their actors for multiple films , including signing actor Samuel L. Jackson to a then " unprecedented " nine @-@ movie contract . In July 2014 , Feige said that the studio has all actors sign contracts for multiples films , with the norm being for 3 or more , and the 9 or 12 film deals " more rare " . Actor 's contracts also feature clauses that allows Marvel to use up to three minutes of an actor 's performance from one film for another , which Marvel describes as " bridging material " . At Marvel Television , actors such as Charlie Cox ( Matt Murdock / Daredevil in Daredevil ) and Adrianne Palicki ( Bobbi Morse / Mockingbird in Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ) are contractually obliged to appear in a Marvel film if asked . In August 2014 , Vincent D 'Onofrio ( Wilson Fisk / Kingpin in Daredevil ) said , " The thing about Marvel is ... they ’ re looking for artists that are willing to take chances and are willing to create characters , even if that character has been around for years and years in comic books , they still are depending on us to create something and take it somewhere else . " 
 In August 2012 , Marvel signed Joss Whedon to an exclusive contract through June 2015 for film and television . With the deal , Whedon would " contribute creatively " on Phase Two of the MCU and develop the first television series set in the universe . In March 2013 , Whedon expanded on his consulting responsibilities , saying , " I understand what Kevin [ Feige ] is going for and where he ’ s heading , and I read the scripts and watch cuts and talk to the directors and writers and give my opinion . Occasionally there could be some writing . But I ’ m not trying to get in anybody ’ s soup , I ’ m just trying to be helpful . " Whedon later elaborated that " Since the story has already been approved and everybody knows what we 're doing with Avengers 2 , we can really lay it out . It 's not like anyone 's saying " well I don 't know , what if I need that ? " It 's like " doing this is troublesome for us , whereas doing this will actually help us . " It 's a dance , but I had to do it on [ The Avengers ] too . You want to honor the events of the last movie but you don 't want to be beholden to them , because some people will see Avengers [ : Age of Ultron ] who did not see any of the movies in between or even Avengers 1 . " He also found working in television and script doctoring to be " great training ground [ s ] for dealing with this ... because you 're given a bunch of pieces and told to make them fit — even if they don 't . " For the Russo brothers and writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely working on Avengers : Infinity War and Phase Three , they saw " a through line from Winter Soldier , through Civil War , right to Infinity War " , with films like Doctor Strange and Thor : Ragnarok laying groundwork for the " culmination " in Infinity War . Subsequently , they talked " to the directors and writers of the other Phase 3 movies on an almost weekly basis , to make sure everything lines up right . " 
 = = Feature films = = 
 = = Television series = = 
 = = Short films = = 
 = = Comic books = = 
 = = Viral marketing = = 
 In July 2015 , Marvel Studios and Google began a viral marketing campaign to promote Ant @-@ Man , centering on a series of in @-@ universe YouTube videos depicting a faux news program , WHIH Newsfront with Christine Everhart . The videos star Leslie Bibb as Christine Everhart , reprising her role from the Iron Man films , who reports on and discusses issues from the MCU . The campaign is an extension of the fictional news network WHIH World News , which is seen reporting on major events in many MCU films and television series , and returned in April 2016 as part of a similar marketing campaign for Captain America : Civil War . The videos feature a news ticker that contains multiple references and easter eggs to the wider MCU , and are supported by ongoing in @-@ universe social media posts that also reference the MCU 's characters and events . The marketing campaign has been called " one of the more well @-@ produced campaigns " as far as viral marketing goes , and " one of the cannier bits of marketing that Marvel have come up with " . 
 = = Recurring cast and characters = = 
 List indicator ( s ) 
 This table includes characters who have appeared in multiple MCU media . 
 A dark grey cell indicates the character has not appeared in that medium . 
 A P indicates a new appearance in onscreen photographs only . 
 Additionally , Paul Bettany was the first actor to portray two main characters within the universe , voicing Tony Stark 's artificial intelligence J.A.R.V.I.S. in the Iron Man and Avengers films , and portraying Vision in Avengers : Age of Ultron and Captain America : Civil War . Stan Lee , creator or co @-@ creator of many of the characters seen in the MCU , has cameo appearances in all of the feature films and television series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Jim <unk> of Herald & Review called the Marvel Cinematic Universe " complicated " and " impressive " , but said , " As more and more heroes get their own film adaptations , the overall universe becomes increasingly confusing . " Kofi Outlaw of Screen Rant stated that while The Avengers was a success , " Marvel Studios still has room to improve their approach to building a shared movie universe " . Some reviewers criticized the fact that the desire to create a shared universe led to films that did not hold as well on their own . In his review of Thor : The Dark World , Forbes critic Scott Mendelson likened the MCU to " a glorified television series " , with The Dark World being a " ' stand @-@ alone ' episode that contains little long @-@ range mythology . " Collider 's Matt Goldberg considered that while Iron Man 2 , Thor and Captain America : The First Avenger were quality productions , " they have never really been their own movies " , feeling that the plot detours to S.H.I.E.L.D. or lead @-@ ups to The Avengers dragged down the films ' narratives . 
 The metaphor of the MCU as " the world 's biggest TV show " was discussed again , after the release of Captain America : Civil War , by Todd VanDerWerff of Vox , who felt that film in particular highlighted Marvel 's success with the model , saying , " Viewed in complete isolation , the plot of Captain America : Civil War makes little to no sense ... [ but ] when you think about where [ Captain America ] has been in earlier Marvel films ... his <unk> about being subject to oversight makes a lot more sense . " VanDerWerff continued that when thinking about the MCU as a television series , many " common criticisms people tend to level at it take on a new context " such as complaints that the films are formulaic , lack " visual spark " , or " shoehorn in story elements " that " are necessary to set up future films " , all characteristics that " are fairly typical on television , where a director 's influence is much lower than that of the showrunner " , in this case , Feige . Comparing the films to the series Game of Thrones specifically , VanDerWerff noted that each solo film checks " in on various characters and their individual side stories , before bringing everyone together in the finale ( or , rather , an Avengers film ) " , with Guardians of the Galaxy being equivalent to the character Daenerys Targaryen — " both separated by long distances from everybody else . " He noted that this format was an extension of early " TV @-@ like " film franchises such as Star Wars , as well as the format of the comics upon which the films are based . " I say all of this not to suggest that film franchises resembling TV series is necessarily a good trend , " VanDerWerff concluded , " For as much as I generally enjoy the Marvel movies , I 'm disheartened by the possibility that their particular form might take over the film industry ... But I also don 't think it 's the end of the world if Marvel continues on ... there 's a reason TV has stolen so much of the cultural conversation over the past few decades . There 's something legitimately exciting about the way the medium tells stories when it 's good , and if nothing else , Marvel 's success shows the film world could learn from that . " 
 Following the conclusion of season one of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , Mary McNamara at the Los Angeles Times praised the connections between that series and the films , stating that " never before has television been literally married to film , charged with filling in the back story and creating the connective tissue of an ongoing film franchise ... [ Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ] is now not only a very good show in its own right , it 's part of Marvel 's multiplatform city @-@ state . It faces a future of perpetual re @-@ invention , and that puts it in the exhilarating first car of television 's roller @-@ coaster ride toward possible world domination . " Terri Schwartz of Zap2it agreed with this sentiment , stating that " the fact that [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] so influenced the show is game @-@ changing in terms of how the mediums of film and television can be interwoven " , though " the fault there seems to be that Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. had to bide time until The Winter Soldier 's release " , which led to much criticism . 
 In January 2015 , Michael Doran of Newsarama and Graeme McMillian of The Hollywood Reporter had a " point @-@ counterpoint " debate in response to the first Ant @-@ Man trailer . Doran stated , " Marvel has raised the bar sooo high that as opposed to just allowing another film to finish under the [ MCU ] bar , we 're all overly and perhaps even eager to overreact to the first thing that doesn 't clear it " . McMillian responded , " at this point , Marvel 's brand is such that I 'm not sure it can offer up something like [ the trailer ] without it seeming like a crushing disappointment ... part of Marvel 's brand is that it doesn 't offer the kind of run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill superhero movie that you 're talking about , that it 's ... at least different enough to tweak and play with the genre somehow ... The fact that there 's such upset about this trailer being ... well , okay ... suggests to me that the audience is expecting something to knock their socks off . " Doran concluded , " That does seem to be the point here — the expectations fans now have for everything Marvel Studios ... [ and ] Marvel is going to eventually falter . " 
 After seeing the portrayal of Yellowjacket in Ant @-@ Man , the antagonist of the film , McMillian noted , 
 It 's hardly a secret that Marvel Studios has a bit of a problem when it comes to offering up exciting characters for their heroes to fight against ... [ their ] villains generally fall into one of two camps . There 's the Unstoppable Monster ... or there 's the Professional White Guy In A Suit With An Ego ... No matter which of the groups the above villains fall into , they share one common purpose : evil . The motivations for evil likely differ — although , invariably , they fall under the umbrella of ' misguided belief in a greater good that doesn 't exist ' — but that really doesn 't matter , because without fail , there will be so little time in the movie to actually properly explore those motivations , meaning that to all intents and purposes , the villain is being evil for reasons of plot necessity and little else ... The strange thing about this is that Marvel 's comic books offer a number of wonderful , colorful bad guys who could step outside the above parameters and offer an alternative to the formulaic villains audiences have gotten used to ( and arguably bored with ) ... In future movies , we can only hope [ they are ] treated in such a way that their freak flags are allowed to fly free . 
 Following the release of Jessica Jones , David Priest at c | net wrote about how the series rescues " Marvel from itself ... Jessica Jones takes big steps forward in terms of theme , craft and diversity . It 's a good story first , and a superhero show second . And for the first time , the MCU seems like it matters . Our culture needs stories like this . Here 's hoping Marvel keeps them coming . " For Paul Tassi and Erik Kain of Forbes , watching the series made them question the MCU , with Kain feeling that the " morally complex , violent , dark world of Jessica Jones has no place in the MCU ... right now , the MCU is holding back shows like Jessica Jones and Daredevil , while those shows are contributing absolutely nothing to the MCU . " Tassi went so far as to wonder what " the point of the Marvel Cinematic Universe " is , lamenting the lack of major crossovers in the franchise since the Winter Soldier reveal on Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and saying that Jessica Jones is " so far removed from the world of The Avengers , it might as well not be in the same universe at all ... [ I ] really don 't understand the point of [ the MCU ] if they 're going to keep everything within it separated off in these little boxes " . Conversely , Eric Francisco of Inverse called Jessica Jones 's lack of overt connections to the MCU " the show 's chief advantage . Besides demonstrating how physically wide open the MCU 's scope really is , Jessica Jones also proves the MCU 's thematic durability . " 
 In April 2016 , Marvel Studios revealed that Alfre Woodard would appear in Captain America : Civil War , having already been cast as Mariah Dillard in Luke Cage the previous year . This " raised hopes that Marvel could be uniting its film and Netflix universes " , with " one of the first and strongest connections " between the two . However , Civil War writers Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely revealed that Woodard would instead be portraying Miriam Sharpe in the film , explaining that she had been cast on the suggestion of Robert Downey , Jr . , and they had not learnt of her casting in Luke Cage until afterwards . This was not the first instance of actors being cast in multiple roles in the MCU , but this casting was called more " significant " , and seen by many as a " disappointing " indication of " the growing divide " and " lack of more satisfying cooperation " between Marvel Studios and Marvel Television following the September 2015 corporate reshuffling of Marvel Entertainment . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 In September 2014 , the University of Baltimore announced a course beginning in the 2015 spring semester revolving around the Marvel Cinematic Universe , to be taught by Arnold T. Blumberg . " Media Genres : Media Marvels " examines " how Marvel 's series of interconnected films and television shows , plus related media and comic book sources and Joseph Campbell 's monomyth of the ' hero 's journey ' , offer important insights into modern culture " as well as Marvel 's efforts " to establish a viable universe of plotlines , characters , and backstories . " 
 = = = Other studios = = = 
 After the release of The Avengers in May 2012 , Tom Russo of Boston.com noted that aside from the occasional " novelty " such as Aliens vs. Predator ( 2004 ) , the idea of a shared universe was virtually unheard of in Hollywood . Since that time , the shared universe model created by Marvel Studios has begun to be replicated by other film studios that held rights to other comic book characters . In April 2014 , Tuna Amobi , a media analyst for Standard & Poor ’ s Equity Research Services , stated that in the previous three to five years , Hollywood studios began planning " <unk> " for years to come , opposed to working one blockbuster at a time . Amobi added , " A lot of these superhero characters were just being left there to gather dust . Disney has proved that this [ approach and genre ] can be a gold mine . " However , with additional studios now " playing the <unk> game " , Doug Creutz , media analyst for Cowen and Company , feels the allure will eventually die for audiences : " If Marvel 's going to make two or three films a year , and Warner Brothers is going to do at least a film every year , and Sony 's going to do a film every year , and Fox [ is ] going to do a film every year , can everyone do well in that scenario ? I 'm not sure they can . " 
 = = = = DC Entertainment and Warner Bros. = = = = 
 In October 2012 , following its legal victory over Joe Shuster 's estate for the rights to Superman , Warner Bros. announced that it planned to move ahead with its long @-@ awaited Justice League film , uniting such DC Comics superheroes as Batman , Superman , and Wonder Woman . The company was expected to take the opposite approach to Marvel , releasing individual films for the characters after they have appeared in a team @-@ up film . The release of Man of Steel in 2013 was intended to be the start of a new shared universe for DC , " laying the groundwork for the future slate of films based on DC Comics . " In 2014 , Warner Bros. announced that slate of films , similarly to Disney and Marvel claiming dates for films years in advance . That year , DC CCO Geoff Johns stated that the television series Arrow and The Flash were set in a separate universe from the new film one , later clarifying that " We look at it as the multiverse . We have our TV universe and our film universe , but they all co @-@ exist . For us , creatively , it 's about allowing everyone to make the best possible product , to tell the best story , to do the best world . Everyone has a vision and you really want to let the visions shine through ... It 's just a different approach [ to Marvel 's ] . " 
 Discussing the apparent failure of the cinematic universe 's first team @-@ up film , Batman v Superman : Dawn of Justice , to establish a successful equivalent to the MCU , Todd VanDerWerff noted that where the MCU has a television @-@ like " showrunner " in Feige , " the visionary behind Marvel 's entire slate " , the <unk> has director Zack Snyder , whose DC films " seemingly start from the assumption that people have come not to see an individual story but a long series of teases for other ones . It 's like he knows what he needs to do but can 't focus on the task at hand . TV certainly isn 't immune to that problem , but shows that get caught up in high @-@ concept premises and big @-@ picture thinking before doing the necessary legwork to establish characters and their relationships tend to be canceled . " Subsequently , in May 2016 , Warner Bros. gave oversight of the <unk> to Johns and executive Jon Berg in an attempt to " unify the disparate elements of the DC movies " and emulate Marvel 's success . The two were made producers on the Justice League films , on top of Johns ' involvement in several " solo " films , such as the post @-@ production process of Suicide Squad or the writing process of a standalone Batman film . 
 = = = = 20th Century Fox = = = = 
 In November 2012 , 20th Century Fox announced plans to create their own shared universe , consisting of Marvel properties that it holds the rights to including the Fantastic Four and X @-@ Men , with the hiring of Mark Millar as supervising producer . Millar said , " Fox are thinking , ' We 're sitting on some really awesome things here . There is another side of the Marvel Universe . Let 's try and get some cohesiveness going . ' So they brought me in to oversee that really . To meet with the writers and directors to suggest new ways we could take this stuff and new properties that could spin out of it . " X @-@ Men : Days of Future Past , released in 2014 , was Fox 's first step towards expanding their stable of Marvel properties and creating this universe , ahead of the release of a Fantastic Four reboot film the next year . However , in May 2014 , Days of Future Past and Fantastic Four screenwriter Simon Kinberg stated that the latter film would not take place in the same universe as the X @-@ Men films , explaining that " none of the X @-@ Men movies have acknowledged the notion of a sort of superhero team — the Fantastic Four . And the Fantastic Four acquire powers , so for them to live in a world where mutants are prevalent is kind of complicated , because you 're like , ' Oh , you 're just a mutant . ' Like , ' What 's so fantastic about you ? ' ... they live in discrete universes . " In July 2015 , X @-@ Men director Bryan Singer said that there was still potential for a crossover between the X @-@ Men and Fantastic Four franchises , if reaction to Fantastic Four and X @-@ Men : Apocalypse warranted it . 
 Feeling that Singer 's efforts in Apocalypse to establish a larger world , similar to the MCU , did not meet the standards established by Marvel , VanDerWerff noted that unlike Feige 's ability to serve as " pseudo @-@ showrunner " , Singer is instead " steeped in film and the way movie stories have always been told " , so " when it comes time to have Apocalypse dovetail with story threads from the earlier X @-@ Men : First Class ( which was directed by someone else entirely ) , both Singer 's direction and Simon Kinberg 's script rely on hackneyed devices and clumsy storytelling " , indicating a lack of " the kind of big @-@ picture thinking this sort of mega franchise requires " . 
 = = = = Sony Pictures = = = = 
 In November 2013 , Sony Pictures Entertainment Co @-@ Chairman Amy Pascal announced that the studio intended to expand their universe created within the Marc Webb Amazing Spider @-@ Man series , with spin @-@ off adventures for supporting characters , in an attempt to replicate Marvel and Disney 's model . The next month , Sony announced Venom and Sinister Six films , both set in the Amazing Spider @-@ Man universe . With this announcement , IGN stated that the spin @-@ offs are " the latest example of what we can refer to as " the Avengers effect " in Hollywood , as studios work to build interlocking movie universes . " Sony chose not to replicate the Marvel Studios model of introducing individual characters first before bringing them together in a team @-@ up film , instead making the Spider @-@ Man adversaries the stars of future films . However , in February 2015 , Sony Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that the Spider @-@ Man franchise would be retooled , with a new film co @-@ produced by Feige and Pascal being released in July 2017 , and the character being integrated into the MCU . Sony Pictures would continue to finance , distribute , own , and have final creative control of the Spider @-@ Man films . With this announcement , sequels to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 were canceled , and by November 2015 the Venom and Sinister Six films , as well as spin @-@ offs based on female characters in the Spider @-@ Man universe , were no longer moving forward . By March 2016 , the Venom film had itself been retooled , to start its own franchise unrelated to the MCU Spider @-@ Man . 
 After Sony canceled their shared universe plans and started sharing the Spider @-@ Man character with Marvel Studios , multiple critics discussed their failure at replicating the MCU . Scott Meslow of The Week noted the perceived flaws of the first Amazing Spider @-@ Man film , outside of its lead performances , and how the sequel " doubles down on all the missteps of the original while adding a few of its own . … We now have a textbook example of how not to reboot a superhero franchise , and if Sony and Marvel are wise , they 'll take virtually all those lessons to heart as they chart Spider @-@ Man 's next course . " Scott Mendelson noted that The Amazing Spider @-@ Man 2 " was sold as less a sequel to The Amazing Spider @-@ Man than a backdoor pilot for Spider @-@ Man vs. the Sinister Six . … Had Sony stuck with the original plan of a scaled @-@ down superhero franchise , one that really was rooted in romantic drama , they would have at least stuck out in a crowded field of superhero franchises . When every superhero film is now going bigger , Amazing Spider @-@ Man could have distinguished itself by going small and intimate . " This would have saved Sony " a boatload of money " , and potentially reversed the film 's relative financial failure . 
 = = Outside media = = 
 = = = Live attractions = = = 
 After the acquisition by Disney in 2009 , Marvel films began to be marketed at the Innoventions attraction in Tomorrowland at Disneyland . For Iron Man 3 , the exhibit , entitled Iron Man Tech Presented by Stark Industries , features the same armor display that was shown at the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con , with the Marks I @-@ VII and the new Mark XLII . In addition , there is a simulator game , titled " Become Iron Man , " that uses Kinect @-@ like technology to allow the viewer to be encased in an animated Mark XLII armor and take part in a series of " tests , ” in which you fire <unk> rays and fly through Tony Stark 's workshop . The game is guided by J.A.R.V.I.S. , who is voiced again by Paul Bettany . The exhibit also has smaller displays that include helmets and chest pieces from the earlier films and the gauntlet and boot from an action sequence in Iron Man 3 . The exhibit for Thor : The Dark World is called Thor : Treasures of Asgard , and features displays of Asgardian relics and transports guests to Odin 's throne room , where they are greeted by Thor . Captain America : The Winter Soldier 's exhibit , Captain America : The Living Legend and Symbol of Courage , features a meet and greet experience . At San Diego Comic @-@ Con 2016 , it was revealed that the Tower of Terror at Disney California Adventure would be replaced by a new attraction , Guardians of the Galaxy - Mission : Breakout ! . Chris Pratt , Zoe Saldana , Dave Bautista and Benicio del Toro all filmed exclusive footage for the attraction , reprising their roles as Peter Quill / Star @-@ Lord , Gamora , Drax and Taneleer Tivan / The Collector , respectively . 
 = = = = Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. = = = = 
 In May 2014 , the Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. ( Scientific Training and Tactical Intelligence Operative Network ) exhibit opened at the Discovery Times Square center . The exhibit features replica set pieces , as well as actual props from the films , mixed with interactive technology and information , crafted through a partnership with NASA and other scientists . Titus Welliver also provides a " debrief " to visitors , reprising his role as S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Felix Blake . Created by Victory Hill Exhibits , Avengers S.T.A.T.I.O.N. cost $ 7 @.@ 5 million to create , and ran through early September 2015 . 
 The exhibit also opened in Korea at the War Memorial of Korea in April 2015 , in Paris at Esplanade de La Défense a year later , and in Las Vegas at the Treasure Island Hotel and Casino in June 2016 . The Las Vegas version of the exhibit featured updated character details and corresponding science to incorporate the Marvel films that have released since the original exhibit in New York . Additionally , the Las Vegas version features Colbie Smulders reprising her role as Maria Hill to " debrief " visitors , replacing Welliver . 
 = = = Television specials = = = 
 = = = = Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe ( 2014 ) = = = = 
 On March 18 , 2014 , ABC aired a one @-@ hour television special titled Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe , which documented the history of Marvel Studios and the development of the Marvel Cinematic Universe , and included exclusive interviews and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage from all of the films , One @-@ Shots and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and sneak peeks of Avengers : Age of Ultron , Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Guardians of the Galaxy , unaired episodes of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , and Ant @-@ Man . Brian Lowry of Variety felt the special , " contains a pretty interesting business and creative story . While it might all make sense in hindsight , there was appreciable audacity in Marvel ’ s plan to release five loosely connected movies from the same hero @-@ filled world , beginning with the cinematically unproven Iron Man and culminating with superhero team The Avengers . As such , this fast @-@ moving hour qualifies as more than just a cut @-@ and @-@ paste job from electronic press kits , although there ’ s an element of that , certainly . " The special was released on September 9 , 2014 on the home media for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. season 1 . 
 = = = = Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp to Pop ! ( 2014 ) = = = = 
 In September 2014 , Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. executive producer Jeffrey Bell stated that in order to meet production demands and avoid having to air repeat episodes , ABC would likely air a Marvel special in place of a regular installment at some point during the first ten episodes of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s second season . In October , the special was revealed to be Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp to Pop ! , which was hosted by Emily VanCamp , who portrays Agent 13 in Captain America : The Winter Soldier , and aired on November 4 , 2014 . The special features behind the scenes footage from Avengers : Age of Ultron and Ant @-@ Man , as well as footage from the Agent Carter television series previously screened at New York Comic @-@ Con. Brian Lowry of Variety felt an hour for the special did not " do the topic justice " adding , " For anyone who has seen more than one Marvel movie but would shrug <unk> at the mention of Jack Kirby or Steve Ditko , Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp To Pop ! should probably be required viewing . Fun , fast @-@ paced and encompassing many of the company ’ s highlights along with a few lowlights , it ’ s a solid primer on Marvel ’ s history , while weaving in inevitable self @-@ promotion and synergistic plugs . " Eric Goldman of IGN also wished the special had been longer , adding , " Understandably , the more you already know about Marvel , the less you 'll be surprised by Marvel 75 Years : From Pulp to Pop ! , but it 's important to remember who this special is really made for – a mainstream audience who have embraced the Marvel characters , via the hugely successful movies , in a way no one could have imagined . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In September 2015 , Marvel announced the Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe , named as a nod to the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe . Each guidebook is compiled by Mike O 'Sullivan and the Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe team , with cover art from Mike Del Mundo and Pascal Campion , and features facts about the MCU films , film @-@ to @-@ comic comparisons , and production stills . Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe : Marvel 's Iron Man , Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe : Marvel 's Incredible Hulk / Marvel 's Iron Man 2 , Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe : Marvel 's Thor , and Guidebook to the Marvel Cinematic Universe : Marvel 's Captain America : The First Avenger released each month from October 2015 to January 2016 , respectively . 
 = = = Lego Marvel 's Avengers = = = 
 The video game Lego Marvel 's Avengers is centered on events from The Avengers and Avengers : Age of Ultron , with the game 's developer , TT Games , reordering scenes from both films to make a cohesive story . The game also features content from Captain America : The First Avenger , Iron Man 3 , Thor : The Dark World and Captain America : The Winter Soldier , as well as additional references to other MCU properties , locations and characters . TT Games uses lines of dialogue directly from the films in the game ( thus having many actors reprise their roles ) , with Hayley Atwell , Clark Gregg , Colbie Smulders and Ashley Johnson recording new material specifically for the game as their characters Peggy Carter , Phil Coulson , Maria Hill and Beth , the waitress in The Avengers , respectively . Downloadable content ( DLC ) for the game , exclusive initially for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 , adds content and characters from Ant @-@ Man and Captain America : Civil War . Additional DLC features content for Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. The Ant @-@ Man DLC features Michael Peña reprising his role as Luis , recording new dialogue that acts as a narration of the level , while Ming @-@ Na Wen reprised her role as Melinda May with new dialogue in the Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. DLC . Lego Marvel 's Avengers released on a variety of video game platforms on January 26 , 2016 . 
 = = = A Mini Marvel = = = 
 In February 2016 , a commercial for Coca @-@ Cola mini cans aired during Super Bowl 50 . A Mini Marvel was created by Wieden + Kennedy for Coca @-@ Cola through a partnership with Marvel , and was directed by the Russo brothers . In the ad , Ant @-@ Man ( voiced by Paul Rudd , reprising his role ) and the Hulk first fight , and then bond , over a Coke mini can . Luma Pictures provided visual effects for the spot , having worked previously with the two characters in MCU films . For the Hulk , Luma redefined its previous muscular system and simulation process to create and render the character , while Ant @-@ Man received new motion capture . The Super Bowl campaign extended to " limited @-@ edition Coke mini cans [ six packs ] that are emblazoned with images of Marvel characters , including Hulk , Ant @-@ Man , Black Widow , [ Falcon , Iron Man ] and Captain America . " Consumers had the opportunity to purchase the cans by finding hidden clues in the commercial , though " if the program goes well , Coke will consider making the cans available in stores . " The ad had the third most social media activity of all the film @-@ related trailers that aired during the game . 
 = Italian War of 1542 – 46 = 
 The Italian War of 1542 – 46 was a conflict late in the Italian Wars , pitting Francis I of France and Suleiman I of the Ottoman Empire against the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and Henry VIII of England . The course of the war saw extensive fighting in Italy , France , and the Low Countries , as well as attempted invasions of Spain and England . The conflict was inconclusive and <unk> expensive for the major participants . 
 The war arose from the failure of the Truce of Nice , which ended the Italian War of 1536 – 38 , to resolve the long @-@ standing conflict between Charles and Francis — particularly their conflicting claims to the Duchy of Milan . Having found a suitable pretext , Francis once again declared war against his perpetual enemy in 1542 . Fighting began at once throughout the Low Countries ; the following year saw the Franco @-@ Ottoman alliance 's attack on Nice , as well as a series of maneuvers in northern Italy which culminated in the bloody Battle of Ceresole . Charles and Henry then proceeded to invade France , but the long sieges of Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer and Saint @-@ Dizier prevented a decisive offensive against the French . 
 Charles came to terms with Francis by the Treaty of Crépy in late 1544 , but the death of Francis 's younger son , the Duke of Orléans — whose proposed marriage to a relative of the Emperor was the foundation of the treaty — made it moot less than a year afterwards . Henry , left alone but unwilling to return Boulogne to the French , continued to fight until 1546 , when the Treaty of Ardres finally restored peace between France and England . The deaths of Francis and Henry in early 1547 left the resolution of the Italian Wars to their successors . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Truce of Nice , which ended the Italian War of 1536 – 38 , provided little resolution to the long conflict between the Holy Roman Emperor and the King of France ; although hostilities had ended , giving way to a cautious entente , neither monarch was satisfied with the war 's outcome . Francis continued to harbor a desire for the Duchy of Milan , to which he held a dynastic claim ; Charles , for his part , insisted that Francis comply at last with the terms of the Treaty of Madrid , which had been forced on the French king during his captivity in Spain after the Italian War of 1521 – 26 . Other conflicting claims to various territories — Charles 's to Burgundy and Francis 's to Naples and Flanders , among others — remained a matter of contention as well . 
 Negotiations between the two powers continued through 1538 and into 1539 . In 1539 , Francis invited Charles — who faced a rebellion in the Low Countries — to travel through France on his way north from Spain . Charles accepted , and was richly received ; but while he was willing to discuss religious matters with his host — the Protestant Reformation being underway — he delayed on the question of political differences , and nothing had been decided by the time he left French territory . 
 In March 1540 , Charles proposed to settle the matter by having Maria of Spain marry Francis 's younger son , the Duke of Orléans ; the two would then inherit the Netherlands , Burgundy , and Charolais after the Emperor 's death . Francis , meanwhile , was to renounce his claims to the duchies of Milan and Savoy , ratify the treaties of Madrid and Cambrai , and join an alliance with Charles . Francis , considering the loss of Milan too large a price to pay for future possession of the Netherlands and unwilling to ratify the treaties in any case , made his own offer ; on 24 April , he agreed to surrender the Milanese claim in exchange for immediate receipt of the Netherlands . The negotiations continued for weeks , but made no progress , and were abandoned in June 1540 . 
 Francis soon began gathering new allies to his cause . William , Duke of Jülich @-@ Cleves @-@ Berg , who was engaged in the <unk> Wars , a dispute with Charles over the succession in Guelders , sealed his alliance with Francis by marrying Francis 's niece , Jeanne d 'Albret . Francis sought an alliance with the Schmalkaldic League as well , but the League demurred ; by 1542 , the remaining potential French allies in northern Germany had reached their own understandings with the Emperor . French efforts farther east were more fruitful , leading to a renewed Franco @-@ Ottoman alliance ; Suleiman the Magnificent of the Ottoman Empire , seeking to distract Charles from Ottoman advances in Hungary , encouraged the Franco @-@ Imperial rift . 
 On 4 July 1541 , however , the French ambassador to the Ottoman court , Antoine de Rincon , was killed by Imperial troops as he was travelling near Pavia . In response to Francis 's protests , Charles denied all responsibility , promising to conduct an inquiry with the assistance of the Pope ; he had by now formed plans for a campaign in North Africa , and wished to avoid further entanglements in Europe . 
 By the end of September 1541 , Charles was in Majorca , preparing an attack on Algiers ; Francis , considering it impolitic to attack a fellow Christian who was fighting the Muslims , promised not to declare war for as long as the Emperor was campaigning . The Imperial expedition , however , was entirely unsuccessful ; storms scattered the invasion fleet soon after the initial landing , and Charles had returned to Spain with the remainder of his troops by November . On 8 March 1542 , the new French ambassador , Antoine <unk> des <unk> , returned from Constantinople with promises of Ottoman aid in a war against Charles . Francis declared war on 12 July , naming various injuries as the causes ; among them was Rincon 's murder , which he proclaimed " an injury so great , so detestable and so strange to those who bear the title and quality of prince that it cannot be in any way forgiven , suffered or endured " . 
 = = Initial moves and the Treaty of Venlo = = 
 The French immediately launched a two @-@ front offensive against Charles . In the north , the Duke of Orléans attacked Luxembourg , briefly capturing the city ; in the south , a larger army under Claude d 'Annebault and Francis 's eldest son , the Dauphin Henry , unsuccessfully besieged the city of Perpignan in northern Spain . Francis himself was meanwhile in La Rochelle , dealing with a revolt caused by popular discontent with a proposed reform of the <unk> tax . 
 By this point , relations between Francis and Henry VIII were collapsing . Henry — already angered by the French refusal to pay the various pensions , which were owed to him under the terms of past treaties — was now faced with the potential of French interference in Scotland , where he was entangled in the midst of an attempt to marry his son to Mary , Queen of Scots , that would develop into the open warfare of the " Rough Wooing " . He had intended to begin a war against Francis in the summer of 1543 , but negotiating a treaty to that effect with the Emperor proved difficult ; since Henry was , in Charles 's eyes , a schismatic , the Emperor could not promise to defend him against attack , nor sign any treaty which referred to him as the head of the Church — both points upon which Henry insisted . Negotiations continued for weeks ; finally , on 11 February 1543 , Henry and Charles signed a treaty of offensive alliance , pledging to invade France within two years . In May 1543 , Henry sent Francis an ultimatum threatening war within twenty days ; and , on 22 June , at last declared war . 
 Hostilities now flared up across northern France . On Henry 's orders , Sir John Wallop crossed the Channel to Calais with an army of 5 @,@ 000 men , to be used in the defense of the Low Countries . The French , under Antoine de Bourbon , Duke of Vendôme , had captured Lillers in April ; by June , d 'Annebault had taken Landrecies as well . Wilhelm of Cleves openly joined the war on Francis 's side , invading Brabant , and fighting began in Artois and Hainaut . Francis inexplicably halted with his army near Rheims ; in the meantime , Charles attacked Wilhelm of Cleves , invading the Duchy of Jülich and capturing Düren . 
 Concerned about the fate of his ally , Francis ordered the Duke of Orléans and d 'Annebault to attack Luxembourg , which they took on 10 September ; but it was too late for Wilhelm , as he had already surrendered on 7 September , signing the Treaty of Venlo with Charles . By the terms of this treaty , Wilhelm was to concede the overlordship of the Duchy of Guelders and County of Zutphen to Charles , and to assist him in suppressing the Reformation . Charles now advanced to besiege Landrecies , seeking battle with Francis ; the French defenders of the town , commanded by Martin du Bellay , repulsed the Imperial attack , but Francis withdrew to Saint @-@ Quentin on 4 November , leaving the Emperor free to march north and seize Cambrai . 
 = = Nice and Lombardy = = 
 On the Mediterranean , meanwhile , other engagements were underway . In April 1543 , the Sultan had placed Hayreddin Barbarossa 's fleet at the disposal of the French king . Barbarossa left the Dardanelles with more than a hundred galleys , raided his way up the Italian coast , and in July arrived in Marseilles , where he was welcomed by François de Bourbon , Count of Enghien , the commander of the French fleet . On 6 August , the joint Franco @-@ Ottoman fleet anchored off the Imperial city of Nice and landed troops at Villefranche ; a siege of the city followed . Nice fell on 22 August , although the citadel held out until the siege was lifted on 8 September . 
 Barbarossa was by this point becoming a liability ; on 6 September , he had threatened to depart if he were not given the means with which to resupply his fleet . In response , Francis ordered that the population of Toulon — except for " heads of households " — be expelled , and that the city then be given to Barbarossa , who used it as a base for his army of 30 @,@ 000 for the next eight months . Yet Francis , increasingly embarrassed by the Ottoman presence , was unwilling to help Barbarossa recapture Tunis ; so the Ottoman fleet — accompanied by five French galleys under Antoine <unk> des <unk> — sailed for Istanbul in May 1544 , pillaging the Neapolitan coast along the way . 
 In Piedmont , meanwhile , a stalemate had developed between the French , under the Sieur de Boutières , and the Imperial army , under Alfonso d 'Avalos ; d 'Avalos had captured the fortress of Carignano , and the French had besieged it , hoping to force the Imperial army into a decisive battle . During the winter of 1543 – 44 , Francis significantly reinforced his army , placing Enghien in command . D 'Avalos , also heavily reinforced , advanced to relieve Carignano ; and , on 11 April 1544 , Enghien and d 'Avalos fought one of the few pitched battles of the period at Ceresole . Although the French were victorious , the impending invasion of France itself by Charles and Henry forced Francis to recall much of his army from Piedmont , leaving Enghien without the troops he needed to take Milan . D 'Avalos 's victory over an Italian mercenary army in French service at the Battle of Serravalle in early June 1544 brought significant campaigning in Italy to an end . 
 = = France invaded = = 
 On 31 December 1543 , Henry and Charles had signed a treaty pledging to invade France in person by 20 June 1544 ; each was to provide an army of no less than 35 @,@ 000 infantry and 7 @,@ 000 cavalry for the venture . Against this Francis could muster about 70 @,@ 000 men in his various armies . The campaign could not begin , however , until Henry and Charles had resolved their personal conflicts with Scotland and the German princes , respectively . On 15 May , Henry was informed by Edward Seymour , Earl of Hertford , that , after his raids , Scotland was no longer in a position to threaten him ; he then began to make preparations for a personal campaign in France — against the advice of his council and the Emperor , who believed that his presence would be a hindrance . Charles had meanwhile reached an understanding with the princes at the Diet of Speyer , and the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg had agreed to join his invasion of France . 
 By May 1544 , two Imperial armies were poised to invade France : one , under Ferrante Gonzaga , Viceroy of Sicily , north of Luxemburg ; the other , under Charles himself , in the Palatinate . Charles had gathered a combined force of more than 42 @,@ 000 for the invasion , and had arranged for another 4 @,@ 000 men to join the English army . On 25 May , Gonzaga captured Luxembourg and moved towards <unk> and Ligny , issuing a proclamation that the Emperor had come to overthrow " a tyrant allied to the Turks " . On 8 July , Gonzaga besieged Saint @-@ Dizier ; Charles and the second Imperial army soon joined him . 
 Henry , meanwhile , had sent an army of some 40 @,@ 000 men to Calais under the joint command of Thomas Howard , Duke of Norfolk , and Charles Brandon , Duke of Suffolk . While Henry continued to squabble with the Emperor over the goals of the campaign and his own presence in France , this massive army moved slowly and aimlessly into French territory . Finally , Henry decided that the army was to be split . Norfolk , ordered to besiege Ardres or Montreuil , advanced towards the latter ; but he proved unable to mount an effective siege , complaining of inadequate supplies and poor organization . Suffolk was ordered to attack Boulogne ; on 14 July , Henry crossed to Calais and moved to join him . A siege of Boulogne began on 19 July — despite the protests of the Emperor , who insisted that Henry should advance towards Paris . 
 Charles himself , on the other hand , was still delayed at Saint @-@ Dizier ; the city , fortified by Girolamo Marini and defended by Louis IV de <unk> , Count of Sancerre , continued to hold out against the massive Imperial army . On 24 July , Charles captured Vitry @-@ le @-@ François , from which French forces had harassed his supply lines ; finally , on 8 August , the defenders of Saint @-@ Dizier , running low on supplies , sought terms . On 17 August , the French capitulated , and were permitted by the Emperor to leave the city with banners flying ; their resistance for 41 days had broken the Imperial offensive . Some of Charles 's advisers suggested withdrawing , but he was unwilling to lose face and continued to move towards Châlons , although the Imperial army was prevented from advancing across the Marne by a French force waiting at <unk> . The Imperial troops marched rapidly through Champagne , capturing Épernay , Châtillon @-@ sur @-@ Marne , Château @-@ Thierry , and Soissons . 
 The French made no attempts to intercept Charles . Troops under Jacques de Montgomery , Sieur de <unk> , sacked <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Marne , whose citizens had allegedly rebelled ; but no attempt was made to engage the advancing Imperial army . Paris was gripped by panic , although Francis insisted that the population had nothing to fear . Charles finally halted his advance and turned back on 11 September . Henry , meanwhile , was personally directing the besiegers at Boulogne ; the town fell in early September , and a breach was made into the castle on 11 September . The defenders finally surrendered a few days later . 
 = = Treaty of Crépy = = 
 Charles , short on funds and needing to deal with increasing religious unrest in Germany , asked Henry to continue his invasion or to allow him to make a separate peace . By the time Henry had received the Emperor 's letter , however , Charles had already concluded a treaty with Francis — the Peace of Crépy — which was signed by representatives of the monarchs at Crépy in Picardy on 18 September 1544 . The treaty had been promoted at the French court by the Emperor 's sister , Queen Eleanor , and by Francis 's mistress , the Duchess of Étampes . By its terms , Francis and Charles would each abandon their various conflicting claims and restore the status quo of 1538 ; the Emperor would relinquish his claim to the Duchy of Burgundy and the King of France would do the same for the Kingdom of Naples , as well as renouncing his claims as suzerain of Flanders and Artois . The Duke of Orléans would marry either Charles 's daughter Mary or his niece Anna ; the choice was to be made by Charles . In the first case , the bride would receive the Netherlands and Franche @-@ Comté as a dowry ; in the second , Milan . Francis , meanwhile , was to grant the duchies of Bourbon , Châtellerault , and Angoulême to his son ; he would also abandon his claims to the territories of the Duchy of Savoy , including Piedmont and Savoy itself . Finally , Francis would assist Charles against the Ottomans — but not , officially , against the heretics in his own domains . A second , secret accord was also signed ; by its terms , Francis would assist Charles with reforming the church , with calling a General Council , and with suppressing Protestantism — by force if necessary . 
 The treaty was poorly received by the Dauphin , who felt that his brother was being favored over him , by Henry VIII , who believed that Charles had betrayed him , and also by the Sultan . Francis would fulfill some of the terms ; but the death of the Duke of Orléans in 1545 rendered the treaty moot . 
 = = Boulogne and England = = 
 The conflict between Francis and Henry continued . The Dauphin 's army advanced on Montreuil , forcing Norfolk to raise the siege ; Henry himself returned to England at the end of September 1544 , ordering Norfolk and Suffolk to defend Boulogne . The two dukes quickly disobeyed this order and withdrew the bulk of the English army to Calais , leaving some 4 @,@ 000 men to defend the captured city . The English army , outnumbered , was now trapped in Calais ; the Dauphin , left unopposed , concentrated his efforts on besieging Boulogne . On 9 October , a French assault nearly captured the city , but was beaten back when the troops prematurely turned to looting . Peace talks were attempted at Calais without result ; Henry refused to consider returning Boulogne , and insisted that Francis abandon his support of the Scots . Charles , who had been appointed as a mediator between Francis and Henry , was meanwhile drawn into his own disputes with the English king . 
 Francis now embarked on a more dramatic attempt to force Henry 's hand — an attack on England itself . For this venture , an army of more than 30 @,@ 000 men was assembled in Normandy , and a fleet of some 400 vessels prepared at Le Havre , all under the command of Claude d 'Annebault . On 31 May 1545 , a French expeditionary force landed in Scotland . In early July , the English under John Dudley , Viscount Lisle , mounted an attack on the French fleet , but had little success due to poor weather ; nevertheless , the French suffered from a string of accidents : d 'Annebault 's first flagship burned , and his second ran aground . Finally leaving Le Havre on 16 July , the massive French fleet entered the Solent on 19 July and briefly engaged the English fleet , to no apparent effect ; the major casualty of the skirmish , the Mary Rose , sank accidentally . The French landed on the Isle of Wight on 21 July , and again at Seaford on 25 July , but these operations were abortive , and the French fleet soon returned to blockading Boulogne . D 'Annebault made a final sortie near Beachy Head on 15 August , but retired to port after a brief skirmish . 
 = = Treaty of Ardres = = 
 By September 1545 , the war was a virtual stalemate ; both sides , running low on funds and troops , unsuccessfully sought help from the German Protestants . Henry , Francis , and Charles attempted extensive diplomatic maneuvering to break the deadlock ; but none of the three trusted the others , and this had little practical effect . In January 1546 , Henry sent the Earl of Hertford to Calais , apparently preparing for an offensive ; but one failed to materialize . 
 Francis could not afford to resume a large @-@ scale war , and Henry was concerned only for the disposition of Boulogne . Negotiations between the two resumed on 6 May . On 7 June 1546 , the Treaty of Ardres — also known as the Treaty of Camp — was signed by Claude d 'Annebault , Pierre Ramon , and Guillaume <unk> on behalf of Francis , and Viscount Lisle , Baron Paget and Nicholas Wotton on behalf of Henry . By its terms , Henry would retain Boulogne until 1554 , then return it in exchange for two million écus ; in the meantime , neither side would construct fortifications in the region , and Francis would resume payment of Henry 's pensions . Upon hearing the price demanded for Boulogne , the Imperial ambassador told Henry that the city would remain in English hands permanently . 
 During the treaty negotiations , two Protestant mediators — Han Bruno of Metz and Johannes Sturm — were concerned that Henry 's war in Scotland was a stumbling block . The sixteenth article of the treaty made Scotland a party to the new peace , and Henry pledged not to attack the Scots again without cause . This gave Scotland a respite from the War of the Rough Wooing , but the fighting would recommence 18 months later . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 <unk> expensive , the war was the costliest conflict of both Francis 's and Henry 's reigns . In England , the need for funds led to what Elton terms " an unprecedented burden of taxation " , as well as the systematic debasement of coinage . Francis also imposed a series of new taxes and instituted several financial reforms . He was not , therefore , in a position to assist the German Protestants , who were now engaged in the Schmalkaldic War against the Emperor ; by the time any French aid was to be forthcoming , Charles had already won his victory at the Battle of Mühlberg . As for Suleiman , the conclusion of the Truce of Adrianople in 1547 brought his own struggle against the Habsburgs to a temporary halt . 
 Henry VIII died on 28 January 1547 ; on 31 March , Francis followed . Henry 's successors continued his entanglements in Scotland . When , in 1548 , friction with the Scots led to the resumption of hostilities around Boulogne , they decided to avoid a two @-@ front war by returning the city four years early , in 1550 . The causes of the war themselves — chiefly , the contested dynastic claims in Italy — remained unresolved until the Peace of Cateau @-@ Cambrésis ended the Italian War of 1551 – 59 and six decades of conflict . 
 = April 2014 lunar eclipse = 
 A total lunar eclipse took place on April 15 , 2014 . It was the first of two total lunar eclipses in 2014 , and the first in a tetrad ( four total lunar eclipses in a series ) . Subsequent eclipses in the tetrad are those of October 8 , 2014 , April 4 , 2015 , and September 28 , 2015 . 
 The eclipse was visible in the Americas and the Pacific Ocean region , including Australia and New Zealand . During the 5 hour , 44 minute @-@ long eclipse , the Moon passed south of the center of the Earth 's shadow . As a result , the northern part of the Moon was noticeably darker than the southern part . Totality lasted for 1 hour 18 minutes . The eclipse occurred during the ascending phase of the Moon 's orbit , part of lunar saros 122 . Mars was near opposition . 
 This is the 56th member of Lunar Saros 122 . The previous event was the April 1996 lunar eclipse . The next event will be April 2032 lunar eclipse . 
 = = Background = = 
 A lunar eclipse occurs when the Moon passes within Earth 's umbra ( shadow ) . As the eclipse begins , the Earth 's shadow first darkens the Moon slightly . Then , the shadow begins to " cover " part of the Moon , turning it a dark red @-@ brown color ( typically - the color can vary based on atmospheric conditions ) . The Moon appears to be reddish because of Rayleigh scattering ( the same effect that causes sunsets to appear reddish ) and the refraction of that light by the Earth 's atmosphere into its umbra . 
 The following simulation shows the approximate appearance of the Moon passing through the Earth 's shadow . The Moon 's brightness is exaggerated within the umbral shadow . The northern portion of the Moon was closest to the center of the shadow , making it darkest , and most red in appearance . 
 = = Description = = 
 On April 15 , 2014 , the Moon passed through the southern part of the Earth 's umbral shadow . It was visible over most of the Western Hemisphere , including east Australia , New Zealand , the Pacific ocean , and the Americas . In the western Pacific , the first half of the eclipse occurred before moonrise . In Europe and Africa , the eclipse began just before moonset . Mars , which had just passed its opposition , appeared at magnitude <unk> about 9 @.@ 5 ° northwest of the Moon . Spica was 2 ° to the west , while Arcturus was 32 ° north . Saturn was 26 ° east and Antares 44 ° southeast . 
 The Moon entered Earth 's penumbral shadow at 4 : 54 UTC and the umbral shadow at 5 : 58 . Totality lasted for 1 hour 18 minutes , from 7 : 07 to 8 : 25 . The moment of greatest eclipse occurred at 7 : 47 . At that point , the Moon 's zenith was approximately 3 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) southwest of the Galápagos Islands . The Moon left the umbra shadow at 9 : 33 and the penumbra shadow at 10 : 38 . 
 The peak umbral magnitude was 1 @.@ <unk> , at which moment the northern part of the moon was 1 @.@ 7 arc @-@ minutes south of the center of Earth 's shadow , while the southern part was 40 @.@ 0 arc @-@ minutes from center . The gamma of the eclipse was <unk> . 
 The eclipse was a member of Lunar Saros 122 . It was the 56th such eclipse . 
 = = Timing = = 
 * The penumbral phase of the eclipse changes the appearance of the Moon only slightly and is generally not noticeable . 
 † The Moon was not visible during this part of the eclipse in this time zone . 
 The timing of total lunar eclipses are determined by its contacts : 
 P1 ( First contact ) : Beginning of the penumbral eclipse . Earth 's penumbra touches the Moon 's outer limb . 
 U1 ( Second contact ) : Beginning of the partial eclipse . Earth 's umbra touches the Moon 's outer limb . 
 U2 ( Third contact ) : Beginning of the total eclipse . The Moon 's surface is entirely within Earth 's umbra . 
 Greatest eclipse : The peak stage of the total eclipse . The Moon is at its closest to the center of Earth 's umbra . 
 U3 ( Fourth contact ) : End of the total eclipse . The Moon 's outer limb exits Earth 's umbra . 
 U4 ( Fifth contact ) : End of the partial eclipse . Earth 's umbra leaves the Moon 's surface . 
 P4 ( Sixth contact ) : End of the penumbral eclipse . Earth 's penumbra no longer makes contact with the Moon . 
 = = Viewing events = = 
 Many museums and observatories planned special events for the eclipse . The United States National Park Service sponsored events at Great Basin National Park and Sleeping Bear Dunes National Lakeshore . The University of Hawaii 's Institute for Astronomy held events at two locations on the islands . The Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles , California streamed the eclipse live on the Internet . 
 NASA hosted two live question @-@ and @-@ answer sessions online . The first happened roughly 12 hours before the eclipse via Reddit 's Ask Me Anything . The second was a web chat hosted on NASA 's site just before the eclipse began . NASA also streamed the eclipse live on their website . NASA TV provided 3 hours of live coverage beginning at 2 a.m. EDT . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = Relation to prophecy = = 
 Starting in 2008 , Christian pastors John Hagee and Mark Biltz began teaching " blood moon prophecies " : Biltz said the Second Coming of Jesus would occur at the end of the tetrad that began with the April 2014 eclipse , while Hagee said only that the tetrad is a sign of something significant . The idea gained popular media attention in the United States , and prompted a response from the scientific radio show Earth & Sky . According to Christian Today , only a " small group of Christians " saw the eclipse as having religious significance , despite the attention . 
 = = = Related eclipses = = = 
 The April 15 eclipse was the first eclipse in a tetrad ; that is , four consecutive total eclipses with no partial eclipses in between . There will be another eclipse every six lunar cycles during the tetrad – on October 8 , 2014 , April 4 , 2015 , and September 28 , 2015 . The lunar year series repeats after 12 cycles , or 354 days , causing a date shift when compared to the solar calendar . This shift means the Earth 's shadow will move about 11 degrees west in each subsequent eclipse . 
 This tetrad started during the ascending node of the Moon 's orbit . It is the first tetrad since the 2003 – 04 series , which started in May . The next series will be from 2032 to 2033 , starting in April . 
 = = = Half @-@ Saros cycle = = = 
 A lunar eclipse will be preceded and followed by solar eclipses by 9 years and 5 @.@ 5 days ( a half saros ) . This lunar eclipse is related to two hybrid total / <unk> solar eclipses of solar saros 129 . 
 = No. 4 Operational Training Unit RAAF = 
 No. 4 Operational Training Unit ( No. 4 OTU ) was an operational conversion unit of the Royal Australian Air Force during World War II . It was formed at Williamtown , New South Wales , in October 1942 to train pilots and wireless air gunners to operate Vultee Vengeance dive bombers . The school was equipped with Vengeances and CAC Wirraway aircraft . Accidents were common in operational conversion units , and No. 4 OTU suffered several fatal crashes during its existence . It was disbanded in April 1944 , handing Williamtown over to No. 5 Operational Training Unit . 
 = = History = = 
 During World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) established eight operational training units ( OTUs ) to convert recently graduated air crews from advanced trainers to combat aircraft , and to add fighting ability to the flying skills they had already learned . No. 4 Operational Training Unit was formed on 1 October 1942 at Williamtown , New South Wales , to convert crews to the Vultee Vengeance dive bomber , 400 of which had been ordered by the RAAF ( 344 were eventually delivered ) . No. 4 OTU 's inaugural commanding officer was Wing Commander E.G. Fyfe . The first pilots and wireless air gunner trainees arrived from No. 12 Squadron on 28 October 1942 , and undertook a Vengeance conversion course that ran until 25 November . By the end of the month , No. 4 OTU 's strength stood at seven Vengeances . These were augmented in January 1943 by the unit 's first CAC Wirraway , which students flew before commencing their Vengeance conversion course . 
 OTUs , employing as they did warplanes that were more advanced and more powerful than trainers , and teaching combat techniques that often carried high risk , generally suffered higher accident rates than other flying training schools . On 3 March 1943 , a Wirraway of No. 4 OTU crashed near Williamtown , killing both crewmen . Two others died when their Vengeance crashed and burned near Goulburn during a cross @-@ country exercise on 4 August . On 16 August , a Vengeance flew into trees after apparently pulling out late from a dive , resulting in two fatalities . A Vengeance blew up in flight during dive @-@ bombing practice at Williamtown on 14 September , killing both crewmen . On 5 October , a Vengeance on a dive @-@ bombing exercise crashed into the sea near Newcastle ; both crewmen were reported as missing , believed killed . No. 4 OTU suffered two more fatalities when a Vengeance struck a hill near Braidwood during a cross @-@ country flight on 26 November 1943 . Another Vengeance hit the water and exploded in Nelson Bay on 7 April 1944 after failing to recover from a dive , killing the two @-@ man crew . 
 On 1 December 1943 , Squadron Leader R.E. Bell took over command of No. 4 OTU on a temporary basis , handing over to Flight Lieutenant R. <unk> @-@ Wilkinson on 27 April 1944 . The Vengeances had meanwhile been withdrawn from operations in the South West Pacific theatre , having flown their last combat mission on 8 March . No. 4 OTU disbanded on 30 April 1944 ; a small detachment remained to hand over the Williamtown base to an advance party of No. 5 Operational Training Unit the following day . The rest of No. 5 OTU transferred from Tocumwal to Williamtown during July . By the time No. 4 OTU disbanded , the school 's Vengeances had accumulated 7 @,@ 593 flying hours and the Wirraways 7 @,@ 646 hours . 
 = HMS Hermes ( 95 ) = 
 HMS Hermes was an aircraft carrier built for the Royal Navy . The ship began construction during World War I and finished after the war ended . She was the world 's first ship to be designed as an aircraft carrier , although the Imperial Japanese Navy 's Hōshō was the first to be commissioned and launched . The ship 's construction was delayed by multiple changes in her design after she was laid down . After she was launched , her shipyard closed and her construction was suspended . Most of the changes were made to optimise her design in light of the results of experiments with the existing carriers . 
 Commissioned in 1924 , Hermes served briefly with the Atlantic Fleet before spending the bulk of her career assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet and the China Station . In the Mediterranean , she worked with other carriers developing multi @-@ carrier tactics . While showing the flag at the China Station , she helped to suppress pirates in Chinese waters . Hermes returned home in 1937 and was placed in reserve before becoming a training ship in 1938 . 
 When World War II began in September 1939 , the ship was briefly assigned to the Home Fleet and conducted anti @-@ submarine patrols in the Western Approaches . She was transferred to Dakar in October to cooperate with the French Navy in hunting down German commerce raiders and blockade runners . Aside from a brief refit , Hermes remained there until Vichy France was established at the end of June 1940 . Supported by several cruisers , the ship then blockaded Dakar and attempted to sink the French battleship Richelieu by exploding depth charges underneath her stern , as well as sending Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers to attack her at night . While returning from this mission , Hermes rammed a British armed merchant cruiser in a storm and required several months of repairs in South Africa , then resumed patrolling for Axis shipping in the South Atlantic and the Indian Ocean . 
 In February 1941 , the ship supported Commonwealth forces in Italian Somaliland during the East African Campaign and did much the same two months later in the Persian Gulf during the Anglo @-@ Iraqi War . After that campaign , Hermes spent most of the rest of the year patrolling the Indian Ocean . She refitted in South Africa between November 1941 and February 1942 and then joined the Eastern Fleet at Ceylon . 
 Hermes was berthed in Trincomalee on 8 April when warning of an approaching Japanese fleet was received and sailed that day for the Maldives with no aircraft on board . She was spotted on 9 April near Batticaloa by a Japanese scout plane and attacked by several dozen dive bombers shortly afterwards . With no air cover , the carrier was quickly sunk by the Japanese aircraft . Most of the survivors were rescued by a nearby hospital ship , although 307 men from Hermes were lost in the sinking . 
 = = Development = = 
 Like Hōshō , Hermes was based on a cruiser @-@ type hull and she was initially designed to carry both wheeled aircraft and seaplanes . The ship 's design was derived from a 1916 seaplane carrier design by Gerard Holmes and Sir John Biles , but was considerably enlarged by Sir Eustace d 'Eyncourt , the Director of Naval Construction ( DNC ) , in his April 1917 sketch design . Her most notable feature was the seaplane slipway that comprised three sections . The seaplanes would taxi onto the rigid submerged portion aft and dock with a trolley that would carry the aircraft into the hangar . A flexible submerged portion separated the rear section from the rigid forward portion of the slipway to prevent the submerged part from rolling with the ship 's motion . The entire slipway could be retracted into the ship , and a gantry crane ran the length of the slipway to help recover the seaplanes . The design showed two islands with the full @-@ length flight deck running between them . Each island contained one funnel ; a large net could be strung between them to stop out @-@ of @-@ control aircraft . Aircraft were transported between the hangar and the flight deck by two aircraft lifts ( elevators ) ; the forward lift measured 30 by 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 by 9 @.@ 1 m ) and the rear 60 by 18 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 by 5 @.@ 5 m ) . This design displaced 9 @,@ 000 long tons ( 9 @,@ 100 t ) and accommodated six large Short Type 184 seaplanes and six smaller Sopwith Baby seaplanes . The ship 's armament consisted of six 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) guns . 
 The DNC produced a detailed design in January 1918 that made some changes to his original sketch , including the addition of a rotating bow catapult to allow the ship to launch aircraft regardless of wind direction , and the ship was laid down that month to the revised design . Progress was slow , as most of the resources of the shipyard were being used to finish the conversion of Eagle from a battleship to an aircraft carrier . The leisurely pace of construction allowed for more time with which to rework the ship 's design . By mid @-@ June the slipway had been deleted from the design and the ship 's armament had been revised to consist of eleven 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns and only a single anti @-@ aircraft gun . By this time , the uncertainty about the best configuration for an aircraft carrier had increased to the point that the Admiralty forbade the builder from working above the hangar deck without express permission . Later that year the ship 's design was revised again to incorporate a single island , her lifts were changed to a uniform size of 44 by 20 feet ( 13 @.@ 4 by 6 @.@ 1 m ) , and her armament was altered to ten 6 @-@ inch guns and four 4 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns . These changes increased her displacement to 10 @,@ 110 long tons ( 10 @,@ 270 t ) . 
 Construction was suspended after Hermes was launched in September 1919 as the Admiralty awaited the results of flight trials with Eagle and Argus . Her design was modified in March 1920 with an island superstructure and funnel to starboard , and the forward catapult was removed . The logic behind placing the island to starboard was that pilots generally preferred to turn to port when recovering from an aborted landing . A prominent tripod mast was added to house the fire @-@ control systems for her guns . 
 The last revisions were made to the ship 's design in May 1921 , after the trials with Argus and Eagle . The lifts were moved further apart to allow for more space for the arresting gear and they were enlarged to allow the wings of her aircraft to be spread in the hangar . Her anti @-@ ship armament was reduced to six 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) guns and her flight deck was faired into the bow . 
 = = = Description = = = 
 Hermes had an overall length of 600 feet ( 182 @.@ 9 m ) , a beam of 70 feet 3 inches ( 21 @.@ 4 m ) , and a draught of 23 feet 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 1 m ) at deep load . She displaced 10 @,@ 850 long tons ( 11 @,@ 020 t ) at standard load . Each of the ship 's two sets of Parsons geared steam turbines drove one propeller shaft at a speed of 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) . Steam was supplied by six Yarrow boilers operating at a pressure of 235 psi ( 1 @,@ 620 kPa ; 17 kgf / cm2 ) . The turbines were designed for a total of 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 000 kW ) , but they produced 41 @,@ 318 shaft horsepower ( 30 @,@ 811 kW ) during her sea trials , and gave Hermes a speed of 26 @.@ 178 knots ( 48 @.@ 482 km / h ; 30 @.@ 125 mph ) . The ship carried 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 480 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 160 mi ) at 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . 
 The ship 's flight deck was 570 feet ( 173 @.@ 7 m ) long and her lifts ' dimensions were 36 by 36 @.@ 6 feet ( 11 @.@ 0 by 11 @.@ 2 m ) . Her hangar was 400 feet ( 121 @.@ 9 m ) long , 50 feet ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) wide and 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) high . Hermes was fitted with longitudinal arresting gear . A large crane was positioned behind the island . Because of her size , the ship was only able to carry about 20 aircraft . Bulk petrol storage consisted of 7 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 32 @,@ 000 l ; 8 @,@ 400 US gal ) . The ship 's crew totalled 33 officers and 533 men , exclusive of the air group , in 1939 . 
 For self @-@ defence against enemy warships , Hermes had six BL 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk I guns , three on each side of the ship . All four of her QF Mk V 4 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns were positioned on the flight deck . The ship 's waterline belt armour was 3 inches ( 76 mm ) thick and her flight deck , which was also the ship 's strength deck , was 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick . Hermes had a metacentric height of 2 @.@ 9 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) and handled well in heavy weather . However , she had quite a large surface area exposed to the wind and required as much as 25 to 30 degrees of weather helm at low speed when the wind was blowing from the side . 
 = = Service = = 
 Hermes was laid down by Sir W. G. Armstrong @-@ Whitworth and Company at Walker on the River Tyne on 15 January 1918 as the world 's first purpose @-@ designed aircraft carrier , and was launched on 11 September 1919 . She was christened by Mrs. A. Cooper , daughter of the First Lord of the Admiralty , Walter Long . The shipyard was scheduled to close at the end of 1919 and the Admiralty ordered the ship towed to Devonport , where she arrived in January 1920 for completion . 
 = = = 1920s = = = 
 Captain Arthur Stopford was appointed as the ship 's commanding officer in February 1923 and the ship began her sea trials in August . After fitting @-@ out , Hermes was commissioned on 19 February 1924 and later assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . She conducted flying trials with the Fairey IIID reconnaissance biplanes for the next several months . Hermes participated in the fleet review conducted by King George V on 26 July in Spithead . Afterwards she was refitted until November and then transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet . She arrived at Malta on 22 November and needed some repairs to fix storm damage suffered en route . At this time the ship embarked No. 403 Flight with Fairey Flycatcher fighters and 441 Flight with Fairey IIIDs . Hermes conducted flying exercises with Eagle and the rest of the Mediterranean Fleet in early 1925 before she began a seven @-@ week refit in Malta on 27 March , then sailed for Portsmouth where she arrived on 29 May after her aircraft had flown ashore . 
 Hermes sailed for the China Station on 17 June with 403 and 441 Flights aboard , but made a lengthy pause en route in the Mediterranean during which Captain Stopford was replaced by Captain C. P. Talbot . She arrived at Hong Kong on 10 August 1925 . The ship made her first foreign port visit to Amoy in November . Hermes returned to the Mediterranean in early 1926 and was refitted at Malta between April and June . 441 Flight was transferred to Eagle at this time in exchange for 440 Flight which flew aboard in September . 442 Flight also joined the ship at this time ; both flights were equipped with Fairey IIIs . The ship exercised with the Mediterranean Fleet after her refit was completed and Captain R. Elliot relieved Captain Talbot on 14 August . Hermes returned to Hong Kong on 11 October and conducted routine training until she sailed to the naval base at Wei Hai Wei on 27 July 1927 to escape the summer heat . The ship rendezvoused in September with Argus , which was to replace her on the China Station . Before she departed the area , however , both ships attacked the pirate base at Bias Bay and their fleet of junks and sampans . Hermes reached the United Kingdom on 26 October and began a refit at Chatham Dockyard at the beginning of November . One of her 4 @-@ inch guns was removed at this time . Sometime after this refit , the ship was provided with two single 1 @.@ 57 @-@ inch ( 40 mm ) 2 @-@ pounder " pom @-@ pom " AA guns . 
 Captain Eliot was relieved by Captain G. Hopwood on 2 December and the ship sailed for the China Station on 21 January 1928 . The Fairey IIIDs of 440 Flight had been replaced by IIIFs , and the ship kept the same three flights for this deployment . En route to Hong Kong , Hermes stopped at Bangkok , Siam , in March for four days and was inspected by King Rama VII . She reached Hong Kong on 18 March , relieving Argus . The ship spent a month in the port of Chefoo in May and then the following three weeks in Wei Hai Wei . While visiting <unk> in July , one of her Fairey IIIF seaplanes made a forced landing outside the port ; the Italian destroyer Muggia rescued the pilot and towed the aircraft back to the carrier . During the rest of the year , the ship visited Shanghai , Manila , as well as Kudat and Jesselton in Borneo . She began a refit in Hong Kong in January 1929 and Captain J. D. Campbell assumed command on 28 March . After refit was completed in April , Hermes conducted flying training before sailing up the Yangtze River to visit Nanking the following month . Afterwards she spent the next four months at Wei Hei Wei . She made visits to Tsingtao and Japan before returning to Hong Kong on 29 October where she remained for the rest of the year . 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 On 28 January 1930 , Hermes transported the British Minister to China , Sir Miles Lampson , to Nanking for talks with the Chinese Government over the Japanese invasion of Manchuria and she remained there until she sailed downriver to Shanghai on 2 March . By the end of the month , the carrier was back in Hong Kong and remained there until June when she returned to Wei Hai Wei for her annual summer visit . The ship briefly returned to Hong Kong before departing for Great Britain on 7 August . Hermes reached Portsmouth on 23 September , but only remained there for six days before transferring to Sheerness . Captain E. J. G. MacKinnon relieved Captain Campbell there on 2 October . She was given a brief refit at Chatham Dockyard before sailing for the China Station . The ship had aboard only 403 and 440 Flights on this deployment and transported six Blackburn <unk> to deliver to Malta and HMS Eagle . Hermes departed Portsmouth on 12 November and reached Hong Kong on 2 January 1931 . En route to her summer refuge at Wei Hai Wei , the ship received a report on 9 June that the submarine Poseidon had been sunk there while on exercise . Captain MacKinnon took command of the rescue effort when Hermes arrived at the accident site an hour afterwards . Eight of the submarine 's crewmen managed to escape through the forward torpedo hatch , but only six of those reached the surface where they were picked up and treated in Hermes 's sickbay ; two of those six subsequently died . 
 The ship remained at Wei Hai Wei until the end of August when she sailed up the Yangtze River for Hankow . She reached the inland port on 5 September and dispatched armed guards to put down unrest on several British @-@ owned merchant ships . Her primary purpose , though , was to aid the Chinese government 's survey of the massive flooding in the area . Charles Lindbergh and his wife , Anne Morrow Lindbergh , were also in the city to survey the flooding with their Lockheed Sirius float @-@ plane and they were invited to use the carrier as their base . Unfortunately , their aircraft was flipped on the morning of 2 October by a strong current as it was being hoisted out by Hermes 's crane . They were quickly rescued by a boat from the carrier , but their aircraft was damaged . Captain MacKinnon offered to take them and their aircraft to Shanghai where it could be repaired and the ship departed the next day . She remained in Shanghai until 2 November , when she sailed for Hong Kong . Hermes received a distress message on 3 November from a Japanese merchantman , SS <unk> Maru , that had run aground on the Tan Rocks near the Chinese mainland at the mouth of the Taiwan Strait . The ship managed to rescue nine crew members before she was relieved by the Japanese destroyer <unk> and could proceed to Hong Kong . She reached the city on 7 November and remained in the area until April 1932 . 
 Captain MacKinnon took sick the next month and he was relieved by Captain W. B. Mackenzie on 25 February . After a short refit , the carrier , escorted by the destroyer Whitehall , made a brief visit to Amoy in late April before sailing for Wei Hai Wei where she stayed until 17 September . On that day , Hermes sailed for the Japanese city of Nagasaki and then spent four weeks in Shanghai . The ship did not return to Hong Kong until 28 October and spent the next few months there . In January 1933 , the carrier visited the Philippines for several weeks before returning to Hong Kong where she was given a brief refit . After short visits to Tsingtao and Wei Hai Wei , Hermes departed Hong Kong in mid @-@ June for Great Britain . She reached Sheerness on 22 July , but the ship was transferred shortly afterwards to Chatham Dockyard and opened to the public during Navy Week in early August . She sailed the next month for Devonport Dockyard for a thorough refit . Transverse arresting gear was fitted and her machinery was thoroughly overhauled . Sometime in 1932 , the two single 2 @-@ pounders were replaced by two quadruple .50 @-@ calibre Mark III machine gun mounts . 
 Captain the Honourable G. Fraser was appointed on 15 August 1934 as the new commanding officer and the ship began trials of the new equipment in early November . At the same time the nine Fairey Seal torpedo bombers of 824 Squadron joined the ship . Hermes left Portsmouth on 18 November for the China Station and arrived at Hong Kong on 4 January 1935 . The Hawker Osprey reconnaissance biplanes of 803 Squadron were transferred aboard from Eagle before that ship left Hong Kong . Pirates captured a British @-@ owned merchant ship , SS <unk> , with 90 British and American children on board on 29 January and Hermes was ordered to search for the ship when she failed to arrive at Chefoo at her scheduled time . Three Seals spotted her in Bias Bay on 1 February and the pirates abandoned the ship when it was found , leaving the passengers unharmed . Hermes remained in the vicinity of Hong Kong until mid @-@ May when she steamed to Wei Hai Wei . There she remained until 12 September when the Admiralty decided to transfer her to Singapore where she was closer to East Africa in case a military response to the Italian invasion of Ethiopia was deemed necessary . The ship arrived on 19 September and remained in the area for the next five months . 
 The ship 's aircraft were detailed to search for the missing Lady Southern Cross of Sir Charles Kingsford Smith when it failed to arrive at Singapore on 8 November during an attempt to set a new speed record between Britain and Australia . No sign was found of either the aircraft or its crew despite a month @-@ long search . Hermes returned to Hong Kong at the beginning of March 1936 before beginning a tour of Japan on 21 April , escorted by the destroyers Duncan and Delight . She summered at Wei Hai Wei and did not return to Hong Kong until the end of October . For most of January 1937 , the carrier , accompanied by the heavy cruiser Dorsetshire and the destroyers Duncan and Diana , toured the Dutch East Indies . The ship 's torpedo bombers practised torpedo attacks on the cruisers Cumberland and Dorsetshire in February , working with the Royal Air Force 's torpedo bombers based at RAF Seletar , Singapore . Hermes left Singapore on 17 March , leaving 803 Squadron behind , and reached Plymouth on 3 May 1937 . Following the Coronation Fleet Review at Spithead on 20 May for King George VI , she was assigned to the Reserve Fleet . On 16 July 1938 , Hermes was transferred from the Reserve Fleet and became a training ship at Devonport . 
 Plans were made in 1937 to replace Hermes 's three single 4 @-@ inch guns with two twin 4 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns , one forward and another aft of the island , as well as two octuple 2 @-@ pounder mounts . A single High @-@ Angle Control System would have been fitted to control these guns , but the dockyard was overwhelmed with other work and couldn 't begin to design the changes until July 1938 . They were scheduled to be installed between September and December 1939 , but the beginning of the war intervened and nothing was done . The ship 's petrol storage was to be increased to 13 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 59 @,@ 000 l ; 16 @,@ 000 US gal ) in April 1940 , but this also does not seem to have occurred . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The ship was given a brief refit in early August 1939 and Captain F. E. P. Hutton assumed command on 23 August . She was recommissioned the following day , and 12 Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers of 814 Squadron flew aboard on 1 September . Hermes conducted anti @-@ submarine patrols in mid @-@ September in an effort to find and destroy U @-@ boats in the Western Approaches . On 18 September , the day after the fleet carrier Courageous was sunk on one such patrol , Hermes located a submarine , but attacks by her escorting destroyers , Isis and Imogen , were ineffective . The carrier was then ordered to return to Devonport where she was fitted with degaussing gear during another brief refit . On 7 October , the ship rendezvoused with the French battleship Strasbourg and they arrived at Dakar in French West Africa on 16 October . Designated as Force X , they began searching for German ships in the Atlantic on 25 October . Hermes performed these patrols with no sightings until the end of December when she escorted a convoy to Britain where she could be refitted from 9 January to 10 February 1940 ; the ship then returned to Dakar and resumed her patrols for German commerce raiders and blockade runners . 
 Captain Richard F. J. Onslow relieved Captain Hutton on 25 May and Hermes continued her fruitless patrols . After returning from one such patrol on 29 June , the ship was ordered to leave harbour only nine hours after her arrival and to begin a blockade of Dakar as the Governor of French Senegal had declared the colony 's allegiance to the Vichy French regime . On the night of 7 / 8 July , a boat from Hermes attempted to drop four depth charges underneath the Richelieu 's stern in conjunction with a torpedo attack by the Swordfish of 814 Squadron . The boat was successful in reaching the French ship , but the depth charges failed to detonate . The torpedo attack was more successful as one of the battleship 's propellers was damaged . French aircraft attacked the British forces several times in retaliation , but without success . While returning to Freetown after the attack , Hermes accidentally rammed the armed merchant cruiser HMS Corfu during a rainstorm in the dark on 10 July . The impact injured three of the carrier 's crew , one of whom subsequently died of his injuries , but no one from Corfu 's crew was injured . The two ships were locked together so that Corfu 's crew could walk from one to the other when Captain Onslow ordered most of her crew to be evacuated onto Hermes . They were pulled apart by a combination of the carrier 's turbines at full speed astern and blowing of ballast tanks on board Corfu to lighten that ship forward . Hermes had crumpled the forward 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) of her bow , mostly above water , and was able to proceed to Freetown at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) , but Corfu had to be towed stern first to Freetown where she arrived three days later . The carrier joined a convoy to South Africa on 5 August and began repairs at Simonstown 12 days later . They were completed on 2 November and the ship arrived back at Freetown on 29 November after working up . 
 The ship was joined by the light cruiser Dragon on 2 December to search for German commerce raiders in the South Atlantic . They mostly operated from Saint Helena during the month and were later joined by the armed merchant cruiser Pretoria Castle to search for the pocket battleship Admiral Scheer without success . The force sailed for Simonstown on 31 December and Hermes was dispatched to search off the South African coast for Vichy French blockade runners . One such ship was spotted on 26 January , but she returned to Madagascar . On 4 February , the ship headed north to rendezvous with the heavy cruisers Shropshire and Hawkins to blockade the Somali port of Kismayo which was under siege by Commonwealth forces . Hawkins captured three Italian merchantmen and Hermes captured one on 12 February . 
 On 22 February , the carrier was one of the ships tasked to search for Admiral Scheer after she was spotted by an aircraft from the light cruiser Glasgow , but the pocket battleship successfully broke contact . Hermes arrived in Colombo , Ceylon , on 4 March and continued to search for Axis shipping . She was sent to the Persian Gulf in April to support British operations in Basra , Iraq , and remained there until mid @-@ June when she returned to patrolling the Indian Ocean between Ceylon and the Seychelles Islands . The ship continued to patrol until 19 November when she arrived in Simonstown for a refit that was not completed until 31 January 1942 . Hermes was assigned to the Eastern Fleet and arrived at Colombo on 14 February . She put to sea on 19 February to receive the Swordfish of 814 Squadron and to rendezvous with the destroyer HMAS Vampire to conduct an anti @-@ submarine patrol . The squadron was disembarked on 25 February after the ships arrived in Trincomalee Harbour . The two ships were ordered to Fremantle , Australia , in mid @-@ March to join the Allied naval forces headquartered there , but they were recalled after three days and assigned to Force B of the Eastern Fleet . 
 After the raid on Colombo by the Japanese aircraft carriers on 5 April , Hermes and Vampire were sent to Trincomalee to prepare for Operation Ironclad , the British invasion of Madagascar , and 814 Squadron was sent ashore . After advance warning of a Japanese air raid on 9 April 1942 , they left Trincomalee and sailed south down the Ceylon coast before it arrived . They were spotted off Batticaloa , however , by a Japanese reconnaissance plane from the battleship Haruna . The British intercepted the spot report and ordered the ships to return to Trincomalee with the utmost dispatch and attempted to provide fighter cover for them . The Japanese launched 85 Aichi D3A dive bombers , escorted by nine Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , at the two ships . At least 32 attacked them and sank them in quick order despite the arrival of six Fairey Fulmar II fighters of No. 273 Squadron RAF . Another six Fulmars from 803 and 806 Squadrons arrived after Hermes had already sunk . The rest of the Japanese aircraft attacked other ships further north , sinking the RFA Athelstone of 5 @,@ 571 gross register tonnage ( GRT ) , her escort , the corvette Hollyhock , the oil tanker SS British Sergeant and the Norwegian ship SS <unk> of 2 @,@ 924 GRT . 
 Hermes sank at coordinates 7 ° 35 ′ 28 @.@ 392 ″ N 82 ° 05 ′ 55 @.@ 089 ″ E with the loss of 307 men , including Captain Onslow . Vampire 's captain and seven crewmen were also killed . Most of the survivors of the attack were picked up by the hospital ship Vita . Japanese losses to all causes were four D3As lost and five more damaged , while two Fulmars were shot down . 
 = = = = Two HMS Hermes = = = = 
 The merchant ship SS Mamari III was converted to resemble Hermes as a decoy ship to confuse the Axis where Hermes was actually operating . The superstructure was mainly a wooden mock @-@ up . She was a part of the phantom fleet of mock @-@ up British warships designated as Fleet Tender C. On 4 June 1941 , when she was sailing down the east coast of England to Chatham Dockyard in Kent to be converted back to a merchant ship , the decoy Hermes hit a submerged wreck and ran aground off Norfolk during a German aerial attack . Before being refloated she was totally disabled by German E @-@ boats . The Germans initially thought they had sunk an aircraft carrier . 
 = Australian magpie = 
 The Australian magpie ( Cracticus tibicen ) is a medium @-@ sized black and white passerine bird native to Australia and southern New Guinea . Although once considered to be three separate species , it is now considered to be one , with nine recognised subspecies . A member of the Artamidae , the Australian magpie is classified in the butcherbird genus Cracticus and is most closely related to the black butcherbird ( C. quoyi ) . It is not , however , related to the European magpie , which is a corvid . The adult Australian magpie is a fairly robust bird ranging from 37 to 43 cm ( 14 @.@ 5 to 17 in ) in length , with distinctive black and white plumage , gold brown eyes and a solid wedge @-@ shaped bluish @-@ white and black bill . The male and female are similar in appearance , and can be distinguished by differences in back markings . With its long legs , the Australian magpie walks rather than waddles or hops and spends much time on the ground . 
 Described as one of Australia 's most accomplished songbirds , the Australian magpie has an array of complex vocalisations . It is omnivorous , with the bulk of its varied diet made up of invertebrates . It is generally sedentary and territorial throughout its range . Common and widespread , it has adapted well to human habitation and is a familiar bird of parks , gardens and farmland in Australia and New Guinea . This species is commonly fed by households around the country , but in spring a small minority of breeding magpies ( almost always males ) become aggressive and swoop and attack those who approach their nests . Magpies were introduced into New Zealand in the 1860s but have subsequently been accused of displacing native birds and are now treated as a pest species . Introductions also occurred in the Solomon Islands and Fiji , where the birds are not considered an invasive species . The Australian magpie is the mascot of several Australian sporting teams , most notably the Collingwood Magpies . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Australian magpie was first described by English ornithologist John Latham in 1801 as <unk> tibicen , the type collected in the Port Jackson region . Its specific epithet derived from the Latin tibicen " flute @-@ player " or " piper " in reference to the bird 's melodious call . An early recorded vernacular name is piping <unk> , written on a painting by Thomas Watling , one of a group known collectively as the Port Jackson Painter , sometime between 1788 and 1792 . <unk> @-@ won @-@ nang , or <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> were names used by the local Eora and Darug inhabitants of the Sydney Basin . <unk> and <unk> were Wiradjuri words , and <unk> was a Jardwadjali term from Victoria . Among the <unk> , it is <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . It was known as <unk> among the Yindjibarndi people of the central and western Pilbara . Other names used include piping crow @-@ shrike , piper , <unk> , flute @-@ bird and organ @-@ bird . The term bell @-@ magpie was proposed to help distinguish it from the European magpie but failed to gain wide acceptance . 
 The bird was named for its similarity in colouration to the European magpie ; it was a common practice for early settlers to name plants and animals after European counterparts . However , the European magpie is a member of the Corvidae , while its Australian counterpart is placed in the Artamidae family ( although both are members of a broad corvid lineage ) . The Australian magpie 's affinities with butcherbirds and currawongs were recognised early on and the three genera were placed in the family Cracticidae in 1914 by John Albert Leach after he had studied their musculature . American ornithologists Charles Sibley and Jon Ahlquist recognised the close relationship between woodswallows and the butcherbirds in 1985 , and combined them into a Cracticini clade , which became the family Artamidae . The Australian magpie had been placed in its own genus Gymnorhina , but several authorities , Storr in 1952 and later authors including Christidis and Boles in their 2008 official checklist , place it in the butcherbird genus Cracticus , giving rise to its current binomial name , arguing that its adaptation to ground @-@ living is not enough to consider it a separate genus . Evidence confirming this was published in a 2013 molecular study , which showed that it was the sister taxon to the black butcherbird ( C. quoyi ) . The ancestor to the two species is thought to have split from the other butcherbirds between 8 @.@ 3 and 4 @.@ 2 million years ago , during the late Miocene to early Pliocene , while the two species themselves diverged sometime during the Pliocene ( 5 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 0 million years ago ) . 
 The Australian magpie was subdivided into three species in the literature for much of the twentieth century — the black @-@ backed magpie ( C. tibicen ) , the white @-@ backed magpie ( C. hypoleuca ) , and the western magpie ( C. dorsalis ) . They were later noted to hybridise readily where their territories crossed , with hybrid grey or striped @-@ backed magpies being quite common . This resulted in them being reclassified as one species by Julian Ford in 1969 , with most recent authors following suit . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 There are currently thought to be nine subspecies of the Australian magpie , although there are large zones of overlap with intermediate forms between the taxa . There is a tendency for birds to become larger with increasing latitude , the southern subspecies being larger than those further north , except the Tasmanian form which is small . The original form known , as the black @-@ backed magpie and classified as Gymnorhina tibicen , has been split into four black @-@ backed races : 
 C. tibicen tibicen , the nominate form , is a large subspecies found in southeastern Queensland , from the vicinity of Moreton Bay through eastern New South Wales to Moruya , New South Wales almost to the Victorian border . It is coastal or near @-@ coastal and is restricted to east of the Great Dividing Range . 
 C. tibicen terraereginae , found from Cape York and the Gulf Country southwards across Queensland to the coast between Halifax Bay in the north and south to the Mary River , and central and western New South Wales and into northern South Australia , is a small to medium @-@ sized subspecies . The plumage is the same as that of subspecies tibicen , although the female has a shorter black tip to the tail . The wings and tarsus are shorter and the bill proportionally longer . It was originally described by Gregory Mathews in 1912 , its subspecies name a Latin translation , terra " land " reginae " queen 's " of " Queensland " . Hybridisation with the large white @-@ backed subspecies tyrannica occurs in northern Victoria and southeastern New South Wales ; intermediate forms have black bands of varying sizes in white @-@ backed area . Three @-@ way hybridisation occurs between Bega and Batemans Bay on the New South Wales south coast . 
 C. tibicen <unk> , the Top End magpie , is found from the Kimberley in northern Western Australia , across the Northern Territory through Arnhem Land and Groote Eylandt and into the Gulf Country . It is a small subspecies with a long and thinner bill , with birds of Groote Eylandt possibly even smaller than mainland birds . It has a narrow black terminal <unk> , and a narrow black band ; the male has a large white nape , the female pale grey . This form was initially described by H. L. White in 1922 . It intergrades with subspecies terraereginae southeast of the Gulf of Carpentaria . 
 C. tibicen longirostris , the long @-@ billed magpie , is found across northern Western Australia , from Shark Bay into the Pilbara . Named in 1903 by Alex Milligan , it is a medium @-@ sized subspecies with a long thin bill . Milligan speculated the bill may have been adapted for the local conditions , slim fare meaning the birds had to pick at dangerous scorpions and spiders . There is a broad area of hybridisation with the western dorsalis in southern central Western Australia from Shark Bay south to the Murchison River and east to the Great Victoria Desert . 
 The white @-@ backed magpie , originally described as Gymnorhina hypoleuca by John Gould in 1837 , has also been split into races : 
 C. tibicen tyrannica , a very large white @-@ backed form found from Twofold Bay on the New South Wales far south coast , across southern Victoria south of the Great Dividing Range through to the Coorong in southeastern South Australia . It was first described by Schodde and Mason in 1999 . It has a broad black tail band . 
 C. tibicen <unk> , found from Cowell south into the Eyre and Yorke Peninsulas in southern South Australia , as well as the southwestern Gawler Ranges . Described by Schodde and Mason in 1999 , its subspecific name is an anagram of <unk> " white @-@ backed " . It is very similar to tyrannica , differing in having a shorter wing and being lighter and smaller overall . The bill is relatively short compared with other magpie subspecies . Intermediate forms are found in the Mount Lofty Ranges and on Kangaroo Island . 
 C. tibicen hypoleuca now refers to a small white @-@ backed subspecies with a short compact bill and short wings , found on King and Flinders Islands , as well as Tasmania . 
 The western magpie , C. tibicen dorsalis was originally described as a separate species by A. J. Campbell in 1895 and is found in the fertile south @-@ west corner of Western Australia . The adult male has a white back and most closely resembles subspecies <unk> , though it is a little larger with a longer bill and the black tip of its tail plumage is narrower . The female is unusual in that it has a scalloped black or brownish @-@ black mantle and back ; the dark feathers there are edged with white . This area appears a more uniform black as the plumage ages and the edges are worn away . Both sexes have black thighs . 
 The New Guinean magpie , C. tibicen <unk> , is a little @-@ known subspecies found in southern New Guinea . The adult male has a mostly white back with a narrow black stripe , and the female a blackish back ; the black feathers here are tipped with white similar to subspecies dorsalis . It has a long deep bill resembling that of subspecies longirostris . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult magpie is a fairly solid , sturdy bird ranging from 37 to 43 cm ( 14 @.@ 5 to 17 in ) in length with a 65 – 85 cm ( 25 @.@ 5 – 33 @.@ 5 in ) wingspan , and weighing 220 – 350 g ( 7 @.@ 8 – 12 @.@ 3 oz ) . Its robust wedge @-@ shaped bill is bluish @-@ white bordered with black , with a small hook at the tip . The black legs are long and strong . The plumage is pure glossy black and white ; both sexes of all subspecies have black heads , wings and underparts with white shoulders . The tail has a black terminal band . The nape is white in the male and light greyish @-@ white in the female . Mature magpies have dull red eyes , in contrast to the yellow eyes of currawongs and white eyes of Australian ravens and crows . The main difference between the subspecies lies in the " saddle " markings on the back below the nape . Black @-@ backed subspecies have a black saddle and white nape . White @-@ backed subspecies have a wholly white nape and saddle . The male Western Australian subspecies dorsalis is also white @-@ backed , but the equivalent area in the female is scalloped black . 
 Juveniles have lighter greys and browns amidst the starker blacks and whites of their plumage ; two- or three @-@ year @-@ old birds of both sexes closely resemble and are difficult to distinguish from adult females . Immature birds have dark brownish eyes until around two years of age . Australian magpies generally live to around 25 years of age , though ages of up to 30 years have been recorded . The reported age of first breeding has varied according to area , but the average is between the ages of three and five years . 
 Well @-@ known and easily recognisable , the Australian magpie is unlikely to be confused with any other species . The pied butcherbird has a similar build and plumage , but has white underparts unlike the former species ' black underparts . The magpie @-@ lark is a much smaller and more delicate bird with complex and very different banded black and white plumage . <unk> species have predominantly dark plumage and heavier bills . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 One of Australia 's most highly regarded songbirds , the Australian magpie has a wide variety of calls , many of which are complex . Pitch may vary over up to four octaves , and the bird can mimic over 35 species of native and introduced bird species , as well as dogs and horses . Magpies have even been noted to mimic human speech when living in close proximity to humans . Its complex , musical , warbling call is one of the most familiar Australian bird sounds . In Denis Glover 's poem " The Magpies " , the mature magpie 's call is described as <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> doodle , one of the most famous lines in New Zealand poetry , and as waddle giggle gargle paddle poodle , in the children 's book Waddle Giggle <unk> by Pamela Allen . 
