 When alone , a magpie may make a quiet musical warbling ; these complex melodious warbles or <unk> are pitched at 2 – 4 KHz and do not carry for long distances . These songs have been recorded up to 70 minutes in duration and are more frequent after the end of the breeding season . Pairs of magpies often take up a loud musical calling known as carolling to advertise or defend their territory ; one bird initiates the call with the second ( and sometimes more ) joining in . Often preceded by warbling , carolling is pitched between 6 and 8 kHz and has 4 – 5 elements with slurring indistinct noise in between . Birds will adopt a specific posture by tilting their heads back , expanding their chests , and moving their wings backwards . A group of magpies will sing a short repetitive version of carolling just before dawn ( dawn song ) , and at twilight after sundown ( dusk song ) , in winter and spring . 
 <unk> and juvenile magpies emit a repeated short and loud ( 80 dB ) , high @-@ pitched ( 8 kHz ) begging call . Magpies may indulge in beak @-@ clapping to warn other species of birds . They employ several high pitched ( 8 – 10 kHz ) alarm or rallying calls when intruders or threats are spotted . Distinct calls have been recorded for the approach of eagles and monitor lizards . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Australian magpie is found in the Trans @-@ Fly region of southern New Guinea , between the <unk> River and the Princess <unk> Strait , and across most of Australia , bar the tip of Cape York , the Gibson and Great Sandy Deserts , and southwest of Tasmania . Birds taken mainly from Tasmania and Victoria were introduced into New Zealand by local Acclimatisation Societies of Otago and Canterbury in the 1860s , with the Wellington Acclimatisation Society releasing 260 birds in 1874 . White @-@ backed forms are spread on both the North and eastern South Island , while black @-@ backed forms are found in the Hawke 's Bay region . Magpies were introduced into New Zealand to control agricultural pests , and were therefore a protected species until 1951 . They are thought to affect native New Zealand bird populations such as the tui and kererū , sometimes raiding nests for eggs and nestlings , although studies by Waikato University have cast doubt on this , and much blame on the magpie as a predator in the past has been anecdotal only . Introductions also occurred in the Solomon Islands and Sri Lanka , although the species has failed to become established . It has become established in western Taveuni in Fiji , however . 
 The Australian magpie prefers open areas such as grassland , fields and residential areas such as parks , gardens , golf courses , and streets , with scattered trees or forest nearby . Birds nest and shelter in trees but forage mainly on the ground in these open areas . It has also been recorded in mature pine plantations ; birds only occupy rainforest and wet sclerophyll forest in the vicinity of cleared areas . In general , evidence suggests the range and population of the Australian magpie has increased with land @-@ clearing , although local declines in Queensland due to a 1902 drought , and in Tasmania in the 1930s have been noted ; the cause for the latter is unclear but rabbit baiting , pine tree removal , and spread of the masked lapwing ( Vanellus miles ) have been implicated . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The Australian magpie is almost exclusively diurnal , although it may call into the night , like some other members of the Artamidae . Natural predators of magpies include various species of monitor lizard and the barking owl . Birds are often killed on roads or electrocuted by powerlines , or poisoned after killing and eating house sparrows or mice , rats or rabbits targeted with baiting . The Australian raven may take nestlings left unattended . 
 On the ground , the Australian magpie moves around by walking , and is the only member of the Artamidae to do so ; woodswallows , butcherbirds and currawongs all tend to hop with legs parallel . The magpie has a short femur ( thigh bone ) , and long lower leg below the knee , suited to walking rather than running , although birds can run in short bursts when hunting prey . 
 The magpie is generally sedentary and territorial throughout its range , living in groups occupying a territory , or in flocks or fringe groups . A group may occupy and defend the same territory for many years . Much energy is spent defending a territory from intruders , particularly other magpies , and different behaviours are seen with different opponents . The sight of a raptor results in a rallying call by sentinel birds and subsequent coordinated mobbing of the intruder . Magpies place themselves either side of the bird of prey so that it will be attacked from behind should it strike a defender , and harass and drive the raptor to some distance beyond the territory . A group will use carolling as a signal to advertise ownership and warn off other magpies . In the negotiating display , the one or two dominant magpies parade along the border of the defended territory while the rest of the group stand back a little and look on . The leaders may fluff their feathers or <unk> repeatedly . In a group strength display , employed if both the opposing and defending groups are of roughly equal numbers , all magpies will fly and form a row at the border of the territory . The defending group may also resort to an aerial display where the dominant magpies , or sometimes the whole group , swoop and dive while calling to warn an intruding magpie 's group . 
 A wide variety of displays are seen , with aggressive behaviours outnumbering pro @-@ social ones . Crouching low and uttering quiet begging calls are common signs of submission . The manus flutter is a submissive display where a magpie will flutter its primary feathers in its wings . A magpie , particularly a juvenile , may also fall , roll over on its back and expose its underparts . Birds may fluff up their flank feathers as an aggressive display or preceding an attack . Young birds display various forms of play behaviour , either by themselves or in groups , with older birds often initiating the proceedings with juveniles . These may involve picking up , manipulating or tugging at various objects such as sticks , rocks or bits of wire , and handing them to other birds . A bird may pick up a feather or leaf and flying off with it , with other birds pursuing and attempting to bring down the leader by latching onto its tail feathers . Birds may jump on each other and even engage in mock fighting . Play may even take place with other species such as blue @-@ faced honeyeaters and Australasian pipits . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The Australian magpie is omnivorous , eating various items located at or near ground level including invertebrates such as earthworms , millipedes , snails , spiders and scorpions as well as a wide variety of insects — cockroaches , ants , beetles , moths and caterpillars and other larvae . Insects , including large adult grasshoppers , may be seized mid @-@ flight . <unk> , frogs , mice and other small animals as well as grain , tubers , figs and walnuts have also been noted as components of their diet . It has even learnt to safely eat the poisonous cane toad by flipping it over and consuming the underparts . Predominantly a ground feeder , the Australian magpie paces open areas methodically searching for insects and their larvae . One study showed birds were able to find scarab beetle larvae by sound or vibration . Birds use their bills to probe into the earth or otherwise overturn debris in search of food . Smaller prey are swallowed whole , although magpies rub off the stingers of bees and wasps before swallowing . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Magpies have a long breeding season which varies in different parts of the country ; in northern parts of Australia they will breed between June and September , but not commence until August or September in cooler regions , and may continue until January in some alpine areas . The nest is a bowl @-@ shaped structure made of sticks and lined with softer material such as grass and bark . Near human habitation , synthetic material may be incorporated . Nests are built exclusively by females and generally placed high up in a tree fork , often in an exposed position . The trees used are most commonly eucalypts , although a variety of other native trees as well as introduced pine , Crataegus , and elm have been recorded . Other bird species , such as the yellow @-@ rumped thornbill ( Acanthiza <unk> ) , willie wagtail ( Rhipidura leucophrys ) , southern whiteface ( <unk> leucopsis ) , and ( less commonly ) noisy miner ( Manorina melanocephala ) , often nest in the same tree as the magpie . The first two species may even locate their nest directly beneath a magpie nest , while the diminutive striated <unk> ( <unk> striatus ) has been known to make a burrow for breeding into the base of the magpie nest itself . These incursions are all tolerated by the magpies . The channel @-@ billed cuckoo ( Scythrops novaehollandiae ) is a notable brood parasite in eastern Australia ; magpies will raise cuckoo young , which eventually outcompete the magpie nestlings . 
 The Australian magpie produces a clutch of two to five light blue or greenish eggs , which are oval in shape and about 30 by 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 by 1 @.@ 6 in ) . The chicks hatch synchronously around 20 days after incubation begins ; like all passerines , the chicks are altricial — they are born pink , naked , and blind with large feet , a short broad beak and a bright red throat . Their eyes are fully open at around 10 days . Chicks develop fine downy feathers on their head , back and wings in the first week , and <unk> in the second week . The black and white colouration is noticeable from an early stage . Nestlings are fed exclusively by the female , though the male magpie will feed his partner . The Australian magpie is known to engage in cooperative breeding , and helper birds will assist in feeding and raising young . This does vary from region to region , and with the size of the group — the behaviour is rare or nonexistent in pairs or small groups . 
 Juvenile magpies begin foraging on their own three weeks after leaving the nest , and mostly feeding themselves by six months old . Some birds continue begging for food until eight or nine months of age , but are usually ignored . Birds reach adult size by their first year . The age at which young birds disperse varies across the country , and depends on the aggressiveness of the dominant adult of the corresponding sex ; males are usually evicted at a younger age . Many leave at around a year old , but the age of departure may range from eight months to four years . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Magpies are ubiquitous in urban areas all over Australia , and have become accustomed to people . A small percentage of birds become highly aggressive during breeding season from late August to early October , and will swoop and sometimes attack passersby . The percentage has been difficult to estimate but is significantly less than 9 % . Almost all attacking birds ( around 99 % ) are male , and they are generally known to attack pedestrians at around 50 m ( 160 ft ) from their nest , and cyclists at around 100 m ( 330 ft ) . There appears to be some specificity in choice of attack targets , with the majority of individuals specializing on either pedestrians or cyclists . Attacks begin as the eggs hatch , increase in frequency and severity as the chicks grow , and tail off as the chicks leave the nest . 
 These magpies may engage in an escalating series of behaviours to drive off intruders . Least threatening are alarm calls and distant swoops , where birds fly within several metres from behind and perch nearby . Next in intensity are close swoops , where a magpie will swoop in from behind or the side and audibly " snap " their beaks or even peck or bite at the face , neck , ears or eyes . More rarely , a bird may dive @-@ bomb and strike the intruder 's ( usually a cyclist 's ) head with its chest . A magpie may rarely attack by landing on the ground in front of a person and lurching up and landing on the victim 's chest and peck at the face and eyes . 
 Magpie attacks can cause injuries , typically wounds to the head , and being unexpectedly swooped while cycling can result in loss of control of the bicycle , which may cause injury . 
 If it is necessary to walk near the nest , wearing a broad @-@ brimmed or legionnaire 's hat or using an umbrella will deter attacking birds , but <unk> and bicycle helmets are of little value as birds attack the sides of the head and neck . 
 Magpies prefer to swoop at the back of the head ; therefore , keeping the magpie in sight at all times can discourage the bird . A basic disguise such as sunglasses worn on the back of the head may fool the magpie as to where a person is looking . Eyes painted on hats or helmets will deter attacks on pedestrians but not cyclists . 
 Cyclists can deter attack by attaching a long pole with a flag to a bike , and the use of cable ties on helmets has become common and appears to be effective . 
 Magpies are a protected native species in Australia , so it is illegal to kill or harm them . However , this protection is removed in some Australian states if a magpie attacks a human , allowing for the bird to be destroyed if it is considered particularly aggressive ( such a provision is made , for example , in section 54 of the South Australian National Parks and Wildlife Act ) . More commonly , an aggressive bird will be caught and relocated to an unpopulated area . Magpies have to be moved some distance as almost all are able to find their way home from distances of less than 25 km ( 16 mi ) . Removing the nest is of no use as birds will breed again and possibly be more aggressive the second time around . 
 Some claim that swooping can be prevented by hand @-@ feeding magpies . Magpies will become accustomed to being fed by humans , and although they are wild , will return to the same place looking for handouts . The idea is that humans thereby appear less of a threat to the nesting birds . Although this has not been studied systematically , there are reports of its success . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 The Australian magpie featured in aboriginal folklore around Australia . The Yindjibarndi people of the Pilbara in the northwest of the country used the bird as a signal for sunrise , frightening them awake with its call . They were also familiar with its highly territorial nature , and it features in a song in their <unk> , or songs of customs . It was a totem bird of the people of the Illawarra region south of Sydney . 
 Under the name piping shrike , the white @-@ backed magpie was declared the official emblem of the Government of South Australia in 1901 by Governor Tennyson , and has featured on the South Australian flag since 1904 . The magpie is a commonly used emblem of sporting teams in Australia , and its brash , cocky attitude has been likened to the Australian psyche . Such teams tend to wear uniforms with black and white stripes . The Collingwood Football Club adopted the magpie from a visiting South Australian representative team in 1892 . The Port Adelaide Magpies would similarly adopt the black and white colours and Magpie name in 1902 . Other examples include Brisbane 's Souths Logan Magpies , and Sydney 's Western Suburbs Magpies . Disputes over who has been the first club to adopt the magpie emblem have been heated at times . Another club , Glenorchy Football Club of Tasmania , was forced to change uniform design when placed in the same league as another club ( Claremont Magpies ) with the same emblem . 
 In New Zealand , the Hawke 's Bay Rugby Union team , from Napier , New Zealand , is also known as the magpies . One of the best @-@ known New Zealand poems is " The Magpies " by Denis Glover , with its refrain " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> doodle " , imitating the sound of the bird – and the popular New Zealand comic <unk> Flats features a magpie character by the name of Pew . 
 = Flame robin = 
 The flame robin ( Petroica phoenicea ) is a small passerine bird native to Australia . It is a moderately common resident of the coolest parts of south @-@ eastern Australia , including Tasmania . Like the other two red @-@ breasted Petroica robins — the scarlet robin and the red @-@ capped robin — it is often simply called the robin redbreast . Like many brightly coloured robins of the Petroicidae , it is sexually dimorphic . Measuring 12 – 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long , the flame robin has dark brown eyes and a small thin black bill . The male has a brilliant orange @-@ red chest and throat , and a white patch on the forehead above the bill . Its upper parts are iron @-@ grey with white bars , and its tail black with white tips . The female is a nondescript grey @-@ brown . Its song has been described as the most musical of its genus . 
 The position of the flame robin and its Australian relatives on the passerine family tree is unclear ; the Petroicidae are not closely related to either the European or American robins but appear to be an early offshoot of the Passerida group of songbirds . The flame robin is predominantly insectivorous , pouncing on prey from a perch in a tree , or foraging on the ground . A territorial bird , the flame robin employs song and plumage displays to mark out and defend its territory . Classified by BirdLife International as Near Threatened , the species has suffered a marked decline in the past 25 years . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The flame robin was first described by the French naturalists Jean René Constant Quoy and Joseph Paul Gaimard in 1830 as Muscicapa chrysoptera . The specific epithet , " chrysoptera " , is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " golden " , and pteron " feather " . 
 John Gould placed the flame robin in its current genus as Petroica phoenicea in his 1837 description , and it was this latter binomial name that has been used since that time . Given this , Quoy and Gaimard 's name was declared a nomen oblitum . The generic name is derived from the Ancient Greek words <unk> " rock " and oikos " home " , from the birds ' habit of sitting on rocks . The specific epithet is also derived from Ancient Greek , from the adjective <unk> " red " . It is one of five red- or pink @-@ breasted species colloquially known as " red robins " , as distinct from the " yellow robins " of the genus Eopsaltria . Although named after the European robin , is not closely related to it or the American robin . The Australian robins were placed in the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae , and the whistler family <unk> , before being classified in their own family Petroicidae , or <unk> . Sibley and Ahlquist 's DNA @-@ DNA hybridisation studies placed the robins in a Corvida parvorder comprising many tropical and Australian passerines including pardalotes , fairy @-@ wrens and honeyeaters as well as crows . However , subsequent molecular research ( and current consensus ) places the robins as a very early offshoot of the Passerida , or " advanced " songbirds , within the songbird lineage . 
 No subspecies are recognised , and the degree of geographic variation is unclear . Adult male birds which breed on the mainland have been reported as having lighter upperparts and underparts than their Tasmanian relatives , and females are said to be browner , but these differences may also result from worn plumage . Furthermore , migration across the Bass Strait by some birds obfuscates the issue . Mainland and Tasmanian birds are the same size . Ornithologists Richard Schodde and Ian Mason argued that the poor quality of museum collections and partially migratory habits meant that discrete subspecies could not be distinguished on the basis of the observed variation within the species . 
 Flame @-@ breasted robin was the common name formerly used for the species , and it was gradually abbreviated to flame robin . Other names recorded include bank robin , redhead , and ( inaccurately ) robin redbreast . " Flame Robin " is the preferred vernacular name of the International Ornithological Congress . 
 = = Description = = 
 The largest of the red robins , the flame robin is 12 – 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 – 5 @.@ 5 in ) long . It has a more slender build than other members of the genus Petroica , with relatively long wings and neck and small head . The male is easily distinguished by the bright orange @-@ red plumage of the throat , breast and abdomen . The crown , nape , ear coverts , hindneck , and sides of neck are dark grey , and lores and chin are a grey @-@ black . The grey feathers of the sides of the crown may be suffused with dull orange . The rest of the upperparts , comprising the wings , back and tail , are dark grey . There is a small white frontal spot above the bill , and the wing bar and outer tail shafts are white . The feathers of the posterior belly , flanks and vent are white with grey @-@ black bases . The female is plainly coloured — pale brown overall , and a lighter buff underneath . The posterior belly , flanks and vent are off @-@ white . As in the male , feathers on the side of the crown may be suffused with a dull orange , and this may also occur with breast feathers . There are small off @-@ white marks on the wings and above the bill . The bill , legs , feet and claws are black , and the eyes dark brown . A flame robin with an all lemon @-@ yellow breast and otherwise female plumage was observed in a small flock of flame robins near Swansea in eastern Tasmania in September 1950 . 
 Nestlings have dark grey or brown down , cream to grey bills , cream gapes and orange throats . The plumage of juvenile birds in their first moult resembles that of the adult female , but the head and upperparts are streaked and slightly darker . Soon after fledging , juveniles moult into their first immature plumage , and more closely resemble the adult female . The breasts of male birds may have some orange feathers . Birds in their second year moult into a second immature phase , some males of which may resemble adult males , while others retain a more immature brown plumage . Determining the age and sex of birds in brown plumage can be very difficult . Information on exact timing of moulting is lacking , but the replacement of primary feathers takes place over the summer months between December and February . 
 The colour alone is not a reliable guide to determine the species , as some scarlet robins ( P. boodang ) take on an orange hue , but while male scarlet and red @-@ capped robins ( P. goodenovii ) have red breasts and black throats , the flame robin 's breast plumage extends right up to the base of the bill . It is also a little slimmer and has a smaller head than the scarlet robin , and is clearly larger than the red @-@ capped . Females of the respective species are harder to tell apart . Those of red @-@ capped , rose and pink robins are all smaller , with wing lengths less than 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) , smaller than the smallest flame robin . The female scarlet robin has a more pronounced red flush to the breast and the spot on the crown above the bill is more prominent and white rather than off @-@ white . 
 The flame robin 's calls are grouped into louder and quieter calls ; the former can be heard from 150 m ( 490 ft ) away , the latter , which are often briefer , from 30 m ( 98 ft ) . Loud songs make up almost 90 % of calls in spring , summer and autumn , but less than 50 % of calls from May to July . Males sing rarely during this time , although they do so to defend their territories . Their song is more varied and complex than that of the scarlet robin , and has been described as the most musical of the red robins . A series of descending notes in groups of three , the musical song has been likened to the phrases , " you @-@ may @-@ come , if @-@ you @-@ will , to @-@ the @-@ sea " or " you @-@ are @-@ not a @-@ pretty @-@ little @-@ bird like @-@ me " . Both males and females sing this song , often perched from a vantage point such as a stump or fence . This loud song is used to attract the attention of a potential mate , and to announce the bringing of food to its mate or young . The softer call has been described as a <unk> , <unk> or pip and is used as a contact call in the vicinity of the nest . The female makes a hissing sound if approached while on the nest , and the male has been recorded making a wheezing call when displaying around the nest . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The flame robin is found in temperate regions of southeastern Australia and all over Tasmania , although it is less common in the southwest and west . In Victoria , it is more common in uplands than lower altitudes . It ranges from the Adelaide and Murray Plains around the mouth of the Murray River in southeastern South Australia , across Victoria and into the South West Slopes and southern regions of New South Wales . Further north , it is found along the Great Dividing Range and its western slopes , with a few records from southeast Queensland . Within its range , it is generally migratory , moving from alpine and subalpine regions to lowlands in winter , although the breeding and non @-@ breeding ranges overlap . There is some evidence that male birds migrate several days before females . It is unclear what proportion of Tasmanian birds cross Bass Strait to winter in Victoria . Birds which remain in Tasmania move away from breeding areas and are found in paddocks in loose flocks of up to fourteen birds . They have left these areas by August , and immature birds appear to disperse earlier . A field study in the outer Melbourne suburb of <unk> showed that climate did not influence peak abundance of Flame Robins there . The international organization BirdLife International has regraded it from Least Concern to Near Threatened in 2004 due to its population decline over the previous 25 years . The Australian Government had classified it as Least Concern , but noted evidence of decline at the edges of its non @-@ breeding range ; it has become rare in South Australia and Victoria . Flame robins are not rare in Victoria . They are frequently encountered at high elevations on the Great Dividing Range , especially in sparser snow gum woodland and similar habitat , and during the summer breeding season are one of the most reliably observed species around the summit of Mount Macedon , NW of Melbourne . 
 In spring and summer , the flame robin is more often found in wet eucalypt forest in hilly or mountainous areas , particularly the tops and slopes , to an elevation of 1 @,@ 800 m ( 5 @,@ 900 ft ) . It generally prefers areas with more clearings and less understory . In particular it prefers tall forests dominated by such trees as snow gum ( Eucalyptus pauciflora ) , mountain ash ( E. regnans ) , alpine ash ( E. delegatensis ) , manna gum ( E. viminalis ) , messmate stringybark ( E. obliqua ) , black gum ( E. <unk> ) , white mountain gum ( E. dalrympleana ) , brown barrel ( E. <unk> ) , narrow @-@ leaved peppermint ( E. radiata ) , and black peppermint ( E. <unk> ) . It is occasionally encountered in temperate rainforest . In the autumn and winter , birds move to more open areas such as grasslands and open woodlands , such as those containing river red gum ( E. camaldulensis ) , Blakely 's red gum ( E. blakelyi ) , yellow box ( E. melliodora ) , grey box ( E. microcarpa ) , and mugga ironbark ( E. sideroxylon ) , at lower altitude . 
 Flame robins often become more abundant in areas recently burnt by bushfires , but move away once the undergrowth regrows . They may also move into logged or cleared areas in forests . However , a field study in the Boola Boola State Forest in central Gippsland revealed they are not found in areas where the regrowth after logging is dense . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The flame robin mostly breeds in and around the Great Dividing Range , the Tasmanian highlands and islands in Bass Strait . With the coming of cooler autumn weather , most birds disperse to lower and warmer areas , some travelling as far as eastern South Australia , southern Queensland , or ( in the case of some Tasmanian birds ) across Bass Strait to Victoria . Birds breeding in the warmer climates north of the Blue Mountains in New South Wales tend to retain their highland territories all year round . Outside the breeding season , birds may congregate in loose flocks , but they are most usually encountered throughout the year singly or in pairs , the latter more commonly in breeding season . 
 When perched or between bouts of foraging on the ground , the flame robin holds itself in a relatively upright pose , with its body angled at 45 ° or less from the vertical , and its wings held low below its tail . It impresses as nervous and twitchy , flicking its wings alternately when still . The flame robin 's flight is fast , with a markedly undulating character . 
 The flame robin is territorial , defending its territory against other members of its species and also scarlet robins where they co @-@ occur . In Nimmitabel in southern New South Wales , migratory flame robins invaded and eked out their territories from amid existing scarlet robin territories . Once settled , however , no species dominated over the other and stable boundaries emerged . The flame robin deploys a number of agonistic displays , including a breast @-@ puffing display where it puffs its breast feathers and a white spot display where it puffs its feathers to accentuate its frontal white crown , white wing markings or white outer tail feathers . They may also fly at intruders or sing to defend their territory . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Like all Australasian robins , the flame robin is a perch and pounce hunter , mainly eating insects , and often returning to a favourite low perch several times to stand erect and motionless , scanning the leaf @-@ litter for more prey . They are typically seen in pairs ( during the spring and summer breeding season ) or in loose companies in more open country in winter , when they more commonly feed on the ground . A field study in the Southern Tablelands of New South Wales found no significant difference in foraging behaviour between male and female flame robins . Birds have been recorded foraging for insects in furrows in freshly ploughed fields . In Deniliquin , a flame robin was observed holding one foot forward and pattering the ground repeatedly to disturb ground @-@ dwelling insects , and then watching and snapping up any which emerged ; this behaviour is otherwise seen in waders . 
 Compared with the scarlet robin , the flame robin eats a higher proportion of flying insects . Biologist Doug Robinson has proposed that scarcity of flying insects in winter is a reason why the flame robin migrates . They have been seen in mixed @-@ species flocks with other small insectivorous passerines , such as scarlet robins , hooded robins ( <unk> cucullata ) , white @-@ fronted chats ( <unk> albifrons ) , and Australasian pipits ( Anthus <unk> ) . 
 Among the types of insects consumed are many families of beetles , wasps and ants , flies ( families Tabanidae and <unk> ) , bugs , and caterpillars . Other invertebrates eaten include spiders , millipedes and earthworms . The flame robin consumes small prey items whole , and bashes larger victims against a hard surface repeatedly to break up before eating . The latter group constitute only 0 @.@ 5 % of prey over time — seasonally varying from a peak of 1 @.@ 8 % in autumn to a low of 0 @.@ 2 % of prey caught in winter . 
 = = = Courtship and breeding = = = 
 Several courtship behaviours have been recorded . Males have been recorded feeding females . A male flame robin either lands next to and moves a female off her perch , or flies in front of her . Courting males also run to and fro in front of a female , in a crouch with wings and head lowered and hiding their breast feathers . In both displays , the male proceeds to chase the female . Pairs are generally monogamous , and remain together unless one bird perishes , although " divorces " have been recorded . 
 The breeding season is August to January with one or two broods raised . The male proposes suitable nest sites to the female by hopping around the area . Unlike other robins , the female sometimes initiates the site selection . A pair spends anywhere from one to five days looking before finding a suitable site . The female constructs the nest alone . Eucalypts are generally chosen , but birds have been recorded nesting in Pinus radiata on Mount Wellington in Tasmania . The flame robin is more versatile in its selection of nesting sites than other robins , and has even been recorded nesting in sheds . 
 The nest is a neat deep cup made of soft dry grass , moss and bark . Spider webs , feathers and fur are used for binding / filling , generally in a tree fork or crevice , or cliff or riverbank ledge , typically within a few metres of the ground . The clutch generally numbers three or four dull white eggs , which are laid on consecutive days . They are tinted bluish , greyish or brownish and splotched with dark grey @-@ brown , and measure 18 mm x 14 mm . A field study in open eucalypt forest at Nimmitabel found that flame robins and scarlet robins chose different sites to breed , the former in tree hollows and bark crevices , most commonly of Eucalyptus viminalis around 4 m ( 13 ft ) off the ground , and the latter more commonly in forks or on branches of E. pauciflora around 7 m ( 23 ft ) above the ground . Flame robins , which were migratory at the site , were more successful in raising young , but the success rate of scarlet robins in the area appeared to be poor compared with other sites . 
 Incubation has been recorded as averaging around 17 days . Like all passerines , the chicks are altricial ; they are born blind and naked , and start to develop down on their heads on day two . Their eyes open around day six , and they begin developing their primary flight feathers around day nine or ten . For the first three days after hatching , the mother feeds the nestlings alone , with food brought to her by the father . The father feeds them directly from the fourth day onwards , with the mother brooding them afterwards until day seven . Flies , butterflies , moths , caterpillars and beetles predominate in the food fed to the young birds . Flame robins fed a higher proportion of flying insects to their young at Nimmitabel than did scarlet robins , which may have been due to their later start to breeding . Both parents participate in removing faecal sacs from the nest . Parents have been observed feeding young up to five weeks after leaving the nest . 
 The fan @-@ tailed cuckoo ( Cacomantis flabelliformis ) and pallid cuckoo ( C. pallidus ) have been recorded as brood parasites of the flame robin ; female cuckoos lay their eggs in robin nests , which are then raised by the robins as their own . One fan @-@ tailed cuckoo was recorded ejecting baby robins before being raised by its foster parents . Other nest predators recorded include the grey <unk> ( Colluricincla harmonica ) , pied currawong ( Strepera graculina ) , and eastern brown snake ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = Jill Biden = 
 Jill Tracy Biden ( née Jacobs , previously Stevenson ; born June 3 , 1951 ) is an American educator who is married to the 47th and current Vice President of the United States , Joe Biden , making her the Second Lady of the United States since 2009 . 
 She was born in Hammonton , New Jersey , and grew up in Willow Grove , Pennsylvania . She married Joe Biden in 1977 , and became stepmother to his two young sons from his first marriage , Beau and Hunter , whose mother and baby sister died in a car accident . Joe and Jill Biden have a daughter , Ashley , born in 1981 . 
 Jill Biden has a bachelor 's degree from the University of Delaware , master 's degrees from West Chester University and Villanova University , and a doctoral degree from the University of Delaware . She taught English and reading in high schools for 13 years , and also taught adolescents with emotional disabilities at a psychiatric hospital . From 1993 to 2008 , she was an English and writing instructor at Delaware Technical & Community College . Since 2009 , she has been a professor of English at Northern Virginia Community College and is thought to be the first Second Lady to hold a paying job while her husband is Vice President . She is the founder of the Biden Breast Health Initiative non @-@ profit organization , co @-@ founder of the Book Buddies program , is active in Delaware Boots on the Ground , and is co @-@ founder of Joining Forces with First Lady Michelle Obama . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jill Tracy Jacobs was born on June 3 , 1951 in Hammonton , New Jersey . Moving several times while very young , she and her four younger sisters spent the majority of their childhood in Willow Grove , Pennsylvania . Her father , Donald C. Jacobs ( 1927 – 1999 ) , was a bank teller who became head of a savings and loan in the Chestnut Hill neighborhood of Philadelphia . His family name had originally been <unk> before her Italian grandfather anglicized it . Her mother , Bonny Jean ( Godfrey ) Jacobs ( 1930 – 2008 ) , was a homemaker . The family was not particularly religious , but in ninth grade , Jacobs independently took classes in order to join the Presbyterian church . 
 Jacobs always intended to have her own career . She began working at age 15 , which included waitressing at the Jersey Shore . She attended Upper Moreland High School , where she was somewhat rebellious and enjoyed her social life , but always liked English class . She graduated in 1969 . 
 = = Education and career , marriage and family = = 
 Jacobs enrolled in a junior college in Pennsylvania to study fashion merchandising , but soon found it unsatisfying . She married Bill Stevenson , a former college football player , in February 1970 . Within a couple of years he opened the Stone Balloon in Newark , Delaware , near the University of Delaware . It became one of the most successful college bars in the nation . 
 She enrolled at the University of Delaware , where she declared English as her major . She then took a year off from college and did some modelling work for a local agency in Wilmington . She and Stevenson drifted apart . 
 Subsequently , she returned to college and met Senator Joe Biden as a senior at Delaware in March 1975 . They met on a blind date set up by Joe 's brother , though Biden had seen her photograph in a local advertisement . She graduated with a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Delaware later in 1975 . She began her career teaching high school English . Meanwhile , she was going through turbulent divorce proceedings with Stevenson ; the court case ended in 1976 , with her not getting the half @-@ share in the Stone Balloon she had wanted . 
 She and Joe Biden were married by a Catholic priest on June 17 , 1977 , at the Chapel at the United Nations in New York City . This was four and a half years after his first wife and infant daughter died in a motor vehicle accident ; Joe had proposed several times before she accepted , hesitant to take on the commitment of raising his two young sons who had survived the accident . She continued to teach and then , while pregnant , received a Master of Education with a specialty in Reading from West Chester University in 1981 . The Bidens ' daughter Ashley Blazer was born on June 8 , 1981 , and Jill stopped working for two years while raising the three children . 
 She then returned to work , teaching English , acting as a reading specialist , and teaching history to emotionally disturbed students . She taught in the adolescent program at the Rockford Center psychiatric hospital for five years in the 1980s . In 1987 , Biden received a second Master of Arts degree , this one in English from Villanova University . During her husband 's 1988 bid for the Presidency , she said she would continue her job of teaching emotionally disturbed children even if she became First Lady . In all , she spent 13 years teaching in public high school , including 3 years at Claymont High School . 
 From 1993 through 2008 , Biden was an instructor at the Stanton / Wilmington campus of Delaware Technical & Community College , where she taught English composition and remedial writing , with an emphasis on instilling confidence in students . She has said of teaching at a community college , " I feel like I can make a greater difference in their lives . I just love that population . It just feels really comfortable to me . I love the women who are coming back to school and getting their degrees , because they 're so focused . " 
 Biden is president of the Biden Breast Health Initiative , a nonprofit organization begun in 1993 that provides educational breast health awareness programs free of charge to schools and other groups in the state of Delaware . In the following 15 years , the organization informed more than 7 @,@ 000 high school girls about proper breast health . In 2007 , Biden helped found Book Buddies , which provides books for low @-@ income children , and has been very active in Delaware Boots on the Ground , an organization that supports military families . She runs five miles , five times a week , and she has run in the Marine Corps Marathon . 
 Biden later returned to school for her doctoral degree , studying under her birth name , Jill Jacobs . In January 2007 , at age 55 , she received a Doctor of Education in educational leadership from the University of Delaware . Her dissertation , Student Retention at the Community College : Meeting Students ' Needs , was published under the name Jill Jacobs @-@ Biden . 
 = = Role in 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 Following George W. Bush 's reelection in 2004 , she urged her husband to run again for President , later saying : " I literally wore black for a week . I just could not believe that he won , because I felt that things were already so bad . I was so against the [ Iraq War ] . And I said to Joe , ' You 've got to change this , you have to change this . ' " During Joe Biden 's 2008 campaign to be the Democratic nominee , she continued to teach during the week and would join him for campaigning on weekends . She said that she would have taken an activist role in addressing education as her chief focus of concern as a potential First Lady . She also said that she was basically apolitical and would not seek inclusion in Cabinet meetings . 
 Once her husband was selected as the Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama 's running mate , she began campaigning again . She wore a Blue Star Mothers Club pin in recognition of Beau Biden 's deployment to Iraq . She was not a polished political speaker , but was able to establish a connection with the audience . She also made some joint appearances with Michelle Obama . Throughout the time her husband was running for vice president , Jill Biden continued to teach four days a week at Delaware Technical & Community College during the fall 2008 semester , and then campaigned over the long weekend , while grading class papers on the campaign bus . 
 = = Second Lady of the United States = = 
 = = = First term = = = 
 Despite moving to Number One Observatory Circle ( the vice presidential residence in Washington ) as Second Lady of the United States , Biden intended to keep teaching at a Washington @-@ area community college , and several of them recruited her . In January 2009 , she began teaching two English courses as an adjunct professor at the Alexandria campus of Northern Virginia Community College ( NOVA ) , the second largest community college in the nation . It has been rare for Second Ladies to work while their spouses serve as Vice President , and Biden is thought to be the first Second Lady to hold a paying job while her husband is Vice President . Biden planned to be a public advocate for the importance of community colleges and to advise the Obama administration on issues related to them . In White House announcements and by her preference , she is referred to as " Dr. Jill Biden " . 
 Catherine Russell , a former adviser to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee , was named Biden 's chief of staff for her Second Lady role . Courtney O ’ Donnell , a former spokesperson for Howard Dean and Elizabeth Edwards , was named her communications director and Kirsten White , a lawyer at Morgan , Lewis & <unk> , her policy director . As Second Lady , Biden has a staff of eight overall and occupies a corner suite in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building . 
 On The Oprah Winfrey Show just before the inauguration , Jill Biden said that Barack Obama had offered her husband either the Vice @-@ Presidency or the position of U.S. Secretary of State . However , Joe Biden 's spokesperson stated that Biden had only been offered one job by Obama . In May 2009 , Obama announced that Biden would be in charge of an initiative to raise awareness about the value of community colleges . 
 In June 2009 , Biden gave the commencement address at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn , New York , and received an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree from the City University of New York . Biden continued teaching two English reading and writing classes at NOVA in fall 2009 . In January 2010 , she gave the commencement speech at the University of Delaware 's winter commencement , the first such address by her at a major university . In August 2010 , Biden appeared as herself in an episode of Lifetime 's Army Wives , making it part of her campaign to raise awareness of military families . 
 In April 2011 , she and Michelle Obama founded a national initiative , Joining Forces , to showcase the needs of U.S. military families . In September 2011 , Biden lent her support to USAID 's FWD campaign , a push for awareness surrounding the deadly famine , war , and drought affecting over 13 million people in the Horn of Africa . She continued to teach at NOVA , and by 2011 held a permanent position as an associate professor , teaching three English and writing composition courses two days per week . Her position there was as normal as she could make it , sharing a cubicle with another teacher , holding regular office hours for students , and trying to get her accompanying Secret Service agents to dress as unobtrusively as possible . Her life with her husband at Number One Observatory Circle tended towards the informal and was centered around family and their nearby grandchildren . In June 2012 , she published a children 's book , Don 't Forget , God Bless Our Troops , based around her son Beau 's deployment . The same month , the Bidens ' daughter Ashley , a social worker and staffer at the Delaware Department of Services for Children , Youth , and Their Families , was married . 
 = = = Role in 2012 presidential campaign = = = 
 In the 2012 U.S. presidential election , in which her husband was running for re @-@ election as vice president , Biden played a modest role . She did not cut back on her teaching schedule and made few solo campaign appearances . This reflected her continuing distaste for both politics and public speaking , even though the Obama campaign considered her valuable in connecting to military families , teachers , and women . 
 = = = Second term = = = 
 Following the re @-@ election of Obama and her husband on November 6 , 2012 , Biden began a second term as second lady . She wore a silk blue gown by Vera Wang when she appeared at the inaugural balls in January 2013 . 
 During her second term , Biden continued to be involved with supporting military personnel , including staging multiple visits to the Center for the Intrepid rehabilitation facility for amputees and attending the inaugural Invictus Games in London . During the 2014 U.S. midterm Congressional elections she campaigned for a number of Democrats , including some ones in high @-@ profile contests such as Mark Udall in Colorado and Michelle Nunn in Georgia . 
 In May 2015 she suffered the death of her stepson Beau Biden from brain cancer . She was present at her husband 's side in the Rose Garden on October 21 , 2015 , when he announced he would not run for the Democratic Party presidential nomination in the 2016 election . By her own account , Biden was disappointed by his decision , believing her husband was highly qualified for the position , and " would have been the best president . " 
 Biden continued to teach at NOVA , handling a full load of five classes during the Fall 2015 semester . During 2016 , she was present with her husband on a listening tour for Cancer Moonshot 2020 , an effort he was leading . In March 2016 she headed the official party that welcomed American astronaut Scott Kelly back to Earth from his almost full year in space . 
 = Justus = 
 Justus ( sometimes <unk> ; died on 10 November between 627 and 631 ) was the fourth Archbishop of Canterbury . He was sent from Italy to England by Pope Gregory the Great , on a mission to Christianize the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native paganism , probably arriving with the second group of missionaries despatched in 601 . Justus became the first Bishop of Rochester in 604 , and attended a church council in Paris in 614 . 
 Following the death of King Æthelberht of Kent in 616 , Justus was forced to flee to Gaul , but was reinstated in his diocese the following year . In 624 Justus became Archbishop of Canterbury , overseeing the despatch of missionaries to Northumbria . After his death he was revered as a saint , and had a shrine in St Augustine 's Abbey , Canterbury . 
 = = Arrival in Britain = = 
 Justus was an Italian and a member of the Gregorian mission sent to England by Pope Gregory I. Almost everything known about Justus and his career is derived from the early 8th @-@ century Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum of Bede . As Bede does not describe Justus ' origins , nothing is known about him prior to his arrival in England . He probably arrived in England with the second group of missionaries , sent at the request of Augustine of Canterbury in 601 . Some modern writers describe Justus as one of the original missionaries who arrived with Augustine in 597 , but Bede believed that Justus came in the second group . The second group included Mellitus , who later became Bishop of London and Archbishop of Canterbury . 
 If Justus was a member of the second group of missionaries , then he arrived with a gift of books and " all things which were needed for worship and the ministry of the Church " . A 15th @-@ century Canterbury chronicler , Thomas of Elmham , claimed that there were a number of books brought to England by that second group still at Canterbury in his day , although he did not identify them . An investigation of extant Canterbury manuscripts shows that one possible survivor is the St. Augustine Gospels , now in Cambridge , Corpus Christi College , Manuscript ( MS ) 286 . 
 = = Bishop of Rochester = = 
 Augustine consecrated Justus as a bishop in 604 , over a province including the Kentish town of Rochester . The historian Nicholas Brooks argues that the choice of Rochester was probably not because it had been a Roman @-@ era bishopric , but rather because of its importance in the politics of the time . Although the town was small , with just one street , it was at the junction of Watling Street and the estuary of the Medway , and was thus a fortified town . Because Justus was probably not a monk ( he was not called that by Bede ) , his cathedral clergy was very likely non @-@ monastic too . 
 A charter purporting to be from King Æthelberht , dated 28 April 604 , survives in the Textus Roffensis , as well as a copy based on the Textus in the 14th @-@ century Liber <unk> . Written mostly in Latin but using an Old English boundary clause , the charter records a grant of land near the city of Rochester to Justus ' church . Among the witnesses is Laurence , Augustine 's future successor , but not Augustine himself . The text turns to two different addressees . First , Æthelberht is made to admonish his son Eadbald , who had been established as a sub @-@ ruler in the region of Rochester . The grant itself is addressed directly to Saint Andrew , the patron saint of the church , a usage <unk> by other charters in the same archive . 
 Historian Wilhelm Levison , writing in 1946 , was sceptical about the authenticity of this charter . In particular , he felt that the two separate addresses were incongruous and suggested that the first address , occurring before the preamble , may have been inserted by someone familiar with Bede to echo Eadbald 's future conversion ( see below ) . A more recent and more positive appraisal by John Morris argues that the charter and its witness list are authentic because it incorporates titles and phraseology that had fallen out of use by 800 . 
 Æthelberht built Justus a cathedral church in Rochester ; the foundations of a nave and chancel partly underneath the present @-@ day Rochester Cathedral may date from that time . What remains of the foundations of an early rectangular building near the southern part of the current cathedral might also be contemporary with Justus or may be part of a Roman building . 
 Together with Mellitus , the Bishop of London , Justus signed a letter written by Archbishop Laurence of Canterbury to the Irish bishops urging the native church to adopt the Roman method of calculating the date of Easter . This letter also mentioned the fact that Irish missionaries , such as Dagan , had refused to share meals with the missionaries . Although the letter has not survived , Bede quoted from parts of it . 
 In 614 , Justus attended the Council of Paris , held by the Frankish king , Chlothar II . It is unclear why Justus and Peter , the abbot of Sts Peter and Paul in Canterbury , were present . It may have been just chance , but historian James Campbell has suggested that Chlothar summoned clergy from Britain to attend in an attempt to assert overlordship over Kent . The historian N. J. Higham offers another explanation for their attendance , arguing that Æthelberht sent the pair to the council because of shifts in Frankish policy towards the Kentish kingdom , which threatened Kentish independence , and that the two clergymen were sent to negotiate a compromise with Chlothar . 
 A pagan backlash against Christianity followed Æthelberht 's death in 616 , forcing Justus and Mellitus to flee to Gaul . The pair probably took refuge with Chlothar , hoping that the Frankish king would intervene and restore them to their sees , and by 617 Justus had been reinstalled in his bishopric by the new king . Mellitus also returned to England , but the prevailing pagan mood did not allow him to return to London ; after Laurence 's death , Mellitus became Archbishop of Canterbury . According to Bede , Justus received letters of encouragement from Pope Boniface V ( 619 – 625 ) , as did Mellitus , although Bede does not record the actual letters . The historian J. M. Wallace @-@ <unk> assumes that both letters were general statements of encouragement to the missionaries . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 Justus became Archbishop of Canterbury in 624 , receiving his pallium — the symbol of the jurisdiction entrusted to archbishops — from Pope Boniface V , following which Justus consecrated Romanus as his successor at Rochester . Boniface also gave Justus a letter congratulating him on the conversion of King " Aduluald " ( probably King Eadbald of Kent ) , a letter which is included in Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum . Bede 's account of Eadbald 's conversion states that it was Laurence , Justus ' predecessor at Canterbury , who converted the King to Christianity , but the historian D. P. Kirby argues that the letter 's reference to Eadbald makes it likely that it was Justus . Other historians , including Barbara Yorke and Henry Mayr @-@ Harting , conclude that Bede 's account is correct , and that Eadbald was converted by Laurence . Yorke argues that there were two kings of Kent during Eadbald 's reign , Eadbald and Æthelwald , and that Æthelwald was the " Aduluald " referred to by Boniface . Yorke argues that Justus converted Æthelwald back to Christianity after Æthelberht 's death . 
 Justus consecrated Paulinus as the first Bishop of York , before the latter accompanied Æthelburg of Kent to Northumbria for her marriage to King Edwin of Northumbria . Bede records Justus as having died on 10 November , but does not give a year , although it is likely to have between 627 and 631 . After his death , Justus was regarded as a saint , and was given a feast day of 10 November . The ninth century Stowe Missal commemorates his feast day , along with Mellitus and Laurence . In the 1090s , his remains were translated , or ritually moved , to a shrine beside the high altar of St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury . At about the same time , a Life was written about him by Goscelin of Saint @-@ Bertin , as well as a poem by Reginald of Canterbury . Other material from Thomas of Elmham , Gervase of Canterbury , and William of Malmesbury , later medieval chroniclers , adds little to Bede 's account of Justus ' life . 
 = The Legendary Axe = 
 The Legendary Axe ( <unk> Densetsu in Japan ) is a horizontal platform video game for the PC Engine and TurboGrafx @-@ 16 . It was developed by Victor Interactive Software and was published by Victor in Japan and by NEC in North America . It was released in Japan for the PC Engine on September 23 , 1988 ( 1988 @-@ 09 @-@ 23 ) and in North America alongside the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 's launch on August 29 , 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 08 @-@ 29 ) . It is one of the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 's launch titles . In the game , the player controls Gogan , a barbarian whose girl , Flare , was kidnapped by the cult of Jagu . The player must navigate though six platforming levels , armed with a legendary axe named " Sting " to defeat Jagu and his minions and rescue Flare . The game features a rechargeable " strength meter " that determines how much damage is dealt from the axe to enemies . 
 The Legendary Axe received high praise and accolades among video game reviewers , and it received positive preview coverage in anticipation with the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 's launch , showcasing the new console 's capabilities . Reviews from gaming magazines such as Electronic Gaming Monthly called it one of the best adventure games seen at the time . It was highly praised for its detailed graphics and animation , diverse music and gameplay , difficulty level , and execution . It won the " Best [ TurboGrafx @-@ 16 ] Game of the Year " and " Video Game of the Year " ( for all consoles ) awards from Electronic Gaming Monthly and VideoGames & Computer Entertainment respectively for 1989 . The game continued to receive praise from reviewers 20 years after its release for its simple gameplay and game design that showed the performance and capabilities of the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Legendary Axe takes place in a faraway land , where its inhabitants have been under the control of the cult of Jagu . The cult , who has regularly pillaged the countryside , is led by a half @-@ man half @-@ beast named Jagu . The game 's protagonist , Gogan , lives in the village of <unk> , who must hand over one person as a human sacrifice to the Jagu every year . Gogan was away in a remote village studying warfare when he finds out that his childhood friend , Flare , has been selected by the Jagu as their annual sacrifice . Rushing back to <unk> , he finds that she has already been taken by the Jagu to the " Evil Place " located in the mountains . The village elders hand Gogan the Legendary Axe named " Sting " which gives him great strength to fight the evil cult . Armed with this axe , he sets off to the Evil Place to defeat Jagu and his cult and rescue Flare . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Legendary Axe is a side @-@ scrolling action / platform video game in which the player assumes the role of Gogan , who sets out through six differently @-@ themed levels ( called " zones " ) including jungles , caves , and mountains ; the object is to defeat creatures such as " frog men " , bears , and giant spiders with his Legendary Axe " Sting " ; eliminate Jagu and his cult ; and rescue Flare . Players must also navigate obstacles and hazards by jumping . Gogan has a life meter that decreases every time he sustains damage from creatures , and the player loses a life when Gogan 's life meter runs out or if he falls off the screen . The game ends when players have lost all their lives , but they get four continues in which they can restart the game at the same section in which they have lost all their lives . 
 Gogan has a flashing " strength meter " on the top of the screen that determines how much damage he can inflict on enemies when he swings his axe . The strength meter empties after attacking and then slowly refills back to its maximum . The strength meter increases by 25 % whenever the player collects a " crystal container " . This incorporates an element of strategy in the game in which the player can either make a series of weak strikes with the axe or wait and build the strength meter for a single , more @-@ powerful strike . Scattered throughout the game to help Gogan are miniature statues called " Jagu idols " that reveal power @-@ ups when destroyed ; these power @-@ ups include " crystal containers " that increase Gogan 's attack strength , wings that increase the speed of Gogan 's attacks , power balls that help replenish Gogan 's life meter , crystals that award bonus points , and extra lives . Additional lives can also be obtained by earning certain amounts of points . 
 The zones in The Legendary Axe consist of different environments ; they range from dark forests to caverns to mountain plateaus to fortresses . Players will face many enemies along the way which they need to get through : " frog men " that leap from the water and spit fire ; jumping and rolling amoeba creatures in the caverns ; " rock men " that spring out and attack on the mountain plateaus ; and giant spiders that shoot webs at players . The bosses in the game are guardians of Jagu 's cult and are fought at the end of each zone . They include the following : at the end of Zone 1 , a pair of possessed grizzly bears ; of Zone 2 , a magical boulder ; of Zone 3 , a group of flying slinky @-@ type monsters called " Aqua Lungs " ; and of Zone 4 , a pair of creatures with shields and spears called " <unk> " . Zone 5 culminates with a maze of rooms called the " Pits of Madness " which feature every enemy encountered up to that point plus some new enemies ; at its end is a fire @-@ throwing cult demon . Zone 6 consists of the final battle with Jagu himself . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Legendary Axe was developed by Victor Interactive Software , and it was released under the title <unk> Densetsu in Japan for the PC Engine by the same company on September 23 , 1988 ( 1988 @-@ 09 @-@ 23 ) . Prior to its North American release , the game was retitled The Legendary Axe and was displayed with the other PC Engine games and the console itself at the 1989 International Winter Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas , Nevada . Later in 1989 , NEC retooled Hudson Soft 's console and renamed it the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 for its imminent North American release . NEC sought third @-@ party support to develop for the console ; since they were purely a hardware developer , they lacked the ability to develop any software or games . This allowed NEC to publish games developed by those supporting third @-@ party companies in North America . The Legendary Axe was released in North America as a launch title for the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 on August 29 , 1989 ( 1989 @-@ 08 @-@ 29 ) . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 This game did Not spawn a sequel . 
 In September 7th in 1990 a game was published , in Japan Titled <unk> OF <unk> " Ankoku Densetsu " By Atlus Software using the already existing Rastan game matrix . Atlus had purchased the developing software usage rights , but not the " title " product label from Taito . When the game was Released in the United States it was quickly re @-@ titled to " the Legendary Axe II " in hopes of boosting sales by using the well known title as a publicity sales tactic . Reviews for the new title were not good , some reviewers gave overly supportive reviews , they may have possibly purchased those positive comments . 
 <unk> ( November 1990 ) <unk> Rated at 4 out of 5 
 " Legendary Axe II has the same magic as the first version , but with snazzier graphics . You get more power @-@ ups here so you can stay in the hunt longer , enhancing the game 's arcade feel There 's also a better variety of enemies . If you like thumb @-@ numbing , hack @-@ em , slash @-@ em action , give this sequel a try ! Remember , you axed for it ! " <unk> Winstead 
 <unk> # 2 <unk> Magazine 68 % out of 100 % 
 " Admittedly , the game does look remarkably like Rastan Saga II also released this month . Unfortunately the game has changed little from <unk> [ sic ] , the graphics haven 't improved much , neither has the sound , in fact , there are far better games available for the Engine . " 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ( The 1991 Video Game Buyer 's Guide ) Rated at 6 out of 10 
 " This is not a sequel ! The character looks different , and fights differently . It 's not a bad game , there 's just nothing new or interesting ! More like Rastan than Axe , Axe 2 simply borrows their ideas . " <unk> X 
 The Legendary Axe was previewed by various video gaming magazines before its release . A preview from Electronic Gaming Monthly called the game " a definite 10 " and " one of the best video games we 've ever played " . In an overview of the PC Engine , VideoGames & Computer Entertainment referred to the game as " characteristic of the PC Engine 's advanced sound , graphics and game play " . A later preview from the same magazine said that it was one of the console 's better games , and they applauded the arcade @-@ like graphics and gameplay . They said that everyone who owned the console should own the game and that it was an " excellent showcase of the game system 's capabilities " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Legendary Axe received positive coverage upon its release . It was reviewed in Electronic Gaming Monthly in September 1989 . In the review , Steve Harris said it was one of his favorite games , praising its theme , graphics , sound , and execution ; he added that its features were unsurpassed by any video game at the time . Ed Semrad used this game to criticize Rastan , saying The Legendary Axe " is how [ a platform game ] should have been done " . He added that it should be the first game TurboGrafx @-@ 16 owners should buy . Donn Nauert called the game one of the best adventure games seen at the time and echoed Harris ' praises . Jim Allee repeated Semrad 's observation that the game is Rastan but with better graphics ; he praised its detailed sprites , the diverse music and gameplay , and difficulty level and concluded that it " is everything you could want in a game " . Later in that issue Nauert presented a partial walkthrough of the game , where he further praised the game for breathing new life into the platformer genre . An abridged <unk> was published in VideoGames & Computer Entertainment in November 1989 . 
 The Legendary Axe received several awards and accolades . In Electronic Gaming Monthly 's " Best and Worst of 1989 " , the game won " Best Game of the Year " honors for the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 . The magazine cited a " perfect blend of action and adventure " and outstanding graphics and sound . It also received an award for " Coolest Boss Attackers " for its final boss Jagu – an award that was shared with 1989 Sega Genesis " Best Game of the Year " <unk> ' n Ghosts for its final boss " Loki " . The game won " Video Game of the Year " ( for all consoles ) honors from VideoGames & Computer Entertainment in 1989 . They said that the game " has a little of everything : loads of axe @-@ swinging action , layer upon layer of high @-@ quality music and smooth , colorful animation . The combination of these elements brought this action adventure to the top of the video @-@ game heap like rising cream . " 
 The Legendary Axe continued to receive praise from reviewers almost 20 years after its release . In a brief overview of the game in his overview of the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 's history , IGN 's Levi Buchanan pointed out that the game made the console " an easy sell " for buyers and showed the superior performance of the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 over the Nintendo Entertainment System . He said that The Legendary Axe " made the NES look downright ancient " . In a separate full review of the game , Buchanan noted that the game was an improvement over the console 's pack @-@ in game Keith Courage in Alpha Zones ; he said that The Legendary Axe was more fun and had good action compared to the former . He noted that the game remained enjoyable almost 20 years after its release because of its simple platforming gameplay compared to more complicated modern video games like Mass Effect . He praised the game 's smooth animation , innovative and detailed backgrounds , enemy designs , and soundtrack – saying that " any classic game tune nerd would enjoy having [ the music ] on their iPod " . Allgame noted a change in the gameplay near the end of the game ; after the fifth level , players must navigate a maze called the " Pits of Madness " which if they take the wrong path , they get sent back to its beginning . 
 The Legendary Axe has not been released for the Wii 's Virtual Console service , and IGN 's Lucas Thomas rated the game as the 3rd best in a list of " Top 10 unreleased TurboGrafx Titles " for the system . He said that he was shocked to find that this game was not on the Virtual Console , given that it was one of the TurboGrafx @-@ 16 's flagship titles that were heavily advertised when it was released . UK @-@ based magazine Retro Gamer , in a look back to video gaming in January 1989 , made a similar comparison of the game to Rastan , " with a lot of sword slashing and platform jumping " . The reviewer said that the popularity of The Legendary Axe in Japan was what caused it to be released as a TurboGrafx @-@ 16 launch title in North America . 
 = The Green Child = 
 The Green Child is the only completed novel by the English anarchist poet and critic Herbert Read . Written in 1934 and first published by Heinemann in 1935 , the story is based on the 12th @-@ century legend of two green children who mysteriously appeared in the English village of Woolpit , speaking an apparently unknown language . Read described the legend in his English Prose Style , published in 1931 , as " the norm to which all types of fantasy should conform " . 
 Each of the novel 's three parts ends with the apparent death of the story 's protagonist , President Olivero , dictator of the fictional South American Republic of Roncador . In each case Olivero 's death is an allegory for his translation to a " more profound level of existence " , reflecting the book 's overall theme of a search for the meaning of life . Read 's interest in psychoanalytic theory is evident throughout the novel , which is constructed as a " philosophic myth ... in the tradition of Plato " . 
 The story contains many autobiographical elements , and the character of Olivero owes much to Read 's experiences as an officer in the British Army during the First World War . The novel was positively received , although some commentators have considered it to be " inscrutable " , and one has suggested that it has been so differently and vaguely interpreted by those who have given it serious study that it may lack the form and content to justify the praise it has received . 
 = = Biographical background and publication = = 
 Primarily a literary critic , poet , and an advocate for modern art , Read wrote his only novel , The Green Child , in about eight weeks during 1934 , most of it in the summer house behind his home in Hampstead , London . Hampstead was then a " nest of gentle artists " who included Henry Moore , Paul Nash , Ben Nicholson , and Barbara Hepworth . Read was at that time interested in the idea of unconscious composition , and the first sixteen pages of the manuscript – written on different paper from the rest – are considered by some critics to look like the recollection of a dream . Read claimed in a letter written to psychoanalyst Carl Jung that the novel was a product of automatic writing . As of 2016 , the original manuscript is in the possession of the University of Leeds Library ; Read had been a student at the University . 
 Following the Russian Revolution of 1917 Read became a supporter of communism , believing it to offer " the social liberty of my ideals " , but by the 1930s his conviction had begun to waver . Increasingly his political ideology leaned towards anarchism , but it was not until the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 that Read became confirmed in his anarchist beliefs and stated them explicitly . The Green Child was therefore written at a time when Read 's political and philosophical ideas were in flux . 
 There have been six editions of the novel , the first from Heinemann in 1935 , priced at 7 shillings and sixpence , the equivalent of about £ 23 in 2016 . Ten years later a second edition was published by Grey Walls Press , with the addition of illustrations by Felix Kelly . A third edition , for which Graham Greene wrote an introduction focusing on the novel 's autobiographical elements , was published by Eyre and Spottiswoode in 1947 . The first American edition was published in New York by New Directions in 1948 , with an introduction by Kenneth Rexroth . Penguin Books published a fifth edition in 1979 , which included the 1947 introduction by Greene . A sixth edition , published by R. Clark , appeared in 1989 and was reprinted in 1995 , both containing Greene 's introduction . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The first and last parts of the story are told as a third @-@ person narrative , but the middle part is written in the first person . The story begins in 1861 with the faked death of President Olivero , dictator of the South American Republic of Roncador , who has staged his own assassination . He returns to his native England , to the village where he was born and raised . On the evening of his arrival Olivero notices that the stream running through the village appears to be flowing backwards , and he decides to follow the water upstream to discover the cause . 
 The stream 's course leads Olivero to a mill , where through a lighted window he sees a woman tied to a chair , forced by the miller to drink the blood of a freshly slaughtered lamb . Instinctively , Olivero hurls himself through the open window , his " leap into the world of fantasy " . The miller initially offers no resistance and allows Olivero to release the woman , whom he recognises by the colour of her skin to be Sally , one of the two green children who had mysteriously arrived in the village on the day he left , thirty years earlier ; Olivero also recognises the miller as Kneeshaw , an ex @-@ pupil at the village school where he had once taught . During a struggle between the two men Kneeshaw is accidentally drowned in the mill pond . The next morning Olivero and Sally continue on Olivero 's quest to find the stream 's destination , a pool in the moors high above the village . Paddling in its water , Sally begins to sink into the silvery sand covering its bed . Olivero rushes to her , and hand in hand they sink beneath the water of the pool . 
 The book 's second part recounts the events between Oliver leaving the village as its young schoolmaster and his return as ex @-@ President Olivero . He travels to London initially , hoping to find employment as a writer , but after three years spent working as a bookkeeper in a tailor 's shop he takes passage on a ship which lands him in Cádiz , Spain . Unable to speak the language , and in possession of a book by Voltaire , he is arrested as a suspected revolutionary . Held captive for two years , he learns Spanish from his fellow prisoners and determines to travel to one of the liberated American colonies he has learned of , where the possibility exists to establish a new world " free from the oppression and injustice of the old world " . 
 Freed in an amnesty following the death of King Ferdinand of Spain , Oliver makes his way to Buenos Aires . There he is mistaken for a revolutionary agent and taken to meet General Santos of the Roncador Army . Together they hatch a plot to seize the country 's capital city and assassinate its dictator . The plot is successful and " Don Olivero " finds himself leader of the Assembly , making him the country 's new dictator , a position he holds for 25 years . Eventually he realises that his style of government is leading the country into stagnation and " moral <unk> " ; he begins to feel nostalgia for the English village where he was brought up , and resolves to escape . Wishing to avoid any suspicion that he is deserting Roncador , Olivero fakes his own assassination . 
 The final part of the book continues the story from when Olivero and Sally disappear under the water . A large bubble forms around them , transporting them to the centre of the pool and ascending into a large grotto , from where they proceed on foot through a series of adjoining caverns . Sally tells Olivero that this is the country she and her brother left 30 years ago . Soon they encounter her people , to whom Sally , or Siloēn as she is properly known , explains that many years ago she wandered off and became lost , but that she has now returned with one who " was lost too , and now wishes to dwell among us " . Olivero and Siloēn are welcomed into the community , where life is ordered around a progression from lower to upper ledges : the first ledge teaches the pleasures of youth ; on the second ledge the pleasure of manual work is learned ; on the third of opinion and argument ; and finally , on the upper ledge , the " highest pleasure " , of solitary thought . 
 Olivero soon tires of the first ledge , and leaving Siloēn behind he moves to the second , where he learns to cut and polish crystals , the most sacred of objects in this subterranean world . Eventually he is allowed to move to the highest ledge of all , " the final stage of life " . There he is taught the " basic principles of the universe " , that there is only Order and Disorder . " Order ... [ is ] the space @-@ filling Mass about them ... Disorder is empty space " . Disorder is caused by the senses , which , " being confined to the body ... create the illusion of self @-@ hood " . Olivero selects a grotto in which to spend what remains of his life alone , contemplating the " natural and absolute beauty " of the crystals he accepts from the crystal @-@ cutters . Food and water is brought regularly , and he settles to the task of preparing his body for " the perfection of death " , which when it comes he meets with a " peculiar joy " . Removing Olivero 's body from the grotto the attendants encounter another group carrying Siloēn , who died at the same time as Olivero . The pair are laid together in a petrifying trough , to " become part of the same crystal harmony " , as is customary when any of the Green people die . 
 = = Genre and style = = 
 Richard Wasson , professor of English , has said that The Green Child is " defiant of classification " , complicated by its division into " three arbitrarily related sections " . The first part of the novel adopts the style of a 19th @-@ century Gothic fairy tale . The " fluid , seemingly unbroken hand " in which it is written has encouraged the notion that it was produced in a single sitting , followed by a break before the second part was begun . Part two is written as a " conventional political adventure " , in which Olivero tells in flashback the story of his rise to power as the dictator of Roncador . The final part of the novel continues the narrative where the first left off , in the " fantastical , subterranean world of the Green people " . So different in style is the first part from what follows that some critics regard it as an entirely separate work , or " the ' true ' novel " . 
 Olivero 's quest in the underground world is written as a reversal of Plato 's allegory of the cave as described in his Republic . In Plato 's allegory , prisoners confined in a cave and condemned to stare at a blank wall , with only the light from a flickering fire behind them , see just the shadows of what is real ; the philosopher , on the other hand , is like someone released from the cave , able to see the true form of what is casting the shadows . Read turns the idea on its head ; when Siloēn left her subterranean world she left behind the Platonic " eternal forms " , and Olivero has to follow her back to her " cave " to discover the " divine essence of things " . 
 In the last few pages of the book , in which Olivero prepares for his death and petrification , Read describes Olivero 's final thoughts in a form adapted from Plato 's Phaedo , but in an almost mirror image . Socrates , whose thoughts on the afterlife Plato was describing , argued that death was the ideal home of the soul , but Olivero longs for his body to be free from the torments of the soul , to become part of the crystalline solidity of the universe . Olivero regards life , not death , as the destroyer , " for it [ life ] disrupts the harmony of inorganic matter " . Socrates ' suggestion , towards the end of the Phaedo , that our own world is but one of many , each a hollow in the earth connected by underground rivers , is a strikingly similar image to the subterranean land of the Green people that Read describes . Read however was " almost certainly " influenced in his depiction of the world of the Green people by W. H. Hudson 's 1887 utopian novel A Crystal Age , a story in which people strive to " live above their own mortality " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The novel 's overarching theme is " a dialectical search for the meaning of life , a search which involves a return to life 's source " . The Green people 's emphasis on achieving " a literal oneness with the material universe " by petrifying the bodies of their dead , although it has " repulsed " some readers , is a vehicle that allows Read to parody the " traditional Western religious notion of the soul aspiring to rise through air to a vaporous paradise " . 
 The manuscript was originally entitled " Inland Far " , but at some point , perhaps during the gap between writing the first and subsequent parts , Read changed it to " The Green Child " , which suggests that the focus of the novel changed from Olivero 's quest for the source of the stream to the story of the green child herself . The original title was an allusion to William Wordsworth 's ode " <unk> of Immortality " , which describes the " ' bright landscape ' of childhood that casts its spell over later life " . 
 Read was interested in psychoanalysis , and employed psychoanalytic theory in his work , both Freudian and Jungian , although " more as machinery than as a key to meaning " . Olivero 's quest for the source of the stream has been described as " travelling allegorically across a landscape of the mind " , moving him " from the boundaries of the <unk> to the center of the id " . To Olivero , the miller Kneeshaw represents " the evil destructive instinct which lurks beneath the civilised conventions of society " , the Freudian id , whereas Olivero represents the ego . Thirty years earlier , Olivero had taught Kneeshaw at the local school , where he had seen the boy deliberately break a locomotive from a model railway that Olivero had brought into the school , by <unk> its clockwork mechanism . Unable to comprehend such wilful destruction , and already frustrated by the lack of opportunities offered by village life , Olivero left the next day . " When that spring snapped , something snapped in my mind . " 
 Olivero 's confrontation with Kneeshaw displays a Jungian psychoanalytic symbolism , as does the character of Siloēn , " the archetype of the anima , or Jungian ' soul ' , particularly in its function as intermediary between conscious and unconscious . " Kneeshaw represents " the shadow , the dark side of man 's nature , the primitive , animal part of the personality found in the personal unconscious " . Jung believed that the only way to face the shadow was to acknowledge it , not to repress it as Olivero had done 30 years earlier by leaving the village . 
 = = Autobiographical elements = = 
 During the First World War Read served with the Green Howards , fighting in the trenches of France . He was awarded the Military Cross , promoted to the rank of lieutenant , and became " obsessively determined not to betray his own men through cowardice " . The novel 's development of the " clearly autobiographical hero " of Olivero owes a great deal to Read 's wartime experiences and the " resolute self @-@ possession " they instilled in him . The irony of Olivero overthrowing a dictator only to become one himself is perhaps consistent with a view Read expressed in the mid @-@ 1930s : " From certain points of view , therefore , I can welcome the notion of the totalitarian state , whether in its Fascist or Communist form . I am not afraid of the totalitarian state as an economic fact , an economic machine to facilitate the complex business of living in a community . " 
 The son of a farmer , Read was born at <unk> Grange , about four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of the small North Yorkshire market town of <unk> , to which he returned in 1949 . One of his favourite walks was along the course of Hodge Beck , the inspiration for the stream followed by Olivero . Hodge Beck led to a mill , which Read called his " spiritual hermitage " . 
 The crystals carved by the workmen on the second ledge of the Green people 's underground world , and contemplated by the sages on the highest ledge of all , symbolise Read 's ideas about the relationship of art to nature . He believed physical form to be the " underlying principle of the universe ... the ultimate reality in a completely material cosmos . Therefore it is the quality of recurring forms that makes possible all beauty and value " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In the words of historian David Goodway , Read 's " remarkable career and formidable output have generated a surprisingly limited biographical and critical literature " . Richard Wasson has commented that The Green Child " though judged favorably by the few critics and scholars who give it serious study ... is so vaguely and variously interpreted that it would seem to lack both the form and the content which justify such praise " . The critic Richard E. Brown , writing in 1990 , considered the work to be " an important attempt by one of [ the 20th @-@ century 's ] most influential English critics to integrate his wide @-@ ranging thoughts into a complex interpretation of experience " , but added that it divided commentators , appearing to some to be " fascinating but inscrutable " . Reviewing the first American edition in 1948 , Professor of English Robert Gorham Davis commented that the novel " baffled some English critics when it arrived in 1935 " , but that it was " beautifully imagined and beautifully written " . 
 A review published in The Times shortly after the book 's publication described it as a " very charming philosophical tale " , and in his paper the historian and lecturer Bob Barker praised the novel for being " remarkable for its cool yet vivid style " . Critic Orville Prescott , writing in The New York Times , although admitting that the novel was " beautifully written " and " a triumph of delicate and suggestive mystification " , nevertheless concluded that the story was " ridiculous " and " vexatious " . He ended his review with the words : " One feels constantly that shining truths are about to be revealed ; that there is something important , something significant , hidden in these pages . But it is never made clear , while the ridiculous details remain all too conspicuously in view . " Prescott was just as critical of Rexroth 's preface to the first American edition , describing it as a " pretentious introduction of uncommon density " . Writing in The Independent in 1993 , shortly after the 100th anniversary of Read 's birth , critic Geoffrey Wheatcroft commented that Read may not have been a great novelist " but The Green Child is the kind of book to write if you are going to leave just the one novel behind : singular , odd , completely original " . 
 = Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area = 
 Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area is an Illinois state park on 1 @,@ 350 acres ( 550 ha ) in Kendall County , Illinois , United States . The park was established in the late 1960s and is named for the natural spring within its boundaries . The park has two artificial lakes and the Fox River flows through the northern end of the park . Silver Springs hosts a variety of activities including fishing , hunting , boating and hiking . The park has areas of native prairie restoration , a sledding hill and a seven mile ( 11 km ) equestrian trail . The prairie restoration areas hold many species of plants including lead plant , and purple <unk> . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Park is divided by the Fox River , with the northern area situated next to the Farnsworth House , designed by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe . The property that Mrs. Farnsworth bought frames part of the western side of the Park . One of the main access points to the park is a bridge that takes Fox River Drive ( Ben Street in Plano ) , over the river , and to an adjoining road ( Fox Road ) that runs past the entrance to the park . In the 1960s when the current bridge was being constructed , Mrs. Farnsworth appealed to the Kendall County Board , suggesting a block to the bridge , citing ecological concerns among other things . 
 = = History = = 
 There is evidence that the Fox River valley near Silver Springs was populated by indigenous people near the end of the last Ice Age , 10 – 14 @,@ 000 years ago . The original 1 @,@ 250 acres ( 510 ha ) tract of land that became Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area was purchased by the state of Illinois in 1969 , and has been open since January of that year . The park is located in Kendall County , Illinois , five miles ( 8 km ) west of the city of Yorkville . Since the original acquisition in 1969 , 100 acres ( 40 ha ) have been added to the park 
 Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area was one of five new state parks opened in northern Illinois from 1969 – 1971 . As part of more than 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 ha ) added to the Illinois state park system during this period , Silver Springs opened to alleviate traffic at other state parks in the area . At the time , the Illinois Department of Natural Resources ( IDNR ) , which oversees the state park system , was attempting to provide the Chicago area with the most state park facilities in Illinois . 
 The park had nine extant wells tapping the Galena – Platteville Aquifer when the state purchased the property . By 1973 a modern well was drilled , reaching a depth of 120 feet ( 37 m ) . The well , located near the park entrance , was drilled by K & K Well Drilling Co. of <unk> , Illinois through black dirt , gravel , clay , and limestone . Upon completion , the well produced about 500 US gallons ( 1 @,@ 900 l ) per day during the summer . The well provides the park with water , but the other nine wells remained in use following its completion . 
 A prairie restoration project began on 30 acres ( 12 ha ) within Silver Springs in 1980 ; 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) was added to the restoration project in 1991 . The IDNR undertook another prairie restoration in an area within the park , on the north side of the Fox River , in 2002 . For the 2002 project , the IDNR removed numerous invasive species from the area including : basswood , ash , maple , and exotic honeysuckle . The non @-@ native exotic honeysuckle species had thrived in the absence of fire through human intervention . These actions were meant to allow native burr and black oak , and shagbark hickory a chance to reproduce . 
 = = Bodies of water = = 
 Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area covers 1 @,@ 350 acres ( 550 ha ) and includes four distinct bodies of water , two artificial lakes , the Fox River , and Silver Springs . The larger of the two lakes , Loon Lake , covers 21 acres ( 8 @.@ 5 ha ) and has 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) of shoreline . Loon Lake 's maximum depth is 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) and it has an average depth of 11 @.@ 8 feet ( 3 @.@ 6 m ) . Loon Lake , sometimes known as Silver Spring Lake , was constructed in 1960 when a lowland area was excavated . The lake 's water level is maintained through a small 20 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) watershed and groundwater seepage . Water quality at Loon Lake was identified as " good " in 1996 by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency . Beaver Lake , north of Loon Lake , is smaller , covering 4 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 8 ha ) . It has almost a half mile ( 800 m ) of shoreline and a maximum depth of 14 feet ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) ; Beaver Lake 's average depth is 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) . 
 The park 's name comes from a natural spring located along a trail on the south end of the park . The spring 's name is derived from the effect of sunlight on its surface , which makes the pool appear to shimmer like silver . Even through the winter , the bubbling spring never freezes , and plants often poke through snow surrounding the watercress @-@ bordered pool in the coldest months . Three miles of the Fox River , which Silver Springs empties into , flows through the park 's north end . 
 = = Wildlife = = 
 Plant species native to Illinois prairies prior to European settlement are found within the park 's 45 @-@ acre ( 18 ha ) prairie restoration . While the plant life varies by season , species observed in the park include : lead plant , purple <unk> , wild bergamot , and purple prairie clover , black @-@ eyed <unk> , tall <unk> , compass plant , wild quinine , rattlesnake master , New Jersey tea , big bluestem , switch grass , and Indian grass . Along the park 's four mile ( 6 km ) trail , several species of trees are found . Six species of oak , three species of ash , and basswood , cottonwood , pawpaw , Kentucky <unk> and <unk> are among the tree species living within the boundaries of Silver Springs . 
 The Fox River at Silver Springs has numerous species of freshwater fish including , bluegill , crappie , channel catfish , bullhead , carp , <unk> and northern pike . The Loon and Beaver Lake fish population is maintained through human stocking . Channel catfish , bass , bluegill and crappie are stocked in both lakes . 
 Besides its prairie restorations and bodies of water , Silver Springs has areas of deciduous forests , and wetlands , both of which are populated with species of mammals , birds and insects . Bird life observed in the park includes : osprey , great horned owl , eastern screech owl and long @-@ eared owl ; bald eagle have been sighted further upstream along the Fox . Reptiles and amphibians are present in the park but are more elusive than other types of animal life . 
 = = Activities = = 
 When in season , hunting and fishing are two of the park 's primary activities ; during the fall and winter over 1 @,@ 300 acres ( 530 ha ) are opened to the public for hunting . Pheasant hunting , through a park operated controlled hunting program , is popular at the park . Dove hunting , squirrel hunting , and bow hunting for deer are also permitted with some restrictions . The park has areas set aside for trap shooting , and archery , participants are required to bring their own equipment and restrictions apply . For anglers , Loon Lake is stocked in the spring and fall with rainbow trout and a small one @-@ half acre pond to the east of the lake is stocked annually for children during the National Hunting and Fishing Days , which is marked yearly by events at Silver Springs . The Fox River is open for fishing from both the bank and boats . There are no motor restrictions and a boat launch is available at the park . The Fox River is shallow near the park and boaters are advised to use caution . 
 Silver Springs State Fish and Wildlife Area has trails for hiking and horseback riding . A short , half mile ( 800 m ) trail leads to Silver Springs near the park 's east entrance . A longer , four mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) trail follows the course of the Fox River through the park 's wooded areas . The equestrian trail is located in the wildlife management area of the park and stretches seven miles ( 11 km ) . A one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) path travels through the prairie restoration area as well . During the winter , much of the park 's trail system is open to cross @-@ country skiing , and a four mile ( 6 km ) trail is open to snowmobiling , weather permitting . When ice thickness permits , the lakes are opened to ice skating and ice fishing . <unk> is another popular activity ; Toboggan Hill is located inside the park 's east entrance . 
 = Refugee controversy in Sjöbo = 
 The refugee controversy in Sjöbo , Sweden , refers to the surrounding events of the 1988 referendum that banned Sjöbo Municipality from admitting foreign refugees . In 1987 , despite opposition and demonstrations , local Centre Party politician Sven @-@ Olle Olsson ( 1929 – 2005 ) , who was Sjöbo 's municipal commissioner at the time , was successful in gaining the support of the Sjöbo municipal assembly to hold a referendum to decide if Sjöbo should ban the acceptance of foreign refugees . The controversial referendum passed with a 67 @.@ 4 % majority for the ban in 1988 , gaining Olsson and Sjöbo much publicity in the Swedish media . The outcome was heavily criticized by Swedish media and politicians ( including then @-@ Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson ) . 
 Olsson was in turn expelled from the Centre Party following the referendum which led to the forming of the nationalist Sjöbo Party ( Swedish : <unk> ) in March 1991 . In the municipal elections the same year , the party received 31 % of the votes . This led to Olsson once again becoming Municipal Commissioner , a position he held until 1998 , when his party 's support was reduced to 15 % in municipal elections . Following the Sjöbo party 's loss of support , the ban was overturned by Sjöbo 's municipal assembly , and Sjöbo accepted its first refugees for more than a decade in 2001 . 
 = = Background and motion = = 
 In 1977 , while a member of the Centre Party , Sven @-@ Olle Olsson , a former farmer , was elected as Sjöbo 's Municipal <unk> Centre Party in Sjöbo , led by Olsson , motioned before Sjöbo 's municipal assembly in June 1987 for a referendum on the acceptance of foreign refugees in the municipality . The motion came after a proposal that fifteen refugees be accepted into the municipality , an idea Olsson disliked . It has been speculated that the reason behind the motion was not these fifteen refugees , a small number for the municipality , but , instead , Olsson 's idea to create a protest against Sweden 's positive stance on refugees . Despite heavy protests from most of the country , Sjöbo 's municipal assembly decided in October 1987 to go through with the referendum in 1988 . If the referendum passed , it would completely ban Sjöbo from accepting foreign refugees . 
 = = Referendum = = 
 = = = Debate and media attention = = = 
 The municipality 's decision to go through with the referendum was met with even more criticism from the rest of the country . Immigration minister and Social Democrat Georg Andersson described the vote as a " macabre expression of egoism , and a violation of the refugees ' human dignity . " A majority of the population in Sjöbo , however , was in favor of the referendum . One citizen stated that " Foreigners just create problems . It 's only democratic to vote about this . I 'm all for it . " 
 It was , however , reported , that several of those who were in favor of accepting refugees , were afraid of expressing their opinion in public . On the day of the vote , 18 September 1988 , the Associated Press reported that the refugee issue had split families , friends and even the town 's only church . " 
 The referendum and the protests against it also drew attention abroad . On 12 September 1988 , The Philadelphia Inquirer wrote : " A referendum on accepting refugees in this quiet Swedish town has flared into an ugly battle watched closely by a country that prides itself on its tolerant attitudes and absence of racism . " 
 Madeleine Ramel , a baroness , and the head of the local Social Welfare Board that was planning on taking care of the refugees , said : " a lot of people are very ashamed . It 's terrible . The town has changed . " Ramel was Olsson 's strongest opposition in Sjöbo at the time . The Baroness became a symbol of the minority who supported the acceptance of refugees into the municipality . According to the local newspaper <unk> Dagbladet , " the Swedish media , especially the evening newspapers , loved the polarization between the simple farmer who did not want foreigners in the village and the baroness who wanted to take in the needy with open arms . " 
 Olsson 's main argument in the debate leading up to the day of the referendum was that foreigners would not be able to fit into a community such as Sjöbo . He repeatedly stated that these people come from " unknown cultures " and that it would be impossible for them to integrate into the Swedish society . Per @-@ Ingvar Magnusson , the then @-@ chairman of the Sjöbo branch of the Center Party , stated to the media that the referendum had nothing to do with racism ; he claimed that the reason for the vote was that Sjöbo lacked housing and jobs . He said in an interview that he was surprised by the attention the town had received in the media : " They make us out to be stupid , fools , farmers who live in isolation . The town simply wants to take care of its own first . " 
 = = = Result = = = 
 The referendum was held in Sjöbo on 18 September 1988 , the day of the Swedish general election , and passed with a 67 percent majority of the votes ( 6 @,@ 237 for and 3 @,@ 000 against ) , which led to even more criticism from the Swedish population . Then @-@ Prime Minister of Sweden Ingvar Carlsson said the results were " tragic " , and the then @-@ leader of the Centre Party , Olof Johansson , called the ban " improper " . The result of the referendum led to concerns from the Swedish government that other municipalities would follow in Sjöbo 's footsteps . The day after the vote , Madeleine Ramel commented : " This is a sad result . Everyone is a loser . It is unfortunate for Sjöbo . " 
 <unk> <unk> , a Swedish historian , stated that one of the likely reasons for the relatively large xenophobia in Skåne County at the time was the high unemployment numbers . The county had accepted a large amount of refugees compared to the rest of Sweden , and many saw this as the reason for the lack of jobs . <unk> also stated that the xenophobia could have been strengthened by local traditions . Nazi groups were " relatively strong " in Skåne in the 1930s . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The ban was heavily discussed in the Swedish media . Following the criticism , and after claims that Olsson was associated with the New Swedish Movement , the Centre Party decided in 1988 to exclude Olsson and his companions Börje Ohlsson and Per @-@ Ivar Magnusson from the party . They responded by forming the nationalist Sjöbo Party ( Swedish : <unk> ) in March 1991 . In the municipal elections the same year , the party received 31 percent of the votes . This led to Olsson once again becoming Municipal Commissioner , a position he held until 1998 , when the party 's support was reduced to 15 % in the municipal elections . Following Sjöbo party 's loss of support , the referendum was overturned by Sjöbo 's municipal assembly , and Sjöbo accepted its first refugees since more than a decade in 2001 . Although Olsson died in 2005 , the party is still active , and in the 2010 municipal election the party received 11 @.@ 4 % of the votes , making it the third largest party in Sjöbo . 
 = Convention of 1833 = 
 The Convention of 1833 ( April 1 – 13 , 1833 ) , a political gathering of settlers in Mexican Texas , was a successor to the Convention of 1832 , whose requests had not been addressed by the Mexican government . Despite the political uncertainty resulting from a recently concluded civil war , 56 delegates met in San Felipe de Austin to draft a series of petitions to the Mexican government . 
 The volatile William H. Wharton presided over the meeting . Although the convention 's agenda largely mirrored that of the Convention of 1832 , delegates also agreed to pursue independent statehood for the province , which was at the time part of the state of Coahuila y Tejas . Under the guidance of Sam Houston , former governor of the US state of Tennessee , a committee drafted a state constitution to submit to the Mexican Congress . The proposed constitution was largely patterned on US political principles , yet retained several Spanish customs . Delegates also requested customs exemptions and asked that a ban on immigration into Texas be lifted . 
 Some residents complained that this convention , like its predecessor , was illegal . Nevertheless , Stephen F. Austin journeyed to Mexico City to present the petitions to the government . Frustrated with the lack of progress , in October Austin wrote a letter encouraging Texans to form their own state government . This letter was forwarded to the Mexican government and Austin was imprisoned in early 1834 . During his imprisonment , the federal and state legislatures later passed a series of measures to placate the colonists , including the introduction of trial by jury . Austin acknowledged that " [ e ] very evil complained of has been remedied . " 
 = = Background = = 
 Mexico won its independence from Spain in 1821 . After the new country 's monarchy was overthrown , the Constitution of 1824 established a federalist republic composed of multiple states . Sparsely populated provinces were denied independent statehood and instead merged with neighboring areas . Mexican Texas , which marked the country 's eastern border with the United States , was combined with Coahuila to form the new state Coahuila y Tejas . To facilitate government of the large area , the state was subdivided into several departments ; all of Texas was included in the Department of Béxar . 
 Texas was part of the Mexican frontier , and settlers faced frequent raids by native tribes . Bankrupt and unable to provide much military assistance , in 1824 the federal government legalized immigration from the United States and Europe , hoping that an influx of settlers would discourage raiding . As the number of American living in Texas increased , Mexican authorities became apprehensive that the United States intended to annex the area , possibly by force . To curb the perceived threat , the Mexican government passed the Law of April 6 , 1830 , which restricted immigration from the United States into Texas and called for the first enforcement of customs duties . The new laws were unpopular with both native Mexicans in Texas ( Tejanos ) and recent immigrants ( Texians ) . 
 In 1832 , General Antonio López de Santa Anna led a revolt against President Anastasio Bustamante 's centralist government . Under the pretext that they supported Santa Anna , a small group of Texians armed themselves and overthrew the commander of the garrison that was enforcing the new customs duties . Other settlers followed their example , and within weeks all Mexican soldiers in eastern Texas had been forced to leave . 
 Buoyed by their military success , Texians organized a political convention to persuade Mexican authorities to weaken the Laws of April 6 , 1830 . Although the two municipalities with the largest Tejano populations , San Antonio de Béxar and Victoria , refused to participate , 55 delegates met in October for the Convention of 1832 . They adopted a series of resolutions that requested changes in the governance of Texas . The most controversial item was for Texas to become an independent state , separate from Coahuila . After approving the list of resolutions , delegates created a seven @-@ member central committee to convene future meetings . 
 Before the list of concerns could be presented to the state and federal governments , Ramón Músquiz , the political chief of the Department of Béxar , ruled that the convention was illegal . The law directed that citizens should protest to their local ayuntamiento ( similar to a city council ) , which would forward their concerns to the political chief . The political chief could then escalate the concerns to the appropriate governmental authority . Because this process had not been followed , Músquiz annulled the resolutions . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 The previous convention 's lack of Tejano representation fostered a perception that only newcomers to Texas were dissatisfied . The president of the Convention of 1832 , Stephen F. Austin , traveled to San Antonio de Béxar to garner support for the changes the convention had requested . Austin found that the Tejano leaders largely agreed with the result of the convention but opposed the methods by which the resolutions had been proposed . They urged patience ; Bustamante was still president and would not look favorably on a petition from settlers who had recently sided with his rival , Santa Anna . 
 As a compromise , the ayuntamiento of San Antonio de Béxar drafted a petition containing similar language to the convention 's resolutions . Following legal norms , they submitted this to Músquiz , who forwarded it to the Mexican Congress in early 1833 . At this time , the federal and state governments were in flux . Bustamante had resigned the presidency in late December 1832 as part of a treaty to end the civil war . There was no effective state government . The governor of Coahuila y Tejas had died in September 1832 , and his replacement , federalist Juan Martín de Veramendi , immediately dissolved the state legislature , which had centralist leanings . Veramendi called elections to seat a new government in early 1833 . Due to the political uncertainty , Austin urged that the federal government be given several months to address the petition . If no action was eventually taken , he advised that Texas residents would form their own state government , essentially declaring independence from Coahuila , if not from Mexico . 
 Austin 's timeframe was endorsed by Tejano leaders , but it did not pacify the Texian settlers . Towards the end of December , the central committee called for a new convention to meet in San Felipe de Austin in April 1833 . Elections were scheduled for March . This action disturbed the Tejano leaders , who saw it as a violation of their agreement with Austin . 
 Communities in Texas elected 56 delegates for the new convention . In a departure from the previous election , San Antonio de Béxar also sent delegates , including James Bowie , the son @-@ in @-@ law of Governor Veramendi . Bowie , like many of his fellow delegates , was known as an agitator who wanted immediate change . The majority of the delegates to the previous convention had been more cautious . 
 = = Proceedings = = 
 The Convention of 1833 was called to order on April 1 , 1833 , in San Felipe de Austin . By coincidence , on that day Santa Anna was inaugurated as the new President of Mexico . Delegates elected William H. Wharton , a " known hothead " , as president of the convention . Wharton had lost his bid to be president of the previous convention . Historian William C. Davis describes Wharton 's election as " a public declaration that while Austin was still respected , his moderate course would no longer be followed " . 
 On the first day , several delegates addressed the convention to justify the recent Texian actions . Many argued that the expulsion of most garrisons in the region was not an act of disloyalty to Mexico , but instead resistance to a particular form of governance . Sam Houston , who represented Nacogdoches , commented that " Santa Anna was only a name used as an excuse for resistance to oppression " . Several delegates argued that the recently concluded civil war had left Mexico in too much turmoil to provide effective rule for Texas . Echoing the American Revolution slogan " no taxation without representation " , one delegate insisted that Texas was not bound by Mexican laws since its settlers had no representation . This delegate overlooked the fact that Texas had been granted two representatives to the Coahuila y Tejas legislature . 
 Austin presented an overview of the events that had occurred in Texas and in the rest of Mexico over the previous year . He enumerated several grievances against the political and judicial systems and concluded that Texas needed to become an independent state . This could be justified , in his opinion , by language in the Constitution of 1824 . 
 = = = State constitution = = = 
 By the second day of the convention , delegates were in agreement to pursue separate statehood . Austin wrote to a friend , " We are now able to sustain A State Govt. and no country ever required one more than this " . Houston was named chairman of a committee to draft a new state constitution . Although Houston had not lived in Texas for very long , he was well @-@ known , having served as governor of Tennessee and as a member of the United States Congress . 
 The new constitution was based on a copy of the 1780 Massachusetts Constitution provided by one of the committee members . The proposed document also drew from the constitutions of other states in the United States , including Louisiana , Missouri , and Tennessee . It provided " meticulous detail " for the new system of government . The executive branch structure , proposed by Austin , called for a governor who would serve two @-@ year terms . The state would have a bicameral legislature and a three @-@ tier judiciary system , with local and district courts ultimately kept in check by a state supreme court . 
 A 27 @-@ article bill of rights , containing , according to historian Howard Miller , an " impressive list " of protected rights , was included . This document aligned closely with contemporary American political ideals , especially the notion that all men had a right to liberty . Much of the language and concepts were drawn from the first eight amendments to the United States Constitution . The document called for trial by jury , a distinct departure from Mexican law , which required that trials be heard by the local alcalde . Defendants would be granted counsel and would have the right to examine any evidence against them . They would be protected from excessive bail or cruel and unusual punishments . Civil authorities would take priority over military authorities . Delegates also agreed to protect " free communication of thoughts and opinions " , a phrase carefully drafted to imply freedom of speech , of assembly , and of the press . Although it could also be interpreted to imply freedom of religion , delegates were unwilling to explicitly grant that right , knowing that it would cause an uproar in Catholic Mexico . 
 A few of the rights were drawn from Spanish practices . The proposed constitution forbade the English practices of primogeniture and entailment , following a change made to Spanish law in 1821 . Delegates retained the traditional Spanish prohibition against seizing a debtor 's physical property and extended it to forbid imprisonment as a punishment for debt . This was a novel idea . In the United States , nine states had enumerated certain conditions under which a debtor could not be imprisoned , but no state had an unqualified prohibition on the practice . 
 Borrowing from the resolutions of the Convention of 1832 , delegates wrote into the constitution a guarantee of free public education . They further banned unsecured paper currency and insisted the state economy should be based solely on hard currency . When the constitution was completed , David G. Burnet headed a subcommittee to craft a letter to Mexican authorities to explain the merits of the proposal . 
 = = = Resolutions = = = 
 In addition to the development of a state constitution , delegates passed a series of resolutions that asked Mexican authorities for reforms . Several of these echoed resolutions passed at the previous year 's convention . Delegates again insisted that the ban on immigration should be repealed and that customs duties be lifted . Resolutions also requested additional protection from raids by native tribes , and that the government implement a more efficient mail delivery system . 
 One of the resolutions would have been more suited for passage by a state legislature than a group of concerned citizens . Perhaps to atone for some of the more revolutionary items they had requested , as one of their final acts delegates passed a resolution that condemned the slave trade within Texas . The Constitution of 1824 had already abolished the slave trade , and the constitution of Coahuila y Tejas had forbidden the importation of slaves into the state . Most settlers in Texas ignored the restrictions and instead converted their slaves to servants indentured for 99 years . African slaves were still imported into Texas occasionally , and a ship carrying slaves docked in Galveston Bay as the convention met . This ship , like most others used to import slaves , came from Cuba , which was a possession of Spain . Because Spain did not officially recognize Mexican independence , delegates considered this trade treasonous to Mexico . 
 Delegates ordered that the resolution be printed in newspapers in the Mexican interior and in New Orleans . It was not printed in Texas , clearly indicating that it was intended to influence public opinion in the Mexican interior rather than in Texas . The resolution was not binding , and slaves continued to be imported to Texas through Cuba . 
 Despite a vocal minority advocating for the unilateral implementation of the proposals , delegates agreed to present the requests to the Mexican Congress for approval . They did agree to take action if it appeared their demands would be ignored . As their last act , delegates elected Austin , James Miller , and Erasmo Seguín to deliver their petitions to Mexico City . Seguin , a prominent citizen of San Antonio de Béxar , had not attended the convention . Delegates hoped Austin could persuade Seguin to accompany him , thus implying that Tejanos supported the resolutions . 
 = = Preparations for delivery = = 
 When the convention adjourned on April 13 , Austin went directly to San Antonio de Béxar to meet with Seguin . Seguin called a series of meetings , held from May 3 to 5 , for prominent locals to discuss the convention proceedings . He was the only Béxar resident to fully support separate statehood . Other residents suggested that the capital of Coahuila y Tejas should be moved to San Antonio de Béxar , giving Texas more power . There was precedent for this ; under Veramendi , the capital had just been moved from Saltillo to Monclova . If the legislature rejected the move , these residents vowed to support separate statehood . 
 A third group of residents believed that the convention , like its predecessor , was illegal . Under their interpretation of the laws , only the state legislature would be able to petition the Mexican Congress for such a drastic change . Austin argued that the laws really meant that no one could petition on behalf of the people unless the people had been consulted , and the convention served as that consultation . The meetings ended with no agreement on how to proceed . Austin wrote that " the people here agree in substance with the rest of Texas , but differ as to the manner , and will express no opinion for , nor against " . 
 Seguin declined to accompany Austin . Miller also withdrew . Texas was in the throes of a cholera epidemic , and Miller , a physician , felt it his duty to stay and tend the sick . Austin then visited Goliad but was unable to attract any more Tejano support . He chose to go to Mexico City alone ; he had visited several times and had established a good reputation among government officials . Although he was warned that his reception would likely be poor , he ignored suggestions to delay his journey . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Within the Mexican interior , rumors abounded that Texas was on the verge of revolution . Many citizens in Matamoros believed Texians had already declared independence and were raising an army . Santa Anna was infuriated , especially at the involvement of Houston , a former officer in the United States military . 
 Immediately after Santa Anna had taken office in April , he had handed over all decision @-@ making authority to his vice president , Valentín Gómez Farías , and retired to the countryside . Farías enacted many federalist reforms , which angered citizens and army leaders . Much of the country was clamoring for a return to centralism , yet Texians wanted to take further steps toward self @-@ rule . By the time Austin arrived in Mexico City on July 18 , several Mexican states had engaged in minor revolts against Farías 's reforms . Although Texians had expelled troops within their province before Santa Anna and Farías took office , many officials identified the province with the other rebellious states and were suspicious of Austin 's intentions . 
 The cholera epidemic reached Mexico City within days of Austin 's arrival , prompting Congress to adjourn before Austin could present the convention 's resolutions . As he waited for the legislature to reconvene , Austin heard rumors that Texians were planning a third convention to unilaterally declare themselves a separate state . Although Austin was also frustrated at the lack of progress , he disapproved of this drastic proposal . In an attempt to quell the more radical groups in Texas , in October Austin sent a letter to the ayuntamiento in San Antonio de Béxar in which he proposed that all of the ayuntamientos should jointly form a new state government . In what could be interpreted as an inflammatory gesture , Austin signed his letter " dios y Tejas " ( " God and Texas " ) rather than the traditional Mexican closing " dios y libertad " ( " God and liberty " ) . A few days after he had posted the letter , the immigration ban was repealed , assuaging one of the major Texian concerns . 
 Austin had expected the letter to reach his friend Músquiz , who could be trusted to determine when or if it was appropriate to publicly disclose its contents . The letter arrived while Músquiz was out of town and was read by an unsympathetic ayuntamiento member . At this member 's request , the ayuntamiento of San Antonio de Béxar forwarded the letter to state officials in Coahuila . The new governor , Francisco <unk> y <unk> , ordered Austin 's arrest . Austin was arrested in December on suspicion of treason . He was imprisoned through all of 1834 and remained in Mexico City on bond until July 1835 . 
 During Austin 's imprisonment , the government addressed several more of the convention 's proposals . At Santa Anna 's urging , the Coahuila y Tejas legislature enacted several measures to placate the Texians . In early 1834 , Texas gained an additional seat in the state legislature . An American immigrant was named state Attorney General , and , for the first time , foreigners were granted explicit permission to participate in retail trade . Several American legal concepts , including trial by jury , were introduced to Texas , and English was authorized as a second language . Finally , the state created four new municipalities in Texas : Matagorda , San Augustine , Bastrop , and San Patricio . In a letter to a friend , Austin wrote " Every evil complained of has been remedied . This fully compensates me for all I have suffered . " 
 = Annika Zeyen = 
 Annika Zeyen ( born 17 February 1985 ) is a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ point wheelchair basketball player , who has played for ASV Bonn and RSV Lahn @-@ Dill in the German wheelchair basketball league , and for the University of Alabama in the United States . She has also played for the national team , with which she won three European titles , was the runner @-@ up at 2010 World Championships , won silver at the 2008 Summer Paralympic Games in Beijing , and won a gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , for which President Joachim Gauck awarded the team Germany 's highest sporting honour , the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Zeyen was born on 17 February 1985 . She is nicknamed " Anni " . At the age of 14 , she was involved in a serious horse riding accident that left her paralysed . During rehab , she was introduced to the sport of wheelchair basketball . She left the hospital and started looking for a club where she could play . 
 Zeyen joined ASV Bonn , initially playing with the youth team , then with the seconds , and finally with the firsts . In 2001 , she played in the German Championships for Women , and was named most valuable young player . In 2004 , she switched to RSV Lahn @-@ Dill , with which she won several German championships . She was invited to try out for the national team , and joined its development squad . She competed in her first paralympic games , the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens . She subsequently played for the national team that won the European championships in 2005 , 2007 , 2009 and 2011 . 
 In September 2008 , Zeyen participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , but Germany was beaten in the gold medal match by the United States team , which contained three of her former team mates from the University of Alabama , Stephanie Wheeler , Mary Allison Milford and Alana Nichols . The German team took home Paralympic silver medals instead . After the Paralympics , the team 's performance was considered impressive enough for it to be named the national " Team of the Year " , and it received the Silver Laurel Leaf , Germany 's highest sporting honour , from German President Horst Koehler . 
 Zeyen took up a scholarship to the University of Alabama in 2009 , majoring in advertising and minoring in graphic design . She maintained a 4 @.@ 0 grade point average . Her team at the University of Alabama won three titles in five years , narrowly missing out in March 2013 to the University of Wisconsin – Whitewater , which won the championship game 55 – 41 , a game in which Zeyen scored 11 points . Zeyen was named an Academic All @-@ American in 2012 and 2013 . 
 In June 2012 , Zeyen was named as one of the team that competed at the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London . In the Gold Medal match , her team faced Australia , a team that had defeated them 48 – 46 in Sydney just a few months before . They defeated the Australians 58 – 44 in front of a crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal , the first that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball in 28 years . They were awarded a Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 , and were again named Team of the Year for 2012 . 
 The German team lost the European Championship to the Netherlands before a home town crowd of 2 @,@ 300 in Frankfurt in July 2013 by a point , 56 @-@ 57 . The game was televised live in Germany , and cameras lingered on a tearful Zeyen , who could have tied the game and sent it into extra time with a free throw in its dying moments . 
 In April 2014 , Zeyen was part of the BG Baskets Hamburg team that won the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation Euro League Challenge Cup , its first International title , with a 62 – 54 over the Frankfurt Mainhatten Skywheelers . The team also won the Fair Play Award of the International Wheelchair Basketball Federation Europe , and Zeyen was elected to its All Star team . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2005 : Gold at European championships ( Villeneuve d 'Ascq , France ) 
 2006 : Bronze at World Championships ( Amsterdam , Netherlands ) 
 2007 : Gold at European championships ( Wetzlar , Germany ) 
 2008 : Silver at the Paralympic Games ( Beijing , China ) 
 2009 : Gold at the European Championships ( Stoke Mandeville , England ) 
 2010 : Silver at the World Championships 
 2011 : Gold at the European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold at the Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver at the European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 2015 : Gold at the European Championships ( Worcester , England ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2008 : Team of the Year 
 2008 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 = Limnoperdon = 
 Limnoperdon is a fungal genus in the monotypic family Limnoperdaceae . The genus is also monotypic , as it contains a single species , the aquatic fungus Limnoperdon incarnatum . The species , described as new to science in 1976 , produces fruit bodies that lack specialized structures such as a stem , cap and gills common in mushrooms . Rather , the fruit bodies — described as aquatic or floating puffballs — are small balls ( 0 @.@ 5 – 1 mm diameter ) of loosely interwoven hyphae . The balls float on the surface of the water above submerged twigs . Experimental observations on the development of the fruit body , based on the growth on the fungus in pure culture , suggest that a thin strand of mycelium tethers the ball above water while it matures . Fruit bodies start out as a tuft of hyphae , then become cup @-@ shaped , and eventually enclose around a single chamber that contains reddish spores . Initially discovered in a marsh in the state of Washington , the fungus has since been collected in Japan , South Africa , and Canada . 
 = = Taxonomy , classification and phylogeny = = 
 The family , genus and species were first described in a 1976 publication by graduate students Gustavo Escobar and Dennis McCabe , and undergraduate Craig <unk> who , in the fall of 1974 , found the fungus as part of " a class project to find and isolate <unk> " . The holotype is located in the University of Washington Mycological Herbarium . An isotype ( duplicate of the holotype specimen ) is located in the Herbarium of the University of El Salvador in San Salvador . 
 Limnoperdon incarnatum was originally thought to be associated with the Gasteromycetes , an artificial assemblage of species united by the fact that their spores mature inside the fruit bodies and are not forcibly discharged from the basidia . Other morphologically similar genera include the <unk> of the family <unk> , and the <unk> of the family <unk> ; however , it was excluded from these genera because of significant differences in spore color and structure , presence of clamp connections , and structure of the basidia . For these reasons the new family Limnoperdaceae was described to contain the new species , and it was classified along the <unk> in the ( now defunct ) order <unk> . More recently , molecular phylogenetics has been used to clarify the relationship Limnoperdon with other fungi . In 2001 , David Hibbett and Manfred Binder established the membership of Limnoperdon incarnatum in the <unk> clade , a phylogenetically related group of species traditionally forming the order Agaricales . Additional molecular studies have placed Limnoperdaceae in the <unk> clade of the Agaricales , a grouping that includes the families Pluteaceae , Amanitaceae , and <unk> ; other studies that used comparisons of ribosomal DNA sequences placed Limnoperdon near the gilled genera <unk> or <unk> , of the Tricholomataceae family . 
 A 2007 field study that used molecular techniques to survey aquatic fungal taxa in a small <unk> in Valley Spring , Southern Ontario , Canada discovered many fungal taxa with high genetic affinity to Limnoperdon incarnatum , which suggests that a closely related species may also be common in streams . 
 = = Description = = 
 The genus description is similar to the family description , but further specifies that the fruit bodies float , are sometimes embedded in a loose subiculum ( a woolly or net @-@ like growth of hyphae ) , and that the spores are reddish . The fungus has been described as an " aquatic puffball " , although a later review considered " floating puffball " to be a more apt descriptor . 
 The fruit bodies of L. incarnatum are tiny , oval to roughly spherical , and measure 35 – 1250 by 200 – 450 μm . The floating balls are sometimes enclosed in a loose subiculum , with a whitish surface that is <unk> ( consisting of fine threads ) . The peridium ( the outer protective tissue layer ) is 18 – 30 μm thick , <unk> , and made of clamped hyphae typically 2 @.@ 5 – 4 μm in diameter intertwined with <unk> ( irregularly branched cystidia ) 1 μm in diameter . The surface of the peridium is hydrophobic , a feature that helps keep water off the growing hymenium during its development , and gives the fruit body buoyancy . 
 The gleba is a single chamber , reddish in color , with a cavity that has an oblate spheroid shape . Initially empty , in maturity it is filled with spores that measure 330 – 1220 by 180 – 420 μm . The smooth inner surface of the chamber comprises the fertile spore @-@ bearing tissue ( the hymenium ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) — conspicuous when viewed under the microscope — are hyaline ( translucent ) , more or less club @-@ shaped , and usually have basal and apical swellings separated by a narrow strip of variable length . The basidia are four @-@ spored , and have inflated sterigmata with a central constriction . The basidia measure 20 – 90 ( typically 25 – 55 ) μm long by 8 – 10 μm thick . Reddish in mass , the spores are obovate ( egg @-@ shaped , with the broad extremity located away from the base ) , smooth , thick @-@ walled , and measure 11 – 16 ( typically 12 – 15 ) by 7 – 10 μm . They have a beaked pedicel that is 2 – 4 by 2 – 5 μm , and a basal germ pore . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The species was originally discovered floating in petri dishes that contained submerged hardwood twigs previously collected from a marsh next to a playground on the south shore of Lake Union in Seattle , Washington . After the initial 1976 publication , L. incarnatum was reported the following year when Keisuke <unk> recovered it from wood blocks submerged in brackish water in Japan ; scientists Seiya Ito and T. Yokoyama later reported collecting it in Japanese rice paddy fields . Later surveys uncovered the fungus in several localities in South Africa and in freshwater ponds in Canada . 
 = = Development = = 
 Escobar grew cultures of the fungus by placing fresh fruit bodies on agar containing growth medium with an extract of horse dung . The tips of the hyphae were used to obtain axenic cultures ; the fungus can grow on a variety of media commonly used to grow fungi in the laboratory . Depending on the composition of the growth media , fruit bodies were formed as early as eight days after initiating , when grown at 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) and under dim light . When minute agar blocks containing mycelium were submerged in distilled water , mycelial strands grew towards the water surface and eventually gave rise to floating fruit bodies connected to the parent agar block by strands of hyphae . 
 Mycologist Dennis McCabe studied the development of the fruit body using specimens grown in pure culture . Starting out as a hyphal tuft , the fungus grows into a cup shape before eventually closing in completely to create the spherical structure of the mature fruit body . When the fungus is in the cup stage , the exposed hymenium is immature ; typically , spores develop after the fruit body is fully closed . In some cases , the fruit body stops developing at the cup stage while the hymenium continues to mature . This results in a cup @-@ shaped fungus with an exposed layer of basidia bearing normal and mature spores . Limnoperdon incarnatum is a structurally simple fungus , and relatively easy to grow in culture , suggesting it may have potential as a model organism for fruit body development in general . Under the experimental conditions used , fruit bodies matured to produce spores about 72 hours after the fungus started growing . The aborted cups resemble the sporocarps of the <unk> fungi , but can be distinguished by their <unk> spore attachment and the lack of ballistospory ( forceful spore discharge ) . McCabe and Escobar later suggested that the fungus may have evolved the loss of ballistospory by being compensated with the cup @-@ shaped fruit body closing at maturity . <unk> villosa is another small cup @-@ shaped Basidiomycete fungus that has adapted to a marine environment ; in contrast to L. incarnatum , however , it starts out with a closed fruit body that later opens up to become cup @-@ shaped . 
 Although it is not known with certainty how the spores are dispersed , they may disperse passively in the water , or a mature spore @-@ containing fruit body may float on the water surface for dispersal . L. incarnatum is <unk> , a mode of reproduction commonly employed by marine fungi that may confer a competitive advantage in marine environments . 
 = Nevada State Route 564 = 
 State Route 564 ( SR 564 ) is an east – west highway in Clark County , Nevada , in the southeast portion of the Las Vegas Valley . The route travels through the city of Henderson , connecting Interstate 215 ( I @-@ 215 ) and I @-@ 515 / U.S. Route 93 ( US 93 ) / US 95 to Lake Mead . The route was designated in 2002 , replacing a portion of SR 146 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 564 begins as a continuation of the Las Vegas Beltway , starting where I @-@ 215 ends at its junction with I @-@ 515 / US 93 / US 95 . From there , the route travels east along Lake Mead Parkway , a major arterial roadway , towards downtown Henderson to cross Boulder Highway ( SR 582 ) . After entering the center of Henderson , SR 564 turns northeast near residential areas . The route then turns east just west of Lake Mead National Recreation Area . The road enters the park , near by Lake Las Vegas . State maintenance ends , and the road continues east . Around 52 @,@ 500 vehicles travel on the highway near its western terminus on average each day . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1970s , the highways in the state highway system were renumbered . SR 41 was split into two state routes . SR 146 is a started from I @-@ 15 to US 93 / US 95 in Henderson . SR 147 started from US 93 / US 95 to North Las Vegas . A limited access highway alignment from US 93 / US 85 started construction in 1985 – 86 . An interchange was built for SR 146 in 1989 – 90 , and the highway was completed by 1995 – 96 . The designation I @-@ 515 was added to the highway . In the same period , SR 147 's designation was removed from eastern section of Lake Mead Drive , and replaced by SR 146 . As the Las Vegas Beltway ( I @-@ 215 ) was being constructed in the late 1990s , the last five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) between Saint Rose Parkway and Interstate 515 were constructed on the SR 146 alignment . This left SR 146 in two separate segments . The eastern segment of SR 146 was reassigned to SR 564 by 2002 . I @-@ 215 from SR 146 to SR 564 's western terminus was completed in October 2005 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Henderson , Clark County . 
 = Sotra Bridge = 
 The Sotra Bridge ( Norwegian : Sotrabrua ) is a suspension bridge which crosses Knarreviksundet between Knarrevik in Fjell and <unk> on the mainland of Bergen in Hordaland , Norway . It carries two road lanes and two narrow pedestrian paths of National Road 555 , providing a fixed link for the archipelago of Sotra . The bridge is 1 @,@ 236 metres ( 4 @,@ 055 ft ) long , has a main span of 468 metres ( 1 @,@ 535 ft ) and a clearance of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) . In 2007 , it had an average 25 @,@ 494 vehicles per day . 
 The bridge was brought into use on 11 December 1971 , although not officially opened until 1972 . It cost 40 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) to build , of which NOK 23 @.@ 5 million was paid for with tolls , which were collected until 1983 . When it opened , it was the longest suspension bridge in Norway , but is now the seventh longest . There exist plans to build a second bridge to either expand the road to four lanes , or carry a proposed extension of the Bergen Light Rail . Alternatively , a subsea tunnel could be built to carry a motorway . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The concrete bridge crosses Knarreviksundet , which separates the island of Litlesotra , part of the Sotra archipelago , from the mainland and Bergen . The western part of the bridge , on Sotra , lies in Knarrevik in Fjell , while the eastern part lies in <unk> in Bergen . The bridge is 1 @,@ 236 metres ( 4 @,@ 055 ft ) long with a main span of 468 metres ( 1 @,@ 535 ft ) . It carries two lanes of National Road 555 , with a combined width of 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) . In addition , it has a 0 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 2 ft 7 in ) wide sidewalk on each side . In 2009 , it had an annual average daily traffic of 25 @,@ 494 vehicles . Because it is located across the sound , the bridge is vulnerable to winds from the north and south . It is closed whenever the wind speed exceeds 30 metres per second ( 98 ft / s ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The first discussion of a bridge in a public forum was in 1954 , when Anton P. <unk> proposed a bridge to the major and municipal engineer of Fjell . <unk> lived in Oslo and had worked with public relations for various other bridge projects . The issue was discussed in the municipal councils of Fjell and Sund , but they both concluded that there were more pressing needs on the islands ' road network , so they did not want to prioritize a bridge . National Road 555 was completed in 1957 , and the following years various road projects were completed . 
 Another person who took up the initiative in the late 1950s was <unk> Iversen , who was plant manager at Norwegian Talc at Knarrevik . The plant had large costs freighting their products across the sound on the <unk> – Brattholmen Ferry . In 1958 , he took the initiative to conduct a traffic count , which along with estimates of increased traffic from other places that had replaced a ferry with a bridge , would give estimates for the revenue from tolls . Norwegian Talc also paid for a draft plan for a bridge . In 1959 , Iversen presented an estimate that a bridge would cost NOK 15 @.@ 5 million , and on 19 December 1959 , the council voted unanimously to recommend that a committee be established to continue work on the bridge plans . In 1960 , the bridge was included in the road plan for Hordaland . 
 There were also some plans for the future which would remove the last ferries within the Sotra and Øygarden archipelagos , meaning that the entire twin archipelago would have ferry @-@ free access to the mainland , should the Sotra Bridge be built . The plans had been spurred by a large decrease in fishing during the late 1950s , and the need for increased tax revenue from new industries . The framework for the plan started in 1961 with the creation of an inter @-@ municipal cooperation , which in 1964 resulted in the merger of the municipalities of <unk> and Herdla to create Øygarden . On 8 May 1962 , an inter @-@ municipal road committee was established , which recommended that a limited company be established to finance the bridge . In Bergen , Bro og <unk> had similarly built the <unk> Bridge and Eidsvåg Tunnel , and the inter @-@ municipal council recommended a similar model . However , they wanted a separate company for Sotra and Øygarden , so extra tolls could be used to help finance road projects on the archipelago . 
 On 29 June 1962 , Fjell Municipality sent an official application to the County Governor to start planning , and this was sent onwards to the Directorate for Public Roads . They concluded that it would be possible to finance the bridge with tolls collected over 13 to 14 years , with the state paying for one @-@ third of the bridge . The plans called for the bridge to run south of Norwegian Talc , but it was later routed slightly north , so that the span could be reduced from 520 to 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 710 to 1 @,@ 640 ft ) . The optimal location would be within the Norwegian Talc plant , and by placing the western pylon on a skerry , it was possible to reduce the span to 468 metres ( 1 @,@ 535 ft ) . 
 The plans from 1959 called for a height of 60 meters ( 200 ft ) , but the Public Roads Administration stated that a height of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) would be sufficient , and also help to reduce the construction costs . In 1962 , the extra costs for the higher height were estimated at NOK 4 million . Bergen Port Authority stated in 1963 that they required a height of 66 metres ( 217 ft ) , while the local newspapers felt that 50 metres ( 160 ft ) was sufficient . Bergen City Council voted in favor of the shortest proposal . The Royal Norwegian Navy supported a taller bridge , but were more willing to reduce the height than the port authority . The port authority reduced its preferred height to 62 metres ( 203 ft ) , with the road authority responding that such a clearance only existed in a very few places in the world , and that the extra costs could result in the whole project being abandoned . 
 It was the Ministry of Fisheries and Coastal Affairs who had the final word in the matter . A national committee was established in 1963 to make guidelines for clearances , and it recommended that 60 meters ( 200 ft ) be used in fjords and sounds where very large ships , in particular cruise ships , would pass , while 50 meters ( 160 ft ) would permissible for minor and inner parts of fjords , as well as passages where alternatives were available . The clearance of the Sotra Bridge would only be applicable for ships coming from the south , and even these had the option of sailing around Øygarden , a increased distance of 83 kilometres ( 52 mi ) . For ships from the east , the distance would be the same , while from the north they would not pass through the sound . The port authority stated on 11 November 1963 that they were willing to allow a smaller clearance , which was back up by Bergen City Council on 27 November . The ministry finalized the decision on 16 December , supporting a height of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) . 
 = = = Financing and construction = = = 
 On 2 January 1965 , the bridge committee recommended that a limited company be established to finance the bridge . The three archipelago municipalities , Fjell , Sund and Øygarden , would purchase shares for NOK 500 @,@ 000 , while another NOK 200 @,@ 000 would be purchased from the mainland municipalities and Hordaland County Municipality . The company was established as A / S Sotrabrua on 16 October 1965 , with the head office located in Fjell . The company was given authority by its owners to apply for a 20 @-@ year concession to collect tolls on a new bridge ; if the tolls gave a profit beyond covering the debt of the bridge , it was to be used for further construction of roads on Sotra and Øygarden . The company was formally registered on 12 January 1966 . 
 To get satisfactory conditions for the loan , the company was recommended by banks to increase the ownership equity to 10 % of the loan . The share capital was insufficient , so the company started issuing preferred shares to individuals and the companies , and managed to secure NOK 1 @.@ 7 million . An exception to the rules was made , and the company was allowed to start detailed planning before the loans had been finalized . An estimate from 1966 showed that the bridge itself would cost NOK 27 million , while the auxiliary roads would cost NOK 4 million , excluding inflation and interest during construction . On 23 November 1966 , the county council supported a proposal that one third of the construction costs be covered by national road funds . On 10 August 1967 , the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Norway gave permission that the company could borrow up to NOK 25 million . The loan was a bond sold by Bergens Privatbank and <unk> Forsikring , consisting of one series valued at NOK 15 million issued in 1968 , and one valued at NOK 10 million issued in 1970 , with an interest of 5 @.@ 5 % and 6 @.@ 0 % , respectively . There was a five years interest @-@ only period , followed by ten years of repayment . The mortgage deed was secured in the right to collect tolls , supported by guarantees from the municipalities of Bergen , Fjell , Sund and Øygarden , and the county municipality . In addition , the company was granted loans from Bergens Privatbank , Bergens Sparebank and <unk> for NOK 3 million , although these were never used . The state 's part of the financing was through a loan from the Regional Development Fund . 
 The bridge was approved by the Parliament of Norway on 5 June 1968 . An agreement regarding financing was made between A / S Sotrabrua and the Ministry of Transport and Communications on 1 July 1968 . The construction of the road would be done by Hordaland Public Road Administration , who would receive two @-@ thirds of the financing of costs up to NOK 34 million from the company . The company would also advance the state 's part of the costs , which would be repaid to the company as NOK 1 million per year , for an estimated advance of NOK 8 @.@ 3 million . The company would be responsible for any interest , including that which would be accumulated during construction , and would have the right to collect tolls on all traffic on the bridge . 
 The optimal crossing point ran over Norwegian Talc 's plant , and would involve placing the western pylon in the middle of their area . The company offered the authorities free land on the condition that they received a satisfactory intersection with the bridge . A formal agreement was reached in mid @-@ 1970 . On the eastern side , an area development plan had to be made , which was approved on 19 May 1967 . The necessary land not already owned by the municipalities was expropriated . 
 Initial plans had called for the bridge to be completed by October 1972 . On 28 December 1968 , the company asked the road administration if construction could be quickened . They estimated that the bridge could be completed by December 1971 for a price increase of NOK 750 @,@ 000 . This gave the company NOK 2 million more in profits , as it could more quickly start collecting toll revenue . The company chose to accept this extra cost . The start of construction was delayed , first by the parliamentary decision coming right before the holidays , followed immediately by a national strike by engineers . The contract for the foundation and concrete work was won by Selmer , who started work in March 1969 . The steel @-@ work contracts were issued to <unk> , <unk> and Alfred Andersen ; despite them not having the lowest bid , the road administration chose to use the largest companies . 
 On 11 December 1971 , the bridge opened for traffic , and on the same day , the <unk> – Brattholmen Ferry was terminated . In February 1972 , there were twice as many cars as there had been on the ferry in February 1971 . The official opening by King Olav V took place on 25 May 1972 . The bridge cost NOK 39 @.@ 8 million to construct . This included NOK 650 @,@ 000 for the county road between Knarrevik and Brattholmen , which had been paid for by the state . The cost the company had to pay was NOK 23 @.@ 45 million . The final estimates for the project were for NOK 34 million , and the whole cost above this was covered by the state . When it opened , the bridge was the longest in Norway . 
 = = = Tolls and auxiliary projects = = = 
 Since the bridge would be the only road from the mainland to the archipelago , tolls could be collected in only one direction . The tolls were set to NOK 40 for <unk> , NOK 30 for buses , NOK 20 for trucks , NOK 12 for cars , NOK 5 for motorcycles , NOK 4 for bicycles , NOK 2 for adults and 1 for children . Discounts were available at the same rates as for ferries . The four people who had worked the longest on the ferry were offered the job as toll plaza employees . From 1972 , the bookkeeping of the company was transferred from the company 's secretary to Bergens Privatbank 's branch in Sotra , while the auditing was placed at Hordaland County Auditing . 
 In 1972 , the company collected NOK 3 @.@ 07 million in tolls , 21 % more than estimated . By 1977 , the annual income had reached NOK 5 @.@ 03 million , which was up 28 % from the estimates . From 1978 , the tolls for people were removed , resulting in about NOK 1 million less revenue per year . One of the reasons for the removal of passenger tolls was the extra time used to count passengers , which increased the queues at the toll plaza , and that the company 's debt would be covered anyway , even without the extra revenue . From 1 January 1981 , scheduled buses were also exempt from tolls , under the condition that the funds saved were used by the bus companies to strengthen public transport on Sotra . From 1980 , there was disagreement within the company as to whether the toll period should be extended to increase the subsidies to projects on Sotra and Øygarden , or if an as short as possible collection period was desirable . The board decided to terminate toll collections from 31 December 1983 . A minority of the owners wanted to extend the period for another two years , which would have given an estimated additional NOK 20 million . 
 The company collected NOK 73 @.@ 5 million in tolls , in addition to accumulating NOK 16 @.@ 3 million in interest . Costs , mostly for running of the toll plaza , were NOK 7 @.@ 6 million , in addition to financial costs of NOK 20 @.@ 0 million . This gave a profit of NOK 62 @.@ 4 million , including the necessary repayments of the initial loan . Because the debt had been financed with bonds , the company chose to place revenue in the bank with a higher interest instead of paying off the bonds faster . The preferred shares were repaid in 1980 , while all bonds had been repaid by 1985 . A / S Sotrabrua was formally liquidated on 9 February 1989 . 
 Among the company 's other goals was that of helping finance road projects on Øygarden . The most pressing issue was the section from <unk> on Store Sotra to the bridge , part of National Road 555 . In 1976 , the company issued NOK 5 million in an interest @-@ free loan to the project , which was repaid in 1982 and 1983 . Similar conditions were imposed for NOK 2 million for National Road 561 to <unk> <unk> and NOK 1 @.@ 2 million for the establishment of the <unk> – Rong Ferry in 1974 . The rest of the subsidies were given as grants . The main project was National Road 561 , which ran from <unk> northwards through Øygarden , for which the company paid NOK 28 @.@ 6 million . It paid a further NOK 9 @.@ 3 million for other projects in Sotra and Øygarden , including connections to <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Future = = 
 In 2005 , 8 @,@ 000 people commuted between Sotra and Bergen , and the bridge had an average daily traffic of 22 @,@ 000 vehicles . On National Road 555 between Straume , the municipal center of Fjell , and Storavatnet , where National Road 555 becomes a motorway , there are long queues during rush hour . The Norwegian Public Roads Administration has proposed a four @-@ lane motorway along National Road 555 from <unk> to Straume . This will require a new crossing across Knarreviksundet . Such a motorway extension is estimated to cost between NOK 3 and 4 billion , and the government has allocated NOK 400 million in National Transport Plan 2010 – 2019 for the project . It is presumed that most of the project will be financed as a toll road . 
 Four main proposals were suggested for the new fixed link . One involved a four @-@ lane subsea tunnel , one involved building a second , two @-@ lane bridge immediately adjacent to the current one , which would give the impression of a single bridge , another involved a new four @-@ lane bridge slightly to the south , and the last involved a new bridge considerably further to the south , which would connect to County Road 557 . 
 A tunnel would consist of two sections , one from <unk> to <unk> , where there would be an intersection , and one from <unk> to Storavatnet . Both would be subsea tunnels , where the western @-@ most would be 4 @.@ 7 kilometers ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) long and reach 80 meters ( 260 ft ) below mean sea level ( <unk> ) , while the eastern tunnel would be 7 @.@ 0 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) long and reach 140 metres ( 460 ft ) <unk> . This would involve the current National Road 555 being reclassified as a local road . A tunnel would be 1 @.@ 5 kilometers ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) longer than a bridge , which would give higher costs of roughly NOK 1000 per year for an average commuter . The tunnel would catch long @-@ distance travel ( Straume and westwards ) , while the bridge would be used for local traffic . An alternate tunnel proposal was to build it roughly 2 kilometers ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south of the current bridge , between Brattholmen and Håkonshella . This would connect to County Road 557 about 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south of <unk> . 
 The company <unk> AS has been established to lobby for and potentially debt @-@ finance the construction , which potentially could include other parts of National Roads 555 and 561 . In 2008 , the company estimated that it might be possible to start construction in 2013 , and complete the project by 2016 . On 21 April 2009 , State Secretary Geir <unk> stated that the government would support a bridge , but did not indicate if a two @-@ lane or four @-@ lane solution would be chosen . The Norwegian Public Roads Administration has recommended a four @-@ lane bridge , while the Institute of Transport Economics has recommended the two @-@ lane bridge . It is largely up to the city councils of Bergen and Fjell to determine which of the bridge alternatives will be chosen . 
 A four @-@ lane bridge is estimated to cost NOK 2 billion . It could either be located immediately north of the current bridge , or south of Norwegian Talc . The traffic from Askøy , along County Road 562 , connects with National Road 555 at Storavatnet . Without a bypass , the increased capacity from Sotra would not be achieved without expanding the motorway from Storavatnet to the city center . In 2010 , an alternative was launched whereby a four @-@ lane bridge would be built south of Norwegian Talc , and would immediately run into a tunnel and connect to the current motorway at <unk> . This is the planned intersection between National Road 555 and County Road 557 ( Ring Road West ) , which would result in traffic from Sotra towards southern Bergen would not take up capacity on the current 555 motorway until after traffic from both Sotra and Askøy heading towards southern Bergen have had a possibility to head onto County Road 557 . 
 In June 2010 , Hordaland County Council decided that an extension of the Bergen Light Rail to Sotra was to be made part of the extension plans in the period until 2040 . For the light rail to use existing infrastructure , a bridge would have to be chosen . The road project has been criticized by environmentalists because it uniformly bases growth in transport to the archipelago based on cars , and lacks any plans for inclusion of public transport , whether by light rail or as bus lanes . Criticism has also been raised against the Norwegian Public Roads Administration being responsible for planning the public transport , as they have failed to produce efficient public transport systems in Bergen . 
 = Evan O 'Neill Kane = 
 Evan O 'Neill Kane ( April 6 , 1861 – April 1 , 1932 ) was a surgeon working in Pennsylvania , United States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , and a member of a notable Pennsylvanian family . Several other members of his family were also surgeons or physicians and their family home , Anoatok , is now a listed building . 
 He is most well known for the remarkable feat of removing his own appendix under local anaesthetic in 1921 at the age of 60 . He operated on himself again at the age of 70 to repair a hernia . In many ways Kane was idiosyncratic in his practices , which included the tattooing of his patients . Kane was again in the public eye when he gave evidence at the sensational trial of his son for murder . 
 Kane was one of the founding members of the Kane Summit Hospital and became chief surgeon there . A large part of Kane 's work was in railway surgery . In this field he contributed a number of innovations in procedures and equipment . These included asbestos bandages , mica windows for brain surgery , and multiple site hypodermoclysis . 
 = = Family and home = = 
 Kane 's father was the American Civil War Major General Thomas L. Kane , who was also the founder of the town Kane , Pennsylvania and a prominent abolitionist . Thomas L. Kane also played a role in preventing war with the Mormons through his friendship with Brigham Young . Kane 's mother , Elizabeth Denniston Wood Kane , M.D. also practiced medicine ( until 1909 ) as did his brother , William ( also called Thomas L. Kane Jr . ) ( b . 1863 ) , and his sister , Harriet Amelia ( 1855 – 1896 ) . Kane also had an elder brother , Elisha Kent Kane ( b . 1856 ) , an engineering graduate from Princeton . 
 Kane married his first wife Blanche Rupert on 18 May 1893 , but she died less than a year later , two weeks after giving birth to their son Elisha Kent Kane ( b . 18 March 1894 ) . He then married Lila Rupert on 1 June 1897 . With Lila he had a further six children : William Wood Kane ( b . 7 May 1898 ) , Blanche Rupert Kane ( b . 9 August 1899 ) , Bernard Evan Kane ( b . 18 February 1902 ) , Thomas <unk> Kane ( b . 3 August 1903 ) , Robert Livingston Kane ( b . 29 August 1904 ) , and his twin Schuyler Kane born on the same date . 
 Kane 's son , Elisha Kent Kane , was head of the Romance language department at the University of Tennessee . Elisha was charged with the murder of his wife , Jenny G. Kane ( 1898 – 1931 ) , by drowning her in Chesapeake Bay . The trial was such a sensation at the time that there were crowds of people outside the courthouse unable to find room inside . Evan Kane was instrumental in obtaining his son 's acquittal by presenting medical evidence at his trial . He established that Jenny had a heart condition that contributed to her drowning . Elisha resigned his position with the university after his trial . A book by Ann Davis , a local historian , gives a fictionalized account of these events . 
 The arctic explorer Elisha Kent Kane is related ( he is Evan Kane 's uncle ) , but is a different person from both Evan Kane 's son and his brother of the same name . 
 Kane lived in the family home Anoatok , which is now listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Anoatok was built by Kane 's mother to house herself , Evan O 'Neill Kane and another son , Thomas L. Kane , and their families after the original family home burned down in 1896 . The architect was Walter Cope who had married into the Kane family – to a cousin of Major General Kane . The name Anoatok , an Eskimo word , honours Elisha Kent Kane the arctic explorer . Elizabeth died in 1909 and Thomas moved his family out in 1910 into a new home also designed by Walter Cope , leaving Evan O 'Neill Kane and his family as the sole occupants . Anoatok remained Kane 's home and office until his death . 
 Kane died of pneumonia at the age of 70 in 1932 , shortly after the trial of his son and just a few months after his major hernia operation . 
 = = Kane Summit Hospital = = 
 In 1887 , Elizabeth Kane together with two of her sons , Evan and William , founded the Woodside Cottage Hospital in Kane . The concept of a cottage hospital originated with Major General Kane , who thought that wounds healed better " in the Kane air " , but he died in 1883 , some years before Elizabeth founded the hospital . Around 1892 the hospital , together with its patients , was moved to a larger site , built on land donated by Elizabeth Kane , and was thereafter known as Kane Summit Hospital . Evan graduated from Jefferson Medical College , Philadelphia in 1884 . He practiced as a physician in Kane and later became chief surgeon of the Kane Summit Hospital , a position he held at the time of his own appendectomy operation . He died at his own hospital in 1932 . The facility ceased work as a hospital in 1970 , but the building is still used by Kane Community Hospital for administration . 
 Kane Summit Hospital , as a public hospital , received charitable grants from the State of Pennsylvania . The tight family control of the hospital led to complaints from local physicians , who claimed that they were not able to freely use the hospital . Patients were admitted on condition that Evan O 'Neill Kane , as the chief surgeon , had the final say in their treatment . The complaining physicians felt that they alone should be the judge of the proper treatment of their own patients and found this condition unacceptable . In February 1908 , formal complaints to the Pennsylvania Board of Charity Commissioners resulted in an investigation . The complainants were requesting that the Hospital grant should be withdrawn so this was a serious matter for the hospital , but both Evan and his assistant Thomas L. Kane were away in Florida at the time . Answering the charges fell to their brother Elisha Kent Kane , who was on the board of management of the hospital , but not the medical staff , and the hospital superintendent Dr. M. J. Hays . The hospital admission rules were changed as a result of the investigation . The commissioners found that the Kanes were not using their position to make unacceptable profits from the hospital ; on the contrary , they had made large donations , but recommended that stock holding in the hospital should be more broadly extended outside the Kane family . The commissioners also requested that the private practice offices of Evan and Thomas Kane be moved outside the hospital . Although the furnishing of these offices were paid for by the occupants , the cost of fuel , water and lighting was borne by the hospital . 
 = = Railway surgery = = 
 Kane was a railway surgeon for five different railroads . In Kane 's time , railway surgery was markedly different from surgery in a hospital and was considered to be its own field . Surgeons frequently needed to operate at great distances from a proper hospital facility , often in dirty and unsanitary conditions , and operations were performed with only basic equipment and materials . Industrial accidents on the railways resulted in many crushing injuries . A large proportion of the estimated 1 @,@ 000 operations Kane performed in the three years from 1898 to 1900 were treatment for accidents on the railways , many of which were <unk> . Several of Kane 's medical innovations were intended to be aids to the surgeon in the field , and clearly inspired by his work as a railway surgeon . 
 = = Innovations and inventions = = 
 Kane is responsible for one of the first uses of music as a medical therapy . Starting in 1914 , he played music with a phonograph in the operating theatre prior to <unk> the patient . Kane believed this had a calming effect on his patients and was more effective than simply talking to them as the surgeon was often distracted and conversations with the assistants , in his experience , soon dried up . Modern studies have shown that music can help reduce pain following an operation , and consequently also reduces the need for pain @-@ killing drugs . 
 Kane invented an improvement to the Murphy button , a device then commonly used for intestinal anastomosis , but now usually done with a surgical stapler . Kane was seeking a device with a larger aperture and less possibility of blockage after losing a patient to whom he had fitted a Murphy button . 
 Kane presented a paper to the American Academy of Railway Surgeons in 1900 addressing the difficulty of administering intravenous infusions in the field . Kane lists among the difficulties the unsterilized conditions and the tendency of veins to collapse following haemorrhage . Kane 's solution was a device which could administer multiple instances of <unk> simultaneously . Kane 's device could have up to ten needles , but Kane never used this many , as four were normally sufficient . Normal hypodermoclysis would be too slow in emergency conditions , but Kane 's invention speeded up the rate of fluid replacement many times . Kane 's device was subsequently criticised for its use of an unsealed rubber bulb by Edwin Hasbrouck , who proposed an alternative improved design . Administering hypodermoclysis at two sites for faster fluid uptake is a technique still in use today . 
 Kane had some novel ideas on materials for use in surgery . Influenced by his work in railway surgery , he was particularly concerned with materials that were good for use in the field and sometimes advocated the use of supplies that could be obtained locally from hardware stores and similar suppliers . He made his own bandages from woven asbestos , a material readily available at the time . <unk> dressings , and keeping them sterilised , was a problem in the field . Unlike modern dressings — which are supplied in sealed , sterile packs — the dressings of the time had to be sterilised immediately before use . In an emergency situation there may be little time to do this . The use of fire @-@ proof bandages allowed them to be sterilised quickly in an open fire . In 1924 , Kane proposed the use of mica to repair head wounds that had exposed and damaged the brain . He cited among the advantages of this that it provided a window for the physician to observe the damage and that in an emergency in the field , mica could be obtained by removing it from a stove window , an application for which it was commonly used at the time . 
 Another of Kane 's innovations for use in the field was an acetylene lamp worn on the head by the surgeon . This was intended for operations carried out in the field at night . Kane says it was particularly useful for illuminating the abdominal cavity . 
 Kane advocated , and practiced , tattooing newborn infants ( in an inconspicuous place ) with an identifying mark matching an identical tattoo on the mother . Kane was aware of cases where claims had been made of babies being mixed up and wished to avoid any possibility of this occurring in his hospital . In Kane 's view , complex clerical systems designed to prevent errors that might be implemented in a large hospital were impracticable in a small hospital because the administrative staff to run it were simply not available . Kane also argued that it was impossible to positively prove that a mistake had not been made with a purely clerical system . 
 = = Do @-@ it @-@ yourself surgery = = 
 Kane had a history of operating on himself . In 1919 he self @-@ amputated one of his own fingers that had become infected . But it was the operation of removing his own appendix under local anaesthetic , performed on 15 February 1921 at the age of 60 , which brought him wider media attention . He is believed to have been the first to have undertaken this self @-@ operation . Dr. Kane did this , in part , to experience the procedure from the patient 's perspective . He had in mind using local anaesthesia in future on patients with medical conditions that prevented a general anaesthetic being administered , and wanted to ensure that the procedure could be tolerated by the patient . Kane believed ether ( the usual general anaesthetic of the time ) was used too often and was more dangerous than local anaesthetics . The anaesthetic used by Kane was <unk> , a fairly recent replacement for the more dangerous cocaine . Kane performed the operation , which he had carried out nearly 4 @,@ 000 times on others , with the aid of mirrors that enabled him to see the work area . At this time the operation was rather more major than today , as the incision to remove an appendix was much larger than that needed for modern keyhole surgery techniques . Nevertheless , Kane was well enough to be taken home the following day . 
 This operation by Kane was not only a sensation at the time — it continued to be reported for many years afterwards . For instance , Popular Science discusses it in 1933 in an article on anaesthesia . More recently , it was held up as an example of commitment in a self @-@ motivation book . 
 On another occasion , in 1932 at the age of 70 , Kane repaired his own inguinal hernia under local anaesthetic . The hernia had been caused by a horse riding accident six years earlier . The operation was carried out at the Kane Summit Hospital with the press , including a photographer , in attendance . This operation is more dangerous than the earlier appendectomy because of the risk of puncturing the femoral artery . The operation lasted one hour and 55 minutes . Kane was back in the operating theatre working 36 hours later . 
 In the latter part of his career , Kane had started signing his handiwork by tattooing on his patients the letter " K " in morse code ( — · — ) using India ink . However , during his hernia operation he became too drowsy to finish the stitching up so this task and the tattooing fell to Dr. Howard Cleveland ( who later became Chief Surgeon in 1938 ) . 
 = = Alcohol = = 
 Kane was opposed to the consumption of alcohol . Alcohol had been previously widely used as a treatment in medicine , but Kane believed that this was neither necessary nor desirable . He also spoke out against a suggestion that the sale of spirits should be reintroduced in army bases . Alcohol had ceased to be available to soldiers on base when , in a prelude to prohibition , the army canteens were abolished in 1901 . For many years Richard <unk> attempted to introduce a Bill reversing this decision and his efforts were supported by a petition of 279 physicians . In a letter to JAMA in 1912 , Kane railed against this with " If our soldiers cannot find agreeable amusement without booze to make it attractive it is time that a determined effort to refine their depraved taste be made by the officers , who have plenty of spare time on their hands " . 
 = = Publications = = 
 " Fire @-@ proof asbestos dressing " , Journal of the American Medical Association , vol.25 , <unk> , pp. 996 – 997 , 7 December 1895 . 
 " Cure of prostatic hypertrophy by internal pressure " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 521 – 522 , 14 March 1896 . 
 " A new apparatus for fracture of the clavicle " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 596 – 597 , 12 September 1896 . 
 " Syphilis and drunkenness " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 951 – 952 , 15 May 1897 . 
 " Simple device for rapid hypodermoclysis in combating shock " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , no.9 , pp. 520 – 521 , 3 March 1900 . 
 " A new coupler for rapid intestinal anastomosis " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 1003 – 1005 , 19 April 1902 . 
 " Pin in appendix " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , no.3 , p . 199 , 16 July 1904 . 
 " Acetylene headlight and reflector for night operating " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , p . 1231 , 22 October 1904 . 
 " Cardiac dilation and displacement due to pleurisy " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 792 – 793 , 2 September 1911 . 
 " Peculiar twin ectopic gestation " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , p . 475 , 17 February 1912 . 
 " Phonograph in operating @-@ room " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , p . 1829 , 6 June 1914 . 
 " Railway and army surgery – a comparison " , International Journal of Surgery , <unk> , p . 390 , December 1916 . 
 " Radium therapy " , Radium , <unk> , no.1 , pp. 16 – 20 , April 1916 . 
 " <unk> metal clips as substitutes for ligatures and deep sutures in wound closure " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 663 – 664 , 24 May 1917 . 
 " The injury to cancer patients of securing specimens prior to operation " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , p . 955 , 29 March 1919 . 
 " <unk> : a case history " , International Journal of Surgery , <unk> , <unk> , pp. 100 – 102 , March 1921 . 
 Is the Practice of Medicine Worth While ? , Harrisburg , Pa : Medical Society of the State of Pennsylvania , 1921 OCLC <unk> . 
 " Sheet mica in brain surgery " , Journal of the American Medical Association , <unk> , <unk> , p . 1714 , 24 May 1924 . 
 = Fu ( poetry ) = 
 Fu ( Chinese : <unk> ) , variously translated as rhapsody or poetic exposition , is a form of Chinese rhymed prose that was the dominant literary form during the Han dynasty ( 206 BC – AD 220 ) . Fu are intermediary pieces between poetry and prose in which a place , object , feeling , or other subject is described and rhapsodized in exhaustive detail and from as many angles as possible . Classical fu composers attempted to use as wide a vocabulary as they could , and often included great numbers of rare and archaic terms in their compositions . Fu poems employ alternating rhyme and prose , varying line length , close alliteration , onomatopoeia , loose parallelism , and extensive cataloging of their topics . 
 Unlike the songs of the Classic of Poetry ( Shijing <unk> ) or the Verses of Chu ( Chu ci <unk> ) , fu were meant to be recited aloud or chanted but not sung . The fu genre came into being around the 3rd to 2nd centuries BC and continued to be regularly used into the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . Fu were used as grand praises for the imperial courts , palaces , and cities , but were also used to write " fu on things " , in which any place , object , or feeling was rhapsodized in exhaustive detail . The largest collections of historical fu are the Selections of Refined Literature ( Wen <unk> <unk> ) , the Book of Han ( Han shu <unk> ) , the New Songs from the Jade Terrace ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , and official dynastic histories . 
 There is no counterpart or similar form to the fu genre in Western literature . During a large part of the twentieth century , fu poetry was harshly criticized by Chinese scholars as excessively ornate , lacking in real emotion , and ambiguous in its moral messages . Because of these historical associations , scholarship on fu poetry in China almost ceased entirely between 1949 and the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976 . Since then , study of fu has gradually returned to its previous level . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The term " fu " , when applied to Chinese literature , first appears in the Zhou dynasty ( c . 1046 – 221 BC ) , where it meant " to present " , as in poetic recitations . It was also one of the three literary devices traditionally assigned to the songs of the Classic of Poetry ( Shijing <unk> ) . Over the course of the late 1st millennium BC , fu became the name of poetic expositions in which an author or composer created a comprehensive exposition and performed it as a rhapsody . Han dynasty historian Ban Gu in the " Monograph on Arts and Letters " defined fu as " to recite without singing " ( bù gē ér sòng <unk> ) . 
 Fu poetry is often viewed as a descendant of the Verses of Chu ( Chu ci <unk> ) songs combined with the rhetorical expositions of the <unk> of the Warring States ( <unk> ce <unk> ) . During the golden age of fu in the 2nd century BC , many of the greatest fu composers were from the southwestern area of Shu ( modern Sichuan Province ) . A chapter of <unk> containing a series of riddles has been theorized to be the earliest known fu . The earliest preserved and definitely datable fu is Jia Yi 's " Fu on the Owl " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , composed about 170 BC . Jia 's surviving writings mention an earlier fu he wrote upon his exile to Changsha which he modeled upon Qu Yuan 's " Encountering Sorrow " ( Li Sao <unk> ) , but it has not survived to the present . 
 = = = Han dynasty = = = 
 Much of the surviving Han fu and other poetry survives through Six Dynasty anthologies and other sources , such as quotations embedded in various works . 
 = = = = Western Han = = = = 
 Fu achieved its greatest prominence during the early Han dynasty . Jia Yi 's " Fu on the Owl " , written around 170 BC , was composed following on the third year of his exile to Changsha , and uses much of the style of the Li Sao and other songs of the Verses of Chu . " Fu on the Owl " , besides being the earliest known fu , is unusual in the author 's extended use of philosophical reflection upon his own situation in life . 
 Emperor Wu of Han ascended the throne in 141 BC , and his 54 @-@ year reign is considered the golden age of " grand fu " ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) . Emperor Wu summoned famous fu writers to the imperial court in Chang 'an , where many of them composed and presented fu to the entire court . The earliest grand fu of Emperor Wu 's reign is " Seven Stimuli " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , by Mei Sheng ( <unk> ; d . 140 BC ) . In " Seven Stimuli " , Mei Sheng acts as a Warring States @-@ style travelling orator who tries to cure a Chu prince of an illness caused by overindulgence in sensual pleasures by pushing his senses to their limits with his fu descriptions . 
 Of all the authors from the golden age of " grand fu " composition , Sima Xiangru is generally considered to be the greatest . A native of Chengdu , he was traditionally said to have been summoned to the imperial court after Emperor Wu happened to personally read his " Fu of Sir <unk> " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , though this is almost certainly a story added later . After arriving in the capital around 136 BC , Sima Xiangru expanded his " Fu of Sir <unk> " into his magnum opus , " Fu on the Imperial Park " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , generally considered the most famous fu of all . This work , whose original title was probably " Fu on the Excursion Hunt of the Son of Heaven " ( <unk> <unk> fù <unk> ) , is a grand celebration of the Emperor 's personal hunting park east of Chang 'an , and is famed for its rich number of rare and difficult words and characters . If not for the survival of Chinese scholar Guo Pu 's early 4th century AD annotations to " Fu on the Imperial Park " , much of its ancient and esoteric terminology would now be unintelligible . 
 The grand fu of the Western Han dynasty were read and recited as celebrations of pure poetic delight , and were the first pieces of Chinese literature to fuse both unrestrained entertainment and moral admonitions together in single works . However , after the reign of Emperor Wu , his court culture began to be criticized as having placed undue emphasis on the grandiose language in fu and therefore having missed opportunities to encourage moral restraint . The most prominent critic of " grand fu " was the other great fu writer of the Han dynasty : Yang Xiong . As a youth , Yang was an admirer and imitator of Sima Xiangru 's fu , but later came to disapprove of grand fu . Yang believed that the original purpose of fu was to " indirectly admonish " ( <unk> <unk> ) , but that the extended rhetorical arguments and complex vocabulary used in grand fu caused their hearers and readers to marvel at their aesthetic beauty while missing their moral messages . Yang juxtaposed early Han dynasty fu with the fu @-@ like expositions in the Classic of Poetry , saying that while those in the Poetry provided moral standards , the fu of the Han poets " led to excess " . While known as one of the fu masters of the Han dynasty , Yang 's fu are generally known for their focus on admonishing readers and listeners to uphold moral values . 
 = = = = Eastern Han = = = = 
 Two of the most famous fu writers of the Eastern Han period were the polymaths Zhang Heng and Cai Yong . Among Zhang Heng 's large corpus of writings are a significant number of fu poems , which are the first to have been written in the shorter style that became typical of post @-@ Han fu . Zhang 's earliest known fu is " Fu on the Hot Springs " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , which describes the hot springs at Mount Li ( modern Huaqing Pool ) which famously later became a favorite of Imperial Concubine Yang during the Tang dynasty . " Fu on the Two <unk> " ( Èr jīng fù <unk> ) is considered Zhang 's masterpiece . Zhang spent ten years gathering material for the fu , a response to an earlier fu by Ban Gu that is a poetic comparison between the two capitals of the Han dynasty : Luoyang and Chang 'an . Zhang 's fu is highly satirical and cleverly mocks many aspects of the Western Han period , including Emperor Wu himself The piece contains long passages colorfully describing life in the two capitals in great detail , including the entertainment areas . 
 Cai Yong , like Zhang Heng , was a prolific writer in addition to his mathematical , astronomical , and musical interests . In AD 159 , Cai was summoned to Chang 'an to perform on the Chinese zither for the imperial court , but became ill shortly before arriving and returned to his home . Cai composed a poetic record of his journey in " Fu on Recounting a Journey " ( <unk> xíng fù <unk> ) , his most well @-@ known fu . In " Fu on Recounting a Journey " , Cai cites examples of treacherous and dishonest rulers and officials from Chinese history , then criticizes the eunuchs of the capital for similar crimes . 
 A number of fu writers from the late 2nd and early 3rd centuries AD became considered great fu poets , and were noted for their descriptions of the chaos and destruction following the collapse of the Han dynasty . Wang Can , who lived as a refugee in Chu following the assassination of Dong Zhuo in AD 192 , wrote a famous fu entitled " Fu on Climbing the Tower " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) in which Wang movingly describes climbing a tower near Jingzhou and gazing longingly in the direction of his home in Luoyang . Poets often used subjects of descriptive fu poems to symbolize themselves , as in " Fu on the Parrot " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , by Mi Heng , in which Mi uses a caged parrot as an allegory for a scholar whose talents go unrecognized and whose inability to control his tongue results in his captivity . During the Three Kingdoms period , the court of the warlord Cao Cao and his sons Cao Pi and Cao Zhi became a famous literary salon , and a number of fu poems from their court have survived to modern times . 
 = = = Six Dynasties = = = 
 During the Six Dynasties period ( 220 – 589 ) , fu remained a major part of contemporary poetry , although shi poetry was gradually increasing in popularity . Six Dynasties fu are generally much shorter and less extravagant than Han dynasty fu , likely due to a tradition of composing works entirely in parallel couplets that arose during the period . While lyrical fu and " fu on things " had been starkly different forms in the Han dynasty , after the 2nd century AD the distinction mostly disappeared . Although the extravagant fu style of the Han mostly disappeared , " fu on things " continued to be widely written . 
 Xie <unk> is one of the best @-@ known poets of the entire Six Dynasties period , second only to Tao Yuanming . In contrast to his older contemporary Tao , Xie is known for the difficult language , dense allusions , and frequent <unk> of his poetry . Xie 's greatest fu is " Fu on Dwelling in the Mountains " ( Shān jū fù <unk> ) , a Han @-@ style " grand fu " describing Xie 's personal estate that borrows its style from the famous " Fu on the Imperial Park " by Sima Xiangru . Like classical Han fu , the poem uses a large number of obscure and rare characters , but " Fu on Dwelling in the Mountains " is unique in that Xie included his own annotations to the poem , without which the poem would be nearly incomprehensible . 
 During the Liang dynasty ( 502 – 587 ) , fu continued to be a popular form of literature , though it began to merge with the popular five- and seven @-@ syllable poetry forms , which completely eclipsed fu during the Tang dynasty . Some fu pieces , such as Shen Yue 's " Fu on Dwelling in the Suburbs " ( <unk> jū fù <unk> ) — an homage to Xie <unk> 's " Fu on Dwelling in the Mountains " — followed the traditional forms and subjects of classical fu , but an increasing number did not . " Fu on Lotus @-@ picking " ( <unk> <unk> fù <unk> ) , by Xiao Gang ( later Emperor Jianwen of Liang ) , is a short , lyrical fu that mixes freely with popular lyric poetry , and portrayed southern China as a romantic land of pleasure and sensuality . Lotus @-@ picking was an activity traditionally associated with peasant women , but in the early 5th century became a popular topic in fu and poetry . 
 Yu Xin is generally considered the last great fu poet of Chinese history . Yu , like Yan <unk> , was born in the south but forced to relocate to northern China after the south 's defeat , and spent the rest of his career writing of the loss of the south as a loss of an entire culture and way of life . Yu 's most famous piece is " Fu on Lamenting the South " ( <unk> <unk> fù <unk> ) , in which he describes his life 's experiences in the context of the larger context of the destruction of the south and its culture . 
 = = = Tang and Song dynasties = = = 
 The fu genre changed rapidly during the Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) . During the early Tang , a new form of fu called " regulated fu " ( <unk> <unk> ) supplanted the original form . " Regulated fu " had strict rules of form and expression , and required the use of consistent rhymes throughout each piece . Additionally , rules were created to govern the arrangement of tones in each poem , as the introduction of Buddhist texts written in Sanskrit and Pali had stimulated the Chinese to methodical study of their own language and the identification of the four tones of Middle Chinese . Beginning in the Tang dynasty , these " regulated fu " were required for the composition sections of the imperial examinations . Tang writers added new topics to the traditional subjects of fu , such as purely moral topics or scenes from Chinese antiquity . The " parallel fu " ( <unk> <unk> ) was another variant of the fu developed in the Tang , and was only used for rhetorical compositions . 
 In 826 , Tang poet Du Mu 's poem " Fu on E @-@ pang Palace " ( <unk> gōng fù <unk> ) laid the foundation for a new form of fu called " prose fu " ( <unk> <unk> ) , in which prose is freely rhymed . This form of fu became the dominant fu form during the late Tang and the Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) . By the 9th and 10th centuries , traditional fu had become mainly historical pursuits , and were largely read and copied because of their inclusion on the imperial examinations . 
 = = Topics = = 
 = = = " Fu on things " = = = 
 Between 130 – 100 BC , Emperor Wu greatly expanded China 's territory into Central Asia , northern Vietnam , and the Korean Peninsula through a series of military campaigns and invasions . As the expansion progressed , a large number of foreign plants , animals , goods , and rarities were brought to the imperial capital at Chang 'an . Throughout the Han dynasty , court officials and poets often composed special fu called " fu on things " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) on these new and unusual things , in which they described and catalogued extensively . These " fu on things " became a major genre in fu poetry , and cover a vast number of instruments , objects , and phenomena . 
 Ban Zhao , one of the most famous female poets of Chinese history , wrote a well @-@ known fu during the reign of Emperor He of Han entitled " Fu on the Great Bird " ( Dà <unk> fù <unk> ) , believed to be a description of an ostrich brought to the Han court from Parthia around AD 110 . Scholar Ma Rong wrote two well @-@ known fu on ancient board games : his " Fu on <unk> " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , which the Chinese believed to actually have been invented by Laozi after he departed west out of China , and his " Fu on Encirclement Chess " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , one of the earliest known descriptions of the game Go . Han dynasty librarian Wang Yi , best known as the compiler of the received version of the Verses of Chu , wrote several object @-@ description fu in the early 2nd century AD , such as " Fu on the <unk> " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) , the earliest known poetic description of the lychee fruit . 
 The literary salon of Cao Pi 's court produced a number of notable " fu on things " in which a group of poets known as the Seven Masters of the Jian 'an period each composed their own version of the fu . During this period , Cao Pi was once presented with a large agate of unusual quality which Cao had made into a bridle . Each of the men composed their own " Fu on the Agate Bridle " ( <unk> <unk> fù <unk> ) for the occasion . Another object @-@ description fu from the Cao court is " Fu on the <unk> Bowl " ( <unk> <unk> fù <unk> ) , which was a bowl made of a <unk> or shell @-@ like substance from somewhere near India , which was then known as the " Western Regions " . 
 One of poet Shu Xi 's ( <unk> ; AD 263 – 302 ) fu has become well known in the history of Chinese cuisine : his " Fu on Pasta " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) is an encyclopedic description of a wide variety of dough @-@ based foods , including noodles , steamed buns , and dumplings , which had not yet become the traditional Chinese foods they are in modern times . Western Jin poet Fu Xian 's " Fu on Paper " ( <unk> fù <unk> ) is well known as an early description of writing paper , which had only been invented about 150 years earlier . 
 = = = Sociopolitical protest = = = 
 Part of the legacy associated with the fu is its use as a form of sociopolitical protest , such as the theme of the loyal minister who has been unjustly exiled by the ruler or those in power at the court , rather than receiving the promotion and respect which he truly deserves . In the Verses of Chu , one of the works attributed to Qu Yuan is the " Li Sao " , which is one of the earliest known works in this tradition , both as ancestral to the fu as well as its incorporation of political criticism as a theme of poetry . The theme of unjust exile is related to the development of <unk> poetry , or the poetry stylistically or thematically based upon lamenting the unjust exile of the poet , either directly , or allegorically through the use of the persona of a friend or historical figure ( a safer course in the case of a poet @-@ official who might be punished for any too blatant criticism of the current emperor ) . During the Han Dynasty , along with the development of the fu stylistically , the idea that it incorporate political criticism through indirection and allegory also developed . Han Dynasty historian and author Ban Gu in his Book of Han pointedly refers to a fu by Qu Yuan as a literary example of the use of the theme of the loyal minister who has been unjustly exiled , rather than receiving the promotion and respect which he truly deserves . As Hellmut Wilhelm puts it : " ... the Han fu can easily be classified into a limited number of types . All types have one feature in common : almost without exception they can be and have been interpreted as voicing criticism — either of the ruler , the ruler 's behavior , or certain political acts or plans of the ruler ; or of the court officials or the ruler 's favorites ; or , generally , of the lack of discrimination in the employment of officials . The few examples that are positive in tone recommend the authors or their peers for employment , or even contain specific political suggestions . In short , almost all fu have a political purport , and , in addition , almost all of them deal with the relationship between the ruler and his officials . " Seen in context , Ban Gu 's discussion of Qu Yuan and the Chu <unk> style is less to the point of the actual evolutionary path of the fu and more to the point that the main purpose of the fu is political and social criticism through poetic indirection : thus , in fu , paradoxically , the " fantastic descriptions and an overflowing rhetoric ... can be reduced to ... restraint " , as the sociopolitical criticism which was key to the fu was constrained within a very subtle , elaborately indirect , occasional , and allusive mode . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Fu pieces comprise the first main category in the Wen Xuan ( Selections of Refined Literature ) , an early Chinese literary anthology which is still extant . The Selections collects all known fu pieces from the early Han dynasty to its compilation in the 6th century AD , during the Liang dynasty ; it has since been the traditional source for studying classical fu . 
 In the late 17th and early 18th centuries , during the reign of the Kangxi Emperor , scholar Chen <unk> ( 1652 – 1736 ) compiled a collection of all known fu extant in his day , publishing his collection in 1706 as Collection of Fu Through the Ages ( <unk> fù <unk> <unk> ) . Chen 's Collection in total contains 4 @,@ 155 fu . 
 = Tephrosia apollinea = 
 Tephrosia apollinea is a legume species , native to southwest Asia ( the Levant , Arabia , Socotra , Iran , Pakistan , northwestern India ) and northeast Africa ( Egypt , Sudan , Ethiopia , Eritrea , Djibouti , Somalia ) . 
 The leaflets of the plant are obovate @-@ oblong and equal @-@ sided , and of a silky texture . The fruits ( legumes ) are typically one to two inches ( 2 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 1 cm ) long and contain six or seven brownish seeds . The species typically grows in areas where the soils are relatively deep , especially in semi @-@ arid and wadi areas , and on terraces and slight inclines and hills . 
 Tephrosia apollinea is known to be toxic to goats . Although it has been used in Oman to treat bronchitis , cough , earache , nasal congestion and wounds and bone fractures , as of 1993 its wider impact on humans had not been assessed . It can be used to make indigo dyes , and the leaves and those of other plants are used to make hot drinks by the Bedouin in parts of Sinai and the Negev . 
 = = Description = = 
 The leaflets of the plant are obovate @-@ oblong , somewhat wedge @-@ shaped , equal @-@ sided , and of a silky texture . The mid @-@ rib is usually folded longitudinally , and they are characterized by parallel transverse veins . The fruits ( legumes ) are typically one to two inches long ( 2 @.@ 5 to 5 @.@ 1 cm ) and contain six or seven brownish seeds . The plant displays purple flowers during season ; they are described as their most attractive in the month of January . It typically grows to 45 – 50 cm in height , and can grow on mountains with an altitude of over 3000 ft . ( 914 m ) . Both diploid ( 22 chromosomes ) and tetraploid ( 44 chromosomes ) <unk> have been reported . 
 The roots of Tephrosia apollinea are deep , penetrating soils to a depth of 3 metres or more , aiding the absorption of moisture from the soil . Moisture is stored in the cortex of the roots , which is protected by a thin <unk> . Water storage in the cortex enables growth and reproduction during times of drought , which allow it to thrive in both arid and semi @-@ arid conditions and to survive during winter and summer months at times of low rainfall . The roots grow at a faster rate than the shoots themselves , and even at the early stage of the plant displaying a shoot the length of a cm , the roots may already be 30 cm or more in length . 
 A proposed 1993 treatment of T. apollinea as a subspecies of Tephrosia purpurea noted some regional variations , with plants in the Eastern Desert of Egypt possibly producing smaller pods , leaves , and leaflets , and plants from oases having densely pubescent spreading hairs . Among the features they described as differentiating the apollinea subspecies from the nominate purpurea subspecies were that apollinea has somewhat longer pods ( 3 @.@ 5 – 5 or sometimes 5 @.@ 5 cm , rather than 3 – 4 cm ) , a wider range in the quantity of seeds per pod ( generally 7 – 9 , as low as 3 , rather than generally 5 – 6 , or sometimes 7 ) , the pods being curved upwards rather than downwards , and leaflets having 9 rather than 7 lateral veins . 
 = = Taxonomy and names = = 
 The plant was initially named Galega apollinea by <unk> <unk> <unk> in 1813 , and moved to the genus Tephrosia by Johann Heinrich Friedrich Link in 1822 . 
 Its treatment as a subspecies of Tephrosia purpurea , called Tephrosia purpurea subsp. apollinea , was proposed by <unk> A. Hosni and Zeinab A. R. El @-@ Karemy in 1993 . This treatment has not been accepted by the databases The Plant List , International <unk> Database & Information Service , or <unk> . Hosni and El @-@ Karemy treated T. apollinea and T. purpurea as a single species after finding that their previous descriptions " agree in most of their characters and the distinction between typical forms is rather difficult ... " The full name with authorities under their revised classification is Tephrosia purpurea ( L. ) <unk> subsp. apollinea ( <unk> ) Hosni & El @-@ Karemy . 
 In parts of southern Arabia the species carries the vernacular name of <unk> , and it is also known as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> or <unk> to Arabs , and written as <unk> in the Arabic language . In the Sinai area of Egypt it is referred to by the Bedouin as <unk> or <unk> . It is also known as <unk> in parts of Sudan . Due to its traditional use in making indigo dyes , Tephrosia apollinea has also been referred to as " Egyptian indigo " . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 The species is recorded in the northeast African nations of Djibouti , Egypt , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Somalia , and Sudan , the Western Asian nations of Iran , Israel , Jordan , Oman , Saudi Arabia , South Yemen , the United Arab Emirates , and Yemen ( including the Yemeni island of Socotra ) , and the South Asian nations of India and Pakistan . Within India , it is documented in the western states of Gujarat , Maharashtra , and Rajasthan . 
 The species , cited as a " leguminous desert forb " , typically grows in areas where the soils are relatively deep , especially in semi @-@ arid and wadi areas , and on terraces and slight inclines and hills . In Saudi Arabia it has been found scattered among species such as Zilla spinosa , <unk> <unk> , Astragalus spinosus , <unk> <unk> , Achillea <unk> and <unk> bottae on the edges of the slopes of desiccated lakes . 
 It has been well documented in sources in Egypt and Sudan . In 1866 the Pharmaceutical Journal stated that it was found as a contaminant in Alexandrian <unk> , being found in cultivated fields in the valleys to the east and south of <unk> , in the Elephantine Islands , opposite <unk> , along the Nile , and <unk> and <unk> . In Israel it grows in the Judean desert , the Dead Sea Valley , the Negev hills and Eilat . 
 In wadi areas of the Yemen it tends to grow on desert alluvial shrubland , and coexist with <unk> indica , Cymbopogon <unk> and <unk> elegans . An example of Tephrosia apollinea was found by Harry St John Bridger Philby in 1936 at <unk> , about 150 miles ( 240 km ) northeast of Sana 'a . In Socotra , an island off the coast of Yemen , it is typically found in the Croton shrubland of lowland plains at altitudes of between sea level and 100 metres on overgrazed soils , along with Cassia <unk> . In a 2000s analysis of vegetation in the woodlands of northern Socotra , the species was found to coexist with <unk> aspera , <unk> <unk> , Bidens chinensis , <unk> viridis , Hibiscus <unk> , Indigofera <unk> , Leucas <unk> , Setaria <unk> and Solanum <unk> . 
 Tephrosia apollinea is also found in the United Arab Emirates and in Oman , where it inhabits the <unk> al @-@ <unk> desert and dominates the beds of wadis in mountains such as Jebel Shams . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Tephrosia apollinea is cited as " unpalatable " , although the seeds of the plant are reportedly a favourite of sandgrouse inhabiting the scrub @-@ desert of northern Sudan , and the butterfly <unk> croceus is known to feed on it . This has allowed it to colonize the landscape in parts of the Middle East which have been overgrazed , especially at lower altitudes . 
 The species is known to be toxic to goats ; a study published in the early 1980s revealed that 11 out of 12 goats died after 1 to 40 days of daily oral dosing of Tephrosia apollinea shoots ( fresh or dried ) , and that they displayed adverse reactions to ingesting it such as dyspnoea , weakness of the limbs and joints causing instability in movement , changes in fat composition , catarrhal enteritis , and hemorrhage in the heart , lungs , and intestinal mucosa . <unk> extracted from the seeds of the plant also caused complete mortality in Aphis <unk> , when applied at a concentration of 0 @.@ 1 % for 48 hours . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Tephrosia apollinea can be used to make indigo dyes . The species was noted to be commonly cultivated for this purpose in Nubia in the 1800s . 
 The plant is known for its medicinal properties and has significant anti @-@ bacterial properties ; the leaves and the root have been used to treat bronchitis , cough , earache , wounds and bone fractures by herbalists in countries like Oman . The ground leaves of Tephrosia apollinea are also inhaled to reduce nasal congestion , or boiled with water to make <unk> . Powdered bark can be mixed with water and poured into the ears of camels to alleviate ticks , and powdered leaves can be used as a paste in the treating of wounds . It can also be rubbed on limbs in conjunction with <unk> indica and <unk> <unk> to treat people affected with polio . 
 Although unpalatable when consumed raw , when boiled the leaves of Tephrosia apollinea and numerous other plants are used to make hot drinks by the Bedouin in parts of Sinai and the Negev . But herbal doctors in Oman warn that Tephrosia apollinea can be potentially harmful to humans , and as of 1993 it had not been fully analyzed chemically to assess the wider impact it could have on health . 
 = = Phytochemistry = = 
 When dried , the leaves of Tephrosia apollinea were found to contain 4 @.@ 4 % moisture , 21 @.@ 1 % of crude protein , 19 @.@ 8 % of crude fiber , and 10 @.@ 9 % of ash . A chemical analysis found that it contains <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and flavones , The chloroform extract of the aerial part of Tephrosia apollinea also revealed seven new 8 @-@ <unk> flavonoids , including <unk> A @-@ G ( 1 @-@ 7 ) . 
 In 2006 , researchers of Oman 's Sultan Qaboos University published their findings from a chemical investigation into the leaves in which they found it contained <unk> , <unk> , and a new <unk> named <unk> . One 2014 study revealed that <unk> extracted from the aerial parts of Tephrosia apollinea had an <unk> effect on cancer cell lines . 
 = Ontario Highway 420 = 
 King 's Highway 420 , commonly referred to as Highway 420 , is a 400 @-@ series highway in the Canadian province of Ontario that connects the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) with downtown Niagara Falls . It continues east as a limited @-@ access expressway named Niagara Regional Road 420 to connect with the Rainbow Bridge international crossing between Canada and the United States over the Niagara River ; this was part of Highway 420 until 1998 . West of the QEW , the freeway ends at an at @-@ grade intersection with Montrose Road ( Niagara Regional Road 98 ) . The highway has a speed limit of 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) , making it the only 400 @-@ series highway to have a speed limit less than 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) for its entirety . 
 Originally constructed as a divided four lane road with two traffic circles , the route of Highway 420 formed part of the QEW between 1941 and 1972 before being assigned a unique route number . This took place during the reconstruction of the four lane divided highway into a freeway and the construction of the large interchange at the freeway 's western terminus . In 1998 , the section of Highway 420 east of Stanley Avenue was transferred to the responsibility of the Regional Municipality of Niagara and redesignated as Regional Road 420 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 At 3 @.@ 3 km ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) , Highway 420 is the shortest 400 @-@ series highway , travelling through Niagara Falls from Montrose Road to Stanley Avenue , on the outskirts of the city 's tourist district . East of Stanley Avenue ( Regional Road 102 ) the highway becomes Niagara Regional Road 420 and is known as Falls Avenue and Newman Hill on approach to the Rainbow Bridge . This portion was designated a part of Highway 420 until 2000 , when it was transferred to the City of Niagara Falls and the Regional Municipality of Niagara , although the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario ( MTO ) still assists with the maintenance of it under a Connecting Link agreement . East of Drummond Road , Highway 420 features stylized light fixtures with the letters " ER " , which stand for Elizabeth Regina and are a tribute to The Queen Mother . 
 Highway 420 begins in the west at a signalized intersection with Montrose Road ( Regional Road 98 ) , west of which it continues as Watson Street through the residential neighbourhood of Greens Corners to Beaverdams Road ( Regional Road 53 ) . East of Montrose Road , the highway is a four lane roadway divided by a raised paved median , and passes north of a forest as it approaches a large interchange with the QEW . In addition to a parclo interchange that provides almost all directional movements , this four @-@ level stack interchange features two flyovers that arc from south to east as well as a four lane mainline that curves from north to east , directing most westbound Highway 420 traffic onto the Toronto @-@ bound QEW . 
 East of the QEW , Highway 420 encounters an interchange with Dorchester Road as both cross the Queenston @-@ Chippawa Power Canal . This interchange was originally a traffic circle that was removed in the early 1970s . The numerous lanes from the stack interchange to the west begin to converge between residential subdivisions east of Dorchester Road , gradually narrowing to four through lanes at the Drummond Road interchange . After passing beneath Portage Road , the route widens on approach to an at @-@ grade intersection with Stanley Avenue . This intersection is the eastern end of both the freeway segment of the route and the signed King 's Highway 420 ; east of Stanley Avenue the route is signed as Niagara Regional Road 420 and known as Falls Avenue . 
 Now separated by a landscaped median , the route progresses eastward , intersecting MacDonald Avenue and providing access to several residential / retail properties that adjoin the road . The route travels through a concrete trench and abruptly curves to the southeast as it passes beneath Victoria Avenue , with which there is a simple interchange . East of this point , the road was named Newman Hill until March 2012 . Palmer Avenue and Ontario Avenue overpass the route as it descends a hill towards the Niagara Gorge . At the bottom , the route curves to the southwest , where it provides access to the Rainbow Bridge border crossing into the United States as well as the tourist district of the city . 
 Due to its association with the number 420 in cannabis culture , Highway 420 is also the location for the annual Cannabis Conference and Protest , usually taking place sometime around April 20 . The event includes a march beginning near Niagara Falls and travelling to Highway 420 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Rainbow Bridge Approach = = = 
 The history of Highway 420 predates its designation by nearly 75 years , tied in with the crossing of the Niagara Gorge between the twin cities of Niagara Falls . The first level crossing between the two cities was the Honeymoon Bridge , constructed in 1898 . The 14 m ( 46 ft ) wide structure spanned 255 m ( 837 ft ) between the Canadian and American sides , 58 m ( 190 ft ) above the Niagara River . Its narrow design proved to be a fatal flaw , and on January 27 , 1938 , under the weight of a massive ice jam in the river , the structure collapsed . A day later , both the owners of the previous bridge — the International Railway Company ( IRC ) — as well as the Minister of Highways Thomas Baker McQuesten announced intentions to construct a new span ; a long political battle ensued for several years over the merits of private or public ownership of border crossings . In the end , the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission ( <unk> ) paid the IRC $ 615 @,@ 000 to purchase the right @-@ of @-@ way of the old bridge as well as the rights to construct the new one . The future Rainbow Bridge was royally dedicated by King George VI and Queen Elizabeth on June 7 , 1939 , just hours after the couple dedicated the QEW . 
 On May 16 , 1940 , Samuel Johnson , the vice @-@ chair of the <unk> , and McQuesten , who in addition to his parliamentary role was chair of the commission , ceremonially turned the first sod for the new bridge using a two @-@ handled shovel . However , construction had begun two weeks earlier on May 4 . The new bridge was assembled over the following 18 months ; the design was prepared by New York engineering firm Waddell & Hardesty and supervised by the Edward Lupfer Corporation , the latter the designers of the Peace Bridge . The new structure was located 167 m ( 548 ft ) downstream from the Honeymoon Bridge , as the gorge is slightly wider at that point , resulting in a 288 m ( 945 ft ) span . 
 Meanwhile , McQuesten was overseeing the construction of the QEW between Toronto and Fort Erie . The new dual highway , inspired by German <unk> , was the first of its kind in Canada . However , the start of World War II in September 1939 would temporarily halt his ambitions , as funding was quickly shifted to the war effort . As a result , construction on the new superhighway was put on hold south of Niagara Falls . McQuesten officially opened the QEW on August 23 , 1940 ; the pavement ended south of Lundy 's Lane . Despite the war , work began on a link between the highway and the Rainbow Bridge through the centre of Niagara Falls . This link would not be completed in time for the opening of the new bridge . 
 On November 1 , 1941 , the Rainbow Bridge was officially opened during a simple ceremony . The oldest living couple known to have wed in Niagara Falls , a pair from Pennsylvania , were the first to cross , followed by a newlywed couple from Georgia . This symbolically tied the history of the two bridges together , and was followed by McQuesten and Johnson walking towards the centre of the structure from the Canadian and American sides , respectively , and shaking hands at the centre . Several explosions followed and the bridge was opened to traffic . 
 Work continued on the four lane bridge approach throughout 1941 , and by the summer of 1942 it was possible to drive directly from the bridge onto the QEW . The new link featured a traffic circle at Dorchester Road as well as at the QEW . Four gravel lanes opened between Niagara Falls and Fort Erie during the summer of 1941 , becoming the main route of the QEW . As a result , what would become Highway 420 was referred to by several names , including the Queen Elizabeth Way Extension ( and known by locals for decades as the " Queen E Extension " ) and the Rainbow Bridge Approach . 
 = = = Upgrade to freeway = = = 
 During the mid @-@ 1960s , the DHO examined the possibility of extending the freeway portion of the route east towards the Rainbow Bridge . They began to purchase properties lining Roberts Street in 1966 . In 1971 , construction began on a three @-@ level stack interchange between the QEW and the Rainbow Bridge Approach . This removed the two traffic circles along the approach . The interchange between the QEW and Lundy 's Lane ( Highway 20 ) was also removed ; instead , the new stack interchange included access to Montrose Road . By April 1972 , the Rainbow Bridge Approach was designated as Highway 420 . 
 In 1998 , the Niagara Falls Transportation Study was released , recommending that Roberts Street be rebuilt as a gateway to the city as opposed to a freeway . Highway 420 east of Stanley Avenue was subsequently transferred to Niagara Region . While the section near the QEW junction has high @-@ mast lighting , like other provincial freeways , the rest of the route ( including Regional Road 420 ) had the " ER " lightposts to commemorate the route 's historical status as the original routing of the QEW . 
 On September 23 , 2010 , Highway 420 was designated as the Niagara Veterans Memorial Highway . On January 31 , 2012 , Niagara Regional Council approved the renaming of Roberts Street and Newman Hill as an extension of Falls Avenue , beginning March 1 . Prior to this , Falls Avenue curved into Newman Hill at the Rainbow Bridge . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 420 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in the Regional Municipality of Niagara . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Beck v. Eiland @-@ Hall = 
 Beck v. Eiland @-@ Hall is a case filed in 2009 before the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) , a United Nations agency . It was filed by political commentator Glenn Beck against Isaac Eiland @-@ Hall , concerning the website " GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com " . Eiland @-@ Hall created the site as a parody to express the view that Beck 's commentary style challenged his guests to prove a negative . The site 's name was based on a joke first used by comedian Gilbert Gottfried at the 2008 Comedy Central Roast of Bob Saget , in which Gottfried jokingly implored listeners to disregard the ( non @-@ existent ) rumor that Saget had raped and murdered a girl in 1990 . Online posters began an Internet meme comparing Gottfried 's joke with Beck 's style of debate , by requesting Beck disprove he had committed the act in question . Eiland @-@ Hall launched his website on September 1 , 2009 . 
 Beck filed a complaint to the WIPO under the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy ( UDRP ) , arguing the domain name of the website was defamatory and asserted trademark infringement in its use of his name . Eiland @-@ Hall filed a response brief to WIPO which cited the U.S. Supreme Court case Hustler Magazine v. Falwell , asserting the website 's domain name was a form of free speech and satirical political humor . 
 Beck made a supplemental filing in the case arguing the domain name was misleading and might lead individuals to believe it contained factual information . Eiland @-@ Hall filed a surreply and stated Beck had depreciated the value of the First Amendment by attempting to evade its reach in a legal proceeding outside U.S. courts . On October 29 , 2009 , WIPO ruled against Beck , concluding that Eiland @-@ Hall was making a political statement through parody in a justified usage of the Glenn Beck mark . 
 Commentators noted Beck 's actions led to a Streisand effect ; his suit against the website drew increased attention to it . Representatives of Public Citizen , the Electronic Frontier Foundation and the Citizen Media Law Project were all of the opinion that Beck 's trademark argument in his complaint against the website was ridiculous . The assistant director of the Citizen Media Law Project applauded WIPO 's decision , saying , " It 's good to see that this WIPO arbitrator had no interest in allowing Beck to circumvent the guarantees of the U.S. Constitution . " Beck 's representative declined comment to PC Magazine about the conclusion of the case . Lawyers for Beck did not respond to a request from National Public Radio for a comment about the WIPO ruling . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 = = = = Gilbert Gottfried joke = = = = 
 Gilbert Gottfried was a featured comedian at the Comedy Central Roast of Bob Saget which first aired on August 16 , 2008 . At Saget 's roast , Gottfried jokingly begged listeners to disregard the ( nonexistent ) rumor that his fellow comedian " raped and killed a girl in 1990 " . Gottfried repeatedly warned the audience at the roast not to spread the rumor , which did not exist before the comedian 's speech . The audience in attendance at the Comedy Central Roast were both shocked and amused by the preposterous nature of Gottfried 's joke which seemed more ludicrous each time he repeated it . 
 = = = = Internet meme = = = = 
 On August 31 , 2009 , a post on the Internet discussion community Fark applied Gottfried 's joke to Glenn Beck . Online posters compared the Internet meme to Beck 's style of arguing , requesting Beck disprove that he had committed the act in question . The meme spread to social @-@ media websites , including Encyclopedia Dramatica , Reddit , Yahoo ! , <unk> , YouTube , Twitter and <unk> A variation of the <unk> technique was used , in which Google provided " Glenn Beck murder " as a search suggestion in a query for " Glenn Beck " . 
 Isaac Eiland @-@ Hall , a 34 @-@ year @-@ old computer science student in Panama City , Florida , saw the discussion on Fark using the Gottfried joke on Beck and created a website , GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com , intending it as a parody of Beck 's style of political commentary . He chose not to identify with the <unk> service and decided to remain anonymous . Eiland @-@ Hall used the domain name registrar <unk> for his site . It was launched on September 1 , 2009 , and received over 120 @,@ 000 page views during its first 24 hours . The website asserted that it did not believe the charges were true . Eiland @-@ Hall wrote on the site that those furthering the meme were asserting Beck used a similar strategy to promote his opinions and increase his viewership . 
 The webpage originally displayed a small text disclaimer at the bottom , stating that the site was satirical . Eiland @-@ Hall later placed two prominent disclaimers at the top of the page , which identified it as parody . The disclaimer at the top of the website 's main page stated its entire contents was parody , and included a link to a larger disclaimer at the bottom of the page . The site criticized Beck 's tactic of challenging those he opposes to prove a negative . Eiland @-@ Hall told Politics Daily that after reading the initial thread at Fark which started the meme , he came to the conclusion that for those involved online participation in its propagation was a form of catharsis . He explained in an interview with Ars Technica that it was a means of utilizing Beck 's strategies to criticize him and a way to focus exasperation around Beck 's style of commentary into action . Eiland @-@ Hall 's website inspired copycat parodies . 
 = = = Litigation = = = 
 = = = = Beck initiates legal action = = = = 
 By September 3 , 2009 , attorneys representing Mercury Radio Arts , Glenn Beck 's media company , had requested that the domain registrar of Eiland @-@ Hall 's website delete the site . Beck 's lawyers characterized the site 's location as libelous . They demanded that the domain registrar revoke the <unk> privacy @-@ protection service for the website , and turn over contact information for the then @-@ anonymous Eiland @-@ Hall . The registrar , <unk> , refused . On September 4 , 2009 , Beck 's lawyers sent another letter to the domain registrar , repeating their requests and noting that they had read the website 's contents and were therefore aware from statements posted to the site that its operator had been notified by the registrar . 
 Their second letter to <unk> observed that the site was still operational on September 4 , 2009 , in spite of their prior requests on behalf of Beck . The domain registrar changed the name server of the website without telling Eiland @-@ Hall ; after contacting the registrar , he was permitted to return to his original name server . In an interview with Gawker on September 9 , 2009 , Eiland @-@ Hall remarked that Beck 's attorneys contacted the registrar of the domain , his hosting provider , as well as the company which housed the servers for his website . He noted that the hosting provider informed him they would not cooperate with the requests from Beck 's lawyers unless they received a court order . 
 = = = = WIPO complaint = = = = 
 In September 2009 , lawyers for Beck and Mercury Radio Arts filed a complaint with the World Intellectual Property Organization ( WIPO ) under the Uniform Domain @-@ Name Dispute @-@ Resolution Policy ( UDRP ) against the privacy service for Eiland @-@ Hall 's website . WIPO is a Switzerland @-@ based agency of the United Nations . The rules of WIPO 's Arbitration and Mediation Center were created by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers ( <unk> ) . The privacy service for the website revealed the identity of the site 's owner in response to Beck 's complaint . 
 The complaint stated that Eiland @-@ Hall was trying to distort perceptions about the purpose and derivation of the site . Beck argued that the domain name of the website could be confused with his trademark , " Glenn Beck " . The complaint described the website 's domain name as libelous claiming that it encroached upon Beck 's legally registered claim of his name . Beck did not claim libel or defamation in the complaint , focusing on the legal issue of trademark . The complaint asserted that the website itself contained factually inaccurate information , was unauthorized and defamatory , and that it was highly probable it would create uncertainty among Beck 's potential customers . 
 Beck 's complaint asserted that the domain name of the website was an example of bad @-@ faith registration . It argued that Eiland @-@ Hall had no legitimate interest in , or right to , the website 's domain name . As of September 2009 Beck was in the process of trademarking the use of his name for " goods and services " , including the usage of " Glenn Beck " on merchandise . 
 = = = = Eiland @-@ Hall response = = = = 
 Eiland @-@ Hall retained First Amendment rights lawyer Marc Randazza to represent him . According to Randazza , Eiland @-@ Hall sought legal representation after he was contacted with legal requests from lawyers representing Beck . On September 28 , 2009 Randazza filed a 17 @-@ page response brief on behalf of his client , asserting that the website 's domain name was a form of protected political speech and satirical political humor . According to Randazza , the website was used for satirical purposes and its owner was not attempting to profit from it . Randazza wrote that an individual would have to be a pathetic idiot to come under the impression that his client 's website was directly affiliated with Beck , contending that the website 's domain name could not be confused with the " Glenn Beck " trademark except to " a moron in a hurry " . 
 Randazza asserted that Beck had insufficiently demonstrated trademark rights to his name , " Glenn Beck " , and claimed that Beck was actually trying to have the website taken down because he did not appreciate the criticism through satire which parodied Beck 's own techniques . He argued that Eiland @-@ Hall had legitimate rights to his website 's domain name because of its use to criticize Beck using political satire and as part of the Internet meme which had begun on the Fark website . 
 The brief gave a short history of Internet phenomena , including video parodies of the German film Downfall , memes based on the film 300 , " Hitler Hates Kanye West " , " All your base are belong to us " , " Mr. Spock Ate My Balls " , and the gerbil story involving Richard Gere . 
 Randazza traced the website 's origin , explaining the internet meme 's roots in Gilbert Gottfried 's joke . He then spelled out the root comedic intent of Eiland @-@ Hall 's website , in an explanation he termed the humor equation : 
 ( Outrageous Accusation ) + ( Celebrity ) + ( Question Why the Celebrity Does Not Deny the Accusation ) = ( Confirmation of the <unk> of the Accusation + Laughter ) 
 The Eiland @-@ Hall response brief cited a clip of Beck interviewing United States Congressman Keith Ellison , a Muslim from Minnesota . Beck had stated to U.S. Representative Ellison , " No offense and I know Muslims , I like Muslims , I 've been to mosques , I really don 't think Islam is a religion of evil . I think it 's being hijacked , quite frankly . With that being said , you are a Democrat . You are saying let 's cut and run . And I have to tell you , I have been nervous about this interview because what I feel like saying is , sir , prove to me that you are not working with our enemies . And I know you ’ re not . I ’ m not accusing you of being an enemy . But that ’ s the way I feel , and I think a lot of Americans will feel that way . " It was argued that this was an example of Beck 's interview style in which he challenged his guests to prove a negative . Randazza concluded Beck 's rhetorical style was similar to Gottfried 's , simply devoid of comedic intent . 
 Randazza 's argument compared the case to the Supreme Court of the United States case Hustler Magazine v. Falwell . Randazza wrote that Beck was attempting to evade the First Amendment to the United States Constitution by filing the legal process with an agency of the United Nations instead of in a U.S. court . In the legal brief , Randazza pointed out that Beck 's action of going to the WIPO in an attempt to get the website taken down was in contradiction to his prior statements saying he preferred United States law over international law . 
 On September 29 , 2009 , Randazza requested that Beck voluntarily ask that the First Amendment be applied to the arbitration case , despite its international setting . Randazza made this request because Beck 's political commentary favored the United States Constitution over international law . Randazza 's September 29 , 2009 letter to Beck 's attorneys cited statements by Beck in which he indicated he preferred United States law over international law . Beck had said , " Once we sign our rights over to international law , the Constitution is officially dead . " Randazza 's letter concluded : " I am certain that neither party wishes to see First Amendment rights subordinated to international trademark principles , thus unwittingly proving Mr. Beck 's point . Lest this case become an example of international law causing damage to the constitutional rights that both of our clients hold dear , I respectfully request that your client agree to stipulate to the application of American constitutional law to this case . " 
 On October 8 , 2009 , Randazza was interviewed about the case on the <unk> radio program , Declaring Independence . He explained why Beck did not file a libel lawsuit in the United States . He pointed out that because Beck was a public figure he had to prove a legal standard referred to as actual malice , and show that Eiland @-@ Hall knew his assertions were inaccurate . He explained that this did not apply to Eiland @-@ Hall 's website even if it was knowingly inaccurate , because the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Hustler Magazine v. Falwell that no proof is needed for an absurd statement made in the context of satire . 
 = = = = Supplemental filing and surreply = = = = 
 Beck submitted a supplemental filing in the case on October 13 , 2009 . In the supplemental filing , his attorneys argued that the joke of the Eiland @-@ Hall website was not obvious ; therefore , the website 's domain name was misleading . The filing asserted : " While there is absolutely nothing humorous or amusing about the statement made by Respondent in his domain name that ' Glenn Beck <unk> and Murdered a Young Girl in 1990 , ' the average Internet user finding the domain name <unk> ( " Disputed Domain Name " ) in a search would have no reason not to believe that they will be directed to a website providing factual information ( as opposed to protected criticism or similar protected speech ) about Mr. Beck . " 
 On October 20 , 2009 , Eiland @-@ Hall filed a surreply in response to Beck 's supplemental filing . Eiland @-@ Hall asserted in the surreply that Beck was the butt of a viral joke which was protected speech even if it was not perceived as comedic in nature by the subject . He stated Beck had depreciated the value of the First Amendment by attempting to evade its reach in a legal proceeding outside U.S. courts . 
 = = = = WIPO ruling = = = = 
 On October 29 , 2009 , the WIPO ruled against Glenn Beck in the case . For Beck to have prevailed in the case , the WIPO court would have had to have ruled in Beck 's favor on three issues : that the domain name could be mistaken for the mark " Glenn Beck " ; that Eiland @-@ Hall did not have a justifiable stake in the name , and that the domain name was " bad faith " . On the first point , WIPO arbitrator Frederick M. Abbott ruled that the domain name could be confused with the " Glenn Beck " mark . On the issue of profit from Beck 's mark WIPO ruled that there had not been substantial commercial activity to warrant this particular claim . Abbott was the sole arbitrator on the WIPO panel . 
 Abbott concluded that Eiland @-@ Hall had legitimate interests in the website 's name for purposes of political satire in the form of comedic parody . Abbott did not draw a conclusion on the third point , noting that it was unlikely that Beck would have prevailed on the " bad faith " issue . Abbott wrote that the determination of whether the website is defamatory would not be an issue for WIPO . Instead , the WIPO limited the case 's scope to a determination of whether the website registrant had engaged in " abusive domain name registration and use " . 
 = = = Eiland @-@ Hall gives domain to Beck = = = 
 On November 6 , 2009 , Eiland @-@ Hall wrote to Beck , giving him control of the domain free of charge , and providing Beck with its username and password . Eiland @-@ Hall wrote that he had made his point , and the act of filing the complaint exacerbated the situation for the complainant . Eiland @-@ Hall explained his rationale for giving away the domain name , citing his desire to protect the applicability of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution had been satisfied . 
 Techdirt reported on November 6 , 2009 , that GlennBeckRapedAndMurderedAYoungGirlIn1990.com was a dead site ; by November 10 the domain name was registered to Beck 's company , Mercury Radio Arts . In a notice posted to one of his other websites , Eiland @-@ Hall wished Beck ( then suffering from appendicitis ) well , and characterized the conclusion of the case as a success . In a post on his blog , Eiland @-@ Hall 's lawyer Marc Randazza described the case as a victory for freedom of speech . 
 Beck did not respond to Eiland @-@ Hall 's letter , and Beck 's representative declined comment to PC Magazine about the conclusion of the case . Lawyers for Beck did not respond to a request for comment about the WIPO ruling from National Public Radio . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 = = = Complaint and response = = = 
 Electronic Frontier Foundation attorney <unk> McSherry and Paul Levy of Public Citizen commented on the case to Ars Technica , calling Beck 's trademark claim before the WIPO ridiculous . The Citizen Media Law Project agreed with this assessment . Levy noted that domain names , in and of themselves , could be seen as defamatory ; however , the statement in the domain name would have to be deemed both false and malicious . Levy and McSherry thought that the filing may have been to ascertain Eiland @-@ Hall 's identity , which was anonymous prior to the complaint . McSherry couldn 't recall a prior case where an individual asserted a domain name was libelous . Jack Bremer of The First Post wrote that the attempt by Beck 's lawyers arguing the domain name of the website was itself defamatory had likely never occurred before in the field of information technology law . 
 Media commentators , including Paul <unk> of the Minnesota Independent , Andy Carvin of National Public Radio , and Andrew <unk> of Domain Name Wire , considered Randazza 's legal brief entertainingly written . Writing for <unk> , Rick Sawyer called Randazza 's legal brief very funny and considered him among the uproariously amusing <unk> in North Shore , Massachusetts . Eriq Gardner of Adweek noted that the case had strategic import for the field of politics , referring to Beck 's style of commentary as exemplified in the interview with Congressman Keith Ellison . Chris <unk> of CNET News commented on the legal issues of the case ; he asked whether it should hold to U.S. law as it involved two citizens , and additionally wondered if Beck was asserting trademark over his full name or his individual first and last names as well . Ed Brayton of ScienceBlogs called Randazza 's request that Beck stipulate to United States law intellectually creative . Daily Kos pointed out the inherent hypocrisy in Beck 's legal position of seeking redress in an international agency when compared to his prior statements criticizing foreign law in favor of U.S. law . 
 = = = Streisand effect = = = 
 Commentators analyzed Beck 's actions with respect to the " Streisand effect " . Jim Emerson of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times commented that the website 's disclaimer was not enough to dissuade attorneys representing Beck from attempting to have the site removed , which triggered the Streisand effect and backfired against their client . Jeffrey Weiss of Politics Daily wrote that by taking legal action , Beck achieved the one impact he did not desire , namely garnering more attention for Eiland @-@ Hall 's website . John Cook of Gawker noted Beck 's attempts to remove the site from the Internet helped assure it would become noteworthy because of his actions . 
 Mike <unk> wrote about the case on Techdirt , commenting on the effect of Beck 's actions on the meme 's spread . He observed in retrospect it would have been advantageous for Beck to have simply done nothing rather than encourage the meme as a byproduct of his attempts to remove it from the Internet . <unk> pointed out that Beck 's actions provided legitimacy to the meme 's <unk> . Steffen Schmidt wrote of Beck 's predicament in a Des Moines Register article : " Mr. Beck has quite a task ahead of him . Shutting down one web site is like trying to eradicate Pueraria lobata the dreaded Kudzu vine that is eating the South . " Citizen Media Law Project observed Beck had exacerbated the situation by intimating legal tactics against Eiland @-@ Hall , which served to increase the popularity of the meme and coverage of it among blogs . 
 = = Impact = = 
 At the conclusion of the WIPO case Glynnis MacNicol of Mediaite commented that those including Glenn Beck afforded freedom of speech guaranteed by the First Amendment must allow for an Internet environment with the same rights given to everyone . Brayton of ScienceBlogs pointed out that Beck and his lawyers never replied to Randazza 's request for all parties to stipulate to the U.S. Constitution and the First Amendment in the case . Brayton observed that this was irrelevant as Beck 's case was weak even when examined under the standards of the UN agency . Of Eiland @-@ Hall 's decision to turn the domain over to Beck after the conclusion of the case he commented that this was a wise strategic move . Monica Hesse of The Washington Post remarked upon the conclusion of the case that the division between what is considered libel and satire was murky , and asked whether this determination was more difficult to make on the Internet where speech can be amplified by others . 
 Wendy Davis of Online Media Daily commented on the potential impact of the case , and observed it was a victory for proponents of Internet rights . Davis pointed out a judgment for Beck would have enabled additional WIPO cases from individuals who were the focus of satire on the web , as a way for those people to avoid judgment in U.S. courts which adhere to First Amendment case law . John Cook of Gawker called Eiland @-@ Hall 's decision to turn the domain name over to Beck an optimal end to the affair which emphasized the ridiculousness of Beck 's actions . Citizen Media Law Project assistant director Sam Bayard applauded WIPO 's decision , noting , " It 's good to see that this WIPO arbitrator had no interest in allowing Beck to circumvent the guarantees of the U.S. Constitution . " 
 The Washington Post columnist Dana Milbank wrote in his 2010 book Tears of a Clown , that Beck had been baited by Eiland @-@ Hall to confirm the importance of the United Nations . Alexander <unk> came to a similar conclusion in his 2010 book Common Nonsense , and pointed out the discrepancy between Beck 's criticism of the United Nations as part of a New World Order with Beck 's subsequent reliance upon the WIPO where he chose to file the case . The case was cited by Jude A. Thomas in a 2011 article published in the John Marshall Review of Intellectual Property Law . In a discussion of the conflicts between freedom of speech and trademark , Thomas noted that panels of the UDRP have concluded website operators had fair use over domain names even in cases where the name in question was exactly the same as that trademarked by the individual filing the complaint to the WIPO . 
 = Jean Bellette = 
 Jean Bellette ( occasionally Jean Haefliger ; 25 March 1908 – 16 March 1991 ) was an Australian artist . Born in Tasmania , she was educated in Hobart and Julian Ashton 's art school in Sydney , where her teachers included Thea Proctor . In London she studied under painters Bernard <unk> and Mark Gertler . 
 A modernist painter , Bellette was influential in mid @-@ twentieth century Sydney art circles . She frequently painted scenes influenced by the Greek tragedies of Euripedes , Sophocles and Homer . She twice won the Sulman Prize , in 1942 with For Whom the Bell Tolls , and 1944 with Iphigenia in Tauris . She helped found the Blake Prize for religious art , and was its inaugural judge . Bellette married artist and critic Paul Haefliger in 1935 . The couple moved to Majorca in 1957 ; although she visited and exhibited in Australia thereafter , she did not return to live , and became peripheral to the Australian art scene . 
 = = Early life and training = = 
 Bellette was born in Hobart on 25 March 1908 and grew up an only child in rural Tasmania with her artist mother and postmaster father . Initially a student at the local Anglican school in Deloraine , at the age of 13 she became a boarder at a Friends School back in Hobart , and then at Hobart 's technical college . She was subsequently a student at Julian Ashton 's art school in Sydney . Her teachers included Thea Proctor , while fellow students included artist John Passmore . Her drawings and watercolours displayed in the 1934 student art exhibition attracted favourable comment from The Sydney Morning Herald art critic . At Ashton 's art school , Bellette met fellow Australian artist Paul Haefliger and in 1935 , they married . The following year they travelled to Europe , and Bellette ( like Passmore ) studied at the Westminster School of Art , where she was taught by figurative painters Bernard <unk> and Mark Gertler . In 1938 , Bellette and her husband studied life drawing at Académie de la Grande Chaumière in Paris . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 Bellette and Haefliger returned to Australia just before the outbreak of World War II . Shortly after her arrival , Bellette held an exhibition at Sydney 's Macquarie Galleries . The couple became influential members of the Sydney Art Group , a network of " fashionable " moderns whose membership included William Dobell and Russell Drysdale . Bellette painted and held regular shows – " a solo show every second year and a group show every year at the Macquarie Galleries " – while her husband served as art critic for The Sydney Morning Herald for a decade and a half . 
 In 1942 , Bellette 's won the Sir John Sulman Prize with For Whom the Bell Tolls . She won it again in 1944 , with her painting Iphigenia in Tauris . The composition is set in a dry , open landscape , with several riders on horses whose appearance suggests " the Australian present , rather than Greek antiquity " . The judge awarding the prize actually preferred another of her entries , Electra – but it failed to meet the size requirements . Both Iphigenia in Tauris and Electra were among the many works created by Bellette in the 1940s that were inspired by the tragedies of Euripedes , Sophocles and Homer . Her choice of subject matter and approach placed her at odds with mainstream modernism , while she seemed to shun explicit links between the classical and the Australian . Bellette reasoned that she preferred to choose her <unk> and the spatial arrangements of her compositions to evoke a place 's atmosphere . Critics identified the influence of European modernists Aristide Maillol and Giorgio de Chirico , as well as Italian Quattrocento painters Masaccio and Piero della Francesca , some of whom Bellette wrote articles about in the journal Art in Australia . 
 The most distinctive feature of the artist 's work was this choice of classical subjects . In 1946 , Bellette 's works were hung in at least four separate exhibitions . Reviewers commented on her synthesis of " the impulsiveness of romanticism and the <unk> of classicism " , and her " romantically classical " approach . Despite the generally positive views , there were some reservations , particularly that the artist might be at risk of settling upon , and then repeating , a formula in her work . Bellette 's treatment of classical subjects extended beyond conventional painting ; in 1947 she created a textile design , titled " myths and legends " , while in 1948 she created the sets for a production of Shakespeare 's Pericles , Prince of Tyre . Her " vigorous <unk> " was well reviewed , though the acting was not . 
 Though she did not again win the Sulman , she was successful in having works hung in that competition on many occasions , including the 1946 , 1947 , 1948 and 1950 shows . Bellette continued to paint classical scenes , and around 1950 produced the work Chorus without Iphigenia . Purchased by the National Gallery of Australia in 1976 , this oil painting shows five figures , " posed like statues in a tableau vivant , [ and who ] possess a kind of erotic energy " . Anne Gray , the National Gallery 's curator , interpreted the scene chosen by Bellette : 
 Although nothing is happening in this image , we associate the figures with tragedy , with death and mourning – with the classical reference in the painting 's title . Iphigenia , Agamemnon 's daughter , gave her life for her country when the goddess Artemis asked for it in exchange for favourable winds so that the Greek ships could sail to Troy . Bellette 's melancholic painting might be supposed to portray Iphigenia 's friends mourning her death . 
 In 1951 , Bellette came second in the Commonwealth Jubilee Art Competition , behind the young Jeffrey Smart . The following year , she won a competitive exhibition sponsored by Metro Goldwyn Mayer , with Girl With Still Life . 
 Although Haefliger never critiqued his wife 's exhibitions , others occasionally stepped in to provide reviews in the Herald . Describing her 1950 exhibition at the Macquarie Galleries , one critic considered it " one of the most stimulating and refreshing that has been seen here for a long time " and that " She paints with a strong , sombre palette and her forms are sculptured with great decision . She uses paint sensuously and passionately , as paint , not as so many contemporary Australians do , as mere colour " . 
 Two years later , the same reviewer , attending another of the artist 's solo Sydney shows , observed that Bellette : 
 is one of the few Australian artists here who combines a firm technique with a sensitive and rich emotion . In some of the lighter landscapes in this exhibition , Miss Bellette seems to have been trying to solve some of the particular difficulties of painting Australian landscapes . The clear , strong light tends to flatten the form and bleach the colour ; a problem that doesn 't lend itself to the dramatic tensions and dark moods that are characteristic of her work . It requires a colder and more dispassionate approach . But when she finds landscapes to her taste , such as the rugged hills and <unk> clouds in No. 8 , the earth decaying with erosion in No. 19 , or the prickly desolation of " Rough Country " , No. 14 , she handles them with great skill and effectiveness . Her figure drawings are decisively drawn and firmly modelled . The girls have a pensive dignity as though they are pondering the burdens and <unk> of a future to be spent as caryatids . The still lives and the interior are admirable exercises in formal organisation , the colours being sombre yet rich . 
 Around this time , Bellette also held a show in Melbourne , which included some black @-@ and @-@ white landscape studies as well as some of her classical Greek subjects . Arnold Shore , art critic for The Argus , drew a contrast between the two groups of works . He thought that one of the landscapes " sets the heart singing with its lovely tone , pattern and sense of place " . Continuing , he noted that the landscapes and some other works " attain at their best a standard only vaguely suggested when the painter concerned herself too much with striving after a new treatment of ancient Grecian ideals . " 
 Paintings by Bellette were among those of twelve Australian artists included in the 1953 Arts Council of Great Britain exhibition in London , five regional British cities , and at the Venice Biennale . Bellette was one of only two women represented , the other being Constance Stokes . As with her Sulman prize @-@ winners , Bellette 's subjects were classically themed works : Electra ( 1944 ) and Oedipus ( 1945 ) . Arts Council chairman Kenneth Clark was disappointed with the response of British critics to the exhibition , and their focus on a theme of nationhood paid little regard to the works of Bellette and several others . 
 As well as spending time in Sydney 's art community , in 1954 Haefliger and Bellette purchased a cottage in Hill End , an old gold mining village in central New South Wales . They added a studio , and the site became both a <unk> and a venue for social visits and artistic endeavours by colleagues from the Sydney circle , including Drysdale , Margaret <unk> , John Olsen , David Edgar Strachan and Donald Friend . This gathering of artists , sometimes referred to as the Hill End Group , is known for its landscape art . Bellette , though sometimes a painter of landscapes , was known for her classical subjects and still lifes , which critics struggled to accommodate within their understanding of the Hill End Group . Nevertheless , several still lifes from this period are held in public collections , including Still Life with Fish ( 1954 ) , in the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery , and Still life with wooden bowl ( c . 1954 ) , in the Art Gallery of New South Wales . These images were often rendered with strong colour , which was also sometimes a feature of earlier works on which critics would remark . 
 Both Bellette and Haefliger had for many years been informal organisers of Sydney 's artistic community . In 1955 , Bellette played a more public role , when she helped found the Blake Prize for religious art , and was its inaugural judge . 
 = = = Majorca = = = 
 In 1957 , Haefliger 's extramarital affair , which had lasted for over a decade , came to an end . Bellette and Haefliger left Australia intending to divorce quietly , but were reconciled . After a year in Paris they settled in Majorca , living first in Deià , before buying a house in the hamlet of C 'an <unk> . Bellette painted landscapes and still lifes that reflected a Spanish influence , and showed periodically in Australia through the 1960s . However , the year she moved to Majorca turned out to be the last year in which she exhibited work outside Australia . The couple visited in 1970 and 1975 , and Bellette returned once more in 1983 . Bellette had , however , become an " onlooker " to the local art scene . This was in part because of a transition in Australian art that included the rise of abstract expressionism , the strong influence of a small number of gallery owners , and discrimination against women that reached " record levels " . Bellette was nevertheless able to secure some exhibitions , in Sydney and in Melbourne . These infrequent exhibitions were received very positively by critics . When her work was hung at the South Yarra Gallery in 1964 , noted art historian and critic Bernard Smith stated in his review for The Age that he " could not recall an exhibition in Melbourne of this quality since I began to write this column . " Reviewing her 1966 show in Sydney , the Herald critic considered it was her " ability to combine the calm beauty of form of her beloved classicism of content with a dark romantic spirit that has gained her such an honourable place in Australian painting ... the antiquity of nature and man 's constructions are explored with a subtle , powerful inquiry . " In 1971 , Melbourne critic Alan McCulloch considered her classical compositions to be her most successful . Drawing parallels between classical tragedy and contemporary global refugee crises , he noted " there is infinite tenderness in these paintings and infinite sadness . For although these rocky , shadowed landscapes are peopled with the ghosts and shades of an ancient civilisation , they are also curiously symbolic of present day tensions and tragedies . " 
 Bellette and Haefliger lived and worked for the rest of their lives in Majorca , with periodic trips to Italy . Friends such as artists Jeffrey Smart and John Olsen visited them regularly in Europe . An injury to her wrist meant that paintings prepared in 1976 for a solo exhibition were her last . Paul died in March 1982 ; Bellette survived breast cancer and a mastectomy in 1986 and died on 16 March 1991 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Prior to her death , Bellette bequeathed the Hill End cottage to the National Parks and Wildlife Service ( which manages the Hill End historic site ) , on condition that it be used as an artists ' retreat . It continues to operate for that purpose . As of 2014 , Bellette is the only woman to have won the Sulman Prize on more than one occasion . A large number of her works are held by the Art Gallery of New South Wales ; other galleries that hold examples include the Art Gallery of South Australia , Art Gallery of Western Australia , Bendigo Art Gallery , Geelong Art Gallery , the National Gallery of Australia , and the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery . In 2004 – 05 , a major retrospective exhibition was held at Bathurst Regional Art Gallery , the S. H. Ervin Gallery in Sydney , the University of Queensland Art Museum , Mornington Peninsula Regional Gallery and the Drill Hall Gallery in Canberra . 
 Described by Amanda Beresford as Australia 's " only true modern classicist " , Bellette is generally regarded as an influential figure in the modern art movement in Sydney in the mid @-@ twentieth century . Art historian Janine Burke described Bellette as " a leader of the post @-@ war art world " , while the University of Queensland Art Museum 's curator placed her as " a seminal figure in the visual arts from the 1930s until her death in Majorca in 1991 " . Of her paintings , opinions vary . Burke described her as " arguably the best painter " of the Sydney circle . Historian Geoffrey Dutton was unconvinced about her choice of subject but nevertheless praised Bellette 's " assured if muted " style , while simultaneously dismissing the lesser efforts of her husband . However , art historian and writer Sasha Grishin had a different view . Commenting on Bellette 's paintings of Greek mythological subjects created in the 1940s , he wrote , " they were neither very convincing as paintings , nor works that had a particular resonance in Sydney or Australian art at the time " . John Passmore and Bellette studied together both in Australia and England , travelled in Europe , and exhibited side by side in group shows . However , he was highly critical of Bellette 's work , while Yvonne Audette , who went to a few of the artist 's drawing classes , described her classical works as " dull poses , and very badly drawn , and even more badly painted , like clumsy colouring @-@ in " . 
 = Tender Mercies = 
 Tender Mercies is a 1983 American drama film directed by Bruce Beresford . The screenplay by Horton Foote focuses on Mac Sledge , a recovering alcoholic country music singer who seeks to turn his life around through his relationship with a young widow and her son in rural Texas . Robert Duvall plays the role of Mac ; the supporting cast includes Tess Harper , Betty Buckley , Wilford Brimley , Ellen Barkin and Allan Hubbard . 
 Financed by EMI Films , Tender Mercies was shot largely in Waxahachie , Texas . The script was rejected by several American directors before the Australian Beresford accepted it . Duvall , who sang his own songs in the film , drove more than 600 miles ( 966 km ) throughout the state , tape recording local accents and playing in country music bands to prepare for the role . He and Beresford repeatedly clashed during production , at one point prompting the director to walk off the set and reportedly consider quitting the film . 
 The film encompasses several different themes , including the importance of love and family , the possibility of spiritual resurrection amid death , and the concept of redemption through Mac Sledge 's conversion to Christianity . Following poor test screening results , distributor Universal Pictures made little effort to publicize Tender Mercies , which Duvall attributed to the studio 's lack of understanding of country music . 
 The film was released on March 4 , 1983 , in a limited number of theaters . Although unsuccessful at the box office , it was critically acclaimed and earned five Academy Award nominations , including one for Best Picture . Tender Mercies won Oscars for Best Original Screenplay for Foote and Best Actor for Duvall , his first and only win as of 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mac Sledge ( Robert Duvall ) , a washed up , alcoholic country singer , awakens at a run @-@ down Texas roadside motel and gas station after a night of heavy drinking . He meets the owner , a young widow named Rosa Lee ( Tess Harper ) , and offers to work in exchange for a room . Rosa Lee , whose husband was killed in the Vietnam War , is raising her young son , Sonny ( Allan Hubbard ) , on her own . She agrees to let Mac stay under the condition that he does not drink while working . The two begin to develop feelings for one another , mostly during quiet evenings sitting alone and sharing bits of their life stories . 
 Mac resolves to give up alcohol and start his life anew . After some time passes , he and Rosa Lee wed . They start attending a Baptist church on a regular basis . One day , a newspaper reporter visits the motel and asks Mac whether he has stopped recording music and chosen an anonymous life . When Mac refuses to answer , the reporter explains he is writing a story about Mac and has interviewed his ex @-@ wife , Dixie Scott ( Betty Buckley ) , a country music star who is performing nearby . 
 After the story is printed , the neighborhood learns of Mac 's past , and members of a local country – western band visit him to show their respect . Although he greets them politely , Mac remains reluctant to open up about his past . Later , he secretly attends Dixie 's concert . She passionately sings several songs that Mac wrote years earlier , and he leaves in the middle of the performance . Backstage , he talks to Dixie 's manager , his old friend Harry ( Wilford Brimley ) . Mac gives him a copy of a new song he has written and asks him to show it to Dixie . Mac tries to talk to Dixie , but she becomes angry upon seeing him and warns him to stay away from their 18 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Sue Anne ( Ellen Barkin ) . 
 Upon his return home , Mac assures Rosa Lee he no longer has feelings for Dixie , whom he describes as " poison " to him . Later , Harry visits Mac to tell him , seemingly at Dixie 's urging , that the country music business has changed and his new song is no good . Hurt and angry , Mac drives away and nearly crashes the truck . He buys a bottle of whiskey but , upon returning home to a worried Rosa Lee and Sonny , he tells them he poured it out . He tells them he tried to leave Rosa Lee , but found he could not . Some time later , Mac and Sonny are baptized together in Rosa Lee 's church . 
 Eventually , Sue Anne visits Mac , their first encounter since she was a baby . Mac asks whether she got any of his letters , and she says her mother kept them from her . Sue Anne also reports that Dixie tried to keep her from visiting Mac and that she plans to elope with her boyfriend despite her mother 's objections . Mac admits he used to hit Dixie and that she divorced him after he tried to kill her in a drunken rage . Sue Anne asks whether Mac remembers a song about a dove he sang to her when she was a baby . He claims he does not , but after she leaves he sings to himself the hymn " On the Wings of a Dove , " which references a dove from the Lord saving Noah and descending at Jesus ' baptism . 
 Boys at school bully Sonny about his dead father , and he and Mac grow closer . The members of the local country band ask Mac permission to perform one of his songs , and he agrees . Mac begins performing with them and they make plans to record together . His newfound happiness is interrupted when Sue Anne dies in a car accident . Mac attends his daughter 's funeral at Dixie 's lavish home in Nashville and comforts her when she breaks down . 
 Back home , Mac keeps quiet about his emotional pain , although he wonders aloud to Rosa Lee why his once sorry existence has been given meaning and , on the other hand , his daughter died . Throughout his mourning , Mac continues his new life with Rosa Lee and Sonny . In the final scene , Sonny finds a football Mac has left him as a gift . Mac watches the hotel from a field across the road and sings " On the Wings of a Dove " to himself . Sonny thanks him for the football and the two play catch together in the field . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Playwright Horton Foote reportedly considered giving up on film writing , due to what he regarded as a poor adaption of his 1952 play The Chase into a 1966 film of the same name . Following what Foote saw as a far more successful adaption of his 1968 play Tomorrow in 1972 , his interest in filmmaking was rekindled , under the condition that he maintain some degree of control over the final product . Foote said of this stage in his career , " I learned that film really should be like theatre in the sense that in theatre , the writer is , of course , very dominant ... If we don 't like something , we can speak our minds . ... It is always a collaborative effort . ... But in Hollywood it wasn 't so . A writer there has in his contract that you are a writer for hire , which means that you write a script , then it belongs to them . " This renewed interest in cinema prompted Foote to write Tender Mercies , his first work written specifically for the screen . In the view of biographer George Terry Barr , the script reflected " Foote 's determination to battle a Hollywood system that generally refuses to make such personal films . " 
 The story was inspired partially by Foote 's nephew , who struggled to succeed in the country music business . Foote was initially interested in writing a film based on his nephew 's efforts to organize a band , which he saw as paralleling his own youthful attempts to find work as an actor . During his research , however , he met an experienced musician who had offered to help his nephew 's band , and Foote found himself growing more interested in a story about him , rather than the band itself . Foote said , " This older man had been through it all . As I thought about a storyline , I got very interested in that type of character . " The moment in the film where a woman asks , " Were you really Mac Sledge ? " and he responds , " Yes ma 'am , I guess I was , " was based on an exchange that Foote overheard between a washed @-@ up star and a fan . Foote said the entire film pivots on that statement , which he believed spoke volumes about Mac 's personality and former status . 
 Foote based Sledge 's victory over alcoholism on his observations of theater people struggling with the problem . He sought to avoid a melodramatic slant in telling that aspect of the story . Foote described his protagonist as " a very hurt , damaged man ... silence was his weapon " . He chose the title Tender Mercies , from the Book of Psalms , for its relation to the Rosa Lee character , who he said seeks only " certain moments of gentleness or respite , [ not ] <unk> or <unk> " . Foote sought to portray each character as realistic and flawed , but not unsympathetic . Although the script conveyed a strong spiritual message with religious undertones , Foote felt it was important to balance those religious elements with a focus on the practical challenges of everyday life . 
 Film historian Gary Edgerton said the Tender Mercies script " catapulted Horton Foote into the most active professional period in his life . " Film director and producer Alan J. Pakula credited the script with helping define the American independent film movement of the late 1980s by initiating a trend of personal filmmaking that often looks beyond Hollywood conventions . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Duvall , who had appeared in To Kill a Mockingbird ( 1962 ) , which Foote adapted from the Harper Lee novel , was involved in Tender Mercies as an actor and co @-@ producer from its earliest stages . He said the script appealed to him because of the basic values it underlined and because the themes were universal even though the story was local . Duvall felt it portrayed people from the central region of the United States without parodying them , as he said many Hollywood films tend to do . Duvall 's early involvement led to rumors that he had requested Foote write the script for him , something that both men denied . 
 Foote took the script to Philip and Mary Ann Hobel , a married couple who ran <unk> Media Production and had produced more than 200 documentaries between them . Foote felt their background in documentaries would lend Tender Mercies the authenticity he and Duvall were seeking . The Hobels agreed to produce it after reading and liking the script ; it would become their feature film debut as producers . The Hobels approached EMI Films , a British film and television production company , which agreed to provide financing for Tender Mercies as long as Duvall remained involved , and under the condition the Hobels find a good director . The script was rejected by many American directors , creating concerns for Foote and the producers that the film would never be made . Foote later said , " This film was turned down by every American director on the face of the globe " . The Hobels eventually mailed the script to Australian director Bruce Beresford because they were impressed by his 1980 film Breaker Morant . Philip Hobel said , " What we saw in Breaker Morant is what we like as filmmakers ourselves — an attention to the environment , a straightforward presentation ; it 's almost a documentary approach . " 
 Beresford was attracted to the idea of making a Hollywood film with a big budget and powerful distribution . Following his success with Breaker Morant , Beresford received about 150 Hollywood scripts as potential projects ; although he went weeks before reading many of them , Beresford read Tender Mercies right away . It immediately appealed to him , in part because it dealt with aspects of American rural life he had seldom encountered in film scripts . Several of those involved with Tender Mercies had reservations about an Australian directing a film about a country music star ; Beresford also found the decision strange , but kept his thoughts to himself because of his desire to direct the film . He contacted EMI Films and asked for one month to visit Texas and familiarize himself with the state before committing to direct , to which the company agreed . Beresford said of the trip , " I want to come over and see if this is all true , because if it 's not really a true picture of what it 's all like , it wouldn 't be right to make it . " During his visit to Texas , he saw parallels between the state and his homeland : the terrain reminded him of the Australian bush country , and the Texans he met in the isolated areas reminded him of residents of the Outback . He met Foote and discussed the script with him . The screenwriter , who gave Beresford tours of small Texas towns , felt the director 's Australian background made him sensitive to the story 's rural characters and would help him achieve the sought @-@ for authenticity . Beresford agreed to direct and was hired after receiving final approval from Duvall ( the actor had a clause in his contract allowing him such approval , the first time he had this power on a film ) . 
 The film was given a budget of $ 4 @.@ 5 million ( $ 11 @,@ 712 @,@ 848 in 2016 dollars ) , modest by Hollywood standards at the time . Philip Hobel said it took about a year to secure the financing from EMI Films , whose major 1981 release , Honky Tonk Freeway , had been a box office failure . For the primary location , Rosa Lee 's home and motel / gas station business , Beresford imposed one requirement : that no other buildings or large manmade structures be visible from it . The filmmakers eventually decided on a property that had been sitting abandoned by a Waxahachie highway . Mary Ann Hobel said the owner , when approached about its availability , immediately handed over the keys : " We said , ' Don 't you want a contract , something in writing ? ' And he said , ' We don 't do things that way here . ' " 
 Beresford , known for carefully planning every shot in his films , drew his own storyboards as well as detailed drawings of how he envisioned the sets . Jeannine <unk> was hired as art director . Beresford praised her as " absolutely brilliant " , especially for her attention to very small details , " going from the curtains to the color of the quilts on the floors . " It was <unk> who named the motel Mariposa , Spanish for " butterfly " , which symbolizes the spiritual resurrection Mac Sledge would experience there . Beresford chose the Australian Russell Boyd as cinematographer and the Irish William Anderson , who had worked on all of the director 's previous features , as editor . He selected Elizabeth McBride as costume designer . It was her first time in the position on a feature film , and she went on to build a reputation for costuming Texan and other Southern characters . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Duvall had always wanted to play a country singer , and Foote was rumored to have written the role of Mac Sledge specifically for him . Foote denied the claim , claiming he found it too constraining to write roles for specific actors , although he did hope Duvall would be cast in the part . Tender Mercies became a very important personal project for Duvall , who contributed a significant number of ideas for his character . In preparing for the role , he spent weeks roaming around Texas , speaking to strangers to find the right accent and mannerisms . He also joined a small country band and continued singing with them every free weekend while the film was being shot . In total , Duvall drove about 680 miles ( 1 @,@ 094 km ) to research the part , often asking people to speak into his tape recorder so he could practice their inflections and other vocal habits . Upon finding one man with the exact accent he wanted , Duvall had him recite the entire script into the recorder . 
 Tess Harper was performing on stage in Texas when she attended a casting call for a minor role in the film . Beresford was so impressed with her that he cast her in the lead . He later said that the actresses he had seen before her demonstrated a sophistication and worldliness inappropriate for the part , while she brought a kind of rural quality without coming across as simple or foolish . Beresford said of Harper , " She walked into the room and even before she spoke , I thought , ' That 's the girl to play the lead . ' " Harper said she knew she won the role when Beresford appeared on her doorstep with a bottle of champagne in each hand . Tender Mercies was Harper 's feature film debut , and she was so excited about the role she bit her script to make sure it was real . When filming ended , Duvall gave her a blue cowgirl shirt as a gift with a card that read , " You really were Rosa Lee " . 
 Beresford visited several schools and auditioned many children for the role of Sonny before he came across Allan Hubbard in Paris , Texas . Beresford said Hubbard , like Harper , was chosen based on a simple , rural quality he possessed . The boy was able to relate easily to the character because , like Sonny , his father died at an early age ; later , some media reports falsely claimed that his father was killed during the Vietnam War , just as Sonny 's was in the film 's backstory . None of the filmmakers knew Hubbard 's father had died until after filming began . Duvall developed a strong , trusting relationship with Hubbard , which Foote felt improved the duo 's on @-@ screen chemistry . Hubbard would often play guitar with Duvall during breaks from filming . 
 Betty Buckley attended a casting session in New York City and was chosen largely based on the quality of her singing voice ; Beresford said that few of the actresses who auditioned for the role were able to sing . Buckley was originally from Fort Worth , Texas , near the Grapevine Opry ; when her concert scenes were filmed there , her whole family participated as extras . Duvall said he thought Buckley perfectly conveyed the underlying frustration of a country singer and " brought a real zing to [ the ] part . " The actual location of the bar scenes were made in Seven Points Texas , in a club called the Cedar Creek Opry House . Seven Points is just east of Ellis county , across the Trinity river in western Henderson county Texas . The Opry House as it was known then , was a two story building that used to be a skating rink in its earlier life . The old rink was upstairs and became the dance floor of the Opry House , where the concert and bar scenes there were filmed . One scene of the movie shows the front of the building with its name visible 
 Ellen Barkin was cast after impressing Beresford during a New York audition . At the time , she had appeared only in television movies ; Diner , her feature film debut , was not yet in theaters . When filming on Diner wrapped , Barkin joked to her agent about future roles , " No more troubled teenagers , unless the movie is with Robert De Niro , Robert Duvall or Robert Redford . " Duvall said of Barkin , " She brings a real credibility for that part , plus she was young and attractive and had a certain sense of edge , a danger for her that was good for that part . " Some media outlets reported that Duvall and Barkin were involved romantically for a brief time during filming . 
 Wilford Brimley was cast at the urging of his good friend Duvall , who was not getting along well with Beresford and wanted " somebody down here that 's on my side , somebody that I can relate to " . Beresford felt Brimley was too old for the part , but eventually agreed to the casting . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Most of Tender Mercies was filmed in Waxahachie and Palmer , two towns in Ellis County in north central Texas . Beresford largely avoided the Victorian architecture and other picturesque elements of Waxahachie and instead focused on relatively barren locations more characteristic of West Texas . The town portrayed in the film is never identified by name . Foote said when he wrote the script he did not have the same isolated and lonely vision for the setting Beresford did , but he felt the atmosphere the director captured served the story well . 
 Principal photography took place between November 2 and December 23 , 1981 . The plants used in the gardening scenes were brought inside at night to keep them from freezing . Due to the tight schedule , the cast and crew worked seven days a week with very long hours each day . Although the Australian filmmakers and the crew , who were mostly from Dallas , got along very well both on and off the set , Beresford and Duvall were at odds during the production . Beresford , in his usual approach , meticulously planned each scene , and Duvall , who preferred a free @-@ form give @-@ and @-@ take on set , felt restricted by the director 's methods . Although Duvall regularly acknowledged his talent as a director , he said of Beresford , " He has this dictatorial way of doing things with me that just doesn 't cut it . Man , I have to have my freedom . " Although he had no problem with Duvall 's acting methodology , the actor 's temperament infuriated Beresford . While filming one scene with Harper and Barkin , he became so frustrated during a phone conversation with Duvall that he said , " Well if you want to direct the film , go right ahead , " and walked off the set . Beresford flew to New York and reportedly was ready to quit , until Duvall flew out to speak with him . After further arguments , the two made amends and returned to work on the film . 
 Beresford also clashed on set with Brimley . On the very first day of filming , he asked the actor to " pick up the pace " , prompting Brimley to reply , " Hey , I didn 't know anybody dropped it . " On another occasion , when Beresford tried to advise Brimley on how Harry would behave , Duvall recalled Brimley responding , " Now look , let me tell you something , I 'm Harry . Harry 's not over there , Harry 's not over here . Until you fire me or get another actor , I 'm Harry , and whatever I do is fine ' cause I 'm Harry . " Duvall said he believed the on @-@ set wrangling resulted in a combination of the director 's and actors ' visions and ultimately improved the picture . Likewise , Beresford said he did not feel the fights negatively affected the film because he and Duvall never disagreed on the interpretation of the Mac Sledge character . 
 Harper described the extent to which Duvall inhabited his character : " Someone once said to me , ' Well , how 's Robert Duvall ? ' and I said , ' I don 't know Robert Duvall . I know Mac Sledge very well . ' " Beresford , too , said the transformation was so believable that he could feel his skin crawling up the back of his neck the first day of filming . Duvall made an effort to help Harper , who was making her film debut . While preparing to shoot a scene in which Mac and Rosa Lee fight , he yelled at a make @-@ up artist in front of Harper to make her angry and fuel her performance ; he apologized to the make @-@ up artist after the scene was shot . 
 Cinematographer Russell Boyd largely utilized available light to give the movie a natural feel , which Beresford said was crucial to its sense of authenticity . Harper said Boyd was so quiet during filming that he mostly used just three words : " ' Yeah ' , ' right ' and ' sure ' " . Beresford , Foote and Duvall considered the climactic scene to be the one in which Mac , tending the family garden , discusses with Rosa Lee his pain over his daughter 's death . Beresford and Boyd filmed the scene in a long take and long shot so it could flow uninterrupted , with the lonely Texas landscape captured in the background . When studio executives received the footage , they contacted Beresford and requested close @-@ up shots be intercut , but he insisted on keeping the long take intact . Duvall said he felt the scene underscored Mac 's stoicism in the face of tragedy and loss . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Tender Mercies includes no original film score , and the musical soundtrack is limited to the performances of country songs and the domestic guitar playing that occur as part of the story . A score was composed for the movie , but Beresford had it removed because he felt it was " too sweet " and sounded phony in the context of the film , although he acknowledged it as " very skillful " . Duvall sang his own songs , a right he insisted be part of his contract . He commented , " What 's the point if you 're not going to do your own [ singing ] ? They 're just going to dub somebody else ? I mean , there 's no point to that . " The film 's financial backers were initially concerned about whether he could sing well enough for the role . Those concerns were allayed after Duvall produced a tape of himself singing a cappella " On the Wings of a Dove " , a Bob Ferguson country song featured in the film . Duvall collaborated with Beresford in deciding on the unusual staging of the emotional scene in which Mac sings it after reflecting on the reunion with his daughter . The song is performed with Mac looking out a window with his back to the camera , his face unseen . Horton Foote thought the choice made the scene more moving and called it " an extraordinary moment " in the film . Duvall wrote two of Mac 's other songs , " Fool 's Waltz " and " I 've Decided to Leave Here Forever " . Several leading country singers , including Willie Nelson , George Jones and Merle Haggard , were believed to have inspired Mac and Duvall 's portrayal of him , but Duvall insisted the character was not based on anyone in particular . Another country star , Waylon Jennings , complimented his performance , saying he had " done the impossible . " 
 Betty Buckley also sang her own songs , one of which , " Over You " , written by Austin Roberts and Bobby Hart , was nominated for an Academy Award . Although Buckley performed it in the film , country singer Lane Brody was chosen to record it for radio release , and Mac Davis later sang it at the 1984 Academy Awards ceremony . Other songs in the film include " It Hurts to Face Reality " by Lefty Frizzell , " If You 'll Hold the Ladder ( I 'll Climb to the Top ) " by Buzz Rabin and Sara Busby , " The Best Bedroom in Town " and " Champagne Ladies & Barroom Babies " by Charlie Craig , " I 'm Drinkin ' Canada Dry " by Johnny <unk> and Austin Roberts , and " You Are What Love Means To Me " by Craig <unk> . 
 = = Themes and interpretations = = 
 = = = Love and family = = = 
 Mac Sledge finds redemption largely through his relationship and eventual marriage with Rosa Lee . This is in keeping with the motif of fidelity common in the works of Foote , inspired , said the writer , by his marriage to Lillian <unk> Foote . He told The New York Times that she " kept me goin ' . She never lost faith , and that 's a rare thing . I don 't know now how we got through it , but we got through it . " The lyrics of " If You 'll Hold the Ladder " , which Mac performs with his new country band in the second half of the film , suggest what love has done for him . He sings of someone holding the ladder for him as he climbs to the top ; this is symbolic of Rosa 's love and guidance , which has allowed Sledge to improve himself and build a new life . The desultory romances that defined his past are represented by the more promiscuous lyrics of Dixie Scott 's songs , such as those of " The Best Bedroom in Town " : " The best part of all / the room at the end of the hall / That 's where you and me make everything alright ... We celebrate the happiness we 've found / Every night in the best bedroom in town " . His storming out of her concert symbolizes his rejection of that earlier life . In contrast , Rosa Lee sings the humble church hymn , " Jesus , Savior , Pilot Me " . In a related way , the film emphasizes the importance of the woman 's role in domestic life — although Mac takes on the role of patriarch in his new family setting , it is only through the support and care of Rosa Lee that he is able to settle into this role . Sociologist Norman K. <unk> points out that Tender Mercies embodies many of the ideas of recovery from addiction that are part of the twelve @-@ step program used by Alcoholics Anonymous . Both the film and the support group 's program advocate the idea of hitting rock @-@ bottom , making a decision to stop drinking , dealing with the past and adopting a spiritual way of life . 
 Tender Mercies also emphasizes the father – child theme common in the works of Foote , a theme that operates on both transcendent and temporal levels . Mac is reunited not only with his spiritual father through his conversion to Christianity , but also with his biological daughter , Sue Anne , when she pays him a surprise visit . Scholar Rebecca Luttrell Briley suggests that although Mac begins to plant new roots with Rosa Lee and Sonny in earlier scenes , they are not enough to fully satisfy his desire for redemption , as he is nearly driven to leave the family and return to his alcoholic ways . According to Briley , Sue Anne 's visit prompts Mac to realize that reconciliation with her and a reformation of their father – daughter relationship is the ingredient that had been lacking in his quest for redemption . This is further demonstrated by Mac 's singing " On the Wings of a Dove " to himself after their meeting ; the lyrics describe God baptizing his son Jesus , which connects Sledge 's spiritual reconciliation with the divine to the earthly reconciliation with his own child . However , the death of Sue Anne also demonstrates that , according to Briley , " all relationships cannot be mended , some by choice and some by chance , and the poignancy of missed opportunities between fathers and their children on this earth is underlined in this scene . " 
 The relationship between Mac and Sonny , whose name derives from " son " , is central to the film 's exploration of the father – child theme . Sonny tries to conjure an image of his biological father , whom he never had the chance to know , through old photographs , his mother 's memories and visits to his father 's grave . Sonny finds a father figure in Mac — when another young boy asks Sonny if he likes Mac more than his real father , Sonny says that he does , because he never knew the other man ; Briley says that this " emphasizes the distinction between companionship and blood relationship Foote has pointed out before . " The final scene , in which Mac and Sonny play catch with a football Mac bought him as a gift , symbolizes the fact that although Mac has lost the chance to reconcile with his daughter , he now has a second chance at establishing a father – child relationship with Sonny . The father – child theme also plays out through Mac 's relationship with the young band members , who say that he has been an inspiration to them , playing a paternal role in their lives before they even met him . Sledge eventually teams up with the musicians , offering them fatherly counsel in a much more direct way . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Mac 's redemption and self @-@ improvement run parallel with his conversion to Christianity . Briley argues that " the emphasis on the Christian family is stronger in this script than in any other Foote piece to this point . " At the urging of Rosa Lee , Mac begins to attend church regularly and is eventually baptized for the first time , along with Sonny . During a church scene , he also sings the hymn " Jesus , Savior , Pilot Me " , which serves as a symbol for his new direction in life . After they are baptized , Sonny asks Mac whether he feels any different , to which Mac responds , " Not yet . " According to scholars , this response indicates Mac 's belief that his reunion with God will lead to meaningful changes in his life . It is after this moment , Briley points out , that Mac is able to forge other relationships , such as those with his young bandmates , and " develop his own potential for success as a man . " Briley also proposes that Mac 's response — " Yes , ma 'am , I guess I was " — to a fan who asks if he was really Mac Sledge suggests that he has washed away his old self through baptism . 
 During one scene , Rosa Lee tells Mac , " I say my prayers for you and when I thank the Lord for his tender mercies , you 're at the head of the list . " Scholar Robert Jewett compares this line to the first verse of Romans 12 , in which Paul the Apostle appeals to Christians to live out their lives in service to others " through the mercies of God " . Many of the elements of Mac 's redemption , conversion to Christianity and budding relationship with Rosa Lee occur off @-@ camera , including their wedding . Jewett writes , " This is perfectly congruent with the theme of faith in the hidden mercies of God , the secret plot of the life of faith in Romans . ... It is a matter of faith , elusive and intangible . " Jewett compares Mac 's story to that of Abraham , because " just like Sledge 's story , [ it ] centers on the provision of a future through the tender mercies of God " . As told in Romans 4 , Abraham and his wife Sarah are too old to produce a son , but Abraham develops the faith that God will provide them an heir , which is exactly what occurs , though — as Paul describes — Abraham did nothing practical to guarantee or deserve such a miracle . Jewett describes Mac as similarly undeserving of redemption , based on his selfish and abusive past , typified by his condition in his first encounter with Rosa Lee : in a drunken stupor following a motel room fight . She takes him in and eventually falls in love with him , despite his having done nothing to deserve her care or his redemption : " It is an undeserved grace , a gift of providence from a simple woman who continues to pray for him and to be grateful for him . " 
 However , in the face of the loss of his daughter , Mac learns , in Briley 's words , that " his life as a Christian is no more sheltered from this world 's tragedies than it was before . " Before finding redemption , Sledge questions why God has allowed his life to take the path it has and , in particular , why his daughter was killed instead of him . Commentators have described this as a prime example of theodicy , the question of why evil exists that is commonly faced by Christians . Scholar Richard Leonard writes , " For all believers , the meaning of suffering is the universal question . ... No answer is completely satisfying , least of all the idea that God sends bad events to teach us something . " Following the death of his daughter , Mac moves forward with uncertainty as the film ends . Jewett writes of this conclusion , " The message of this film is that we have no final assurances , any more than Abraham did . But we can respond in faith to the tender mercies we have received . " 
 = = = Death and resurrection = = = 
 Mac experiences his spiritual resurrection even as he wrestles with death , in both the past — Sonny 's father in the Vietnam War — and present — his own daughter in a car accident . The latter threatens to derail Mac 's new life , captured in the moment when he learns of it and turns off the radio that is playing his new song . Leonard writes of this resurrection , " Depression hangs like a pall over Tender Mercies [ but ] what makes this film inspiring is that it is also about the joy of being found . ... Mac finds the way , the truth , and the life he wants . " In a climactic scene , Mac tells Rosa Lee that he was once nearly killed in a car crash himself , which forces him to address the question of why he was allowed to live while others have died . Jewett writes of this scene , " Mac Sledge can 't trust happiness because it remains inexplicable . But he does trust the tender mercies that mysteriously led him from death to life . " 
 Mac is portrayed as near death at the beginning of the film , having woken up in a drunken stupor in a boundless , empty flatland with nothing in his possession , a shot that scholar Roy M. Anker said " pointedly reflects the condition of his own soul " . The dialogue in other scenes suggests the threat of mortality , including a moment when Mac has trouble singing due to his bad voice and says , " Don 't feel sorry for me , Rosa Lee , I 'm not dead yet . " In several lasting shots , the vast sky dwarfs Mac , Rosa Lee and Sonny , starkly symbolizing their isolation , as well as the fragility of human existence . The fact that Mac sustains his newfound life with Rosa Lee and Sonny after his daughter 's death , rather than reverting to his old pattern of alcoholism and abuse , is consistent with a recurring theme in Foote 's works of characters overcoming tragedy and finding in it an opportunity for growth and maturation . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Philip and Mary Ann Hobel spent a long time seeking a distributor for Tender Mercies without any success . Duvall , who began to doubt the film would be widely released , was unable to help the Hobels because he was busy trying to find a distributor for Angelo My Love , a film he had written , directed and produced . Eventually , Universal Pictures agreed to distribute Tender Mercies . Test screenings for the film were held , which Beresford described as the most unusual he had ever experienced . The director said that the preview audiences appeared to be very engaged with the picture , to the point the theaters were so silent , " if you flicked a piece of paper on the floor , you could hear it fall . " However , the post @-@ screening feedback was , in Beresford 's words , " absolutely disastrous . " As a result , Universal executives lost faith in the film and made little effort to promote it . Foote said of the studio , " I don 't know that they disliked the film , I just think they thought it was inconsequential and of no consequence at all . I guess they thought it would just get lost in the shuffle . " Others in the film industry were equally dismissive ; one Paramount Pictures representative described the picture as " like watching paint dry " . 
 = = = Festivals and theatrical run = = = 
 Tender Mercies was released on March 4 , 1983 , in only three theaters : one in New York City , one in Los Angeles , and one in Chicago . New York Times critic Vincent Canby observed that it was released during " the time of year when distributors usually get rid of all of those movies they don 't think are worth releasing in the prime moviegoing times of Christmas and the midsummer months " . The simultaneous release of Angelo My Love led to some more publicity for Duvall himself , but was of no help to Tender Mercies . Duvall also believed that Universal 's lack of familiarity and comfort with southern culture and the country music genre further reduced their faith in the film . When country star Willie Nelson offered to help publicize it , a studio executive told Duvall she did not understand how the singer could contribute to the promotion , which Duvall said was indicative of the studio 's failure to understand both the film and the country music genre . 
 Tender Mercies was shown in competition at the 1983 Cannes Film Festival , where it was described as a relatively optimistic alternative to darker , more violent entries like One Deadly Summer , Moon in the Gutter and Merry Christmas , Mr. Lawrence . It was also shown at the 1983 International Film Festival of India in New Delhi . A jury headed by director Lindsay Anderson determined that none of the films in contention , including Tender Mercies , were good enough to win the Golden Peacock , the festival 's top prize . Film critic <unk> Abraham said the jury 's standards were higher than those of the Academy Awards , and that Tender Mercies ' lack of success at the festival was a " clear example of what is good cinema for some , not being so good for others " . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Following its brief theatrical run , Universal Studios quickly sold the film 's rights to cable companies , allowing Tender Mercies to be shown on television . When the film unexpectedly received five Academy Award nominations nearly a year after its original release , the studio attempted to redistribute the film to theaters ; however , the cable companies began televising the film about a week before the Oscar ceremony , which essentially halted any attempts at a theatrical rerelease . When the film first played on HBO in March 1984 , it surpassed the three major networks in ratings for homes with cable televisions . Tender Mercies was released on VHS some time later , and was first released on DVD on June 22 , 1999 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Tender Mercies was not considered a box office success . In its first three days , March 4 – 6 , the film grossed $ 46 @,@ 977 from exclusive engagements at the Tower East Theater in New York ( $ 21 @,@ 183 ) , the Fine Arts Theater in Los Angeles ( $ 18 @,@ 254 ) and the Carnegie Theater in Chicago ( $ 7 @,@ 540 ) . Tender Mercies eventually played at a total of 37 theaters and grossed $ 8 @,@ 443 @,@ 124 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Tender Mercies received mostly positive reviews . Richard Corliss of Time declared it the " best American movie of the new year " . Carol <unk> of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune declared Tender Mercies the best movie of 1983 , and " the most poignant , but forthright , film of the year , with a brilliant performance by Robert Duvall " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote , " This is a small , lovely and somewhat overloaded film about small @-@ town life , loneliness , country music , marriage , divorce and parental love , and it deals with all of these things in equal measure . Still , the absence of a single , sharply dramatic story line is a relatively small price to pay for the plainness and clarity with which these other issues are defined . " She also praised Beresford 's direction , which she said lent the movie a light touch . The Times ' Canby wrote , " In all respects Tender Mercies is so good that it has the effect of rediscovering a kind of film fiction that has been debased over the decades by hack moviemakers , working according to accepted formulas , frequently to the applause of the critics as well as the public . " Leonard Maltin gave it three out of four stars , applauding Duvall in particular and describing it as a " winning but extremely low @-@ key film " , though he characterized Foote 's screenplay as " not so much a story as a series of vignettes " . David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor praised the film for its values , for underscoring the good in people and for avoiding flashiness and quick cuts in favor of a subtle and deliberately paced story , while maintaining a PG rating and omitting sex , drugs and violence . He also felt , however , that it tended toward melodrama on a few occasions and that the soundtrack had " a bit of syrupy music ... especially at the end " . 
 Some reviews were less favorable . David Ansen of Newsweek said , " While one respects the filmmaker 's small @-@ is @-@ beautiful philosophy , this story may indeed be too small for its britches . ... Beresford 's nice little movie seems so afraid to make a false move that it runs the danger of not moving at all . " Linda Beath of The Globe and Mail said Duvall 's performance was " fabulous , " but that the film was " very slight " compared to Beresford 's Australian pictures . Gary Arnold of The Washington Post panned the film , criticizing its mood and tempo and describing Buckley as its only true asset : " Tender Mercies fails because of an apparent dimness of perception that frequently overcomes dramatists : they don 't always know when they 've got <unk> of the wrong end of the story they want to tell . " 
 Many critics specifically praised Duvall 's performance . Sterritt called it " one of the most finely wrought achievements to reach the screen in recent memory . " In Corliss 's description , " Duvall 's aging face , a road map of dead ends and dry <unk> , can accommodate rage or innocence or any ironic shade in between . As Mac he avoids both melodrama and condescension , finding climaxes in each small step toward rehabilitation , each new responsibility shouldered . " Ansen said , " Robert Duvall does another of his extraordinary disappearing acts . He vanishes totally inside the character of Mac Sledge . " Maslin said he " so thoroughly transformed into Mac that he even walks with a Texan 's rolling gait " ; she also complimented the performances of the supporting cast . According to a review in People , " Duvall gives it everything he has , which is saying a great deal . His <unk> singing voice is a revelation , and his unfussy , brightly burnished acting is the kind for which awards were invented . " The review also described Betty Buckley as " bitchy and brilliant " . Duvall was praised as well for pulling off his first true romantic role ; the actor said of the response , " This is the only film where I 've heard people say I 'm sexy . It 's real romantic . Rural romantic . I love that part almost more than anything . " 
 Reflecting on the film a decade after it came out , critic Danny Peary said he found Duvall 's restrained portrayal " extremely irritating " and criticized the entire cast , save for Buckley , for their " subdued , emotions @-@ in @-@ check , phony ' honest ' performances . You just wish the whole lot of them would start tickling each other . " In his book Alternate Oscars , listing his personal opinions of who should have won the Academy Awards each year , Peary excluded Tender Mercies from all the categories , and chose Michael Caine as deserving of the Best Actor honor for Educating Rita . In June 2009 , critic Roger Ebert included Tender Mercies in The Great Movies , his series of reviews celebrating what he considers the most important films of all time . He praised what he called one of Duvall 's most understated performances , as well as Foote 's minimalist storytelling and the restraint and patience of Beresford 's direction . Ebert said of Foote 's screenplay , " The down @-@ to @-@ earth quality of his characters drew attention away from his minimalist storytelling ; all the frills were stripped away . ... Rarely does a movie elaborate less and explain more than Tender Mercies . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The 56th Academy Award nominations were announced about ten months after Tender Mercies was released . Little had been done to promote its candidacy : only four Oscar campaign advertisements were purchased ; all of them appeared in the trade journal Variety , and Duvall had declined to campaign for himself or the film . Beresford and studio executives were surprised when the film was nominated for five Academy Awards , including Best Picture . Harper was believed by some to be a strong contender for either Best Actress or Best Supporting Actress , but ultimately she was nominated in neither category . 
 Duvall was the only American actor nominated for the Best Actor Oscar ; his competition were Britons Michael Caine ( who had co @-@ starred with Duvall in the 1976 The Eagle Has Landed ) , Tom Conti , Tom Courtenay and Albert Finney . During an interview before the Oscar ceremony , Duvall offended some Britons by complaining about " the Limey syndrome , " claiming " the attitude with a lot of people in Hollywood is that what they do in England is somehow better than what we do here . " Duvall , who was presented with the Oscar by country music star Dolly Parton , said of winning the award , " It was a nice feeling , knowing I was the home @-@ crowd favorite . " In a New York Times profile of Duvall that appeared six years after Tender Mercies ' release , Nan C. Robertson wrote that despite four previous Academy Award nominations , " it was not until he won as Best Actor in 1983 ... that moviegoers woke up in droves to this great natural resource . The reason was that they rarely recognized Mr. Duvall from one part to another , so effortlessly did he vanish into each celluloid persona . " Foote , who was so certain he would not win the Best Adapted Screenplay Oscar for To Kill a Mockingbird he had not attended the 1963 ceremony , made sure he was present to collect his award for Best Original Screenplay . The critical success of the film allowed Foote to exercise considerable control over his future film projects , including final veto power over major decisions ; when such power was denied , Foote would simply refuse to do the film . 
 = The Boat Race 2010 = 
 The 156th Boat Race took place on 3 April 2010 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was won by Cambridge . Of the eighteen competitors in the race , six were British . Of the non @-@ British rowers , the Oxford crew featured the American Olympic finalists , the Winklevoss twins . It was the first time the race had a title sponsor ; it was also known as the " Xchanging Boat Race " , having been sponsored by Xchanging . 
 Oxford won the Women 's Boat Race by four lengths while Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis in the reserve race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2009 race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Cambridge led overall with 79 victories to Oxford 's 75 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Xchanging for the sixth consecutive year , but it was the first time in the 180 @-@ year history of the Boat Race that the title had been given over to sponsorship ; as such it was referred to as the " Xchanging Boat Race " . 
 Prior to the race , Oxford University Boat Club president and Dutch international rower Sjoerd Hamburger claimed " Last year we had an exceptional crew , power @-@ wise , which we don 't have this year , but we 're starting to match the times we did last year , so I 'm very pleased " . His Cambridge counterpart , American <unk> McEachern , responded : " we 're faster " . Umpire and former Cambridge Blue Simon Harris suggested that he did not anticipate any problems with the two coxes obeying his instructions : " I 've been impressed by the coxes , how they 've responded to the umpire 's calls " . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 Cambridge 's crew weighed an average of 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) per rower more than Oxford . The Dark Blues were coached by Sean Bowden for the 13th time while the Light Blues saw Chris Nilsson act as chief coach for the second time . Cambridge 's crew featured four Britons , three Americans and two Canadians , while Oxford 's consisted of three Americans , two Britons , and rowers from Ireland , The Netherlands , Canada ( dual nationality ) and Germany . 
 Oxford 's crew included the Winklevoss twins ( Cameron and Tyler ) , who rowed in the 2008 Olympic Games for the United States in the men 's coxless pair . Cambridge 's bowman , Canadian international rower Robert <unk> , had won the gold in the men 's eight at the World Rowing Cup in 2007 . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were pre @-@ race favourites , and won the toss , electing to start the race from the Surrey station . They took an early lead and were nearly half a length up on Cambridge by the time the crews passed the Harrods Furniture Depository . The boats closed in on one another and umpire Harris was forced to issue a number of warnings to both coxes as the crews came close to clashing oars . The Light Blues pulled themselves back into contention around the Chiswick Reach and took the lead into Corney Reach . Oxford attempted to find a quicker racing line and were still in touch , but Cambridge inched away from them , passing the finishing post one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ third lengths ahead in a time of 17 minutes 35 seconds . 
 Oxford won the 65th Women 's Boat Race by four lengths , their third consecutive victory . Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie in the reserve race by two lengths , their first win in three years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Cambridge cox Randolph exclaimed " The whole way through I was thinking : ' We could win it , we could win it , we could win it " . Race umpire Simon Harris declared " it was a fantastic race " . Olympic medallist Steve Redgrave remarked " All credit to Oxford ... but all the way from the bend on there was only going to be one winner . It just took Cambridge a little while before they believed it was going to happen . " 
 = Promiscuous ( song ) = 
 " Promiscuous " is a song by Canadian singer Nelly Furtado from her third studio album Loose ( 2006 ) , featuring Timbaland . The song was written by Anthony Motz , along with Tim " Timbaland " Mosley , Furtado and Nate " Danja " Hills . The song 's lyrics , which were penned by Furtado and Clayton , feature a conversation between a man and woman who call each other promiscuous . The overtly @-@ sexual song was released as the lead single from the album in North America in early 2006 , and as the second single elsewhere in mid @-@ 2006 except in Latin America , where the single was released as the third single in late 2006 . 
 The song was well received by music critics , with some critics calling it the highlight of the album . " Promiscuous " was an international success and it had become Furtado 's first number @-@ one single in the US . It is the first number one by a Canadian female artist since 1998 's " I 'm Your Angel " by R. Kelly and Céline Dion on the Billboard Hot 100 chart . The song also topped the chart in New Zealand and peaked within the top ten on many charts across Europe . 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Little X , and features scenes of Furtado and Timbaland , in what Furtado describes as a " verbal Ping @-@ Pong game " . Cameo appearances are made by Keri Hilson , Justin Timberlake , and Bria Myles . 
 The song won the " Best Pop Single of the Year " at the 2006 Billboard Music Awards and received a nomination for the " Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals " at the 49th Grammy Awards , losing to Tony Bennett and Stevie Wonder 's " For Once in My Life " . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 The lyrics of " Promiscuous " describe the two sides of the relationship that the song 's protagonist deals with . It was one of the first songs Furtado wrote with labelmate Timothy " Attitude " Clayton . Furtado called their teamwork something she " had never done before " because she saw the writing process as " extremely freeing " because of his different approach and style . Clayton helped Furtado experiment with interpreting the " promiscuous girl " character and the two @-@ sided relationship she is in . Furtado also described that in the process of writing lyrics " we were actually flirting , which is why the song is so playful " and that she and Clayton nicknamed the song ' The BlackBerry Song ' , because everything we say in the song you could text @-@ message to somebody " . Because of the preponderant musical influence of artists such as Talking Heads , Blondie , Madonna , The Police and Eurythmics , whom producers Timbaland and Danja listened to during the writing of the album , " Promiscuous " takes inspiration from pop music of the 1980s . The sexuality was based on the " strong women in control " of the 1990s , such as Queen Latifah , MC Lyte , Yo @-@ Yo , Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa and TLC . 
 The reference to basketball player Steve Nash in the song 's lyrics led to speculation that he and Furtado were romantically involved , but both deny the link with Nash commenting , " I 'm flattered that she put me in her song , but I 'm completely in love with my wife and two little baby girls " . Furtado decided to include him because she and Nash are both from Victoria , British Columbia , and due to frequent citations of basketballers in songs , she decided to " give him the props " . In one of the verses Timbaland introduces himself as Thomas Crown . The Thomas Crown Affair is a film about wealthy businessman who plays a cat @-@ and @-@ mouse / flirting game with an insurance investigator . Timbaland only performed the song live on special occasions , such as Furtado 's appearance on Saturday Night Live , and the 2006 MuchMusic Video Awards . Starting with Furtado 's show at the 94th Grey Cup on 19 November 2006 , and extending into the Get Loose Tour , Timbaland 's part is filled in by Canadian rapper <unk> . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Promiscuous " received positive reviews from music critics . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone considered it a highlight in Loose . Timbaland 's appearance received particular praise , which added Furtado 's " high @-@ school musical vocals " over his eighty beats according to Sheffield . The New Yorker considered it " a playful update " of Janet Jackson 's " Nasty " , using " a heavier and darker rhythmic bed . " AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine compared it to " vintage Prince " , citing " Promiscuous " as a highlight of Furtado 's makeover . 
 However , Erlewine believed that no matter how much Furtado sings about sex , she does not sound sexy and does not " generate much carnal heat " . IGN 's review considered the song " simultaneously annoying and yet catchy beyond belief " and listed as one of Loose 's " Definitely Downloads " , Pitchfork Media called it " one of the best vocal performances of [ Timbaland 's ] career " , and Billboard called the duo of Furtado and Timbaland " a surprisingly good match " . The song was also included in three lists of best songs of 2006 : fourth on Blender , sixth at The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop , 56th on Rolling Stone , and 80th on Pitchfork . 
 On 4 December 2006 , " Promiscuous " won " Best Pop Single of the Year " at the 2006 Billboard Music Awards , beating Daniel Powter 's " Bad Day " and Sean Paul 's " Temperature " . The song was nominated for the " Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals " at the 49th Annual Grammy Awards , losing to Tony Bennett & Stevie Wonder 's " For Once in My Life " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Canada , the single 's music video debuted on MuchMusic 's MuchOnDemand after an interview with Furtado on 8 May 2006 . On 4 May 2006 , " Promiscuous " debuted inside the top five on the Canadian Singles Chart , and on 1 June , it became Furtado 's first Canadian number @-@ one single . It spent twenty @-@ five weeks on the singles chart , and returned to number two after the commercial release of Loose , but was the year 's shortest @-@ running number @-@ one single . " Promiscuous " charted at number one on the Canadian Digital Chart and was the most successful single release in her home nation since " I 'm Like a Bird " ( 2000 ) . In April 2008 , the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) began certifying ringtone sales , and " Promiscuous " was included in its debut list , having sold 120 @,@ 000 copies in Canada . The single was also previously certified 3 Platinum in January 2007 for digital download sales , denoting sales of 60 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In United States , " Promiscuous " debuted at number sixty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week of 20 May 2006 . On 8 July it topped the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming her first number @-@ one single . It spent six weeks at the top spot and was replaced by Fergie 's " London Bridge " . It reached the top position on Billboard Pop Songs and Hot Dance Club Play chart . " Promiscuous " reached number twenty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and number thirty @-@ six on Hot Latin Songs chart . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital copies . It also made number three on the Billboard Hot 100 year @-@ end chart and number forty @-@ four on the decade @-@ end chart . As of August 2009 , the song has so far sold over 2 @,@ 504 @,@ 000 digital downloads in the United States . 
 Outside North America , " <unk> " performed well . The song debuted at number five on the Australian ARIA Charts and peaked at number two in its third week . It was her first top five hit since " I 'm Like a Bird " ( 2000 ) and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for the sales of 70 @,@ 000 digital copies . 
 " Promiscuous " debuted at number thirty @-@ three on the New Zealand Top 40 on 10 July 2006 . It topped the chart in its third week and became her second number @-@ one single after " Turn off the Light " ( 2001 ) . It remained the top spot for five weeks and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) . 
 In Europe , " Promiscuous " became a commercial success , peaking at number five on European Hot 100 Singles . The song debuted at number fifteen on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number three the following week . It spent a total of fourteen weeks on the chart . On 31 December 2006 BBC Radio 1 reported that " Promiscuous " was the thirty @-@ eighth highest selling single in the UK in 2006 . The single re @-@ entered the UK Singles Chart at number sixty @-@ six in January 2007 due to the The Official UK Charts Company 's new rules . It performed moderately in others European countries , less than the next singles , it <unk> the chart in Denmark and was within the top five in Finland , Hungary , Ireland , Norway and Slovakia . It missed to reach the top ten in Austria , France and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was directed by Little X and features cameo appearances by Keri Hilson , Bria Myles , Sean Faris and Justin Timberlake . It does not follow a storyline and per Furtado 's request , focuses on scenes with dancing and flirting because she wanted to recreate the song 's indicative vibe , and took the opportunity to film a club video for the first time . Furtado said of the video , " It 's that whole dance that goes on . There 's that mystery there , the fun , playful sexiness , the verbal Ping @-@ Pong game " . Furtado and Timbaland cannot decide whether they want to begin dating or instead flirt with others on the dance floor . Their single performances are intercut with several scenes of a dancing crowd , and the lighting changes between blue , green , red , and yellow colors . 
 " Promiscuous " premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live on 3 May 2006 , where it reached number one after spending twenty @-@ one days on the countdown . After its debut on MuchMusic 's Countdown , it ascended to number one for the week of 28 July 2006 . At the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards , it was nominated for the Best Dance , Female and Pop Video Awards . The video was parodied by MADtv in a segment entitled " Syphilis Girl " ; in the video , Furtado ( Nicole Parker ) is comically portrayed as having given Timbaland ( Jordan Peele ) the sexually transmitted disease , as well as on YouTube by the comedic group Train of Thought Sketch Comedy , where the video is parodied by troupe member <unk> and features a puppet version of Timbaland . 
