 " Halfway Down the Stairs " – Kermit & Robin 
 " What Now My Love ? " – Miss Piggy 
 " Tenderly " – Dr. Teeth and The Electric Mayhem 
 " Happy Feet " – Kermit and the Frog Chorus 
 = = Release = = 
 The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz premiered on April 27 , 2005 at the Tribeca Film Festival . The television premiere was on May 20 , 2005 at 8 : 00pm on ABC in the US , where it was rated TV @-@ PG . It aired in Canada on CBC Television , and in the UK on December 18 , 2005 . In the US , the film 's official soundtrack was released on May 17 , 2005 . Buena Vista Home Entertainment released the DVD and VHS in both the US and in international territories . The film was released to Region 1 DVD and VHS on August 9 , 2005 . The Canadian Home Video Classification System rated the film G for all home video releases within Canadian territories . The Region 2 DVD was released on April 3 , 2006 . The film was rated U by the British Board of Film Classification , K @-@ 3 in Finland , and G in Australia . The DVD and VHS were released under the title Extended Version in the US and Anniversary Edition outside the US . The extended version contains 20 minutes of footage cut from the feature film , including the footage of the Kelly Osbourne and Quentin Tarantino cameos . The DVD and VHS included an extended interview with Quentin Tarantino , a blooper reel , and a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes look at the film guided by Pepe the Prawn . In the US , the DVD and VHS release of the film was in a 1 @.@ 33 : 1 ( fullscreen ) aspect ratio , whereas the international versions are in the original 1 @.@ 78 : 1 ( widescreen ) aspect ratio . During Macy 's annual Flower Show promotion , the store 's windows along Broadway displayed flower arrangements illustrating six scenes from the movie , while the store sold The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz @-@ related merchandise , such as plush dolls . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 7 @.@ 75 million viewers watched The Muppets ' Wizard of Oz on its television premiere night in the United States ; it ranked as the forty @-@ second most @-@ watched television program of the week . Michael Schneider of Variety wrote that it " performed solidly ... particularly with adults 18 – 34 , teens and kids . " The film received negative reviews from critics . At Rotten Tomatoes , the movie currently holds a 38 % " rotten " rating , with an average of three out of eight critics giving the film a positive review . 
 For the film 's positive response , Kevin Carr stated that " When you dig down and actually find ( and watch ) the new Muppet material , some of the magic is still there . " MaryAnn Johanson of Flick <unk> said that , " It 's not on a par with the Muppet movie madness of old , but it 's darn close . " According to the Bums Corner 's review the film was a " treat for all ages , and that it was a colorful , musical , humorous romp . " Keith Allen of Movie Rapture gave the film 2 @.@ 5 stars out of 3 , explaining that the film 's humor was surprisingly clever , and that the film would frequently make you laugh . Mutant Reviewers commented that although the Muppet deal with Walt Disney was " disappointing " , the film managed to be funny and witty . 
 For the film 's " negative " response , David Nusair of Reel Film Reviews warned that the film was " strictly for kids " Nusair stated that although Ashanti can sing , she cannot act . Joshua Tyler of Cinema Blend explained that Dorothy visiting the Wizard of Oz to become a star instead of going back home was a big mistake , and that it showed how shallow society has become . R.J. Carter of The Trades gave the film a B- , also stating that Dorothy 's wish to become a star was a selfish one . Ultimate Disney 's review found that the extended version of the film did more harm than good ; Andy <unk> of The Aisle Seat said that the original film was " dull " and that the extended version was actually an improvement . Cold Fusion Video felt that although the film was entertaining , it lacked the heart and wit of Jim Henson 's Muppet films . Bryan Pope of DVD Verdict said that the film drained the Muppets of their spirit and was slightly gratuitous . <unk> TV reviews felt that the film was done poorly on all levels , and that the film was on the higher end of TV @-@ PG . 
 Other reviewers felt that the film 's attempt to appeal to an older , more mature audience was ultimately a bad idea . Kerry Bennett of Parent Previews warned that it sometimes steered " dangerously off course " due to an excess of sexual content and violence . <unk> humor to the marriage of Jennifer Lopez , Manolo Blahnik style silver shoes , and films such as Girls Gone Wild , The Passion of the Christ , Apocalypse Now , and Kill Bill : Volume 1 were seen as too mature . Cold Fusion Video judged the Kelly Osbourne cameo as " pointless " . <unk> contrasted the two guest appearances and found that the Tarantino cameo dragged the film down . Critics were split on the merits of ABC 's modernized adaptation to rely on plot elements from the original novel instead of the iconic 1939 film . 
 = Mourning dove = 
 The mourning dove ( Zenaida macroura ) is a member of the dove family , Columbidae . The bird is also known as the turtle dove , American mourning dove or the rain dove , and was once known as the Carolina pigeon or Carolina Turtledove . It is one of the most abundant and widespread of all North American birds . It is also a leading gamebird , with more than 20 million birds ( up to 70 million in some years ) shot annually in the U.S. , both for sport and for meat . Its ability to sustain its population under such pressure is due to its prolific breeding ; in warm areas , one pair may raise up to six broods of two young each in a single year . The wings make an unusual whistling sound upon take @-@ off and landing , a form of <unk> . The bird is a strong flier , capable of speeds up to 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) . 
 Mourning doves are light grey and brown and generally muted in color . Males and females are similar in appearance . The species is generally monogamous , with two squabs ( young ) per brood . Both parents incubate and care for the young . Mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , but the young are fed crop milk by their parents . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The mourning dove is closely related to the eared dove ( Zenaida <unk> ) and the Socorro dove ( Zenaida <unk> ) . Some authorities describe them as forming a superspecies and these three birds are sometimes classified in the separate genus <unk> , but the current classification has them as separate species in the genus Zenaida . In addition , the Socorro dove has at times been considered conspecific with the mourning dove , although several differences in behavior , call , and appearance justify separation as two different species . While the three species do form a subgroup of Zenaida , using a separate genus would interfere with the monophyly of Zenaida by making it paraphyletic . 
 There are five subspecies of mourning dove : 
 Eastern Z. m. carolinensis ( Linnaeus , 1766 ) 
 Clarion Island Z. m. <unk> ( <unk> , 1890 ) 
 West Indian Z. m. macroura ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) 
 Western Z. m. <unk> ( Woodhouse , 1852 ) 
 Panama Z. m. <unk> Wetmore , 1956 
 The ranges of most of the subspecies overlap a little , with three in the United States or Canada . The West Indian subspecies is found throughout the Greater Antilles . It has recently invaded the Florida Keys . The eastern subspecies is found mainly in eastern North America , as well as Bermuda and the Bahamas . The western subspecies is found in western North America , including parts of Mexico . The Panamanian subspecies is located in Central America . The Clarion Island subspecies is found only on Clarion Island , just off the Pacific coast of Mexico . 
 The mourning dove is sometimes called the " American mourning dove " to distinguish it from the distantly related mourning collared dove ( Streptopelia decipiens ) of Africa . It was also formerly known as the " Carolina turtledove " and the " Carolina pigeon " . The genus name was bestowed in 1838 by French zoologist Charles L. Bonaparte in honor of his wife , Princess <unk> , and macroura is from Ancient Greek makros , " long " and oura , " tail " . The " mourning " part of its common name comes from its call . 
 The mourning dove was thought to be the passenger pigeon 's closest living relative , based on morphological grounds . The mourning dove was even suggested to belong to the same genus , Ectopistes , and was listed by some authors as E. carolinensis . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The mourning dove has a large range of nearly 11 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 4 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . The species is resident throughout the Greater Antilles , most of Mexico , the Continental United States , and southern Canada . Much of the Canadian prairie sees these birds in summer only , and southern Central America sees them in winter only . The species is a vagrant in northern Canada , Alaska , and South America . It has been spotted as an accidental at least seven times in the Western Palearctic with records from the British Isles ( 5 ) , the Azores ( 1 ) and Iceland ( 1 ) . In 1963 , the mourning dove was introduced to Hawaii , and in 1998 there was still a small population in North Kona . The mourning dove also appeared on Socorro Island , off the western coast of Mexico , in 1988 , sixteen years after the Socorro dove was extirpated from that island . 
 = = Description = = 
 The mourning dove is a medium @-@ sized , slender dove approximately 31 cm ( 12 in ) in length . Mourning doves weigh 112 – 170 g ( 4 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 0 oz ) , usually closer to 128 g ( 4 @.@ 5 oz ) . The elliptical wings are broad , and the head is rounded . Its tail is long and tapered ( " macroura " comes from the Greek words for " large " and " tail " ) . Mourning doves have perching feet , with three toes forward and one reversed . The legs are short and reddish colored . The beak is short and dark , usually a brown @-@ black hue . 
 The plumage is generally light gray @-@ brown and lighter and pinkish below . The wings have black spotting , and the outer tail feathers are white , contrasting with the black <unk> . Below the eye is a distinctive crescent @-@ shaped area of dark feathers . The eyes are dark , with light skin surrounding them . The adult male has bright purple @-@ pink patches on the neck sides , with light pink coloring reaching the breast . The crown of the adult male is a distinctly bluish @-@ grey color . Females are similar in appearance , but with more brown coloring overall and a little smaller than the male . The iridescent feather patches on the neck above the shoulders are nearly absent , but can be quite vivid on males . Juvenile birds have a scaly appearance , and are generally darker . 
 All five subspecies of the mourning dove look similar and are not easily distinguishable . The nominate subspecies possesses shorter wings , and is darker and more buff @-@ colored than the " average " mourning dove . Z. m. carolinensis has longer wings and toes , a shorter beak , and is darker in color . The western subspecies has longer wings , a longer beak , shorter toes , and is more muted and lighter in color . The Panama mourning dove has shorter wings and legs , a longer beak , and is grayer in color . The Clarion Island subspecies possesses larger feet , a larger beak , and is darker brown in color . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The mourning dove occupies a wide variety of open and semi @-@ open habitats , such as urban areas , farms , prairie , grassland , and lightly wooded areas . It avoids swamps and thick forest . The species has adapted well to areas altered by humans . They commonly nest in trees in cities or near farmsteads . 
 = = Migration = = 
 Most mourning doves migrate along <unk> over land . On rare occasions , mourning doves have been seen flying over the Gulf of Mexico , but this is exceptional . Spring migration north runs from March to May . Fall migration south runs from September to November , with immatures moving first , followed by adult females and then by adult males . Migration is usually during the day , in flocks , and at low altitudes . However , not all individuals migrate . Even in Canada some mourning doves remain through winter , sustained by the presence of bird feeders . 
 = = Sounds = = 
 This species ' call is a distinctive , plaintive <unk> @-@ woo @-@ woo @-@ <unk> , uttered by males to attract females , and may be mistaken for the call of an owl at first . ( Close up , a grating or throat @-@ rattling sound may be heard preceding the first coo . ) Other sounds include a nest call ( <unk> ) by paired males to attract their mates to the nest sites , a greeting call ( a soft ork ) by males upon rejoining their mates , and an alarm call ( a short roo @-@ oo ) by either male or female when threatened . In flight , the wings make a fluttery whistling sound that is hard to hear . The wing whistle is much louder and more noticeable upon take @-@ off and landing . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Courtship begins with a noisy flight by the male , followed by a graceful , circular glide with outstretched wings and head down . After landing , the male will approach the female with a puffed @-@ out breast , bobbing head , and loud calls . Mated pairs will often preen each other 's feathers . 
 The male then leads the female to potential nest sites , and the female will choose one . The female dove builds the nest . The male will fly about , gather material , and bring it to her . The male will stand on the female 's back and give the material to the female , who then builds it into the nest . The nest is constructed of twigs , conifer needles , or grass blades , and is of flimsy construction . Mourning doves will sometimes requisition the unused nests of other mourning doves , other birds , or arboreal mammals such as squirrels . 
 Most nests are in trees , both deciduous and coniferous . Sometimes , they can be found in shrubs , vines , or on artificial constructs like buildings , or hanging flower pots . When there is no suitable elevated object , mourning doves will nest on the ground . 
 See link below for : courtship dance and mating . 
 The clutch size is almost always two eggs . Occasionally , however , a female will lay her eggs in the nest of another pair , leading to three or four eggs in the nest . The eggs are white , 6 @.@ 6 ml ( 0 @.@ 23 imp fl oz ; 0 @.@ 22 US fl oz ) , 2 @.@ 57 – 2 @.@ 96 cm ( 1 @.@ 01 – 1 @.@ 17 in ) long , 2 @.@ 06 – 2 @.@ 30 cm ( 0 @.@ 81 – 0 @.@ 91 in ) wide , 6 – 7 g ( 0 @.@ 21 – 0 @.@ 25 oz ) at laying ( 5 – 6 % of female body mass ) . Both sexes incubate , the male from morning to afternoon , and the female the rest of the day and at night . Mourning doves are devoted parents ; nests are very rarely left unattended by the adults . When flushed from the nest , an incubating parent may perform a nest @-@ distraction display , or a broken @-@ wing display , fluttering on the ground as if injured , then flying away when the predator approaches it . 
 Incubation takes two weeks . The hatched young , called squabs , are strongly altricial , being helpless at hatching and covered with down . Both parents feed the squabs pigeon 's milk ( dove 's milk ) for the first 3 – 4 days of life . Thereafter , the crop milk is gradually augmented by seeds . Fledging takes place in about 11 – 15 days , before the squabs are fully grown but after they are capable of digesting adult food . They stay nearby to be fed by their father for up to two weeks after fledging . 
 Mourning doves are prolific breeders . In warmer areas , these birds may raise up to six broods in a season . This fast breeding is essential because mortality is high . Each year , mortality can reach 58 % a year for adults and 69 % for the young . 
 The mourning dove is monogamous and forms strong pair bonds . Pairs typically reconvene in the same area the following breeding season , and sometimes may remain together throughout the winter . However , lone doves will find new partners if necessary . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Mourning doves eat almost exclusively seeds , which make up more than 99 % of their diet . Rarely , they will eat snails or insects . Mourning doves generally eat enough to fill their crops and then fly away to digest while resting . They often swallow grit such as fine gravel or sand to assist with digestion . The species usually forages on the ground , walking but not hopping . At bird feeders , mourning doves are attracted to one of the largest ranges of seed types of any North American bird , with a preference for canola , corn , millet , safflower , and sunflower seeds . Mourning doves do not dig or scratch for seeds , though they will push aside ground litter ; instead they eat what is readily visible . They will sometimes perch on plants and eat from there . 
 Mourning doves show a preference for the seeds of certain species of plant over others . Foods taken in preference to others include pine nuts , sweetgum seeds , and the seeds of <unk> , amaranth , canary grass , corn , sesame , and wheat . When their favorite foods are absent , mourning doves will eat the seeds of other plants , including buckwheat , rye , <unk> and <unk> . 
 Mourning doves can be afflicted with several different parasites and diseases , including tapeworms , nematodes , mites , and lice . The mouth @-@ dwelling parasite Trichomonas gallinae is particularly severe . While a mourning dove will sometimes host it without symptoms , it will often cause yellowish growth in the mouth and esophagus that will eventually starve the host to death . Avian pox is a common , insect @-@ vectored disease . 
 The primary predators of this species are diurnal birds of prey , such as falcons and hawks . During nesting , corvids , grackles , housecats , or rat snakes will prey on their eggs . <unk> rarely parasitize mourning dove nests . Mourning doves reject slightly under a third of cowbird eggs in such nests , and the mourning dove 's vegetarian diet is unsuitable for cowbirds . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Like other <unk> , the mourning dove drinks by suction , without lifting or tilting its head . It often gathers at drinking spots around dawn and dusk . 
 Mourning doves sunbathe or <unk> by lying on the ground or on a flat tree limb , leaning over , stretching one wing , and keeping this posture for up to twenty minutes . These birds can also <unk> in shallow pools or bird baths . <unk> is common as well . 
 Outside the breeding season , mourning doves roost communally in dense deciduous trees or in conifers . During sleep , the head rests between the shoulders , close to the body ; it is not tucked under the shoulder feathers as in many other species . During the winter in Canada , roosting flights to the roosts in the evening , and out of the roosts in the morning , are delayed on colder days . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The number of individual mourning doves is estimated to be approximately 475 million . The large population and its vast range explain why the mourning dove is considered to be of least concern , meaning that the species is not at immediate risk . As a gamebird , the mourning dove is well @-@ managed , with more than 20 million ( and up to 40 – 70 million ) shot by hunters each year . 
 = = As a symbol and in the arts = = 
 The eastern mourning dove ( Z. m. carolinensis ) is Wisconsin 's official symbol of peace . The bird is also Michigan 's state bird of peace . 
 The mourning dove appears as the Carolina turtle @-@ dove on plate 286 of Audubon 's Birds of America . 
 References to mourning doves appear frequently in Native American literature . Mourning dove imagery also turns up in contemporary American and Canadian poetry in the work of poets as diverse as Robert Bly , Jared Carter , <unk> <unk> , and Charles Wright . 
 = = Closest related species = = 
 The mourning dove is a related species to the passenger pigeon ( Ectopistes migratorius ) , which was hunted to extinction in the early 1900s . For this reason , the possibility of using mourning doves for cloning the passenger pigeon has been discussed . 
 = Prince Alfred of Great Britain = 
 The Prince Alfred ( 22 September 1780 – 20 August 1782 ) was a member of the British Royal Family as the 14th child and 9th son of King George III and his queen consort Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . Alfred became ill after his inoculation against the smallpox virus ; his early death at the age of nearly two , along with the demise of his brother Prince Octavius six months later , was a shock to their parents . In his later bouts of madness King George would have imagined conversations with both of his youngest sons . 
 = = Life = = 
 Prince Alfred was born , on 22 September 1780 , at Windsor Castle , Windsor , England . His father was King George III , his mother Charlotte of Mecklenburg @-@ Strelitz . The prince was baptised by Frederick Cornwallis , The Archbishop of Canterbury , in the Great Council Chamber at St James 's Palace on 21 October 1780 . His godparents were The Prince of Wales ( his eldest brother ) , The Prince Frederick ( his second brother ) and The Princess Royal ( his eldest sister ) . As his parents ' fourteenth child and ninth son , his birth was no surprise but it did bring joy to his family , especially to his older sister Sophia , who , their sister Elizabeth reported , called the new baby her " grandson " . 
 = = = Death and aftermath = = = 
 In 1782 , Prince Alfred was inoculated against smallpox . The sickness proved too much for the baby and in June he was taken to Deal with his nurse Lady Charlotte Finch to recover . It was hoped that the sea air , bathing in the water , and horseback riding would improve his condition . While he was there , Alfred endeared himself to many , including an old woman whom he waved to . In spite of his charming disposition , he continued to break out in spots and his chest was troubling him . When he returned to Windsor in August 1782 , the doctors inspected him and realized that the boy had only weeks to live . After suffering bouts of fever and continuing problems with his chest , Prince Alfred died on 20 August 1782 , at Windsor Castle , Berkshire , not even two years old . 
 Although the household did not go into mourning ( it was not prescribed for royal children younger than fourteen ) , his parents took the loss harshly . According to Lady Charlotte Finch , the Queen " cried vastly " and was " very much hurt by her loss and the King also . " Alfred was buried at Westminster Abbey , though his remains were later moved to the Royal Vault in St. George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle on 11 February 1820 . His father continued to dwell on his death , and the sight of Alfred 's posthumous portrait in a family painting by Thomas Gainsborough nearly a year after Alfred 's death sent his three eldest sisters into tears . Six months after Alfred 's death , his elder brother Octavius succumbed to the smallpox virus , further devastating the king . During one of his bouts of madness in 1812 , George would have imaginary conversations with his two youngest sons . 
 His youngest sister Princess Amelia was conceived in the months after Alfred 's death , born almost exactly a year after he died . The first of George III and Queen Charlotte 's children to die , Alfred died nearly seventy five years before his older sister Mary , who was the last survivor of George III and Queen Charlotte 's fifteen children . Alfred is also unique among their first fourteen children for never being an older sibling while he was alive , as the only child younger than him was born after his death . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 22 September 1780 – 20 August 1782 : His Royal Highness The Prince Alfred 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = United States Assay Commission = 
 The United States Assay Commission was an agency of the United States government from 1792 to 1980 . Its function was to supervise the annual testing of the gold , silver , and ( in its final years ) base metal coins produced by the United States Mint to ensure that they met specifications . Although some members were designated by statute , for the most part the commission , which was freshly appointed each year , consisted of prominent Americans , including numismatists . Appointment to the Assay Commission was eagerly sought after , in part because commissioners received a commemorative medal . These medals , different each year , are extremely rare , with the exception of the 1977 issue , which was sold to the general public . 
 The Mint Act of 1792 authorized the Assay Commission . Beginning in 1797 , it met in most years at the Philadelphia Mint . Each year , the President of the United States appointed unpaid members , who would gather in Philadelphia to ensure the weight and fineness of silver and gold coins issued the previous year were to specifications . In 1971 , the commission met , but for the first time had no gold or silver to test , with the end of silver coinage . Beginning in 1977 , President Jimmy Carter appointed no members of the public to the commission , and in 1980 , he signed legislation abolishing it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding and early days ( 1792 – 1873 ) = = = 
 In January 1791 , Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton submitted a report to Congress proposing the establishment of a mint . Hamilton concluded his report : 
 The remedy for errors in the weight and alloy of the coins , must necessarily form a part , in the system of a mint ; and the manner of applying it will require to be regulated . The following account is given of the practice in England , in this particular : A certain number of pieces are taken promiscuously out of every fifteen pounds of gold , coined at the Mint , which are deposited , for safe keeping , in a strong box , called the <unk> [ sic , more commonly " pyx " ] . This box , from time to time , is opened in the presence of the Lord Chancellor , the officers of the Treasury , and others , and portions are selected from the pieces of each coinage , which are melted together , and the mass assayed by a jury of the Company of Goldsmiths ... The expediency of some similar regulation seems to be manifest . 
 In response to Hamilton 's report , Congress passed the Mint Act of 1792 . In addition to setting the standards for the new nation 's coinage , Congress provided for an American version of the British Trial of the <unk> : 
 That from every separate mass of standard gold or silver , which shall be made into coins at the said Mint , there shall be taken , set apart by the Treasurer and reserved in his custody a certain number of pieces , not less than three , and that once in every year the pieces so set apart and reserved , shall be assayed under the inspection of the Chief Justice of the United States , the Secretary and Comptroller of the Treasury , the Secretary for the Department of State , and the Attorney General of the United States , ( who are hereby required to attend for that purpose at the said Mint , on the last Monday in July in each year ) ... and if it shall be found that the gold and silver so assayed , shall not be inferior to their respective standards herein before declared more than one part in one hundred and forty @-@ four parts , the officer or officers of the said Mint whom it may concern shall be held excusable ; but if any greater inferiority shall appear , it shall be certified to the President of the United States , and the said officer or officers shall be deemed disqualified to hold their respective offices . 
 The following January , Congress passed legislation changing the date on which the designated officials met to the second Monday in February . Meetings did not take place immediately ; the Mint was not yet striking gold or silver . Minting of silver began in 1794 and gold in 1795 , and some coins were saved for assay : the first Mint document mentioning assay pieces is from January 1796 and indicates that exactly $ 80 in silver had been put aside . The first assay commissioners did not meet until Monday , March 20 , 1797 , a month later than the prescribed date . Once they did , annual meetings took place each year until 1980 , except in 1817 as there had been no gold or silver struck since the last meeting ( until 1837 , the commission examined the coins since the last testing , rather than for a particular calendar year ) . 
 In 1801 , the usual meeting was delayed , causing Mint Director Elias Boudinot to complain to President John Adams that depositors were anxious for an audit so the Mint could release coins struck from their bullion . Numismatist Fred Reed suggested that the delay was probably due to poor weather , making it difficult for officials to travel from the new capital of Washington , D.C. , to Philadelphia for the assay . In response , on March 3 , 1801 , Congress changed the designation of officials required to attend to " the district judge of Pennsylvania , the attorney for the United States in the district of Pennsylvania , and the commissioner of loans for the State of Pennsylvania " . The meeting finally took place on April 27 , 1801 . The 1806 and 1815 sessions were delayed because of outbreaks of disease in Philadelphia ; the one in 1812 was held a month late because of a heavy snowstorm which prevented the commissioners from reaching the Mint . No meeting took place in 1817 ; a fire had damaged the Philadelphia Mint in January 1816 , and no gold or silver awaited the commission . In 1818 , Congress substituted the Collector of the Port of Philadelphia for the Pennsylvania loans commissioner as a member of the Assay Commission . With the Coinage Act of 1834 , Congress removed the automatic disqualification of Mint officers in the event of an unfavorable assay , leaving the decision to the president . 
 The Mint Act of 1837 established the Assay Commission in the form it would have for most of the remainder of its existence . It provided that " an annual trial shall be made of the pieces reserved for this purpose [ i.e. , set aside for the assay ] at the Mint and its branches , before the judge of the district court of the United States , for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , the attorney of the United States , for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , and the collector of the port of Philadelphia , and such other persons as the President shall , from time to time , designate for that purpose , who shall meet as commissioners , for the performance of this duty , on the second Monday in February , annually " . The usual procedure for members of the public to be named to the commission after public appointments began was for the Mint Director to send the president a list of candidates for his approval . According to Jesse P. Watson in his monograph on the Bureau of the Mint , the admission of members of the public to the Assay Commission meant " that permanency and high official dignity were no longer characteristic of the commission " . 
 In 1861 , as the American Civil War broke out , North Carolina joined the Confederate States . The Charlotte Mint , taken over by the Confederacy , eventually closed as the dies that had been shipped from the Philadelphia Mint wore out , and it could obtain no more . Nevertheless , 12 half eagles ( $ 5 gold coins ) were sent from Charlotte to Philadelphia , through enemy lines , in October 1861 . They were duly tested by the 1862 Assay Commission , and were found to be correct . 
 In 1864 , with the metal nickel , used in the cent in short supply , Mint Director James Pollock asked that year 's commission to opine on a substitute for the copper @-@ nickel used in the cent . The members endorsed French bronze ( 95 % copper and 5 % tin or zinc ) as a metal to be used in the cent and a proposed two @-@ cent piece . Pollock sent the conclusions to Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase , who forwarded them ( and draft legislation ) to Maine Senator William P. Fessenden , chairman of the Senate Finance Committee . The Coinage Act of 1864 was signed by President Abraham Lincoln on April 22 , 1864 . 
 = = = Later years ( 1873 – 1949 ) = = = 
 The Coinage Act of 1873 revised the laws relating to coinage and the Mint and retired several denominations including the two @-@ cent piece . The act also changed the officers required to serve on the Assay Commission : 
 That to secure a due conformity in the gold and silver coins to their respective standards of fineness and weight , the judge of the district court of the United States for the eastern district of Pennsylvania , the Comptroller of the Currency , the assayer of the assay @-@ office at New York , and such other persons as the President shall , from time to time , designate , shall meet as assay @-@ commissioners , at the mint in Philadelphia , to examine and test , in the presence of the Director of the Mint , the fineness and weight of the coins reserved by the several mints for this purpose , on the second Wednesday in February , annually . 
 The act also required the Mint to put aside one of every thousand gold coins struck , and one of every two thousand silver coins for the assay . It provided the procedure for putting the coins aside , sealing them in envelopes , and placing them in a pyx to be opened by the assay commissioners . 
 The 1881 Assay Commission found that approximately 3 @,@ 000 silver dollars struck at the Carson City Mint ( 1881 @-@ CC ) had been struck in .892 silver rather than the legally mandated .900 . It is unclear if the Treasury took any steps to attempt to recover the issued pieces . The 1885 commission detected a single silver dollar which was 1 @.@ 51 grains ( 0 @.@ 098 g ) below specifications , the permitted tolerance being 1 @.@ 50 grains ( 0 @.@ 097 g ) . In 1921 , the Assay Commission found that some coins struck at the Denver Mint were struck in <unk> or <unk> silver , above the legal .900 by more than the permitted tolerance . Investigation found that ingots which had been rejected and were intended for melting had instead been used for coin . In the early 20th century , the San Francisco Mint struck silver coins for the Philippines , then a US possession ; those pieces were included in the assay . Proof coins struck by the Mint for collectors were included in the assay ; pieces struck under contract with foreign governments were not . 
 The pyx was a rosewood box , 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) square , of European work , and sealed by heavy padlocks . It was not filled by the coins put aside for the 1934 Assay Commission , of which there were 759 with a total face value of $ 12 @,@ 050 . This had increased by 1940 to 79 @,@ 847 coins , all silver as gold coins were no longer being struck , and by 1941 , many reserved coins could not be kept in the pyx , instead being placed in packing boxes , overflowing with sealed envelopes . By the late 1940s , more than ten million coins were being struck each day at Philadelphia alone ; in 1947 , Congress reduced the number of silver coins required to be put aside for assay from one in 2 @,@ 000 to one in 10 @,@ 000 . This was done at the urging of the Department of the Treasury , as having to store so many assay coins was a burden to the Mint , and it felt that the number of coins available to the commission would still be sufficient . 
 = = = Final years and abolition ( 1950 – 1980 ) = = = 
 By the 1950s , there was considerable competition among numismatists to be appointed an assay commissioner . Appointees received no compensation , but the appointment was prestigious and carried with it a prized assay medal . The procedure was changed so that the Mint Director submitted the names of more individuals than would actually be appointed to the White House , where the final choices were made . It remained possible for the director to ask for special consideration for certain individuals . Later nominations were also screened by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and by the IRS . The Mint Director received nominations for assay commissioner from legislators , political organizations , government officials , and from members of the public . 
 In 1971 , for the first time , the Assay Commission had no silver coins to test ; none were struck by the Mint for circulation in 1970 . Although part @-@ silver Kennedy half dollars were struck in 1970 , they were only for collectors and were not put aside for assay . Commissioners could instead test 21 @,@ 975 dimes and 11 @,@ 098 quarters , all made from copper @-@ nickel clad , though as the Associated Press , reporting on the 1973 Assay Commission , put it , " a discovery of a bum coin hasn 't occurred in years . " Only one in every 100 @,@ 000 clad or silver @-@ clad pieces was put aside for the Assay Commission , and only one in every 200 @,@ 000 dimes . At the 1974 meeting , one copper @-@ nickel Eisenhower dollar was discovered which weighed 15 grains ( 0 @.@ 97 g ) below specification ; after reference to the rules , the coin was deemed barely within guidelines . Numismatist Charles Logan , in his 1979 article about the impending end of the Assay Commission , stated that this incident pointed out " the basic problem with the annual trial . First , the members were not exactly sure how their job was done , or what the requirements were . Second , they really did not want to report a fault in the coinage . Finally , even if the one dollar coin had been found faulty , [ it would have had ] little consequence , except to prompt greater vigilance at the Mint . " 
 In early 1977 , outgoing Mint Director Mary Brooks sent a list of 117 nominees to the new president , Jimmy Carter , from which it was expected that about two or three dozen names would be selected . Carter refused to make any public appointments , feeling the Assay Commission was unneeded given that the Mint performed the same work through routine internal checks and that the $ 2 @,@ 500 appropriated each year was a poor use of taxpayer money . Only government members served on the Assay Commission in 1977 – 1980 . Even so , hundreds of numismatists applied to be on the 1978 commission . Carter made no appointments that year ; the only members were those designated by statute . 
 The 1979 meeting , attended by the government @-@ employed commission members and Mint Director Stella Hackel Sims , was held eight days late on February 22 due to schedule conflicts . In June 1979 , Carter 's Presidential Reorganization Project recommended the abolition of the Assay Commission and two other small agencies . The report estimated that having an Assay Commission cost the federal government about $ 20 @,@ 000 and that the work was done better by vending machine manufacturers to avoid having their machines jam . In August , columnist Jack Anderson deemed the commission an example of wasteful spending in Washington , characterizing its activities , " more than a decade ago , the government stopped putting either gold or silver in its coins — but the commission continues to hold its annual luncheon meeting . <unk> , the commissioners measure the amounts of <unk> metals in U.S. coins , and strike a medal to commemorate their activities . This useless exercise costs the taxpayers about $ 20 @,@ 000 a year . " As coin collector and columnist Gary Palmer put it in 1979 , " who really cares if the weight of a <unk> @-@ nickel quarter is off by a grain or two ? " 
 On March 14 , 1980 , Carter approved legislation abolishing the Assay Commission , as well as the other two agencies , as recommended by his Reorganization Project . The President wrote in a signing statement that with the end of gold and silver coinage , the need for the commission had diminished . Numismatic leaders objected to the ending of the commission , considering the expense small and the tradition worth keeping , although they concurred the commission " had become an anachronism " . At the time of its abolition , the Assay Commission was the oldest existing government commission . In 2000 and 2001 , New Jersey Congressman Steven Rothman introduced legislation to revive the Assay Commission , stating that re @-@ establishing the commission would assure public confidence in the gold , silver , and platinum bullion coins struck by the Mint . The bills died in committee . 
 = = Functions and activities = = 
 The general function of the Assay Commission was to examine the gold and silver coins of the Mint and ensure they met the proper specifications . Assay commissioners were placed on one of three committees in most years : the Counting , Weighing , and <unk> Committees . The Counting Committee verified that the number of each type of coin in packets selected from the pyx matched what Mint records said should be there . The Weighing Committee measured the weight of coins from the pyx , checking them against the weight required by law . The <unk> Committee worked with the Philadelphia Mint 's assayer as he measured the precious metal content of some of the coins . In some years there was a Committee on Resolutions — in 1912 , it urged that a leaflet be published for visitors to the Mint 's coin collection , and that a medal be struck to commemorate the collection . The full Assay Commission adopted that committee 's report . 
 Congress in 1828 had required that the weights kept by the Mint Director be tested for accuracy in the presence of the assay commissioners each year . By statute passed in 1911 , the commission was required to inspect the weights and balances used in assaying at the Philadelphia Mint , and to report on their accuracy . This included the government 's official standard pound weight that had been brought from the United Kingdom . 
 According to a description of the 1948 meeting , silver coins selected for assay were first placed between steel rollers until the thickness was reduced to .0001 inches ( 0 @.@ 0025 mm ) , and then were chopped into fine pieces and dissolved in nitric acid . The fineness of the silver in the coin could be determined by the amount of salt solution needed to precipitate all the silver in the liquid . Numismatist Francis <unk> @-@ <unk> described the work of the Assay Commission : 
 Using balances and weights , the commission weighed several examples of each type of coin , then used calipers to examine them for proper thickness , and finally , using various acids and solvents , determined the amount of alloy used in manufacture of the planchets . Ledgers and journal books on the mint were also examined . If there were any imperfections or deviations from the legal standards in the coins examined , the information was immediately sent to the president of the United States . 
 The commission operated under rules first adopted by the 1856 commission , and then passed down , year to year , and amendable by any Assay Commission , although in practice little change was made . Under the rules , the Director of the Mint called the assay commissioners to order , then introduced the federal judge who was an ex officio member , who presided over the meetings ; if the judge was absent , the members elected a chairman . The chairman divided the members into the committees . If there had been a change of officers at a mint , commissioners examined coins from before and after . After the committees completed their work , the members re @-@ assembled to report their findings and to vote on their report . 
 Every Assay Commission passed the coinage that it was called upon to examine . If pieces varying from the standard were found , that was also noted ; the 1885 Assay Commission reported the one substandard silver coin , which came from the Carson City Mint , but urged the president to take no action , noting that the coin was underweight by an amount too small to be measured by the scales at Carson City . 
 Remains of coins used in the assay were melted by the Mint ; those put aside for the Assay Commission that were not used were placed in circulation from Philadelphia , and were not marked or distinguished in any way . There were thousands of coins for the commission , of which only a few were assayed . Commissioners often purchased some of the remaining pieces as souvenirs , although commemorative coins could not be purchased if Congress had given the exclusive right to sell them to a sponsoring organization — they were instead destroyed . 
 = = Commissioners = = 
 Appointments of members of the public to the Assay Commission by the president are known to have been made as early as 1841 ; the final ones were made in 1976 . Many early commissioners were chosen for their scientific or intellectual attainments . Such qualifications were not required of later public appointees , who included such prominent figures as Ellin Berlin , wife of songwriter Irving Berlin . The first women to be appointed to the Assay Commission were Mrs. Kellogg Fairbanks of Chicago and Mrs. B.B. Munford of Richmond , Virginia , both in 1920 . 
 The recordholder for service as a commissioner is Herbert Gray Torrey , 36 times an assay commissioner between 1874 and 1910 ( missing only 1879 ) by virtue of his office as assayer of the New York Assay Office . The recordholder as a presidential appointee is Dr. James Lewis Howe , head of the Department of Chemistry at Washington and Lee University , 18 times an assay commissioner , serving in 1907 and then each year from 1910 to 1926 . An employee of the National Bureau of Standards was included in the presidential appointments each year ; he brought with him the weights used in the assay , which were checked by the agency in advance . Although no future president served as an assay commissioner , Comptroller of the Currency Charles G. Dawes was a commissioner in 1899 and 1900 ; he was Vice President of the United States from 1925 to 1929 . 
 Among those appointed was coin collector and Congressman William A. Ashbrook , 14 times an assay commissioner between 1908 and 1934 . Ashbrook 's presence on the 1934 Assay Commission has led to speculation that he might have used his position as an assay commissioner ( he left Congress in 1921 ) to secure one or more 1933 Saint @-@ Gaudens double eagles , almost all of which were melted due to the end of gold coinage for circulation . Assay commissioners were traditionally allowed to purchase coins from the pyx that were not assayed , and numismatic historian Roger Burdette speculates that Ashbrook , generally well @-@ treated by the Treasury Department due to his onetime congressional position , might have exchanged other gold pieces for the 1933 coins . 
 The three known specimens of the 1873 @-@ CC quarter , without arrows by the date , and the only known dime of that description , may have been salvaged from assay pieces , as the remainder of those coins had been ordered melted as underweight . A similar mystery attends the 1894 Barber dime struck at San Francisco ( 1894 @-@ S ) of which the published mintage is 24 , although it is not certain whether this total includes the one sent to Philadelphia to await the 1895 Assay Commission . The fact that one of the 1895 assay commissioners was Robert Barnett , chief clerk of the San Francisco Mint , has led numismatic writers Nancy Oliver and Richard Kelly to speculate that he may have been made an assay commissioner in order to retrieve the dime . The 1895 Assay Commission report confirms that the dime was there , as it was counted by the Counting Committee . The dime is not mentioned as having been either weighed or assayed ; Oliver and Kelly , in a May 2011 article in The Numismatist , suggest that Barnett used that privilege of assay commissioners to obtain the rarity . He is not known , however , to have written or spoken of the matter before his murder in 1904 . 
 In 1964 , former assay commissioners formed the Old Time Assay Commissioners Society ( OTACS ) . When President Carter stopped appointing public members to the commission in 1977 , the OTACS fundraised in an unsuccessful attempt to induce the government to continue that tradition . The society met annually through 2012 , usually at the site of the yearly convention of the American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) . With the number of surviving OTACS members at less than three dozen , the society plans no further meetings ; its 2012 session in conjunction with the ANA convention in Philadelphia included an event at the mint . 
 = = Medals = = 
 Assay Commission medals were struck from a variety of metals , including copper , silver , bronze , and pewter . The first Assay Commission medals were struck in 1860 at the direction of Mint Director James Ross Snowden . The initial purpose in having medals struck was not principally to provide keepsakes to the assay commissioners , but to advertise the Mint 's medal @-@ striking capabilities . The nascent custom lapsed when Snowden left office in 1861 . 
 Numismatists R.W. Julian and Ernest E. Keusch , in their work on Assay Commission medals , theorize that the resumption of Assay Commission medal striking in 1867 was at the request of Mint Engraver James B. Longacre to new Mint Director William Millward . Medals to be given to assay commissioners were struck each year after that until public members ceased to be appointed to the Assay Commission in 1977 . 
 Early assay medals featured on the obverse a bust of Liberty or figure of Columbia , and on the reverse a wreath surrounding the words " annual assay " and the year . The 1870 obverse , by Longacre 's successor William Barber , features <unk> surrounded by implements of the assay , such as scales and the pyx . The distinctive designs for each year would sometimes be topical — the 1876 medal bears a design for the centennial of American Independence , and 1879 's depicted the recently deceased Mint Director Henry Linderman . Beginning in 1880 , they most often featured the president or Treasury Secretary . The medals in 1901 and from 1903 to 1909 were rectangular , a style popular at the time . The 1920 reverse , by Engraver George T. Morgan , had a design which symbolized the ending of World War I ; in 1921 , an extra medal was struck in gold , given by the assay commissioners to outgoing President Woodrow Wilson as a mark of respect . 
 The 1936 issuance was a mule of the Mint 's medals for the president at the time , Franklin Roosevelt , and the first president , George Washington . Bearing the words , " annual assay 1936 " on the edge , the medal was prepared in this manner by order of Mint Director Nellie Tayloe Ross after Mint officials realized that they had forgotten to prepare a special design for an assay medal . The 1950 medal illustrates a meeting of three 1792 officeholders ( Secretary of the Treasury Hamilton , Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson and Chief Justice John Jay ) . Although they were officeholders designated by the Mint Act of 1792 , no assay took place until 1797 , by which time all three had left those offices . There was no specially designed medal in 1954 ; instead , the assay commissioners , who met in Philadelphia on Lincoln 's Birthday , February 12 , 1954 , chose to receive the Mint 's standard presidential medal depicting Abraham Lincoln , with the commissioner 's name on the edge . The final medals , 1976 and 1977 , were oval and of pewter . The 1977 medal , depicting Martha Washington , was not needed for presentation , as no public assay commissioners were appointed . They were presented to various Mint and other Treasury officials , and when there was public objection , more were struck and were placed on sale for $ 20 at the mints and other Treasury outlets in 1978 . Material was available for about 1 @,@ 500 medals , and they were initially not available by mail . They were still available in person , and by mail order , in 1980 . 
 All Assay Commission medals are extremely rare . Except for the 1977 medal , none is believed to have been issued in a quantity of greater than 200 , and in most years fewer than 50 were struck . Additional copies of several 19th @-@ century issues are known to have been illicitly struck ; the Mint ended such practices in the early 20th century . The obverse of the 1909 issue , depicting Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou , was reused as Cortelyou 's entry in the Mint 's series of medals honoring Secretaries of the Treasury . The later pieces were struck with a blank reverse , but in the early 1960s , the reverse design from the Assay Commission issue was used with the Cortelyou obverse , and an unknown number sold to the public . The restrikes are said to be less distinctly struck than the originals . 
 = Fortifications of Mdina = 
 The fortifications of Mdina ( Maltese : Is @-@ Swar tal @-@ <unk> ) are a series of defensive walls which surround the former capital city of Mdina , Malta . The city was founded as Maleth by the Phoenicians in around the 8th century BC , and it later became part of the Roman Empire under the name Melite . The ancient city was surrounded by walls , but very few remains of these have survived . 
 The city walls were rebuilt a number of times , including by the Byzantine Empire in around the 8th century AD , the Arabs in around the 11th century , and the Kingdom of Sicily in the medieval period until the 15th century . Most of the extant fortifications were built by the Order of Saint John between the 16th and 18th centuries . 
 The city has withstood a number of sieges , and it was defeated twice – first by the Aghlabids in 870 and then by Maltese rebels in 1798 . Today , the city walls are still intact except for some outworks , and they are among the best preserved fortifications in Malta . Mdina has been on Malta 's tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites since 1998 . 
 = = Punic @-@ Roman walls = = 
 The city of Mdina occupies the tip of a plateau located on high ground in the northern part of the island of Malta , far away from the sea . The site has been inhabited since prehistory , and by the Bronze Age it was a place of refuge since it was naturally defensible . The Phoenicians colonized Malta in around the 8th century BC , and they founded the city of Maleth on this plateau . It was taken over by the Roman Republic in 218 BC , becoming known as Melite . The Punic @-@ Roman city was about three times the size of present @-@ day Mdina , extending into a large part of modern Rabat . Melite 's walls had a thickness of around 5 m ( 16 ft ) and were surrounded by a 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) -long ditch . 
 Very little remains of the Punic @-@ Roman walls of Melite still survive . The remains of a city gate or tower were discovered in <unk> in modern Rabat , about 5 m ( 16 ft ) below the current street level . Parts of the ditch have survived under present @-@ day St. Rita Street and the Church of St. Paul . The lower foundations of some Punic @-@ Roman ramparts , consisting of rusticated ashlar blocks three courses high still in situ , were found near the Magazine Curtain in the western part of Mdina . The only other remains of the ancient walls are Punic @-@ Roman masonry blocks which were reused in the medieval period . These include a wall around Greeks Gate , and some stones which were discovered in excavations at <unk> Street and the <unk> Palace . 
 = = Medieval walls = = 
 At some point following the fall of the Western Roman Empire , a retrenchment was built within the city , reducing it to its present size . This was done to make the city 's perimeter more easily defensible , and similar reductions in city sizes were common around the Mediterranean region in the early Middle Ages . Although it was traditionally assumed that the retrenchment was built by the Arabs , it has been suggested that it was actually built by the Byzantine Empire in around the 8th century , when the threat from the Arabs increased . 
 In 870 , Melite was captured by the Aghlabids , who massacred its inhabitants and " demolished its fortress " according to the chronicler Al @-@ <unk> . This account further mentions that Malta remained almost uninhabited until it was resettled in around 1048 or 1049 by a Muslim community and their slaves , who built a settlement called Medina on the site of Melite . Archaeological evidence suggests that the city was already a thriving Muslim settlement by the beginning of the 11th century , so 1048 – 49 might be the date when the city was officially founded and its walls were constructed . The Byzantines besieged Medina in 1053 – 54 , but were repelled by its defenders . 
 Medina surrendered peacefully to Roger I of Sicily after a short siege in 1091 , and Malta was subsequently incorporated into the County and later the Kingdom of Sicily , being dominated by a succession of feudal lords . The fortifications of Mdina were rebuilt and modified a number of times over the following centuries . A castle known as the Castellu di la Chitati or the castrum civitas was built on the southeast corner of the city near the main entrance , probably on the site of an earlier Byzantine fort . The city withstood a siege by <unk> invaders in 1429 . 
 By the 15th century , most of Mdina 's <unk> had a system of double walls . The land front was flanked by four towers , one near Greeks Gate , another at the centre of the land front , the Turri <unk> ( also known as Turri <unk> <unk> ) near the main entrance and the Turri di la Camera at the southeast corner of the city . A barbican was built near Mdina 's main entrance sometime after 1448 . In the 1450s there were fears of a Barbary or Ottoman attack , so efforts were made to improve Mdina 's walls . The main ditch was completed , and the Castellu di la Chitati was partially demolished by royal licence in 1453 , due to its ruinous state and the excessive cost for its upkeep . 
 By 1474 , cannons had been introduced in Mdina . Other extensive preparations for an attack were made in the 1480s , when the fortifications were once again improved under the direction of Sicilian military engineers . At this point , some buildings in Rabat were demolished to clear the fortifications ' line of fire . By 1522 , the fortifications were being modernized with the construction of embrasures . However , the walls were still regarded as obsolete , since they lacked bastions and could not resist bombardment from modern artillery . 
 Most of the medieval walls of Mdina were gradually dismantled between the 1530s and 1720s , when the city 's fortifications were being upgraded by the Hospitallers . One of the most significant visible remnants of the medieval fortifications is the Greeks Gate and the surrounding curtain walls , which still retains its medieval form apart from the outer portal which was built in the 18th century . Parts of the double walls , including the remains of two gun loops , still stand between the gate and the Torre dello Standardo . Most of the northern and eastern walls date back to the medieval period , although some sections were rebuilt by the Hospitallers . The northern ramparts contain a medieval wall tower , while the remains of Byzantine <unk> and the foundations of a late 15th @-@ century artillery platform have been found in the eastern walls . 
 = = Hospitaller walls = = 
 When the Order of Saint John took over in Malta in 1530 , the nobles ceremoniously handed over the keys of the city to Grand Master Philippe Villiers de L 'Isle @-@ Adam . The Order settled in Birgu and Mdina lost its status as capital city , but L 'Isle @-@ Adam converted the remaining part of the Castellu di la Chitati into a palace , which became the meeting place of the civil administrative council known as the Università . 
 The first major upgrade of Mdina 's fortifications occurred in the 1540s , during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon . Two new bastions were built at the extremities of the land front , possibly to designs of the military engineer Antonio Ferramolino . Parts of the eastern walls were also rebuilt en crémaillère , the only instance this style is found in Malta . The 15th @-@ century barbican in front of the main gate was demolished in 1551 since it obstructed the line of fire of the newly built bastions . That year , the city withstood a brief Ottoman attack . 
 Mdina was not attacked directly during the Great Siege of Malta , but it nonetheless played a crucial role in the siege . Ottoman general Lala Mustafa Pasha wanted to take over the poorly @-@ defended city first , but was overruled by <unk> Pasha who wanted to attack Fort Saint Elmo . The fort was taken over after a month of heavy fighting , but the Ottomans had lost crucial time in doing so . On 7 August 1565 , the Order 's cavalry in Mdina attacked the unprotected Ottoman field hospital , which led in the invaders abandoning a major assault on the main fortifications in Birgu and Senglea . The Ottomans tried to take over the city in September so as to winter there , but abandoned their plans when Mdina fired its cannon , leading them to believe that the city had ammunition to spare . 
 After the siege , Maltese military engineer Girolamo Cassar drew up plans to reduce Mdina 's size by half and turning it into a fortress , but these were never implemented due to protests by the city 's nobles . The city 's main gate was reconstructed in the early 17th century , but the next major alterations were not made until the 1650s , when the large De Redin Bastion was built at the centre of the land front . Despite these modifications , by 1658 there were also proposals to abandon or demolish the entire fortress due to its state of disrepair , although these plans were opposed by the locals . In the late 17th century , some of Mdina 's medieval double walls began to be encased in sloping ramparts . 
 A major restoration of Mdina 's fortifications was undertaken in the 1720s by the French military engineer Charles François de Mondion , during the magistracy of António Manoel de Vilhena . L 'Isle @-@ Adam 's palace , including the remaining parts of the Castellu di la Chitati , were demolished to make way for Palazzo Vilhena , while the main gate was walled up and a new city gate was built in the Baroque style . A Baroque portal was also added to the Greeks Gate . The remaining medieval towers in the land front were demolished and the Torre dello Standardo was built on the site of the Turri <unk> , while the entire western walls of the city were demolished to make way for a single casemated curtain wall known as Magazine Curtain . D 'Homedes Bastion was modified with the addition of a <unk> , while traverse @-@ like batteries were built at the extremities of the land front . The city was further protected with the construction of outworks , including a covertway , two places @-@ of @-@ arms and a glacis . 
 Mondion also made further plans to strengthen Mdina 's fortifications , but they were not implemented since the Order focused on building its fortifications in the harbour area . The only major addition to the Mdina fortifications after Mondion 's reconstruction was Despuig Bastion , which was built during the reign of Ramon Despuig between 1739 and 1746 . 
 On 10 June 1798 , Mdina was captured by French forces without much resistance during the French invasion of Malta . A French garrison remained in the city , but a Maltese uprising broke out on 2 September of that year . The following day , rebels entered the city through a sally port in Despuig Bastion and massacred the garrison of 65 men . These events marked the beginning of a two @-@ year uprising and blockade , which ended in 1800 with Malta becoming a British protectorate . 
 Mdina 's fortifications remained in use during the British period , and some minor alterations such as the installation of gun emplacements were made in the 19th century . By the end of the century , the city was regarded as forming part of the defensive system of the Victoria Lines . 
 In the 1890s , the battery near St. Peter Bastion was demolished and a gateway known as the <unk> Gate was opened within the Magazine Curtain . This was done in order to facilitate access to the newly @-@ built railway station located nearby . The fortifications were included on the Antiquities List of 1925 . 
 Some of the <unk> galleries in Mdina 's ditch were used as air raid shelters during World War II . 
 = = Recent history = = 
 Sections of the medieval walls of Mdina were rediscovered by Dr. Stephen C. Spiteri and Mario <unk> while they were surveying the bastions in 2002 . 
 The first plans to undertake a major restoration of Mdina 's walls were made in 2006 , as part of a project that also included restoration of the fortifications of Valletta , Birgu and the Cittadella . In the case of Mdina , the main focus was to consolidate the terrain , since the city is built on a blue clay plateau which is prone to subsidence . The multimillion @-@ euro restoration was partially financed by the European Regional Development Fund . Works began in early 2008 by the Restoration Unit . The process of restoration was documented by Dr. Spiteri . 
 In 2011 , steel rods were inserted into D 'Homedes Bastion in order to prevent the walls from slipping down the clay slopes . The ditch was inaugurated as a public garden in March 2013 . All <unk> @-@ financed work was completed in late 2013 , but the Restoration Directorate later restored other parts of the fortifications , including the northern walls , St. Peter Bastion and the area around Greeks Gate . The project was fully completed in early 2016 . 
 Throughout the course of the restoration , a number of archaeological discoveries were made . Excavations along the eastern part of the city walls unearthed Byzantine <unk> and the base of a late 15th @-@ century <unk> <unk> ( artillery platform ) . In 2010 , remains of foundations of the Punic @-@ Roman walls were found when excavations were made along the Magazine Curtain . A late 14th @-@ century stone block bearing the coat of arms of Guglielmo <unk> , possibly originating from the Castellu di la Chitati , was discovered in 2012 during the restoration of D 'Homedes Bastion . This block is now displayed at the Fortifications Interpretation Centre in Valletta . 
 = = Layout = = 
 The present configuration of Mdina 's fortifications consists of an irregular perimeter of curtain walls stiffened by a number of bastions . The northern , western and eastern walls are built on the perimeter of the natural plateau , so they were difficult to attack . The southern perimeter of the city is built on level ground , along what is now the border with Rabat . It was the only realistic direction to assault the city , and was hence known as the Mdina Land Front . The southern perimeter contains an arrowhead @-@ shaped bastion with rectangular <unk> on each extremity , with a large pentagonal bastion in the centre : 
 St. Peter Bastion , also known as Greeks Gate Bastion – built in the 1550s during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon 
 De Redin Bastion – built in the 1650s during the magistracy of Martin de Redin 
 D 'Homedes Bastion , also known as St. Paul Bastion or the <unk> del Palacio – built between the 1540s and 1551 during the magistracy of Juan de Homedes y Coscon It is further defended by a <unk> . 
 The two gates into the city , Mdina Gate and Greeks Gate , are located within the curtain walls of the land front . Remains of the medieval double walls as well as the 18th @-@ century Torre dello Standardo are located just within the city walls . The land front is surrounded by a deep ditch , and a traverse @-@ like battery is located in its eastern extremity . 
 Most of the eastern walls of the city consist of an en crémaillère <unk> built in the mid @-@ 16th century , although parts of the walls date back to the medieval period . The pentagonal Despuig Bastion , built in the 1740s during the magistracy Ramon Despuig , is grafted below the walls on the northeastern corner of the city . 
 The northern walls of Mdina still retain their medieval form with a few Hospitaller modifications , and they contain the only surviving tower in the city walls . St. Mary 's Bastion or Ta ' Bachar Bastion , which was built in the 16th century , is grafted on the northwest corner of the city . This is linked to St. Peter Bastion by the Magazine Curtain , a long casemated curtain wall built in the 1720s in the western part of the city . The <unk> Gate , built by the British in the 19th century , is located within this curtain wall . 
 = Werner Mölders = 
 Werner Mölders ( 18 March 1913 – 22 November 1941 ) was a World War II German Luftwaffe pilot and the leading German fighter ace in the Spanish Civil War . Mölders became the first pilot in aviation history to claim 100 aerial victories — that is , 100 aerial combat encounters resulting in the destruction of the enemy aircraft , and was highly decorated for his achievements . He was instrumental in the development of new fighter tactics that led to the finger @-@ four formation . He died in an air crash in which he was a passenger . 
 Mölders joined the Luftwaffe in 1934 at the age of 21 . In 1938 , he volunteered for service in the Condor Legion , which supported General Francisco Franco 's Nationalist side in the Spanish Civil War , and shot down 15 aircraft . In World War II , he lost two wingmen in the Battle of France and the Battle of Britain , but shot down 53 enemy aircraft . With his tally standing at 68 victories , Mölders and his unit , the Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) , were transferred to the Eastern Front in June 1941 for the opening of Operation Barbarossa . By the end of 22 June 1941 , the first day of Barbarossa , he had added another four victories to his tally and a week later , Mölders surpassed Manfred von Richthofen 's 1918 record of 80 victories . By mid @-@ July , he had 100 World War II victories . 
 Prevented from flying further combat missions for propaganda reasons , at the age of 28 Mölders was promoted to Oberst , and appointed Inspector General of Fighters . He was inspecting the Luftwaffe units in the Crimea when he was ordered to Berlin to attend the state funeral of Ernst Udet , the World War I flying ace . On the flight to Berlin , the Heinkel He 111 in which he was traveling as a passenger encountered a heavy thunderstorm during which one of the aircraft 's engines failed . While attempting to land , the Heinkel crashed at Breslau , killing Mölders and two others . 
 The German Wehrmacht of the Third Reich and the Bundeswehr of the Federal Republic of Germany both honoured him by naming two fighter wings , a destroyer and barracks after him . However , in 1998 , the German Parliament decided that members of the Condor Legion such as Mölders , should " no longer be honoured " . Therefore , in 2005 , the German Ministry of Defence decided to remove the name " Mölders " from the fighter wing still bearing his name . 
 = = Childhood , education and early career = = 
 Mölders was born on 18 March 1913 in Gelsenkirchen , the son of teacher Viktor Mölders and his wife Annemarie , née Riedel . He was the third of four children , with an older sister , Annemarie , an older brother , Hans , and a younger brother , Victor . After his father , a Reserve Leutnant in the King 's 145th Infantry Regiment , was killed in action on 2 March 1915 in the Argonne Forest in France , his mother moved the family into her parents ' house in Brandenburg an der Havel . 
 In Brandenburg , Mölders found a father figure in Chaplain Erich Klawitter , who instilled firm religious beliefs in him . From 1919 to 1931 , Mölders attended , first , the elementary school and then the Saldria @-@ Gymnasium , or secondary school . At school he discovered his love for water sports , especially rowing . He joined two rowing clubs , first the Saldria @-@ Brandenburg and later the Brandenburger <unk> , and enjoyed success at rowing @-@ regattas . He was also a member of the Bund Neudeutschland in der <unk> <unk> , a Catholic youth organisation . Mölders graduated from school in early 1931 with the Abitur ( diploma ) and expressed a desire to become an officer in the armed forces . 
 Mölders joined the II . / 2 infantry regiment of the Reichswehr in <unk> , East Prussia on 1 April 1931 , serving as an officer cadet in the infantry . He attained the rank of Fahnenjunker @-@ Gefreiter on 1 October 1931 , rising to Fahnenjunker @-@ Unteroffizier on 1 April 1932 . After completing his basic military training in October 1932 , he transferred to the Military School Dresden . On 1 June 1933 , he successfully completed his training in Dresden and was promoted to ensign . He again was transferred , this time to the 1st Prussian Pioneer Battalion ( Infantry Regiment 2 ) at the Pioneer School in Munich . During his training years , Mölders made his first attempt to fulfil his dream of flying and volunteered for pilot training , but was declared unfit for flying . He tried again and was given conditional permission ( <unk> <unk> — with constraints ) to begin flight training . 
 After his promotion to Oberfähnrich on 1 February 1934 , Mölders began his pilot training at the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ( German transport flying school ) in Cottbus , lasting from 6 February 1934 to 31 December 1934 . On 1 March 1934 , he was promoted to Leutnant and assigned to the recently established Luftwaffe . In the early stages of his pilot training , he suffered continually from nausea and vomiting , but he eventually overcame these problems and finished the course at the top of his class . The next phase of his military pilot 's training was from 1 January 1935 to 30 June 1935 at the combat flying school in Tutow and the Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) at Schleißheim near Munich . He received the newly created Pilot 's Badge of the Luftwaffe on 21 May 1935 . 
 On 1 July 1935 , Leutnant Mölders was posted to <unk> Schwerin ( I. / JG 162 " Immelmann " ) . On 7 March 1936 , during the remilitarisation of the Rhineland , Mölders and his squadron ( Staffel ) flew from <unk> across the Ruhr region ; his unit was the first to arrive in Düsseldorf . During this period , Mölders met Luise <unk> , whom he was to marry a few years later , shortly before his death . On 20 April 1936 , Adolf Hitler 's birthday , numerous promotions were handed out , and Mölders advanced to Oberleutnant , effective as of 1 April 1936 . At the same time , he became leader of the fighter training squadron of the 2nd Group of Jagdgeschwader 134 " Horst Wessel " . This group was under the command of Major Theo Osterkamp , who became another of Mölders ' early mentors . Mölders was appointed squadron leader ( Staffelkapitän ) of the 1st squadron of Jagdgeschwader 334 on 15 March 1937 and served as an instructor in Wiesbaden . 
 = = Condor Legion = = 
 In 1936 , the Germans sent a Luftwaffe force , the Condor Legion , to assist the Nationalists in the Spanish Civil War . Mölders volunteered for service , and arrived by sea in Cadiz on 14 April 1938 . He was assigned to the 3rd squadron of Jagdgruppe 88 ( J 88 ) commanded by Oberleutnant Adolf Galland . The unit , stationed at the Valencia – Ebro front , was equipped with the Heinkel He 51 , but later switched to the Messerschmitt Bf 109 B @-@ 2 . Mölders assumed command of the squadron on 24 May 1938 , when Galland returned to Germany . He claimed his first aerial victory , shooting down a Polikarpov I @-@ 15 " Chato " ( " Curtiss " to the Germans ) near Algar , on 15 July 1938 . Over the remaining months of the year , Mölders became the leading ace of the Condor Legion , shooting down 15 aircraft in Spain : two I @-@ 15 " Curtiss " , 12 I @-@ 16 " Rata " and one Tupolev SB ( one " Rata " claimed on 23 September 1938 was not confirmed ) . 
 In recognition of his exceptional performance as a commander and fighter pilot , Mölders was promoted to Hauptmann ( captain ) on 18 October 1938 , effective as of 1 October 1938 . He claimed his 14th and final confirmed aerial victory of the conflict by downing a Polikarpov I @-@ 16 " Rata " near Mola on 3 November 1938 and returned to Germany on 5 December 1938 . From 6 December 1938 until March 1939 , Mölders was a member of the 1st group of Jagdgeschwader 133 ( JG 133 ) and held a staff position with the Inspector of Fighters at the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( Imperial Air Ministry ) in Berlin . His task was to devise new fighter pilot tactics . In March 1939 he was given command as Staffelkapitän of 1 . / JG 133 , taking over command from Oberleutnant Hubertus von Bonin . JG 133 was later renamed Jagdgeschwader 53 Pik As ( Ace of Spades ) . 
 For his achievements in Spain , Mölders was honoured with the Spanish Medalla de la Campaña and Medalla Militar on 4 May 1939 and the German Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( Spanienkreuz in Gold mit Schwertern und Brillanten ) on 6 June 1939 . The Condor Legion officially returned to Germany on 6 June 1939 and troops marched through Berlin to the <unk> , where the fallen were honoured . A formal state banquet for the most highly decorated soldiers was held in the marble gallery of the Reich Chancellery . Mölders was seated at table 1 , with General der Flieger Hugo Sperrle , General Don Antonio Aranda , General Gonzalo Queipo de Llano , Oberst Walter Warlimont , Oberstleutnant von Donat , Leutnant Reinhard Seiler and Oberfeldwebel Ignatz <unk> . 
 = = = Tactical innovations = = = 
 With other airmen in Spain , Mölders developed the formation known as the " finger @-@ four " . This improved the all @-@ round field of vision and combat flexibility of a flight ( Schwarm ) , enhanced mutual protection , and encouraged pilot initiative . In the " finger @-@ four " , the aircraft assumed positions corresponding to the fingertips of an outstretched hand . The fighters flew in two elements ( Rotten ) of two aircraft each ; two Rotten ( four aircraft ) made up a Schwarm ( swarm ) . 
 Mölders is often credited with inventing the cross @-@ over turn . An early version of the manoeuvre , as used by a " Vic " of five aircraft ( a tight formation forming the letter " V " ) , appeared in the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Training Manual of 1922 , and the manoeuvre may even date back to 1918 . However , it had fallen into disuse due to the difficulty of performing it in a multi @-@ aircraft formation with the contemporary spacing of less than 100 feet ( 30 m ) between aircraft . The wide lateral separation of 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) introduced by J 88 both necessitated such a turning manoeuvre , to enable a Schwarm to turn as a unit , and minimised the risk of midair collisions previously associated with it . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Phoney War and the Battle of France = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II on 1 September 1939 , Mölders ' Staffel was stationed in the west protecting Germany 's border in the Mosel – Saar – Pfalz region . On 8 September 1939 , Mölders ' fighter suffered an engine failure ; he crash @-@ landed , flipping the aircraft over and injuring his back . The injury kept him out of combat for several days . He returned to flying on 19 September . The following day , between <unk> and <unk> , at the apex of the <unk> , over the three borders area , he shot down his first aircraft of the war , a Curtiss P @-@ 36 ( according to other historians , it was one of a trio of French Hawk H @-@ <unk> ) , of Groupe de Chasse II / 5 ( Sgt <unk> bailed out ) . Thanks to that victory , he earned the Iron Cross 2nd Class . He recalled his first victory : 
 On 26 September 1939 , JG 53 was ordered to form its III . Gruppe . Mölders relinquished command of 1 . / JG 53 to Oberleutnant Hans @-@ Karl Mayer and organised the formation of III . / JG 53 at Wiesbaden – <unk> ; within two weeks , Gruppenkommandeur Mölders reported that the Gruppe was conditionally operational with 40 pilots and 48 aircraft . 
 On 22 December , Mölders , leading four Bf 109s from III . / JG 53 , engaged three Hawker Hurricanes over the Saar River , between Metz and Thionville , that were trying to intercept an unidentified aircraft . Mölders and Hans von Hahn shot down two Hurricanes flown by Sergeants R.M. Perry and J. Winn , becoming the first German fighter pilots to shoot down a Hawker Hurricane . Mölders shot down another Hurricane on 2 April , when he forced Flight Lieutenant C.D. " Pussy " Palmer of No. 1 Squadron RAF , to bail out , and on 20 April , he destroyed a French Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawk ( H @-@ <unk> ) east of Saarbrücken . 
 By the time the Phoney War ended and Operation Case Yellow ( Fall Gelb , the invasion of France and the Low Countries on 10 May 1940 ) opened the Battle of France , Mölders ' tally of aerial victories on the Western Front had increased to nine . This number included one Bristol Blenheim , two Curtiss P @-@ 36 Hawks , two Morane @-@ Saulnier M.S.406s and four Hawker Hurricanes . On 14 May , while engaging enemy bombers over Sedan , Mölders was shot down , but bailed out safely . He claimed his 19th and 20th victories on 27 May 1940 , downing two Curtiss Hawks 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) southwest of Amiens . Subsequently , he became the first fighter pilot to be awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) and on 29 May 1940 was honourably mentioned in the Wehrmachtbericht radio report , the first of 11 such mentions . 
 On 5 June 1940 , on his 133rd combat mission of the war , engaging in aerial combat for the 32nd time , Mölders was shot down near Compiègne at about 18 : 40 by Sous lieutenant René <unk> <unk> , flying a French Air Force Dewoitine <unk> Mölders was taken prisoner but liberated three weeks later upon the armistice with France . While in French captivity , Mölders asked to shake hands with the pilot who had shot him down , and learned that <unk> @-@ <unk> had been killed in action 30 minutes after their encounter . His initial experience in French captivity was harsh ; he sustained abrasions to his face and his Knight 's Cross was stolen from him . A French officer , Capitaine Giron , intervened , ensured he was treated fairly , and returned the stolen medal . When a French soldier was later sentenced to death by the Germans for beating Mölders , Mölders approached Hermann Göring and requested clemency , which was granted . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 Returning to Germany , Mölders was promoted to Major on 19 July 1940 and took command the following day of Jagdgeschwader 51 ( JG 51 ) from the recently promoted Generalmajor Theo Osterkamp . At the time , JG 51 were based at Saint @-@ Inglevert , Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais , France . Mölders flew his first combat sortie with JG 51 on 28 July , attacking a No. 41 Squadron Supermarine Spitfire flown by Flying Officer <unk> Lovell . On this mission , according to legend , Mölders was hit in a dogfight over Dover by the South African ace Sailor Malan , sustaining three splinter wounds in the lower leg , one in the knee and one in the left foot . Oberleutnant Richard <unk> shot down the pursuing Spitfire , and Mölders was able to make an emergency landing at Wissant , France . Recent research suggests Mölders was actually wounded in combat by Flight Lieutenant <unk> ( John Terence ) " Terry " Webster DFC in a Spitfire of 41 Squadron . Webster was killed in action on 5 September 1940 . Mölders wounds , although not serious , kept him from further operational flying for a month . Generalmajor Osterkamp briefly led the Geschwader again during Mölders ' convalescence . On 7 August 1940 , Mölders returned to the Geschwader without medical clearance for combat , to participate in Operation Eagle Attack ( code name Adlertag ) . Adolf Hitler had issued Führer Directive no . 17 ( Weisung Nr. 17 ) on 1 August 1940 ; the strategic objective was to engage and defeat the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) so as to achieve air superiority in preparation for Operation Sea Lion ( Unternehmen Seelöwe ) , the proposed amphibious invasion of Great Britain . 
 Mölders returned to approved operational flying status and flew his next two combat missions on 28 August 1940 . His aide and wingman , Oberleutnant <unk> , was shot down and taken prisoner during one of these missions ; Oberleutnant Georg Claus took his place . Mölders claimed two Hurricanes on 31 August and was mentioned again in the Wehrmachtbericht . Oberleutnant Victor Mölders , his younger brother , who had been appointed Staffelkapitän of the 2 . / JG 51 on 11 September , was shot down and taken prisoner of war on 7 October 1940 by Archie McKellar . Two Spitfires of No. 92 Squadron RAF ( Sgt PR Eyles and P / O HP Hill both killed ) were shot down near Dungeness on 20 September increased Mölders ' tally of aerial victories to 40 . He was the first fighter pilot to reach this number during the war and was awarded the 2nd Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 21 September 1940 . The award was presented by Adolf Hitler on 23 September in the new Reichskanzlei in Berlin . After the award ceremony , Hermann Göring invited Mölders to his hunting lodge in the <unk> Heide . 
 Mölders returned to his unit by the end of September and continued to win aerial victories . On 11 October , Mölders claimed his 43rd victory . The 66 Squadron Spitfire I <unk> was flown by Pilot Officer J. H. T. Pickering , who bailed out , wounded , over Canterbury . Three Hurricanes on 12 October brought his tally to 51 victories , and he received a preferential promotion to Oberstleutnant in recognition of his 50 victories on 25 October 1940 . While a severe bout of influenza then kept him grounded for a few weeks , his wingman in over 60 aerial combats , Oberleutnant Georg Claus , was killed over the Thames . On 1 December , Mölders claimed his last and 55th victory of 1940 , 25 of which occurred in the Battle of France and 30 in the Battle of Britain . 
 Mölders and members of JG 53 spent a couple of weeks of R & R skiing in the Vorarlberg before continuing operations against the RAF over the Channel and occupied France during early 1941 . His new wingman from January 1941 was Oberleutnant Hartmann Grasser . Mölders claimed his first aerial victory after the lengthy vacation on 10 February 1941 ; his tally reached 60 on 26 February and stood at 68 when the Geschwader was recalled from the Channel front . His logbook showed 238 combat missions plus an additional 71 reconnaissance flights ; he had engaged in aerial combat 70 times . 
 = = = Eastern Front = = = 
 In June 1941 , JG 51 and the majority of the Luftwaffe were transferred to the Eastern Front in preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the invasion of the Soviet Union . On the first day of combat operations , 22 June 1941 , Mölders shot down three Tupolev SB bombers and one Curtis Hawk , earning him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) . Mölders was only the second German serviceman to receive this award ; Adolf Galland , Fighter Squadron Commodore ( Geschwaderkommodore ) of Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " ( JG 26 ) , had received one the day before . The award was presented by Adolf Hitler on 3 July 1941 in the Wolfsschanze Hitler 's Headquarters in Rastenburg . On 30 June , Mölders had become the highest @-@ scoring fighter pilot in the history of aerial warfare after downing five Soviet bombers and bringing his tally to 82 , two more than the record set in World War I by the " Red Baron " , Manfred von Richthofen . 
 On 12 July 1941 , JG 51 under the leadership of Mölders reported that it had destroyed 500 Soviet aircraft since the beginning of hostilities against the Soviets on 22 June , and had suffered three casualties . That day , JG 51 also reported its <unk> aerial victory of the war , the credit going to Hauptmann <unk> . Three days later , on 15 July 1941 , Mölders surpassed the C mark , claiming victories Nos. 100 and 101 , and celebrated with a victory roll over the airfield . The following day he received news that he had been awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub , Schwertern und Brillanten ) . Mölders was the first of 27 German servicemen to receive this award . The diamonds added to the Knight 's Cross were introduced officially on 28 September 1941 , more than two months after Mölders earned the award . Mölders was promoted to Oberst on 20 July 1941 , effective immediately , and banned from further combat flying . Surrendering command of JG 51 to Major Friedrich Beckh he was transferred to the Reich Air Ministry , a temporary position he held until 6 August 1941 . Mölders was summoned to the Wolfsschanze again , where he received the Diamonds from Adolf Hitler on 26 July 1941 . On 7 August 1941 , he was appointed Inspector of Fighters ( Inspekteur der Jagdflieger ) . 
 = = = High command = = = 
 An Oberst at 28 , Mölders was appointed Inspector General of Fighters , a post responsible for deciding the ongoing tactical and operational doctrine of the Luftwaffe 's fighter strategies . Returning to Russia in September 1941 , he set up a command post at <unk> airfield , from where he flew in his personal Fieseler Fi 156 Storch ( stork ) on tours of the Jagdwaffe and personally directed German fighter operations . 
 Mölders also flew unofficially on missions , and actively commanded his old unit , JG 51 , for several more months . On 9 August 1941 , he took Herbert Kaiser on a " teaching " mission against a formation of Il @-@ 2 <unk> . Mölders showed Kaiser how to shoot them down . He recalled later : " He positioned himself off to one side of @-@ and some distance away from @-@ the last Il @-@ 2 in a formation of six . He then turned in quickly and opened fire at the enemy 's cockpit from an angle of some 30 degrees . The Il @-@ 2 immediately burst into flames and crashed . ' Do you see how it 's done ? ' , Oberst Mölders ' voice came over the R / T. ' Right , now you take the next one . ' I carried out the same manoeuvre and , sure enough , the next Il @-@ 2 went down on fire . ' And again ! ' It was like being on a training flight . Another short burst and the third Il @-@ 2 was ablaze . The whole lesson had lasted no more than 12 minutes ! " In this way , Kaiser scored his 23rd and 24th kills . But because Mölders was officially banned from operational flying , the first Soviet aircraft was never officially credited to him . Within the next two months , it is speculated that Mölders unofficially shot down around another 30 Soviet aircraft . At least six of Mölders ' unofficial victories are recorded in his fellow pilots ' private log books . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 22 November 1941 , Mölders travelled as a passenger in a Heinkel He 111 of Kampfgeschwader 27 " <unk> " from the Crimea to Germany to attend the funeral of his superior , Ernst Udet , who had committed suicide . Attempting to land at Breslau during a thunderstorm , the aircraft crashed . Mölders , pilot Oberleutnant Kolbe and flight engineer Oberfeldwebel Hobbie were killed . Major Dr. Wenzel and radio operator Oberfeldwebel Tenz survived the crash landing . Dr. Wenzel sustained a broken arm and leg as well as a concussion , and Tenz a broken ankle . Mölders ' fatal injuries included a broken back and a crushed ribcage . Accident investigators then and since have speculated whether Mölders would have survived the crash if he had used his seat belt . 
 Mölders was given a state funeral in Berlin on 28 November 1941 . His coffin was laid out in the honour court of the Imperial Air Ministry . The guard of honour consisted of Johann Schalk , Günther Lützow , Walter Oesau , Joachim Müncheberg , Adolf Galland , Wolfgang Falck , Herbert Kaminski and Karl @-@ Gottfried Nordmann . Mölders was buried next to Ernst Udet and Manfred von Richthofen at the Invalidenfriedhof in Berlin . The 8 @.@ 8 cm flak in Berlin Tiergarten fired a salute ; Hermann Göring gave the eulogy . 
 = = Personal life and character = = 
 Mölders was well known for his strength of character . His men nicknamed him " <unk> " ( Daddy ) , in recognition of his paternal attitude toward them , and the care he took of their well @-@ being . He was a devoutly religious individual who demanded that all Allied aviators captured by those under his command be treated civilly , and often would invite captured pilots to dine with him . 
 Mölders married Luise <unk> , née <unk> , the widow of a friend who had been killed in active service , on 13 September 1941 . Erich Klawitter , Mölders ' childhood mentor , performed the religious ceremony in Falkenstein , Taunus . Witnesses to the wedding included Leutnant Erwin <unk> and Oberleutnant Hartmann Grasser . The marriage produced a posthumous daughter , Verena . 
 Third Reich authorities disapproved of his choice of a Catholic marriage ceremony , performed by Klawitter . Klawitter had been barred from membership in the Reichskulturkammer ( Reich Culture Chamber ) and was considered politically unreliable after a 1936 breach of the Pulpit Law , a remnant of the 1870s Kulturkampf that among other religions barred Catholics from criticizing the state from the pulpit . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Werner Mölders ' old unit , Jagdgeschwader 51 , was renamed " Mölders " in his honour , on 22 November 1941 , only hours after his death . Its members were entitled to wear the " Mölders " <unk> . His death , however , was also put to other uses . Shortly after Mölders died , the British Intelligence agency dropped a flyer over Germany . The so @-@ called <unk> ( Mölders @-@ letter ) was a copy of correspondence supposedly written by Mölders to the provost of Schwerin . In this letter , he expressed his strong belief in Catholicism and stated that , especially in the face of death , many supporters of National Socialism still find strength and courage with Catholicism . 
 Mölders ' premature death , just shortly after Udet 's own suicide , was too great an opportunity for Sefton Delmer , the chief of the British black propaganda in the Political Warfare Executive ( PWE ) , to ignore . His idea was to use Mölders ' popularity in Germany , distributing a letter thus creating the assumption that Mölders strong belief led him to oppose the Nazi regime in Germany . The letter was extremely well conceived . It did not bluntly call for opposition against the state . It never even mentioned the National Socialists by name but rather used metaphors like " the godless " . Nevertheless , every German reader knew what was meant . 
 The letter caused a stir in the upper echelons of the Nazi regime . In his diaries , Joseph Goebbels , Reich Minister of Propaganda , assumed that someone in the German Catholic church organisation wrote , and distributed , the letter . A bounty of 100 @,@ 000 Reichsmark , posted by the Führer himself , revealed no clues to its origins . Even the strongest repressive actions could not hinder the distribution of the letter . 
 = = = Post @-@ war honours = = = 
 The Invalidenfriedhof , where Mölders is buried , lay in East Berlin and in 1975 East German officials ordered all the graves leveled . After the 1990 German reunification , Mölders ' grave was rebuilt and rededicated on 11 October 1991 by Mölders ' school friend and <unk> of the St. Hedwig 's Cathedral , Heribert <unk> . The ceremony was witnessed by guests from the United States , Great Britain , Austria , Spain and Hungary . 
 After the war , on 13 April 1968 , a destroyer of the Bundesmarine ( Federal German Navy ) was christened Mölders in Bath , Maine ( USA ) . It was in service between 1969 and 2003 . As of 24 June 2005 , it is the central attraction at the Navy Museum in Wilhelmshaven . On 9 November 1972 , a base of a battalion of the 34th Signal Regiment of the Bundeswehr ( Federal German Army ) in <unk> received the name " Mölders " . Most recently , the Fighter Wing 74 ( Jagdgeschwader 74 ) , stationed in Neuburg an der Donau , received the name " Mölders " in 1973 . Fighter Ace Generalleutnant Günther Rall presented the <unk> . 
 = = = Reversal of honours = = = 
 Mölders ' career and legacy offer an example of the challenges posed in placing the heroism of the German armed forces in the post @-@ war cultural , political and social setting . In 1998 , on the occasion of the 61st anniversary of the bombing of the Spanish town of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War , the German Parliament decided that members of the Condor Legion , such as Mölders , should " no longer be honoured " . In 2005 , the German Ministry of Defence ( <unk> der <unk> ) decided to remove the name " Mölders " from the JG 74 . The decision was confirmed on 11 March 2005 by the Federal Minister of Defence Peter Struck , and at 10 : 00 , the flags and <unk> were removed . 
 Mölders ' supporters challenged the ruling , and pointed out that Mölders had been posted to Spain well after the bombing of Guernica . They pointed to his equivocal political attitude towards National Socialism and his unequivocal moral commitment to Catholicism . Not only did he have a Catholic religious marriage ceremony but Klawitter , regarded by the Third Reich as politically " unreliable , " had performed the ceremony . Furthermore , Mölders had joined the Catholic youth organisation Bund Neudeutschland ( Union for New Germany ) on 1 October 1925 and had been a youth leader of the organisation from 1929 to 1931 . The Third Reich clearly had considered the Bund Neudeutschland as a threat : The Völkischer Beobachter ( The People 's Observer , the official newspaper of the party ) had reported on 26 January 1938 that the Bund had been outlawed for its proven subversive activities against the Reich , based on the <unk> des <unk> zum Schutz von Volk und Staat ( Reich Presidential Decree for the Protection of People and State ) of 28 February 1933 . Despite petitions from politicians and high @-@ ranking active and retired servicemen , among them Horst <unk> , Günther Rall and Jörg <unk> , the Office for Military History ( MGFA ) noted that Mölders ' membership in the Bund Neudeutschland did not provide sufficient evidence of his having been critical of the regime , but rather showed the contrary and concluded that it was questionable whether Mölders had distanced himself enough from National Socialism before his death in 1941 . Consequently , the decision remained in force . 
 Other evidence has surfaced illustrating Mölders ' ambiguous relationship with the National Socialist regime . Mölders may have been in contact with bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen , who was highly critical of the Nazi regime . Von Galen publicly criticised the regime for the Gestapo 's tactics and the deportation and euthanasia of the mentally ill . According to the diary kept by Heinrich Portmann , von Galen 's secretary and chaplain , Mölders threatened to return his awards if von Galen 's euthanasia accusation turned out to be true . Furthermore , Portmann stated that Hitler had asked Mölders during the presentation of the Diamonds to the Knight 's Cross if there was anything he wished for . Mölders reportedly responded , " Please leave the bishop of Münster alone . " Hitler assured him that " Yes , nothing will happen to the bishop of Münster . " The MGFA concluded in 2004 that this story was most likely false . The MGFA revised its position again on 28 June 2007 , concluding that there had been contact between Mölders and von Galen . 
 Evidence also demonstrates Mölders ' propensity to value friendships over political expediency . According to Viktor Mölders , his brother had saved Georg Küch , one of Werner Mölders ' closest friends , who had been classified as a half @-@ Jew by the Nuremberg Laws , from death in the concentration camps . Mölders ' and Küch 's friendship dated to their school days at the Saldria @-@ Gymnasium in Brandenburg an der Havel . Küch 's mother , Alice née Siegel , was of Jewish birth . Küch 's father , Richard Küch , owned and operated a pharmacy in Brandenburg . Georg , himself a pharmacy student , was expelled from university under the Nuremberg Laws , just two semesters shy of his graduation . In 1940 , Richard Küch fell ill , and owning and operating the pharmacy became a bureaucratic problem for the family . Georg Küch contacted his friend Mölders in mid @-@ February 1941 , asking for help . Werner Mölders immediately responded to Küch on 16 February 1941 , stating that he had taken care of the matter and asking Küch not to pursue the issue on his own . When Richard Küch died in June 1941 , his wife was able to sell the pharmacy for fair market value . Normally , since she was Jewish , it would have been confiscated . She also remained exempt from wearing the detested yellow badge until late 1943 . She was then taken to the Theresienstadt concentration camp , where she worked as a cook . Georg Küch , Alice Küch , and Georg 's sister Friedel survived the Holocaust . Friedel Küch repeatedly stated that Werner Mölders had been responsible for protecting the family ; the mantle of his protection had persisted beyond his death . The MGFA ruled this assertion " highly speculative , " and did not investigate further . 
 = = Summary of career = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Wehrmacht Long Service Award 4th Class ( 2 October 1936 ) 
 Medal for the Campaign of 1936 − 1939 ( Medalla de la Campaña 1936 − 1939 or Medalla de la Campaña ) ( Spain , 4 May 1939 ) 
 Military Medal ( Medalla Militar ) ( Spain , 4 May 1939 ) 
 Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ( 6 June 1939 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for Fighter Pilots in Gold and Diamonds 
 Wound Badge in Black 
 Pilot / Observer Badge in Gold with Diamonds ( August 1940 ) 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 20 September 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 2 April 1940 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds 
 Knight 's Cross ( 29 May 1940 ) as Hauptmann and Gruppenkommandeur of III . / Jagdgeschwader 53 
 2nd Oak Leaves ( 21 September 1940 ) as Major and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 
 2nd Swords ( 22 June 1941 ) as Oberstleutnant and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 
 1st Diamonds ( 15 July 1941 ) as Oberst and Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 51 
 Mentioned eleven times in the Wehrmachtbericht 
 = = = Promotions = = = 
 = Brainard Homestead State Park = 
 Brainard Homestead State Park , and alternatively Brainerd Homestead State Park , is a 25 acre undeveloped Connecticut state park located in the town of East Haddam , Connecticut , United States . A farmhouse was built on the site by Timothy Green in 1842 before being purchased by Selden Tyler Brainerd in March 1854 . The ownership of the property was willed to Geraldine W. Hayden . Upon her death in 1929 , the property was willed to the State of Connecticut with the condition that William Brainerd be able to use the property for life . William Brainerd died in 1936 , the buildings were later dismantled , but the Brainard Homestead State Park was established prior to May 1 , 1932 . The undeveloped park is said to offer bird watching , sports fields and hiking according to the Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection . As of 2012 , the fields were noted to be actively farmed and there were no established trails for hiking . 
 = = History = = 
 The known history of Brainard Homestead State Park begins in 1842 when Timothy Green constructed a farmhouse on the property . Green never lived in the farmhouse , but leased it to Jonathan Morgan . In March 1854 , the property was sold to Selden Tyler Brainerd . Brainerd with his wife , Harriet , raised five children in the 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) farmhouse . At some point ownership of the property was transferred to Geraldine W. Hayden in a will . In March 1929 , Hayden died and willed the property to the State of Connecticut so that the homestead could be utilized as a memorial to her grandfather . A report by the Connecticut State Park and Forest Commission noted that it was not an ideal situation due the concerns about identifying a proposed site in advance and establishing the adaptability of the land for public use . The report also notes that Mrs. Hayden was unknown to the commissioners and despite the land having significant liabilities was waiting to become a state park by 1930 . The delay in its transformation stemmed from a request that William Brainerd , one of Selden and Harriet 's sons , have life use of the property . William Brainerd died in 1936 and the terms of the will were completed . At a later date , the State of Connecticut dismantled the buildings and established the Brainard Homestead State Park . 
 Land use records show that two fields on the farm were once leased and used by Mortimer <unk> , but the fields surrounding or on the Brainard Homestead State Park continue to be actively farmed . Leary writes that the park preserves the Brainard Homestead and notes that the foundations and cellar pits are visible and provides a picture of the fieldstone foundation . 
 The establishment date of the Brainard Homestead State Park is unknown , but it predates the death of William Brainard . The 1934 State of Connecticut Register and Manual lists the Brainard Homestead State Park as the 39th State Park and consists of 25 acres . Though it is unspecific , the 1932 State of Connecticut Register and Manual notes that there were 40 state parks as of May 1 , 1932 . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection website highlights three activities for Brainard Homestead State Park : bird watching , field sports and hiking . In 2004 , Leary noted that the open fields were perfect for field sports and picnics . Use of field for sports seem to have ended soon after because a <unk> placed within Brainard Homestead State Park and referenced on the <unk> website notes that the fields were used for farming . In 2012 , the " The A to Z of CT State Parks " Tumblr website noted that the fields were unusable and were currently being farmed . The Connecticut Department of Energy and Environmental Protection website continues to note the park 's " field sports " use as of 2014 . Also " The A to Z of CT State Parks " states that there were no established trails for hiking . Leary writes that there are limited views of the Connecticut River in winter , but the foliage in summer " precludes much of a vista . " Al Braden writes in his book that the park provides access to the Salmon River with parking , boat ramp and docks , but this is the " Salmon River Boat Launch East Haddam " and not a part of the state park . 
 = Tropical Storm Nicole ( 2010 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Nicole was a short @-@ lived and unusually asymmetric tropical cyclone that caused extensive rainfall and flooding in Jamaica during the 2010 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the sixteenth tropical cyclone and the fourteenth named storm of the season , as well as the last of a record eight tropical storms to form in September . Originating from a broad monsoonal low , Nicole became a tropical depression over the northwestern Caribbean Sea on September 28 . It maintained an unusual structure as it tracked northeastward , with a poorly defined wind circulation and few thunderstorms near its center . Nicole approached the coast of Cuba as a weak tropical storm , losing its status as a tropical cyclone over the territory on September 29 . The remnants emerged over the Bahamas and eventually became absorbed by a separate extratropical system . 
 Due to Nicole 's atypical structure , the strongest thundershowers were well removed from the center ; most of the weather activity occurred over the north @-@ central Caribbean . In Jamaica , the storm triggered widespread power outages across more than 288 @,@ 000 residences . Extreme precipitation of up to 37 @.@ 42 inches ( 940 mm ) caused disastrous flooding in several parishes , severely damaging or destroying 528 houses . The devastation extended to the island 's farmland and environment , which suffered from expansive water pollution . In all , Nicole wrought an estimated $ 240 million ( 2010 USD ) in damage throughout Jamaica , and there were sixteen fatalities . Elsewhere , minor flooding occurred in Cuba , Florida , and the Cayman Islands . The remnants of the storm contributed to a large disturbance along the East Coast of the United States , causing additional damage and deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late September 2010 , a wide band of disturbed weather and low pressure associated with the monsoon trough and remnant tropical moisture from Tropical Storm Matthew meandered over the northwestern Caribbean Sea . With a broad upper ridge anchored along the Yucatán coast , diffluence aloft in the vicinity of the disturbance provided focus for the development of scattered convection . The National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) noted an environment supportive of tropical development , and by September 27 a broad surface low formed amid the convection . The next day , surface pressures steadily dropped as sustained winds around the low increased to near tropical storm force . Throughout the development process , moderate westerly wind shear over the region caused the disturbance to exhibit a rather asymmetric structure ; it developed an elongated low @-@ pressure center by September 28 , well to the northwest of its strongest wind field . Despite the asymmetry , the NHC initiated advisories on a tropical depression around 15 : 00 UTC that day , after surface and satellite observations revealed a sufficiently defined circulation center west of the deep convection . Post @-@ season reassessments , however , indicated that a tropical storm had in fact formed three hours earlier , about 75 miles ( 120 km ) south of Cuba 's Isle of Youth . 
 For most of its duration , Nicole maintained a generally northeastward motion , caught in the steering flow between a large mid- to upper @-@ level trough and an anticyclone to the west . Within hours of the storm 's formation , observations from a Hurricane Hunters flight confirmed a composition similar to the one initially discerned , with the strongest gusts and thunderstorms dislocated 250 mi ( 400 km ) east from the ill @-@ defined center . In comparison , the core consisted of light winds and sporadic convection — a structure rather characteristic of a North Indian Ocean monsoon depression . The system 's ambiguous nature led to disagreement among weather specialist over its classification : while the NHC maintained its tropical cyclone status , Cuban meteorologist José Rubiera stated that " no tropical storm exists over [ Cuba ] , or near it , " noting a lack of significant winds in the country 's vicinity . 
 Over the course of September 29 , radar data showed the convection increasing over the northern half of the storm ; bands of intense thunderstorms in the southeastern periphery also formed closer to the center , and weather buoys and ships in that region observed sustained tropical @-@ storm @-@ force winds . Around 12 : 00 UTC , Nicole attained an estimated peak intensity of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) winds and a minimum pressure of 995 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 38 inHg ) , just south of Cuba . Despite the increase in strength , Nicole 's circulation soon became exceedingly elongated and <unk> over central Cuba , prompting the NHC to declassify it as a tropical cyclone by 15 : 00 UTC . The remnant low began interacting with the neighboring trough that had steered Nicole in its tropical stages , resulting in significant amounts of precipitation along the southeastern coastlines of the United States . Accelerating toward the northeast , the system acquired frontal characteristics and became extratropical over the Bahamas by 0600 UTC , September 30 , twelve hours before merging with a developing system over eastern North Carolina . Lingering low pressure and broad cyclonic flow over the north @-@ central Caribbean in Nicole 's wake contributed to the development of Hurricane Paula in the first weeks of October . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Caribbean = = = 
 In anticipation of a tropical storm , warnings were issued for the Cayman Islands , the northwestern and central Bahamas , and the Cuban provinces of Matanzas , Cienfuegos , Villa Clara , Sancti Spíritus , and Ciego de Ávila on September 28 . However , the warnings were discontinued the following day after reports of the storm 's prompt dissipation . After forecasters warned of severe weather across the Cayman Islands , schools and government offices closed in low @-@ lying areas , and emergency teams cleaned out storm drains and readied shelters . Thunderstorms in Grand Cayman forced Cayman Airways to cancel all express flights to Cayman Brac and Little Cayman on October 29 ; weather @-@ resistant jet service was provided to stranded passengers . A marine warning was required for all three islands due to rough sea conditions . 
 In Jamaica , a flash flood warning remained in effect for flood @-@ prone regions for four days , ultimately discontinued on October 3 . Schools and several businesses , including the US Embassy in Kingston , closed on September 29 – 30 as the island braced for heavy rains . Public transit was suspended islandwide on the evening of September 29 , and shipping interests were cautioned to secure their vessels . At the height of the storm , army and police officials patrolled the island in case of emergencies . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Tropical storm warnings were issued for the Florida Keys , the Florida Bay , and from the Jupiter Inlet coast southward to Cape Sable on September 28 . A tropical storm watch was in place for the mainland north from the Jupiter Inlet to the Sebastian Inlet and north of East Cape Sable to Chokoloskee . The warnings and watch were discontinued the next day , after a direct impact was no longer expected . At the time , a flood watch remained in effect for Palm Beach , Broward , Miami @-@ Dade , Collier , and Monroe counties into September 30 . An airport weather warning was issued for Orlando International Airport and Executive Airport on September 28 ; arriving flights were put on hold , and pilots rerouted to other airports if possible . Eight Southwest Airlines flights were diverted to the airports of Tampa and Jacksonville , and one JetBlue flight to West Palm Beach . Though airport officials later reported normalized conditions , an additional 26 flights were canceled at Miami International Airport the next day . 
 In Brunswick and New Hanover counties , North Carolina , officials readied shelters on September 29 to accommodate stranded residents unable to access their homes . Multiple schools in New Hanover and Pender County remained closed the next morning due to worsening storm conditions from the disturbance succeeding Nicole . At the threat of prolonged rainfall , a flood watch was issued for Kent County , Maryland , from September 30 to October 1 . Also in the area , the National Weather Service declared both a coastal flood advisory and wind advisory for September 30 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Jamaica = = = 
 For several days , Nicole and its precursor disturbance brought great amounts of rainfall to much of Jamaica . A maximum total of 37 @.@ 42 inches ( 940 mm ) was recorded in Belleisle , Westmoreland Parish , from September 26 to 30 ; most other parishes received over 12 in ( 300 mm ) during this time . With a return period of 30 years , these quantities tripled the monthly rainfall average for September at several locations . Though the broad @-@ scale wind regime over the island remained gentle , the storm 's intense convective bands produced three microbursts — small downdrafts of intense winds . Following the degradation of river banks and waterways , the heaviest impact was due to landslides and particularly severe flooding across numerous communities , primarily in the southern parishes . 
 The disaster affected a total of 507 @,@ 831 people ; it resulted in 16 deaths — 14 of which confirmed — and 42 injuries . In Saint Andrew Parish 's Sandy Park , a house next to a street gully succumbed to the effects of the storm ; five bodies were recovered near the site , while the remaining missing inhabitant was later presumed dead . Elsewhere in Saint Andrew , three construction workers were killed when the shed in which they were sleeping caved in . A girl was crushed to death under the weight of a collapsed board house in Saint Catherine Parish . Rushing waters in different parts of the island swept away three people , all of whom drowned . A waterspout hit Westmoreland Parish 's capital of Savanna @-@ la @-@ Mar amid a microburst , tearing the roofs off buildings and hospitalizing five residents . In the wake of the storm , a body was recovered from debris along a road in Saint Catherine . Nationwide , floods trapped hundreds of residents in their homes . The obstruction of roads and bridges isolated various communities across seven of the island 's parishes . 
 Jamaica 's infrastructure was devastated in the deluge , accounting for most of the material damage on the island . At the height of the storm , more than 288 @,@ 000 residences lost power due to downed electricity lines and poles , and over 40 percent of the island 's water supply was disrupted . Dozens of bridges collapsed under the force of swollen rivers and creeks . In Kingston , underpasses suffered severe flooding as prolonged rainfall overwhelmed storm drains ; subsequent surface inundations left several of the city 's roads impassable . Destruction to the transport infrastructure was especially extensive in Westmoreland , Saint Elizabeth , and Hanover parishes , though overall 543 of the island 's principle roads sustained some degree of damage . The value of costs linked to the infrastructure neared J $ 20 billion ( US $ 235 @.@ 4 million ) . 
 Nicole wreaked widespread property damage , encompassing 2 @,@ 169 houses : 474 sustained severe damage , while 54 were beyond repair . The losses totaled J $ 274 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 2 million ) , J $ 75 @.@ 6 million ( US $ 890 @,@ 000 ) <unk> required to replace destroyed housing units . With much of its crops and livestock washed away , the island 's agricultural sector suffered about J $ 576 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 8 million ) in losses , including 40 percent of the season 's banana produce . The storm had a discernible impact on the environment , which plays a crucial role in the Jamaica 's economy and tourism . Surface runoffs and spills along industrial zones and sewage systems infiltrated wide stretches of land , leading to scattered pollution , coastal erosion , and deterioration in the ecosystems of the affect regions . In addition , light damage occurred to vegetation as evidenced by uprooted trees . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 While intensifying offshore , Nicole 's outer bands produced heavy downpours over drought @-@ stricken Cuba . Locally , rain along the southeastern coast was particularly high ; a 48 @-@ hour total of 9 @.@ 22 inches ( 235 mm ) fell at Cape Cruz , in the mountainous Granma Province . The region briefly observed gale @-@ force winds , gusting to 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) at Guantánamo Bay . Throughout eastern Cuba , 300 people sought refuge during the storm . As rivers overflowed in Granma , eight houses collapsed and more than 300 others endured flooding in the coastal town of <unk> . Several roads were obstructed , with part of the highway between Granma and Santiago de Cuba destroyed . The floods resulted in 5 @,@ 000 lbs ( 2 @.@ 5 tons ) of losses in crops and livestock . These effects were nevertheless considered minor , and the rains helped alleviate a persistent dry spell in the country . 
 In the Cayman Islands , gusts to 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) stirred up a rough sea with 8 – 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 5 – 3 m ) high waves , causing light erosion along south and western shores . Though heavy rainfall over the region was widespread , the greatest quantities fell on Grand Cayman , where the Owen Roberts International Airport recorded 9 @.@ 02 in ( 229 mm ) of rain over a period of two days . The storm flooded low @-@ lying areas , caused roof leaks , and knocked out the power in parts of eastern Grand Cayman , but overall damage across the islands was limited . 
 Despite initial threats of heavy thunderstorms and strong gusts , Florida was spared a direct impact from Nicole . The storm only skirted the state with showers ; a rainfall total of 12 @.@ 71 inches ( 323 mm ) was recorded at North Key Largo , though the mainland received considerably less . Street flooding occurred in Miami Beach and the northern Florida Keys , but only one residence sustained damage . Similarly , inclement weather spread over parts of the Bahamas without significant consequences . 
 = = = Post @-@ tropical system = = = 
 The extratropical remnants of Nicole retained plenty of moisture and ultimately combined with a large low @-@ pressure system slowly tracking up the US East Coast . The resultant disturbance produced torrential thunderstorms over entire coastlines and inland as far north as Canada , resulting in widespread power outages and shattering numerous precipitation records throughout the region . The most extreme weather was concentrated over Eastern North Carolina ; in the week of September 24 – October 1 , most communities recorded rainfall totals of 8 – 10 in ( 200 – 250 mm ) . Wilmington measured 22 @.@ 54 inches ( 573 mm ) of rain , the most it had received over a five @-@ day period since 1871 , while Kinston recorded 15 in ( 380 mm ) during that time . The rains caused widespread flooding exacerbated by overflowing creeks and rivers , surrounding and isolating several homes . About 150 roads were closed due to the hazardous conditions ; traffic accidents across the state nonetheless resulted in seven deaths . 
 In the Mid @-@ Atlantic , the event broke daily rainfall records for September 30 at several locations including the Norfolk , Baltimore – Washington , and Ronald Reagan Washington airports , which recorded 7 @.@ 85 in ( 199 mm ) , 6 @.@ 02 in ( 153 mm ) , and 4 @.@ 66 in ( 118 mm ) respectively . In Maryland , two buses collided amid the stormy weather , injuring 26 passengers . With localized estimates of up to 8 in ( 200 mm ) , the state of New York experienced some of its most historic rainfall ; an official 4 @.@ 24 in ( 108 mm ) shattered the 24 @-@ hour record for any calendar day in <unk> . Flash floods throughout the state led to one drowning and about US $ 10 @,@ 000 in damage . Considerable flooding also occurred in Vermont and Pennsylvania , with a 24 @-@ hour rainfall maximum of 10 @.@ 5 in ( 265 mm ) observed in Moscow . Farther north , the remnant low enhanced a pressure gradient over southern New England , generating strong winds that knocked out power in Litchfield County . Rainfall there additionally caused minor flooding . In Quebec , torrents following 3 @.@ 5 in ( 90 mm ) of rainfall inundated basements and caused two drownings . Despite the deaths and damage , the rains alleviated prolonged drought conditions in those regions . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On October 5 , a national disaster was declared for Jamaica due to the effects of Nicole . In response , the USAID 's Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance provided US $ 50 @,@ 000 for the purchase and delivery of relief supplies and fuel for emergency vehicles . About J $ 4 million ( US $ 46 @,@ 800 ) was donated by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to the Greenhouse Growers Association for the repair of greenhouses . In conjunction with the Food and Agriculture Organization , an estimated J $ 12 million ( US $ 140 @,@ 400 ) was made available to initiate the planting of about 50 @,@ 000 crop seedlings . The Veterinary Division provided financial assistance to livestock farmers and dispatched animal technicians providing prophylactic medication and vitamins to avert foot rot disease in small ruminants , including goats and sheep . The cost of the medication was estimated at J $ 2 million ( US $ 23 @,@ 400 ) . The Banana Board 's Catastrophe Fund , which at the time comprised J $ 50 million ( US $ 585 @,@ 000 ) , delivered both monetary support and human resources to local banana and plantain farmers . 
 Eleven days after the storm , the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies allocated <unk> ( US $ 156 @,@ 221 ) to sustain the Jamaica Red Cross in distributing aid to about 500 families — or 2 @,@ 500 beneficiaries — in need of life supplies . In late December 2010 , the Jamaica – Canadian Association in Toronto , Canada raised a total of CDN $ 10 @,@ 153 @.@ 87 ( US $ 10 @,@ 221 @.@ 33 ) in relief funds to assist flood victims . The Hanover Parish Council requested J $ 30 million ( US $ 351 @,@ 000 ) to assist the Saint James Parish Council and other municipal authorities across the country in post @-@ storm clean @-@ up and beautification work . A grant of J $ 279 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 26 million ) was approved for the reconstruction of a major roadway section in Westmoreland Parish . 
 In spite of the timely relief efforts , Nicole 's effects were still felt for months in its wake . The gross domestic product for Jamaica , which had been suffering from a substantially slow economic growth rate , further declined following the extensive storm damage . The agriculture sector sustained slight losses from reduced egg production due to the traumatizing effects on farm chickens , and the storm 's impact contributed to below @-@ standard levels of holiday season consumption . 
 = John Madden Football ' 93 = 
 John Madden Football ' 93 is a 1992 sports video game developed by Blue Sky Productions ( later Looking Glass Studios ) and Electronic Arts and published by EA Sports Network . Based on the sport of American football , the game puts the player in control of a football team in modes such as tournament play and sudden death . It was officially endorsed by John Madden . 
 The game 's Sega Genesis version was developed by Blue Sky Productions , which was simultaneously creating Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss . John Madden Football ' 93 adds new animations and features , and it allows players to play as and against famous teams such as the Oakland Raiders of 1976 . Aside from Madden Football 64 , the game was the last in the Madden franchise to lack the NFL license , which was featured in Madden NFL ' 94 onward . 
 With over one million units in sales , John Madden Football ' 93 was a commercial success . Critics awarded the game high scores and praised its updated graphics ; but several reviewers complained that little had changed since John Madden Football ' 92 . Royalties from the game funded the expansion of Blue Sky Productions , and the company 's director , Paul Neurath , later commented that the size of these royalties led Electronic Arts to develop future Madden titles in @-@ house . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 John Madden Football ' 93 is an adaptation of American football that takes place from an isometric perspective in a two @-@ dimensional environment . The player begins each match by selecting such variables as the game mode , weather conditions and team . Game modes include 16 @-@ team tournaments and sudden death , among other things . In addition to the game 's single @-@ player mode , two @-@ player competitive and cooperative modes are available . Unlike prior games in the series , a coin toss at the beginning of every match determines which team will defend each goal , and which team will kick off . 
 Between every down , the player selects a formation , play and , on defense , coverage shell from a menu . The game contains fifty @-@ five offensive plays and seventy @-@ one defensive plays , such as screen and play @-@ action passes , blitzes and man @-@ to @-@ man defense . During a down , the player may control one team member at a time or allow the entire team to execute a play automatically . On offense , depending on the play , the player controls the quarterback , running back or kicker . After a pass , control automatically changes to the ball receiver . On defense , the player may at any time switch control between any members of the team . Instant replay is available to review plays . 
 New features in John Madden Football ' 93 include no @-@ huddle offense , overturning certain calls made by referees , taunting , stumbling , head @-@ butting and one @-@ handed catches . As with its predecessors , the game features updated statistics for the twenty @-@ eight NFL teams in the game , based on their performance in the previous season . In addition to these teams , eight famous team line @-@ ups , such as the Oakland Raiders of 1976 and the Dallas Cowboys of 1977 , are available . Two " All @-@ Madden Greats " teams are compiled from the best players in the history of the sport . No official player or team names , colors , or stadium names are used . A rental @-@ only version of the game , John Madden Football : Championship Edition , uses only " championship caliber " line @-@ ups from the 1966 @-@ 1991 era . Although it still lacks official names , this version features correct team colors . 
 = = Development = = 
 John Madden Football ' 93 was developed for the Sega Genesis by Blue Sky Productions ( credited as " Looking Glass Technology " ) , which was simultaneously working on Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss . The game was not a port , but was rather an original work by the company . They were approached by Electronic Arts soon after production on Ultima Underworld began , an event that company head Paul Neurath later attributed to contacts he had within the publisher , thanks to his involvement with the Electronic Arts project Chuck Yeager 's Advanced Flight Trainer . Neurath said that Electronic Arts was dissatisfied with the work that another studio had been doing on John Madden Football ' 93 , and that the publisher was " scrambling to find a [ replacement ] team " to meet the game 's rapidly approaching deadline . Blue Sky received the source code of John Madden Football ' 92 and had to develop a sequel in five months . Neurath later said that development was " part out @-@ of @-@ house and part in @-@ house " . The game 's visuals were made by Doug Wike , who also created graphics for Ultima Underworld . In 1991 , Neurath contracted the outside programmer Mark Lesser , who had previously worked on Mean 18 , to develop the game 's technical aspects . According to Lesser , this was necessary because none of Blue Sky 's employees had experience programming for the Sega Genesis . 
 Neurath believed that Blue Sky introduced " some nice improvements " to the franchise . A preview in Mega noted that the game had " a lot of added animation " compared to its predecessors . A writer for Mega Drive Advanced Gaming believed that " the most obvious addition is the digitised speech " , which did not appear in the game 's Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) version . In its November 1992 issue , Electronic Gaming Monthly estimated that the game was " 100 % complete " . The game 's Genesis and SNES versions were released at the same time . As with earlier John Madden Football titles , John Madden Football ' 93 lacks the NFL license , which prevented the inclusion of official teams , colors , player names and stadiums . Sega 's competing title , the Joe Montana @-@ endorsed NFL Sports Talk Football ' 93 , had received the license that year . 
 = = Reception = = 
 John Madden Football ' 93 was a commercial success , with over one million copies sold . It has been cited as the highest @-@ selling game developed by Looking Glass Studios , and Neurath later called it " one of the most successful games I 've ever worked on " . Paul <unk> of Mega commented that " the only noticeable difference between [ John Madden Football ' 93 ] and its two predecessors is the animation " . He wrote that this new animation " makes the game incredibly good to look at " and that new motions like stumbling increase the game 's difficulty . Although he believed that the " two @-@ player mode is just as exciting as ever " , he was disappointed by the lack of a full @-@ season mode , which he called " unforgivable " in light of this feature 's appearance in Sega 's NFL Sports Talk Football ' 93 . He concluded that John Madden Football ' 93 was " the best game the Mega Drive has to offer " , but he wrote , " If you own John Madden Football ' 92 , or even the original John Madden American Football for that matter , then you should ignore this game completely " . 
 A writer for GamePro noted that John Madden Football ' 93 was " at first glance " largely identical to its predecessor ; but he believed that , " once you get down to serious business , you 'll notice a wealth of All @-@ Star enhancements " . He wrote that the " game play is now faster and smoother " , and that " the graphics are sharper , more detailed , and even better animated " . He believed that " Electronic Arts has [ ... ] made the best even better " , and he concluded , " John Madden Football ' 93 is even more fun to play than Madden ' 92 " . The staff of Mean Machines Sega called the game " hopelessly redundant " and " very , very disappoint [ ing ] " , and they believed that the John Madden Football series was " on its last legs " . They considered the game to be arguably worse than its predecessors , largely because of framerate problems . The reviewers concluded that it was " not a bad game at all " , but they suggested that readers buy " the slightly better John Madden Football ' 92 if [ they are ] after the definitive American Football game " . 
 Reviewing the SNES version of John Madden Football ' 93 , a GamePro writer believed that it was " a major improvement " over the previous SNES John Madden Football title . He wrote that the game 's visuals were the biggest leap , particularly after the " slow and chunky " graphics of the earlier release . He enjoyed its sound effects , but he noted the lack of voice clips present in the Genesis version . He concluded that the series was now roughly even across the two consoles , and he wrote that the game was " a strong candidate for SNES Sports Cart of the Year " . A writer for Nintendo Power wrote , " Madden ' 93 is easy to play and has the feel of the real game " . He believed that the most noticeable additions were the new teams and " new play options " , although he found it " awkward " to select plays . He finished , " Really the only thing missing is an option to play an entire season " . Carl Rowley of N @-@ Force called the visuals " sharper than ever " and believed that the character sprites were " small but well defined " . He found that the game played " brilliantly " , and he praised the instant replay feature as " superb " and " amazing " . He wrote that his " only niggle is the lack of sampled speech " , which he considered to be " a bit of a let down " . Finishing his review , Rowley wrote that the game was the " best American football game available " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 After the game 's development concluded , programmer Mark Lesser was contracted by Electronic Arts to work on NHL ' 94 , a series that he remained on " for many years " . Neurath said that the royalties Blue Sky ( later Looking Glass Studios ) received from John Madden Football ' 93 " were quite substantial " , and that " it was really the royalties of Madden more than anything else [ ... ] that allowed us to grow the [ company ] " . Neurath believed that the size of these royalties led Electronic Arts to develop future Madden games in @-@ house , in order to maximize profit . Aside from Madden Football 64 , John Madden Football ' 93 was the last game in the Madden franchise to lack the NFL license , which the series first obtained with Madden NFL ' 94 . In 2012 , Michael Rundle wrote in The Huffington Post that John Madden Football ' 93 " really set the bar " for the franchise , and he believed that its gameplay was superior to that of Madden NFL 13 . 
 = Beyond Fantasy Fiction = 
 Beyond Fantasy Fiction was a US fantasy fiction magazine edited by H. L. Gold , with only ten issues published from 1953 to 1955 . The last two issues carried the cover title of Beyond Fiction , but the publication 's name for copyright purposes remained as before . 
 Although not a commercial success , it included several significant short stories by distinguished authors , such as Isaac Asimov , Ray Bradbury and Philip K. Dick . The publication has been described by critics as a successor to the tradition of Unknown , a fantasy magazine that ceased publication in 1943 . It was noted for printing fantasy with a rational basis such as werewolf stories that included scientific explanations . A selection of stories from Beyond was published in paperback form in 1963 , also under the title Beyond . 
 James Gunn , a historian of science fiction , regarded the magazine as the best of the fantasy magazines launched in the early 1950s , and science fiction encyclopedist Donald H. Tuck contended it printed very good material . Not every critic viewed Beyond as completely successful , however ; P. Schuyler Miller , in a 1963 review , commented that the stories were most successful when they did not try to emulate Unknown . 
 = = History and significance = = 
 Beyond Fantasy Fiction was a fantasy @-@ oriented companion to the more successful Galaxy Science Fiction , which launched in 1950 ; Beyond had been planned by editor H. L. Gold from the time Galaxy was launched , but it had to wait until Galaxy was firmly established . Beyond 's first issue , dated July 1953 , included an editorial by Gold in which he laid out the magazine 's scope , excluding ( in his words ) only " the probably possible " and " the <unk> " . Gold recruited Sam Merwin , who had recently quit as editor of Fantastic Universe , to help in editing , though the masthead of both magazines listed Gold as editor . A typical issue of Beyond included several stories that were long enough to be listed as novellas or novelettes , with the contents augmented with shorter works , usually for a total of at least seven stories . 
 The first issue featured Theodore Sturgeon , Damon Knight , Frank M. Robinson , and Richard Matheson . Other writers who appeared in the magazine included Jerome Bixby , John Wyndham , James E. Gunn , Fredric Brown , Frederik Pohl ( both under his own name and with Lester del Rey under the joint pseudonym " Charles Satterfield " ) , Philip José Farmer , Randall Garrett , Zenna Henderson , and Algis Budrys . 
 Five of the ten covers were surrealist , which was an unusual artistic choice for a genre magazine . The cover painting for the first issue was by Richard M. Powers ; Gold was one of the very few American magazine editors to use his work , though Powers was prolific in providing artwork for paperback covers . In addition to Powers , René Vidmer and Arthur <unk> ( among others ) contributed cover art . The magazine also carried interior artwork , usually multiple illustrations , for almost every story ; in addition , each story included a facsimile of the author 's signature , set at the end of the text . The best @-@ known interior artist Beyond used was Ed Emshwiller , though there were several other regular artists . The magazine carried almost no non @-@ fiction , though there were occasional " filler " pieces to occupy spaces at the end of stories . The publication contained no book reviews , and only the first issue carried an editorial . 
 The magazine was not commercially successful : at that time circulation figures were not required to be published annually , as they were later , so the actual circulation figures are not known . Its demise after less than two years can be attributed in part to the decreasing popularity of fantasy and horror fiction . In a 1958 advertisement in Galaxy for complete sets of the magazine for $ 3 @.@ 50 , the publisher described Beyond as " a princely experiment to determine whether there were enough readers to support a truly handsome , fantastically high @-@ quality fantasy fiction magazine . There weren 't " , " as the rest of the country seemed to be ... out of town at the time and missed it on the newsstands " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to science @-@ fiction historian Donald H. Tuck , Beyond published " some very good material , " with appearances by many well @-@ known authors , and the magazine is often cited as being the successor to the unusual fantasy tradition of Unknown . Author James Gunn said of the new fantasy magazines that appeared in the 1950s that " the best of these was Beyond , created by Horace Gold as a companion fantasy magazine to Galaxy , which he had created three years before . Beyond Fantasy Fiction aimed at the same rationalized fantasy niche that Unknown had established and to which Gold had contributed stories . " Not everyone thought the magazine was completely successful in emulating Unknown , however ; P. Schuyler Miller , reviewing an anthology drawn from the pages of Beyond , was generally approving but commented that " Except for Budrys , Pohl , Brown and Sturgeon , these stories from Beyond are rather self @-@ conscious . They are best when they are not trying to be like Unknown . " Miller 's assessment of the magazine overall was that it " made a pass at the same position [ as Unknown ] but didn 't make it . " 
 Beyond 's selection of stories has been described by science fiction historian Michael Ashley as " seeking to achieve … high quality fantasy fiction acceptable to all readers " ; he adds that Beyond was more successful than Fantastic Science Fiction , a competitor in this niche , because Gold " had a clearer vision and was more determined … to achieve it . … despite sales problems , Gold persisted in publishing fiction that sought to stretch the boundaries of imagination . " 
 Several significant or widely reprinted stories appeared during Beyond 's short history : 
 " … And My Fear Is Great … " , by Theodore Sturgeon ( July 1953 ) 
 " The Wall Around the World " , by Theodore R. Cogswell ( September 1953 ) 
 " Kid Stuff " , by Isaac Asimov ( September 1953 ) 
 " The Watchful Poker Chip " , by Ray Bradbury ( March 1954 ) . Generally reprinted under the title " The Watchful Poker Chip of H. Matisse " 
 " Sine of the Magus " , by James E. Gunn ( May 1954 ) 
 " The Green Magician " , by L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt ( November 1954 ) . Part of the <unk> Enchanter series 
 " Upon the Dull Earth " , by Philip K. Dick ( November 1954 ) 
 Although no Hugo Awards were presented in 1954 , the 2004 World Science Fiction Convention awarded " Retro Hugos " for that year . Two Beyond stories appeared as runners @-@ up : Sturgeon 's " … And My Fear Is Great … " placed third in the novella category , and Cogswell 's " The Wall Around the World " fifth in the novelette category . In addition , Gold placed fifth in the editor category , though this recognized his work at Galaxy as well as at Beyond . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The publisher was Galaxy Publishing Corporation , New York . The magazine was initially titled Beyond Fantasy Fiction , and this remained the title on the masthead throughout the ten @-@ issue run . However , issue 9 changed the title to simply Beyond Fiction on the cover , spine , and table of contents . Issue 10 used the new , shorter title on the cover and spine , but reverted to Beyond Fantasy Fiction for the table of contents . As a result , the magazine is often listed as having changed its name for the last two issues . 
 The magazine began as a 160 @-@ page digest , priced at 35 cents . The price stayed the same throughout the run , but the page count was cut to 128 for the eighth issue , September 1954 . The magazine was bimonthly , but issues 9 and 10 did not carry month and year dates , which has led different bibliographers to catalogue them in different ways . However , the masthead for these issues indicates that the magazine remained bimonthly , and so they are now usually catalogued as November 1954 and January 1955 , respectively ; the copyright dates on the last two issues correspond to these dates . The volume numbering was completely regular ; volume 1 had six numbers , and volume 2 ceased with its fourth number . The stories were printed in the two @-@ column format usual to digest magazines . 
 A British edition of the magazine ran for four issues on a bimonthly schedule starting in November 1953 and finishing in May 1954 . These copied the first four issues of the US version , with slightly cut contents . They were numbered 1 to 4 but were not dated . Ten years after the magazine folded , nine stories from Beyond were collected into the 160 @-@ page paperback Beyond , published in 1963 by Berkley Books ( <unk> ) and edited by Thomas <unk> ( who was not credited on the book ) . 
 = HMS Majestic ( 1895 ) = 
 HMS Majestic was a Majestic @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship of the Royal Navy . Commissioned in 1895 , she was the largest predreadnought launched at the time . She served with the Channel Fleet until 1904 , following which she was assigned to the Atlantic Fleet . In 1907 , she was part of the Home Fleet , firstly assigned to the Nore Division and then with the Devonport Division . From 1912 , she was part of the 7th Battle Squadron . 
 When World War I broke out Majestic , together with the rest of the squadron , was attached to the Channel Fleet during the early stages of the war before being detached for escort duties with Canadian troop convoys . She then had spells as a guard ship at the Nore and the Humber . In early 1915 , she was dispatched to the Mediterranean for service in the Dardanelles Campaign . She participated in bombardments of Turkish forts and supported the Allied landings at Gallipoli . On 27 May 1915 , she was torpedoed by a U @-@ boat at Cape Helles , sinking with the loss of 49 men . 
 = = Design = = 
 Majestic was laid down at the Portsmouth Dockyard in February 1894 . She was launched on 31 January 1895 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the Royal Navy less than a year later , in December 1895 . The ship was 421 feet ( 128 m ) long overall and had a beam of 75 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 27 ft ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced up to 16 @,@ 060 t ( 15 @,@ 810 long tons ; 17 @,@ 700 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines powered by eight coal @-@ fired cylindrical boilers . By 1907 – 1908 , she was re @-@ boilered with oil @-@ fired models . Her engines provided a top speed of 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) . The Majestics were considered good seaboats with an easy roll and good steamers , although they suffered from high fuel consumption . She had a crew of 672 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with four BL 12 @-@ inch Mk VIII guns in twin turrets , one forward and one aft . The turrets were placed on pear @-@ shaped barbettes ; six of her sisters had the same arrangement , but her sisters Caesar and Illustrious and all future British battleship classes had circular barbettes . Majestic also carried twelve QF 6 @-@ inch / 40 guns . They were mounted in casemates in two gun decks amidships . She also carried sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder guns and twelve QF 2 @-@ pounder guns . She was also equipped with five 18 in ( 460 mm ) torpedo tubes , four of which were submerged in the ship 's hull , with the last in a deck @-@ mounted launcher . Majestic and the other ships of her class had 9 inches ( 229 mm ) of Harvey armour , which allowed equal protection with less cost in weight compared to previous types of armour . This allowed Majestic and her sisters to have a deeper and lighter belt than previous battleships without any loss in protection . The barbettes for the main battery were protected with 14 in ( 360 mm ) of armour , and the conning tower had the same thickness of steel on the sides . The ship 's armoured deck was 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 in ( 64 to 114 mm ) thick . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 HMS Majestic commissioned into the Channel Squadron on 12 December 1895 , and served at the Portsmouth division . She was present at the Fleet Review at Spithead for the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria on 26 June 1897 , and was later flagship to Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Harry Rawson , Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Channel Fleet . Captain George Egerton was appointed in command on 28 June 1899 , and paid off in April 1901 , when Captain Edward Eden Bradford was appointed in command as she became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Arthur Wilson , who had been appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Channel Squadron . She was present at the Coronation Review for King Edward VII on 16 August 1902 . She underwent a refit at Portsmouth from February to July 1904 , and then became a unit of the Atlantic Fleet when a reorganisation resulted in the Channel Fleet becoming the Atlantic Fleet in January 1905 . On 1 October 1906 , she paid off into reserve at Portsmouth . 
 Majestic recommissioned at Portsmouth on 26 February 1907 to become flagship of the Nore Division in the new Home Fleet , stationed at the Nore . She began a refit later that year in which she received radio and new fire control systems . When the flag was transferred to another ship in January 1908 , she became a private ship in the Nore Division . In June 1908 , Majestic transferred to the Devonport Division of the Home Fleet , stationed at Devonport . Her refit was completed in 1909 , and in March 1909 she transferred to the 3rd Division at Devonport , then in August 1910 to the 4th Division at Devonport , where she underwent another refit in 1911 . In May 1912 , Majestic became part of the 7th Battle Squadron in the 3rd Fleet at Devonport . On 14 July 1912 she collided with her sister ship Victorious during manoeuvres , suffering no serious damage . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Upon the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Majestic and the rest of the 7th Battle Squadron were assigned to the Channel Fleet . Majestic underwent a refit in August and September 1914 , then covered the passage of the British Expeditionary Force to France in September 1914 . She was detached from the 7th Battle Squadron from 3 October 1914 to 14 October 1914 to escort the first Canadian troop convoy . At the end of October 1914 , Majestic was transferred to the Nore to serve as guard ship there . On 3 November 1914 , she transferred to the Humber to serve as guard ship there . In December 1914 she became a unit of the Dover Patrol , and combined with battleship Revenge to bombard German coastal artillery from off of Nieuwpoort , Belgium , on 15 December 1914 . In January 1915 , she was based at Portland . 
 = = = = Dardanelles campaign = = = = 
 In February 1915 , Majestic was assigned to participate in the upcoming Dardanelles Campaign to open the Turkish Straits , and she departed early that month under the command of Captain H. F. G. Talbot to join the Mediterranean Fleet . Upon arriving at Malta , she was fitted with what was termed " mine @-@ catching " gear so that she could serve as a " mine @-@ bumper " . She joined the Dardanelles force on 24 February 1915 , and on 26 February 1915 departed Tenedos to bombard the Ottoman Turkish inner forts at the Dardanelles that morning . On 26 February 1915 , Majestic and battleships Albion and Triumph became the first Allied heavy ships to enter the Turkish Straits during the campaign , firing on the inner forts from <unk> until 1740 hours . Majestic took a hit below the waterline , but was able to continue operations and patrolled the area again on 27 February 1915 . She supported the early landings , shelling the forts from 1125 until 1645 hours on 1 March 1915 and again while patrolling on 3 March 1915 . She arrived at Mudros on 8 March 1915 . 
 On 9 March 1915 , Majestic circumnavigated the entrance to the Dardanelles and bombarded Ottoman Turkish positions from 1007 until 1215 hours . She returned to Tenedos on 10 March 1915 , patrolled off the Dardanelles again on 15 March 1915 , and again returned to Tenedos on 16 March 1915 . Majestic participated in the final attempt to force the straits by naval power alone on 18 March 1915 . She opened fire on Fort 9 at 1420 hours and also engaged Turkish field guns hidden in woods . She shelled Fort 9 until she ceased fire at 18 : 35 ; the fort meanwhile fired on the mortally damaged battleship Ocean . Majestic was hit four times , twice in her lower tops and twice on her forecastle , and returned to Tenedos at 2200 hours with one dead and some wounded crew members . Majestic returned to patrol duties on 22 March 1915 . She shelled Turkish positions on 28 March 1915 from <unk> to 1015 and from 1250 to 1340 hours and again opened fire on 14 April at 1458 hours . On 18 April , she fired on the abandoned British submarine E15 aground near Fort Dardanos and in danger of being captured ; two picket boats , one from Majestic and one from Triumph , destroyed E15 with torpedoes , although the boat from Majestic was itself sunk by Turkish shore batteries while retiring . Majestic returned to Tenedos on 21 April 1915 . 
 On 25 April 1915 , Majestic was back in action , signalling London that Allied landings had begun at Gallipoli and supporting them with coastal bombardments until 1915 hours . She brought 99 wounded troops aboard at 2110 hours and recovered all her boats before anchoring off Gallipoli for the night . On 26 April 1915 , she was back in action early , opening fire at <unk> hours . On 27 April 1915 she exchanged fire with Turkish guns , with several Turkish shells achieving very near misses before both sides ceased firing at 1130 hours . On 29 April 1915 she again was anchored off Gallipoli . Majestic relieved Triumph as flagship of Admiral Nicholson , commanding the squadrons supporting the troops ashore off Cape Helles , on 25 May 1915 . 
 = = = Loss = = = 
 On 27 May 1915 , while stationed off W Beach at Cape Helles , Majestic became the third battleship to be torpedoed off the Gallipoli peninsula in two weeks . Around <unk> hours , Commander Otto Hersing of the German submarine U @-@ 21 fired a single torpedo through the defensive screen of destroyers and anti @-@ torpedo nets , striking Majestic and causing a huge explosion . The ship began to list to port and in nine minutes had capsized in 54 feet ( 16 m ) of water , killing 49 men . Her masts hit the mud of the sea bottom , and her upturned hull remained visible for many months until it was finally submerged when her foremast collapsed during a storm . 
 = Spoken For = 
 Spoken For is the second studio album by Christian rock band MercyMe . Released on October 1 , 2002 , Spoken For sold 28 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuting at number 41 on the Billboard 200 ; it also peaked at number two on the Christian Albums chart and number six on the Top Pop Catalog Albums chart . The album received a generally positive reception from critics , some of whom praised the album as being both a lyrical and musical progression from their debut album Almost There . Several critics also noted a shift in sound from Almost There , describing Spoken For as having a roots rock sound . At the 34th GMA Dove Awards , Spoken For was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year ; the album was certified Gold by the RIAA in October 2003 . 
 Three singles were released in promotion of Spoken For . The lead single and title track , " Spoken For " , peaked at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts . The second single from the album , " Word of God Speak " , spent a record 23 weeks at the top of the Billboard Christian Songs chart , and also topped the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts . " The Change Inside of Me " was released as the final single from the album , and peaked at number eight on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 All songs on the album were written and composed by MercyMe personnel , Bart Millard , Jim Bryson , Robby Shaffer , Mike Scheuchzer , Nathan Cochran , and Pete Kipley . Mark Stuart also contributed to " All the Above " . 
 Discussing the progression from MercyMe 's first album Almost There to the songs on Spoken For , MercyMe 's lead singer Bart Millard said in an interview : " Our goal early on was to make sure our songs were ' singable ' and make sure they fit on power point because we wanted to write songs for corporate worship . Spoken For is filled with songs that I pray the church will use . " He added that this album leaned more toward rock than Almost There . Millard said of the origin of the album title : " Over the last year I ’ ve been consumed with the idea that God is so crazy in love with us — just knowing that we are part of something bigger and we worship a God who ’ s in complete control no matter how good or bad things get . The phrase " spoken for " really stuck with me . " 
 Spoken For was recorded in several locations : Luminous Sound in Dallas , Texas , The Sound Kitchen in Franklin , Tennessee , Indigo Room in Franklin , Tennessee , <unk> Sound Lab in <unk> Island , Georgia , The <unk> in Greenville , Texas , Mountain View Recorders in <unk> , New Mexico , and Playground Recording in Wylie , Texas . It was mastered by Richard Dodd at Vital Recordings , and mixed by F. Reid Shippen at Recording Arts in Nashville , Tennessee , with the exceptions of " All Because of This " , " Word of God Speak , and " Love of God " , ( which were mixed at Salvo Mix by Salvo ) , and " Go " ( which was mixed by J. R. McNeely ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 MercyMe had considered themselves a rock band when they started out . On Spoken For they have progressed to sound " like a solid roots rock band " while retaining an " inspirational adult contemporary sound . " Several critics described the overall sound of the album as roots rock , also regarding Spoken For as a progression or shift beyond the sound of Almost There . The lyrical content has been described as ' refreshingly deep ' and ' thoughtful ' . The instrumentation on Spoken For includes electric guitar , acoustic guitar , bass guitar , and keyboard ; string instruments are also present . The songs on Spoken For are generally guitar @-@ driven , although " Word of God Speak " features only piano and strings over Millard 's vocals . 
 " Spoken For " , the title track , " offers a look at Jesus recognizing His children at heaven ’ s gate " and has been referred to as ' worshipful ' . Among the individual tracks on the album , " The Change Inside of Me " has been described as " firmly on the pop side of adult contemporary music " , as well as " upbeat pop / rock " . " All The Above " has also been described as ' pop ' ; lyrically , it describes " the elation that rang through the heavens when we became children of God " . " Your Glory Goes On " is also an upbeat pop / rock song . " Crazy " is described as a driving ballad " which explores the merits of heaven over earth " , with its opening bars sounding " a little like a slower version of The Police 's " Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic " . " Come One , Come All " sounds like a cross between the sounds of <unk> and John Mellencamp . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Spoken For " was released as the lead single from Spoken For ; it peaked at number one on the Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , spending seven and six weeks respectively at the top of the charts . It also peaked at number six on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " was released as the second single from the album , and peaked at number one on the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts , as well as at number one Radio & Records Christian AC and INSPO charts , and at number 25 on the Radio & Records Christian CHR chart . " Word of God Speak " spent 23 weeks atop the Christian Songs chart , a record for that chart . A third and final single , " The Change Inside pf Me " , peaked at number eight on the Christian CHR chart . 
 = = Release = = 
 Spoken For was released on October 1 , 2002 . It sold 23 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , debuting at number 41 on the Billboard 200 and number two on the Christian Albums chart and at number six on the Top Pop Catalog Albums chart . Spoken For ranked at number ten on the 2003 year @-@ end Christian Albums chart , and at number 20 on the 2004 year @-@ end Christian Albums chart . It also ranked at number 46 on the 2000s decade @-@ end Christian Albums chart . The RIAA certified Spoken For Gold in 2003 , signifying shipments of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critical reception to Spoken For was generally positive . Kevin McNeese of NewReleaseTuesday gave the album four out of five stars , comparing the album favorably to MercyMe 's previous material . Marcia <unk> of CCM Magazine gave the album a positive review , noting a progression in musical focus , songwriting , and vocals . Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today praised the album for its cohesiveness , and found the album an improvement upon the band 's debut album Almost There in its songwriting ; he also praised what he regarded as a shift to a roots rock musical style . Tony Cummings of Cross Rhythms gave the album seven out of ten stars , praising the songs as being " beautifully crafted " . Wendy Lee <unk> of Crosswalk.com praised the band 's musical and lyrical growth since their debut effort , as well as the " passionate intensity and emotion " of lead singer Bart Millard 's vocals . 
 Marcia <unk> of CCM Magazine concluded : " While not a perfect sophomore effort , as the group occasionally sways to the triteness so often found on AC / pop projects , MercyMe has progressed in musical focus , songwriting and vocals . " 
 Spoken For was nominated for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 34th GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 ( Credits lifted from the album liner notes ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 ( Credits lifted from the album liner notes ) 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Flying Eagle cent = 
 The Flying Eagle cent is a one @-@ cent piece struck by the Mint of the United States as a pattern coin in 1856 , and for circulation in 1857 and 1858 . The coin was designed by Mint Chief Engraver James B. Longacre , with the eagle in flight based on the work of Longacre 's predecessor , Christian Gobrecht . 
 By the early 1850s , the large cent ( about the size of a half dollar ) being issued by the Mint was becoming both unpopular in commerce and expensive to coin . After experimenting with various sizes and compositions , the Mint decided on an alloy of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel for a new , smaller cent . After the Mint produced patterns with an 1856 date and gave them to legislators and officials , Congress formally authorized the new piece in February 1857 . 
 The new cent was issued in exchange for the worn Spanish colonial silver coin that had circulated in the U.S. until then , as well as for its larger predecessor . So many cents were issued that they choked commercial channels , especially as they were not legal tender and no one had to take them . The eagle design did not strike well , and was replaced in 1859 by Longacre 's Indian Head cent . 
 = = Inception = = 
 The cent was the first official United States coin to be struck at the Philadelphia Mint in 1793 . These pieces , today known as large cents , were made of pure copper and were about the size of a half dollar . They were struck every year , except 1815 due to a shortage of metal , but were slow to become established in commerce . Worn Spanish colonial silver pieces were then commonly used as money throughout the United States . 
 The Mint then struck silver or gold in response to deposits by those holding bullion , and made little profit from those transactions . By the 1840s , profits , or seignorage , from monetizing copper into cents helped fund the Mint . In 1849 , copper prices rose sharply , causing the Department of the Treasury to investigate possible alternatives to the large one @-@ cent pieces . The cent was unpopular in trade ; as it was not a legal tender , nobody had to take it , and banks and merchants often refused it . The cent was disliked for its large size as well . In 1837 , the eccentric New York chemist Lewis Feuchtwanger had experimented with a smaller cent size in making model coins as part of a plan to sell his alloy ( similar to base @-@ metal German silver ) to the government for use in coinage . His pieces circulated as hard times tokens in the recession years of the late 1830s and early 1840s . 
 By 1850 , it was no longer profitable for the Mint to strike cents , and on May 14 , New York Senator Daniel S. Dickinson introduced legislation for a cent made out of billon , copper with a small amount of silver . At the time , it was widely felt that coins should contain a large proportion of their face value in metal . The coin would be annular ; that is , it would have a hole in the middle . The Mint struck experimental pieces , and found that it was difficult to eject such pieces from the presses where they were struck , and that it was expensive to recover the silver from the alloy . Provisions for a smaller cent were dropped from the legislation that gave congressional approval for the three @-@ cent piece in 1851 . Numismatic historian Walter Breen suggested that one factor in rejecting the holed coins was that they reminded many of Chinese cash coins with their minimal purchasing value . A drop in copper prices in 1851 and early 1852 made the matter of a smaller cent less urgent at the Department of the Treasury , which supervised Mint activities . 
 Copper prices resurged in late 1852 and into 1853 past the $ 0 @.@ 40 per pound that the Mint viewed as the break @-@ even point for cent manufacture after considering the cost of production ; 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 45 kg ) of copper made 42 ⅔ large cents . In 1853 , patterns using a base @-@ metal alloy were struck using a quarter eagle obverse die , about the size of a dime . Some of the proposed alloys contained the metal nickel . Also considered for use in the cent was " French bronze " ( 95 % copper with the remainder tin and zinc ) and various varieties of German silver . In his 1854 annual report , Mint Director James Ross Snowden advocated the issue of small , bronze cents , as well as the elimination of the half cent , which he described as useless in commerce . A number of pattern cents were struck in 1854 and 1855 . These featured various designs , including several depictions of Liberty and two adaptations of work by the late Mint chief engraver , Christian Gobrecht : one showing a seated Liberty , which Gobrecht had placed on the silver coins in the 1830s , and another of a flying eagle , which Gobrecht had created based upon a sketch by Titian Peale . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In early 1856 , Snowden proposed legislation to allow him to issue a smaller cent , but leaving the size and metallic composition up to him and Secretary of the Treasury James Guthrie . Under the plan , the new piece would be legal tender , up to ten cents . It would be issued in exchange for the old Spanish silver still circulating in the United States . In the exchange , the Spanish silver would be given full value ( 12 ½ cents per real , or bit ) when normally such pieces traded at about a 20 % discount due to wear . The loss the government would take on the trade would be paid for by the seignorage on the base @-@ metal pieces . The new cents would also be issued for the old cents , and in exchange for the same value in half cents — that denomination was to be discontinued . The bill was introduced in the Senate on March 25 , 1856 . The old cent weighed 168 grains ( 10 @.@ 9 g ) ; on April 16 , the bill was amended to provide for a cent of at least 95 % copper weighing at least 96 grains ( 6 @.@ 2 g ) and passed the Senate in that form . 
 While the legislation was being considered , Mint Melter and Refiner James Curtis Booth was conducting experiments on alloys that might be appropriate for the new cent . In July 1856 , Snowden wrote to Guthrie , proposing an alloy of 88 % copper and 12 % nickel as ideal and suggesting amendments to the pending bill that would accomplish this . Booth also wrote to Guthrie to boost the alloy ; both men proposed a weight of 72 grains ( 4 @.@ 7 g ) as convenient as 80 cents would equal a troy pound ( 373 g ) , although the avoirdupois pound ( 454 g ) was more commonly used for base metals . 
 The Mint 's chief engraver , James B. Longacre , was instructed to prepare designs for pattern coins . Initially , Longacre worked with Liberty head designs such as were common at the time , but Snowden asked that a flying eagle design be prepared . This occurred as Booth 's experiments continued ; the first cent patterns with the flying eagle design were about the size of a quarter . To promote the new alloy , the Mint had 50 half cents struck in it , and had them sent to Washington for Treasury officials to show to officials and congressmen . In early November 1856 , Longacre prepared dies in what would prove to be the final design , depicting a flying eagle on the obverse and a wreathed denomination on the reverse , in the size sought by Booth . 
 The Mint struck at least several hundred patterns using Longacre 's flying eagle design in the proposed composition . In an effort to secure public acceptance of the new pieces , these were distributed to various congressmen and other officials , initially in November 1856 . Two hundred were sent to the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures , while four were given to President Franklin Pierce . At least 634 specimens were distributed , and possibly several thousand ; extra were available on request . This was the origin of the highly collectable 1856 Flying Eagle cent , which is considered by numismatists as part of the Flying Eagle series although it was actually a pattern or transition piece , not an official coin , as congressional approval had not yet been granted . Additional 1856 small cents were later struck by Snowden for illicit sale , and to exchange for pieces the Mint sought for its coin collection . 
 In December 1856 , Snowden wrote to Missouri Representative John S. Phelps , hoping for progress with the legislation , and stating that he was already " pressed on all hands , and from every quarter , for the new cent — in fact , the public are very anxious for its issue " . When the legislation , amended to include the weight and alloy the Mint had decided on , was debated in the House of Representatives on December 24 , it was opposed by Tennessee Congressman George Washington Jones over the legal tender provision ; Jones felt that under the Constitution , only gold and silver should be made legal tender . Phelps defended the bill on the ground that Congress had the constitutional power to regulate the value of money , but when the bill was brought back up to be considered on January 14 , 1857 , the legal tender provision had been removed . This time , the bill was opposed by New York Congressman Thomas R. Whitney , who objected to a provision in the bill that legalized the Mint 's practice of designing and striking medals commissioned by the public , feeling that the government should not compete with private medallists . The provision was removed , and the bill passed the following day . The House version was then considered by the Senate , which debated it on February 4 , and passed it with a further amendment allowing the redemption of the Spanish coins for a minimum of two years . The House agreed to this on February 18 , and President Pierce signed the bill on the 21st . The act made foreign gold and silver coins no longer legal tender , but Spanish dollars were redeemable at their nominal value for two years in exchange for the new copper @-@ nickel cents . The half cent was abolished . The new pieces would be the same size ( 19 mm ) , though somewhat heavier , than cents are today . 
 In anticipation of the success of the legislation , most of the 333 @,@ 456 large cents struck in 1857 never left the Philadelphia Mint , and were later melted . Snowden purchased a new set of rollers and other equipment so that the Mint could produce its own cent planchets , the first time it had done so in over 50 years . Although the legislation was still a day from final passage , Snowden recommended Longacre 's designs to Guthrie on February 20 . Guthrie approved them on the 24th , though he requested that the edge of the coin be made less sharp ; Snowden promised to comply . Flying Eagle cents were struck beginning in April 1857 and were held pending official release . The Mint stored the pieces pending accumulation of a sufficient supply ; in mid @-@ May , Snowden notified Philadelphia newspapers that distribution would begin on May 25 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Longacre 's obverse of an eagle in flight is based on that of the Gobrecht dollar , struck in small quantities from 1836 to 1839 . Although Gobrecht 's model is not known with certainty , some sources state that the bird in flight was based on Peter the eagle , a tame bird fed by Mint workers in the early 1830s until it was caught up in machinery and killed . The bird was stuffed , and is still displayed at the Philadelphia Mint . 
 Despite its derivative nature , Longacre 's eagle has been widely admired . According to art historian Cornelius Vermeule in his book on U.S. coins , the flying eagle motif , when used in the 1830s , was " the first numismatic bird that could be said to derive from nature rather than from colonial carving or heraldry " . Vermeule described the Flying Eagle cent 's replacement , the Indian Head cent , as " far less attractive to the eye than the Peale @-@ Gobrecht flying eagle and its variants " . Sculptor Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens , when commissioned in 1905 to provide new designs for American coinage , sought to return a flying eagle design to the cent , writing to President Theodore Roosevelt , " I am using a flying eagle , a modification of the device which was used on the cent of 1857 . I had not seen that coin for many years , and was so impressed by it that I thought if carried out with some modifications , nothing better could be done . It is by all odds the best design on any American coin . " Saint @-@ Gaudens did return the flying eagle to American coinage , but his design was used for the reverse of the double eagle rather than the cent . 
 The wreath on the reverse is also derivative , having been previously used on Longacre 's Type II gold dollar of 1854 , and the three @-@ dollar piece of the same year . It is composed of leaves of wheat , corn , cotton and tobacco , thus including produce associated with both the North and the South . The cotton leaves are sometimes said to be maple leaves ; the two types are not dissimilar , and maple leaves are more widely known than cotton leaves . An ear of corn is also visible . 
 = = Release , production , and collecting = = 
 The Philadelphia Mint released the new cents to the public on May 25 , 1857 . In anticipation of large popular demand , Mint authorities built a temporary wooden structure in the courtyard of the Philadelphia facility . On the morning of the date of release , hundreds of people queued , one line for those exchanging Spanish silver for cents , the other for those bringing in old copper cents and half cents . From 9 am clerks paid out cents for the old pieces ; outside the Mint precincts , early purchasers sold the new cents at a premium . Snowden wrote to Guthrie , " the demand for them is enormous ... we had on hand this morning $ 30 @,@ 000 worth , that is three million pieces . Nearly all of this amount will be paid out today . " The 1856 specimen became publicly known about the time of issuance , and had the public checking their pocket change ; 1856 small cents sold for as much as $ 2 by 1859 . The public interest in the new cents set off a coin collecting boom : in addition to seeking the rare 1856 cent , some tried to collect sets of large cents back to 1793 , and found they would have to pay a premium for the rarer dates . 
 The Mint had trouble striking the new design . This was due to the hard copper @-@ nickel alloy and the fact that the eagle on one side of the piece was directly opposite parts of the reverse design ; efforts to bring out the design more fully led to increased die breakage . Many Flying Eagle cents show weaknesses , especially at the eagle 's head and tail , which are opposite the wreath . In 1857 , Snowden suggested the replacement of the eagle with a head of Christopher Columbus . Longacre replied that as there had been objections to proposals to place George Washington on the coinage , there would also be to a Columbus design . Despite the difficulties , the 17 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 Flying Eagle cents struck at Philadelphia in 1857 constituted the greatest production of a single coin in a year at a U.S. mint to that time . 
 In 1858 , the Mint tried to alleviate the breakage problem using a new version of the cent with a shallower relief . This attempt led to the major variety of the series , as coins of the revised version have smaller letters in the inscriptions than those struck earlier . The two varieties are about equally common , and were probably struck side by side for some period as the Mint used up older dies . Efforts to conserve dies were the probable cause of another variety , the 1858 / 7 , as 1857 @-@ dated dies were overstruck to allow them to be used in the new year . 
 The Mint prepared pattern coins with a much smaller eagle in 1858 , which struck well , but which officials disliked . Snowden directed Longacre to prepare various patterns that he could select from for a new piece to replace the Flying Eagle cent as of January 1 , 1859 . The Mint produced between 60 and 100 sets of twelve patterns showing various designs ; these were circulated to officials and also were quietly sold by the Mint over the next several years . Longacre 's design showing Liberty wearing an Indian @-@ style <unk> was adopted , with a wreath with lower relief for the reverse of the Indian Head cent , solving the metal flow issues . On November 4 , 1858 , Snowden wrote to the Treasury Department , stating that the Flying Eagle cent had proved " not very acceptable to the general population " as they felt the bird was not true to life , and that the Native American design would " giv [ e ] it the character of America " . 
 By September 1857 , the volume of Spanish silver coming to the Mint had been so large that Snowden gave up the idea of being able to pay for it just with cents , authorizing payment with gold and silver coins . On March 3 , 1859 , the redemption of the foreign pieces was extended for an additional two years . As commerce was choked with the new cents , Congress repealed this provision in July 1860 , though Snowden continued the practice for more than a year without authorization from Congress . Bankers Magazine for October 1861 reported the end of the exchange , and quoted the Philadelphia Press : " the large issue of the new nickel cents has rendered them almost as much of a nuisance as the old Spanish currency " . According to Breen , " the foreign silver coins had been legal tender , receivable for all kinds of payments including postage stamps and some taxes ; the nickel cents were not . They quickly filled shopkeepers ' <unk> to the exclusion of almost everything else ; they began to be legally refused in trade . " The glut was ended by the hoarding of all federal coinage in the wake of the economic upset caused by the Civil War . 
 After the war , the hoarded Flying Eagle cents re @-@ entered circulation . Many remained there only a few years , being pulled out from among the new bronze cents in Treasury Department redemption programs in the 1860s and 1870s — thirteen million copper @-@ nickel cents were retired by exchange for other base @-@ metal coinage . By the 1880s , it was a rarity in circulation . Today , Flying Eagle cents are relatively inexpensive in well @-@ worn grades . The 2015 edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins lists the 1857 , 1858 large letters , and 1858 small letters each at $ 28 in Good @-@ 4 condition , the lowest collectable grade . The 1856 is $ 7 @,@ 000 in that grade , rising to $ 22 @,@ 000 in uncirculated MS @-@ 63 . The 1858 / 7 starts at $ 75 in G @-@ 4 , rising to $ 10 @,@ 000 in MS @-@ 63 . An 1856 cent in MS @-@ 66 condition sold at auction in January 2004 for $ 172 @,@ 500 . 
 = Looking After Our Own = 
 " Looking After Our Own " is the second episode of the British espionage television series Spooks . It first aired on BBC One in the United Kingdom on 20 May 2002 . The episode was written by series creator David Wolstencroft , and directed by Bharat Nalluri . The episode focuses on MI5 's efforts in bringing down right @-@ wing leader Robert Osbourne ( Kevin McNally ) , who is believed to be planning a series of race riots across the UK . 
 The storyline was originally slated for the finale of the first series , but was pushed forward when the producers were pressured to deliver the story to the BBC . Filming took two weeks , around December 2001 . After its original broadcast , the episode was viewed by over eight million Britons , a decline of one million from the first episode , but was still the strongest performer in its time slot . The episode marked the death of a main character , Helen Flynn ( Lisa Faulkner ) , which was met with considerable controversy due to its perceived violence ; at 250 complaints , it marked the highest number of complaints for a television programme in 2002 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 MI5 suspect that right @-@ wing leader Robert Osbourne is planning a series of race riots in the UK . A team led by Danny Hunter ( David Oyelowo ) attempts to bug his home , only to find it impossible because of the home 's high @-@ tech countersurveillance equipment . What MI5 does find is that Osbourne abuses his wife Claire ( Debra Stephenson ) ; believing Claire is vulnerable for recruitment , Section D start " Operation Greensleeves " and tasks a " runner " to befriend her before recruiting . However , vetting did not pick up on the runner 's alcoholism after she becomes involved in a road traffic accident while inebriated . Harry Pearce ( Peter Firth ) appoints Tom Quinn ( Matthew Macfadyen ) and junior administrative officer Helen Flynn ( Lisa Faulkner ) to step in and pose as a married couple who are substitute tutors at the same Romford community college Claire is attending . 
 The two initially succeed , and are invited to dinner with Osbourne at his home . However , during their visit , Osbourne catches Helen out by addressing Tom as her boyfriend rather than husband ; Helen 's improvising makes Osbourne more suspicious of the two . Later , one of Osbourne 's contacts , Nick Thomas ( Tom Goodman @-@ Hill ) , is revealed to be freelance journalist Kieran Harvey . When Osbourne discovers this , he has Harvey murdered . Tom and Helen gain Claire 's trust and recruit her ; she agrees to help the two in exchange for a £ 600 @-@ a @-@ week account and transport to anywhere in the world . 
 In the meantime , a cargo of illegal immigrants from Chechnya is intercepted by HM Customs and Excise ; the traffickers throw their cargo overboard , drowning them . Believing the traffickers will change their routes , Tessa Phillips ( Jenny Agutter ) and Zoe Reynolds ( Keeley Hawes ) investigate and discover a link between the shipment and Osbourne . With the information gathered from " Greensleeves " , they discover that Osbourne intends to choke the asylum system by overcrowding the holding centres , and after his followers stir up the race riots , Osbourne would encourage independent Member of Parliament ( MP ) Bill Watson ( Jasper Jacob ) to raise the issue of asylum seekers in the House of Commons . 
 Tom and Helen prepare to move out , but are kidnapped by Osbourne 's gang and taken to the kitchen of his waste management plant for interrogation . Knowing they are MI5 officers , Osbourne demands everything Tom knows about their operation ; when Tom fails to cooperate , Osbourne forces Helen 's hand , followed by her head into a deep fryer , before shooting her . Before Tom can suffer the same fate , Claire throws a cigarette into the vat , which ignites , buying Tom time to escape and return to Thames House . However , Tom and Harry are disgusted to hear that the powers @-@ that @-@ be will take no action against Osbourne , in order to track the movements of all far @-@ right groups . At the end of the episode . Harry has Osbourne assassinated . Bill Watson receives photographs of the dead refugees washed up on a beach , presumably sent by MI5 , along with a note reading " are you happy with your wash ? " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and pre @-@ production = = = 
 The episode 's storyline , including Helen 's death , was meant to be in the first series finale . However , by then , the second episode was not yet written , and series producer Kudos were due to deliver the story to the BBC in one month . As a result , the episode was brought forward to the second slot . Since the first episode began Spooks " with a bang " , series creator and writer David Wolstencroft , was under pressure to top the efforts of the first episode with the second , but not by much . During the writing stage , he introduced a story arc involving Danny Hunter and his obsession with money and spending , apparently mirroring the writer ; the arc was created for the temptations that the officers may have . In the original screenplay , Danny was to spend on his mother . 
 Wolstencroft included some suggestions from his friends and girlfriend . An early scene was to take place in a shower room , but was rewritten when the producers thought it would be " too racy " for a 9 : 00 p.m. audience . In another instance , a long sequence would take place at sea concerning the smugglers dropping off illegal immigrants into the water ; the scenes were cut before filming due to time constraints . Also , before deciding on waste disposal , Osbourne was originally going to head a security company . The funeral scene towards the end of the episode was inspired by The Godfather II . In the end , the script was rewritten four times before the BBC took the final version of the episode . 
 Kevin McNally was cast as the antagonist Robert Osbourne ; McNally was chosen because the producers thought he would be perfect to play the part , as is the case with Debra Stephenson , who portrayed his wife . Child actor Daniel Chenery , who played the part of their son , Sammy , was chosen due to his likeness of a younger version of McNally . Also , Simon Crawford Collins 's wife made a cameo appearance as a BT operator . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place over a 13 to 14 days period in December 2001 . It was not filmed on order of the script ; the scenes set around the Osbourne residence for instance , were all filmed at once , during two to three days , though during the episodes , the scenes took place in separate parts of the episode . Parts of the introduction scenes , where Danny 's team break into Osbourne 's house , was actually filmed on the Grid set . Parts of the sequence were originally filmed without sound ; the sound would later be added during post production . The footage of the drowned immigrants found at the shore were shot by the second unit headed by producer Simon Crawford Collins on a pebbled courtyard in Kensington to double as a beach . 
 Some of the exterior scenes at night were filmed with the street wet down so that the lights could kick off the ground . Also in the episode , the editing suite , where the series was edited , was used as a set . The <unk> shopping centre in Shepherd 's Bush , London was used in one scene as an airport , as well as the shopping centre itself in another . The <unk> Community College was filmed at a rugby club . The safe house Tom and Helen were appointed to was filmed in two separate locations . One of those locations was used before in the Mary Kane interrogation scene in the pilot episode " Thou Shalt Not Kill " . In one scene where Tom was driving to the operation the car was in fact towed ; an error was made in the episode where the car looked taller than the other cars on the road during the shoot . 
 = = = Helen Flynn death scene = = = 
 Wolstencroft wrote the death scene with the intention of giving the audience the impression that no one in the series is safe . According to producer Jane Featherstone , the idea to kill off a main character involved a female getting " her head set on fire " later in the series , but she decided " let 's move the most dramatic thing you 've got to episode two and kill off the only actress the audience recognise [ Faulkner was considered the only recognisable cast member when the series was introduced ] and then you 've got them hooked . " Matthew Macfadyen stated that the shooting of the death scene , although not emotionally draining , was rather tough , and gruelling to perform . The part where Osbourne forces Flynn 's arm into the fryer was done with a rubber arm made to double Faulkner 's arm . Furthermore , the " oil " was in fact cold tea with food colour . 
 Director Bharat Nalluri wanted as little of the torture to be seen as possible , because he wanted the sequence to be more psychological to make it easier to frighten the audience , since they know the physicality of being burnt , whereas if Helen was shot , not as many would . Producer Stephen Garrett wanted to show a more realistic sense of violence , rather than a fantastical " cartoon violence " " in which blows to the head with iron bars leave small bruises rather than crushed skulls , gunshot wounds leave neat abrasions in conveniently fleshy parts of the anatomy rather than <unk> their victims ; and fights that would <unk> Mike Tyson are walked away from with barely a mark . " 
 = = Broadcast , reception and controversy = = 
 The episode was first broadcast on 20 May 2002 , during the 9 to 10 pm time slot . It achieved overnight viewing figures of 7 @.@ 8 million , with a 35 per cent audience share . Ratings were down over one million from the pilot episode the previous week . Regardless " Looking After Our Own " won its time slot ; the finale episode of ITV1 drama Helen West came second , with 4 @.@ 9 million viewers and a 21 per cent share . The final numbers posted on the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board website went up slightly to 8 @.@ 1 million viewers , making the episode the ninth most viewed BBC One broadcast , and the nineteenth most viewed broadcast in total the week it aired . 
 The episode attracted controversy following the demise of Helen Flynn after her hand and head were forced into a deep fryer . The death scenes attracted over 250 complaints , 154 of them to the television watchdog , the Broadcasting Standards Commission , the highest number of complaints for a television programme in 2002 . In the wake of the complaints , BBC insiders had admitted that the scenes " clearly disturbed " some of the viewers , but also defended their decision to show the scene as it would show the audience " the kind of threat which might be faced by agents engaged in the fight against terrorism . " The Broadcasting Standards Commission stated that despite the shocking content ; " in the context was acceptable and important for the later narrative , " however the watchdog still criticised the BBC for failing to warn viewers of the violence to come . Garrett refuted this , stating : " Not only was there a clear warning before the programme began , but for anyone who missed that , the subject matter of the episode ( a conspiracy to stir up inter @-@ racial violence perpetrated by a man who clearly beat his wife ) was hardly the stuff of which chirpy little bucolic fantasies are made . " 
 Wolstencroft stated that after watching the episode with his friends , they both commended and criticised his work : " I got some angry phone calls from my friends the next day saying ' how could you , but well done , but how could you , but she was so nice , but how could you , but well done ' . " Oyelowo also responded to the controversy , believing that it came from a result of Faulkner 's male fans . Comedian Charlie Brooker however , commended the scene , as well as the series in general , stating in his Guardian column : " The moment her head was forced into the deep @-@ fat @-@ fryer , viewers reared on the formulaic , it 'll @-@ be @-@ alright @-@ in @-@ the @-@ end blandness of cookie @-@ cutter populist dramas like Casualty and Merseybeat sat up and blinked in disbelief : here was a major BBC drama series that actually had the nerve to confound expectation . " In a January 2010 poll , fans of the show voted Helen 's death as the " most shocking death scene " in the series , drawing 49 % of the votes . 
 = Do or Die ( Thirty Seconds to Mars song ) = 
 " Do or Die " is a song by American rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars , featured on their fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) . Written and produced by lead vocalist Jared Leto , " Do or Die " explores the feeling of standing up and living one 's dreams . The song is styled in electronic rock and imbued with elements of arena rock . It was serviced to mainstream radio in July 2013 in Europe , and was released as a promotional single in the United States in March 2014 . A version of the song remixed by Dutch music producer Afrojack was digitally released in March 2014 and later included on the deluxe edition of Afrojack 's debut studio album Forget the World ( 2014 ) . 
 " Do or Die " received positive reviews from music critics , who hailed its musical diversity and its grand and euphoric nature . It charted in some nations due to digital sales from the parent album . The accompanying music video , directed by Leto , features live footage of Thirty Seconds to Mars onstage as well as stories from their fans , personally interviewed by Leto . The video garnered general acclaim from critics , who lauded its atmosphere and simplicity . The song was included in the setlist of the band 's Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour and the subsequent Carnivores Tour . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Do or Die " was written and produced by Jared Leto . It was engineered by Jamie Reed Schefman and mixed by Serban Ghenea . John Hanes engineered it for mixing at Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia . The song was recorded at The International Centre for the Advancement of the Arts and Sciences of Sound in Los Angeles , California and mastered by Howie Weinberg and Dan Gerbarg at Howie Weinberg Mastering . Thirty Seconds to Mars unveiled six songs from their fourth studio album Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams , including " Do or Die " , during a preview event held at the Electric Lady Studios in New York City on March 14 , 2013 . 
 " Do or Die " is an electronic rock song with influences and elements from arena rock . It opens with a female voiceover introducing the song 's title in the Chinese language , after which there is an electronic introduction . This is followed by the sound of guitars , drum beats and synthesizers . After the first verse , the pre @-@ chorus follows , with Leto voicing the line , " I will never forget the moment " . The full @-@ throated chorus then follows , which features heavy use of synthesizers and drums . The song includes a contribution from the band 's fans , credited as the Knights of the White Shadow , who provide additional vocals recorded at the band 's studio . 
 In an interview with PureVolume , Leto explained that the song is " about standing up and living out your dreams " . Markos Papadatos , in his review for Digital Journal , called it an " upbeat " song which " deals with one taking their own stance on their beliefs , and living life to the fullest " . In a preview of the record , Jeff Benjamin from Fuse described the song by saying that the band goes " the synthy dance route on the track 's intro before fire @-@ alarm guitars and pummeling drums roar in and smash the Korg keyboards to bits " . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Do or Die " was released as a promotional single in Europe in July 2013 through Virgin Records . The song debuted at number 98 on the Ultratip chart of Belgium 's Flemish region on August 24 . The following week , it jumped to number 73 and peaked at number 40 on September 21 . On August 30 , 2013 , it debuted at number 75 on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 . In the Czech Republic , the song entered the national airplay chart at number 91 on the week ending October 20 , 2013 . In Slovakia , it debuted at number 67 on September 22 , 2013 and eventually peaked at number 29 on January 26 , 2014 . Polydor Records released " Do or Die " in the United Kingdom on September 9 , 2013 . It entered the UK Rock Chart at number 38 . After four weeks , the song peaked at number seven on the issue dated September 28 , 2013 . " Do or Die " was used by Major League Baseball as the theme song for the 2013 Major League Baseball Postseason . 
 In March 2014 , it was announced that Dutch music producer Afrojack and Thirty Seconds to Mars had collaborated on a remixed version of the song . It became commercially available for download in March 2014 and was later included on the deluxe edition of Afrojack 's debut studio album Forget the World . Leto described the collaboration by saying , " It was a lot of fun , and it 's kind of our little summer song . I think it 's good to do things that are unexpected . It keeps it exciting and collaboration is always an interesting thing . " The remixed version of " Do or Die " entered the Dutch Top 40 at number 53 on April 19 , 2014 . After five weeks , it peaked at number 42 . The song debuted at number 46 on US Dance / Electronic Songs and reached a peak of number 33 on June 7 , 2014 . 
 In the United States , " Do or Die " was sent to modern rock radio on March 17 , 2014 , after the release of " City of Angels " . It entered the Billboard Alternative Songs chart at number 39 and peaked at number 20 on the issue dated October 11 , 2014 . It debuted on the Billboard Hot Rock Songs chart at number 40 on August 9 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Do or Die " received generally positive reviews from music critics . Emily Zemler , of Billboard , wrote that between the album 's " eclectic experimentation " and " voiceless soundscapes " , the band " slotted in this propulsive rocker , an arena @-@ ready anthem " . She considered " Do or Die " to be one of the album 's " most straightforward tracks " . Dan Slessor of Alternative Press praised it as one of the album 's highlights , in which Thirty Seconds to Mars exercises their capacity for writing " titanic choruses full of sweeping drama in a manner that is almost untouchable " . Brent Faulkner from PopMatters gave a mixed response , writing that the song " relies on a familiar beat as well as liberal layering " . Writers for Contactmusic commended " Do or Die " as one of the standout songs on Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams and a " slow @-@ burning hit of epic , synth @-@ heavy electronica " . 
 Kaitlyn Hodnicki from Stature magazine was impressed with the song , calling it one of the album 's more upbeat tracks , which " blooms into another epic soundscape led by [ Leto 's ] vocals and some brilliantly used electronic elements " . She felt that the fans ' vocal contribution to the song harks back to previous album This Is War without sounding " cliché or overdone " . Sarah O ' Hara from Lowdown also responded positively to the track , writing that " glorious chants fuel the uplifting ' Do or Die ' " . In a mixed review , John Watt from Drowned in Sound called the song " half @-@ baked synth @-@ rock . " Markos Papadatos from Digital Journal rated it an A and wrote that " the band soars as whole on this tune " , calling Leto 's vocals " raw , powerful and captivating . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The music video for " Do or Die " was directed by Leto , who was credited as pseudonym Bartholomew Cubbins . Leto developed its concept as a companion piece to the music video of " Closer to the Edge " ( 2010 ) , shot during the Into the Wild Tour . " Do or Die " was filmed in the summer of 2013 , during a European leg of the Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour and features live footage of Thirty Seconds to Mars onstage as well as fan commentary . It premiered on August 5 , 2013 . 
 Leto personally interviewed the band 's fans , termed as the Echelon , who shared stories about the importance of music in their lives , some personal struggles and their own dreams . In an interview with MTV News , the frontman explained that he was inspired by the will to document the personal changes experienced by the band and its audience . " Most of the interviews " , Leto explained , " I did myself , so they 're really intimate . It 's me , it 's them , and it 's the camera . What I 've found is , that if you talk to everybody long enough , you find an incredible story . Every single person has a moment in their life , something that they 've found a solution for , a story to tell . Some are funny , some are really intriguing , and if you ask the right questions , you get interesting answers . " 
 The music video begins with a German boy who Leto had previously met in Berlin . He spoke about the loss of his father and how he had played a Thirty Seconds to Mars song at the funeral . After Leto again met the German fan again at a concert in Austria , he asked him to share his story on camera . Leto explained , " At the show in Austria , where there were tens of thousands of people , and I ran into him and interviewed him ; he was the first interview of the summer , and he shared this story about losing his father , and what it taught him , it was really an organic and serendipitous and beautiful way to begin . He shared a really personal part of himself and we 're really grateful to him , and that continued throughout all the interviews . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Upon its release , the video received general acclaim from critics and fans . James Montgomery from MTV described it as a love @-@ letter to the band 's fans and a document of life on the road . He also considered it the " spiritual sequel to their stirring 2010 live clip " for " Closer to the Edge " . Karen Bliss of Noisecreep was impressed with the video and opened her review by writing , " Thirty Seconds to Mars never fails to impress with what they can do within the confines of a music video . " She believed that its simplicity turned out to be " impactful , touching and uniting " . Garon Cockrell from The Pratt Tribune gave the video a positive review , calling it " excellent " . John Walker from MTV felt that throughout the fans ' personal struggles " music has helped these individuals persevere and continue to enjoy life . Likewise , Thirty Seconds to Mars seem so moved by the audience 's emotions every time they perform live , ' Do or Die 's concept seems to be that they want to return the favor . " 
 Writers for MuchMusic noticed the band 's tradition for producing unconventional music videos and praised " Do or Die " calling it " another epic " short film . Markos Papadatos of Digital Journal found it " compelling and visually striking " , noticing real @-@ life people from all over the world telling their " moving stories " about their aspirations and dreams . Sean Fitz @-@ Gerald , writing for Mashable , called the video " an inspiring anthem featuring heartfelt , fan @-@ filmed messages " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Do or Die " was first performed at special concerts , dubbed as Church of Mars , in May 2013 , shortly before the release of the album . The song later became a set @-@ fixture of the Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour , usually appearing as the penultimate song before " Up in the Air " . However , after the festival tour in June 2013 , which saw the band travel to Rock am Ring and Rock im Park as headline act , the song was moved to the middle of the setlist , usually played before Leto 's acoustic B @-@ stage set . " Do or Die " was also included in the Carnivores Tour , which Thirty Seconds to Mars co @-@ headlined with Linkin Park , and usually appeared approximately halfway through the set . Reviewing a concert , <unk> Patel from AXS called " Do or Die " a " sweeping rock anthem " , while Ben Jolley of the Nottingham Post described a performance of the song as energetic and inspirational . 
 On September 23 , 2014 , Thirty Seconds to Mars performed the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show , featuring a ten @-@ person choir . During the performance , Leto swung a flag bearing messages in support of certain social goals , and invited the audience to join the band on stage towards the finale , as confetti fell from the ceiling . Markos Papadatos , writing for Digital Journal , commented that the performance was another indication that Jared Leto is one of the " most charismatic live performers " in contemporary rock and that Thirty Seconds to Mars " is always able to put on a high @-@ energy show " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Performed by Thirty Seconds to Mars 
 Written and produced by Jared Leto 
 Recorded at The International Centre for the Advancement of the Arts and Sciences of Sound , Los Angeles , California 
 Additional vocals by Knights of the White Shadow 
 Audio engineering by Jamie Reed Schefman 
 Mixed by Serban Ghenea 
 Engineered for Mix by John Hanes at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia 
 Mastered by Howie Weinberg and Dan Gerbarg at Howie Weinberg Mastering , Los Angeles , California 
 Credits adapted from Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Illmatic = 
 Illmatic is the debut studio album by American rapper Nas , released on April 19 , 1994 , by Columbia Records . After signing with the label with the help of MC Serch , Nas recorded the album in 1992 – 1993 at Chung King Studios , D & D Recording , Battery Studios , and Unique Recording Studios in New York City . Its production was handled by DJ Premier , Large Professor , Pete Rock , Q @-@ Tip , L.E.S. and Nas himself . Styled as a hardcore hip hop album , Illmatic features multi @-@ syllabic internal rhymes and inner @-@ city narratives based on Nas 's experiences in Queensbridge , New York . 
 The album debuted at # 12 on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart , selling 59 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . However , its initial sales fell below expectations and its five singles failed to achieve significant chart success . Despite the album 's low initial sales , Illmatic received rave reviews from most music critics , who praised its production and Nas ' lyricism . On January 17 , 1996 , the album was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , and on December 11 , 2001 it earned a Platinum certification after shipping one million copies in the United States . 
 Since its initial reception , Illmatic has been recognized by writers and music critics as a landmark album in East Coast hip hop . Its influence on subsequent hip hop artists has been attributed to the album 's production and Nas ' lyricism . It also contributed to the revival of the New York City rap scene , introducing a number of stylistic trends to the region . The album is widely regarded as the greatest hip hop album of all time , appearing on numerous best album lists by critics and publications . 
 = = Background = = 
 As a teenager , Nas wanted to pursue a career as a rapper and enlisted his best friend and neighbor , Queensbridge , Queens @-@ native Willy " Ill Will " Graham , as his DJ . He initially went by the nickname " Kid Wave " before adopting the alias " Nasty Nas " . At 15 , he met producer Large Professor from Flushing , and was introduced to his group Main Source . Nas made his recorded debut with them , performing the opening verse on " Live at the Barbeque " from their 1991 album Breaking Atoms . Nas subsequently made his solo debut on his 1992 single " Halftime " for the soundtrack to the film Zebrahead . The single added to the buzz surrounding Nas , earning him comparisons to influential golden age rapper Rakim . Despite his buzz in the underground scene , Nas did not receive an offer for a recording contract , being rejected by major rap labels such as Cold Chillin ' and Def Jam Recordings . Nas and Ill Will continued to work together , but their partnership was cut short when Graham was murdered by a gunman in Queensbridge on May 23 , 1992 ; Nas 's brother was also shot that night , but survived . Nas has cited that moment as a " wake @-@ up call " for him . 
 In mid 1992 , MC Serch , whose group 3rd Bass had dissolved , began working on a solo project and approached Nas . At the suggestion of producer T @-@ Ray , Serch collaborated with Nas for " Back to the Grill " , the lead single for Serch 's 1992 solo debut album Return of the Product . At the recording session for the song , Serch discovered that Nas did not have a recording contract and subsequently contacted Faith Newman , an A & R executive at Sony Music Entertainment . As Serch recounted , " Nas was in a position where his demo had been sittin ' around , ' Live at the Barbeque ' was already a classic , and he was just tryin ' to find a decent deal ... So when he gave me his demo , I shopped it around . I took it to Russell first , Russell said it sounded like G Rap , he wasn 't wit ' it . So I took it to Faith . Faith loved it , she said she 'd been looking for Nas for a year and a half . They wouldn 't let me leave the office without a deal on the table . " 
 Once MC Serch assumed the role of executive producer for Nas 's debut project , he attempted to connect Nas with various producers . Based on his buzz at the time , numerous New York @-@ based producers were eager to work with him and went to Power House Studios with Nas . Among those producers was DJ Premier , recognized at the time for his raw , aggressive production with jazz @-@ based samples and heavy scratching , and for his work with rapper Guru as a part of hip hop duo Gang Starr . After his production on Lord Finesse & DJ Mike Smooth 's Funky Technician ( 1990 ) and <unk> the <unk> 's The Sun Rises in the East ( 1994 ) , Premier began recording exclusively at D & D Studios in New York City before working with Nas on Illmatic . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Prior to recording , DJ Premier had listened to Nas 's debut single , later stating " When I heard ' Halftime ' , that was some next shit to me . That 's just as classic to me as ' Eric B For President ' and ' The Bridge ' . It just had that type of effect . As simple as it is , all of the elements are there . So from that point , after Serch approached me about doing some cuts , it was automatic . You 'd be stupid to pass that up even if it wasn 't <unk> ' no money . " Serch later noted the chemistry between Nas and DJ Premier , recounting that " Primo and Nas , they could have been separated at birth . It wasn 't a situation where his beats fit their rhymes , they fit each other . " While Serch reached out to DJ Premier , Large Professor contacted Pete Rock to collaborate with Nas on what became " The World Is Yours " . Shortly afterwards , producers Q @-@ Tip and L.E.S. chose to work on the album . Nas 's father , Olu Dara , also contributed with a cornet solo on " Life 's a Bitch " , which features rapper AZ . 
 In an early promotional interview , Nas claimed that the name " Illmatic " ( meaning " beyond ill " or " the ultimate " ) was a reference to his incarcerated Queensbridge friend , Illmatic Ice . Nas later described the title name as " supreme ill . It 's as ill as ill gets . That shit is a science of everything ill . " At the time of its recording , expectations in the hip hop scene were high for Illmatic . In a 1994 interview for The Source , which dubbed him " the second coming " , Nas spoke highly of the album , saying that " this feels like a big project that 's gonna affect the world [ ... ] We in here on the down low [ ... ] doing something for the world . That 's how it feels , that 's what it is . For all the ones that think it 's all about some ruff shit , talkin ' about guns all the time , but no science behind it , we gonna bring it to them like this . " AZ recounted recording on the album , " I got on Nas ' album and did the ' Life 's a Bitch ' song , but even then I thought I was terrible on it , to be honest . But once people started hearing that and liking it , that 's what built my confidence . I thought , ' OK , I can probably do this . ' That record was everything . To be the only person featured on Illmatic when Nas is considered one of the top men in New York at that time , one of the freshest new artists , that was big . " During the sessions , Nas composed the song " Nas Is Like " , which he later recorded as a single for his 1999 album I Am … . 
 Concerning the recording of the album 's opening song " N.Y. State of Mind " , producer DJ Premier later stated " Nas — he 's one of our saviors now . When we did ‘ N.Y. State of Mind , ’ at the beginning when he says , ‘ Straight out the dungeons of rap / Where fake niggas don ’ t make it back , ’ then you hear him say , ‘ I don ’ t know how to start this shit , ’ ’ cause he had just written it . He 's got the beat running in the studio , but he doesn ’ t know how he 's going to format how he 's going to convey it . So he 's going , ‘ I don ’ t know how to start this shit , ’ and I ’ m counting him in [ to begin his verse ] . One , two , three . And then you can hear him go , ‘ Yo , ’ and then he goes right into it . " DJ Premier later discussed the unexpectedness of Nas 's delivery during the recording , stating " He didn ’ t know how he was gonna come in , but he just started going because we were recording . I ’ m actually yelling , ‘ We ’ re recording ! ’ and banging on the [ vocal booth ] window . ‘ Come on , get ready ! ’ You hear him start the shit : Rappers … . And then everyone in the studio was like , ‘ Oh , my God ’ , ’ cause it was so unexpected . He was not ready . So we used that first verse . And that was when he was up and coming , his first album . So we was like , ' Yo , this guy is gonna be big . ' " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Illmatic contains discerning treatment of its subject matter : gang rivalries , desolation , and the ravages of urban poverty . Nas , who was twenty years old when the album was released , focuses on depicting his own experiences , creating highly detailed first @-@ person narratives that deconstruct the troubled life of an inner city teenager . One writer describes the theme of the album as a “ [ S ] tory of a gifted writer born into squalor , trying to claw his way out of the trap . It 's somewhere between The Basketball Diaries and Native Son … . ” The narratives featured in Illmatic originate from Nas 's own experiences as an adolescent growing up in Queensbridge , as the lyrics allude to the housing projects located in the Long Island City @-@ section of Queens , New York . Nas said in an interview in 2001 : “ When I made Illmatic I was a little kid in Queensbridge trapped in the ghetto . My soul was trapped in Queensbridge projects . ” In a 2012 interview , he explained his inspiration for exploring this subject matter : 
 " [ W ] hen my rap generation started , it was about bringing you inside my apartment . It wasn 't about being a rap star ; it was about anything other than . I want you to know who I am : what the streets taste like , feel like , smell like . What the cops talk like , walk like , think like . What crackheads do — I wanted you to smell it , feel it . It was important to me that I told the story that way because I thought that it wouldn 't be told if I didn 't tell it . I thought this was a great point in time in the 1990s in [ New York City ] that needed to be documented and my life needed to be told . " 
 When depicting life in the projects , Nas alternates from moments of pain and pleasure to frustration and braggadocio . The columnist for OhWord.com wrote : " [ His ] narrative voice swerves between personas that are cynical and optimistic , naïve and world @-@ weary , enraged and serene , globally conscious and provincial " . Music writer Jeff Weiss of Pitchfork describes the " enduring image " often associated with Nas 's narrated stream of consciousness : " [ A ] baby @-@ faced Buddha monk in public housing , scribbling lotto dreams and grim reaper nightmares in dollar notebooks , words <unk> in the margins . The only light is the orange glow of a blunt , bodega liquor , and the adolescent rush of first creation . Sometimes his pen taps the paper and his brain blanks . In the next sentence , he remembers dark streets and the noose . " Critic and blogger Kenny Waste comments on the significance of Queensbridge as a setting in Illmatic , writing , “ The songs are made up largely of recollections or Nas describing his emotions , which range from feeling trapped to overt optimism about his abilities to escape the ' hands of doom ' . But they always remain within the walls of his Queensbridge home . ” 
 Along with its narratives , Illmatic is also distinct for its many portrayals and descriptions of places , people , and interactions . In his songs , Nas often depicts the corners and boulevards of Queensbridge , while mentioning the names of streets , friends , local crews and drug dealers , and utilizing vernacular slang indigenous to his hometown . Poet and author Kevin Coval describes this approach to songwriting as that of a “ hip @-@ hop poet @-@ reporter ... rooted in the intimate specificity of locale . ” Commenting on Nas 's use of narrative , Sohail Daulatzai , Professor of Film and Media Studies at University of Southern California , compares the album to cinema , citing its " detailed descriptions , dense reportage , and visually stunning rhymes ... " In Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic , he writes : " Like the 1965 landmark masterpiece film The Battle of Algiers , which captured the Algerian resistance against French colonialism , Illmatic brilliantly blurred the lines between fiction and documentary , creating a heightened sense of realism and visceral eloquence for Nas 's renegade first @-@ person narratives and character @-@ driven odes . ” 
 = = = Drug violence = = = 
 Many of the themes found in Illmatic revolve around Nas ’ s experience living in an environment where poverty , violence , and drug use abound . Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , residents of Queensbridge experienced intense violence , as the housing development was overrun by the crack epidemic . Illmatic contains imagery inspired by this prevalence of street crime . In " N.Y. State of Mind " , Nas details the trap doors , rooftop snipers , street corner lookouts , and drug dealers that pervade his urban dreamscape . Sohail Daulatzai describes this language as " chilling " and suggests that it “ harrowingly describes and imagines with such surreal imagery , with so much noir discontent and even more fuck @-@ you ambition , the fragile and tenuous lives of ghetto dwellers … ” Author Adam Mansbach interprets Nas 's violent aesthetics as a metaphoric device meant to authenticate the rough edges of his persona : " Nas 's world and worldview are criminal and criminalized . Hence , he uses metaphoric violence as a central trope of his poetic . ” Writer and musician Gregory Tate regards this violent imagery as part of a trend towards dark subject matter that came to prevail among East Coast rappers in the hardcore hip hop scene . He writes , “ [ S ] ome of the most memorably dark , depressive but flowing lyrics in hip hop history were written by Nas , Biggie , and members of the Wu @-@ Tang Clan on the death knell of the crack trade . 
 Other writers , such as Mark Anthony Neal , have described these lyrical themes as a form of “ brooding introspection ” , disclosing the tortured dimensions of drug crime and its impressions on an adolescent Nas . Critic Sam Chennault wrote , " Nas captures post @-@ crack N.Y.C. in all its ruinous glory ... [ r ] <unk> that drugs were both empowering and destructive , his lyrics alternately embrace and reject the idea of ghetto glamour " . According to Steve Juon of RapReviews.com , Nas " illustrates the Queensbridge <unk> life of his existence [ sic ] , while at the same time providing hope that there is something greater than money , guns and drugs . " Richard Harrington of The Washington Post described Nas 's coming @-@ of @-@ age experience as " balancing limitations and possibilities , distinguishing hurdles and springboards , and acknowledging his own growth from roughneck adolescent to a maturing adult who can respect and criticize the culture of violence that surrounds him . 
 = = = Artistic credibility = = = 
 The content of Illmatic is also informed by notions of artistic authenticity . The promotional press sheet that accompanied the album 's release implied Nas ’ s refusal to conform to commercial trends , stating : “ While it 's sad that there 's so much <unk> ' in the rap world today , this should only make us sit up and pay attention when a rapper comes along who 's not about milking the latest trend and running off with the loot . ” At the time of the album 's release , the hip hop community was embroiled in a debate about artistic authenticity and commercialism in popular music . Rapper Common , describes in the preface to Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic the concerns that were felt by him and his contemporaries : “ It was that serious for so many of us . We didn ’ t just grow up with hip hop ; we grew up with hip @-@ hop as hip @-@ hop was also growing , and so that made for a very close and intimate relationship that was becoming more and more urgent – and we felt it . Our art was being challenged in many ways as the <unk> began to sink their teeth into us . ” 
 In the context of this debate , music writers have interpreted Illmatic as an admonishment for hip hop purists and practitioners . In the opening track , " The Genesis " , Nas bemoans the lack of legitimacy among other MCs in the projects , insisting that he has " Been doin ' this shit since back then . " Citing songs such as “ Life 's a Bitch ” , Guthrie Ramsay Jr. argues that Nas “ set a benchmark for rappers in an artistic field consumed by constantly shifting notions of ' realness ' , authenticity , and artistic credibility . " Sohail Daulatzai writes : " Though Illmatic was highly anticipated release , far from under the radar , Nas 's taking it back to ' the dungeons of rap ' was … a kind of exorcism or purging ( ' where fake niggas don ’ t make it back ' ) that was at the very least trying to claim a different aesthetic of resistance and rebellion that was all too aware of hip @-@ hop 's newfound mainstream potential . " 
 = = = Musical endowment = = = 
 In addition to its lyrical content , many writers have commented on the thematic significance of Illmatic 's musical endowments . “ Drawing on everything from old school hip @-@ hop , to blues , to fairly avant @-@ garde jazz compositions , ” writes music blogger Kenny Waste , “ the sampling choices within Illmatic reflect an individual with not only a deep appreciation for but also a deep knowledge of music . ” Musicologist and pianist Guthrie Ramsay Jr. describes Illmatic as “ an artistic emblem ” that “ anchors itself in the moment while reminding us that powerful musical statements often select past material and knowledge for use in the present and hope for the future . ” Kevin Coval considers the sampling of artists Craig G and Biz Markie in ' Memory Lane ' as an attempt to build upon the hip hop tradition of Queens , most notably the Juice Crew All Stars . These samples are intended to serve as tributes to “ Nas 's lyrical forebearers [ sic ] and around @-@ the @-@ way influences . He is <unk> his borough ’ s hip hop canon . ” The involvement of older artists , including Nas ’ s father , has also been cited as a formative influence in the making of Illmatic . Author Adam Mansbach argues , “ It 's the presence of all these benevolent elders – his father and the cadre of big brother producers steering the album – that empowers Nas to rest comfortably in his identity as an artist and an inheritor of tradition , and thus find the space to innovate . ” 
 Music writers have also characterized the album 's contents as a commentary on hip @-@ hop 's evolution . As Princeton University professor Imani Perry writes , Illmatic “ embodies the entire story of hip @-@ hop , bearing all of its features and gifts . Nas has the raw lyrics of old schoolers , the expert deejaying and artful lyricism of the 1980s , the slice of hood life , and the mythic ... The history of hip @-@ hop up to 1994 is embodied in Illmatic . ” In the song , " Represent " , Nas alludes to the Juice Crew 's conflict with Boogie Down Productions , which arose as a dispute over the purported origins of hip hop . Princeton University professor Eddie S. <unk> Jr. claims that this " situates Queensbridge and himself within the formative history of hip @-@ hop culture . " The opening skit , ' The Genesis , ' also contains an audio sample of the 1983 film , Wild Style , which showcased the work of early hip @-@ hop pioneers such as Grand Master Flash , Fab Five Freddy , and the Rock Steady Crew . After the music of Wild Style is unwittingly rejected by one of his peers , Nas admonishes his friend about the importance of their musical roots . Kenny Waste suggests that embedded deep within this track " is a complex and subtle exposition on the themes of Illmatic . ” Similarly , Professor <unk> Nama of California State University Northridge writes , “ ’ [ T ] he use of Wild Style ... goes beyond a simple tactic to imbue Illmatic with an aura of old @-@ school authenticity . The sonic vignette comments on the collective memory of the hip hop community and its real , remembered , and even imagined beginning , as well as the pitfalls of assimilation , the importance of history , and the passing of hip @-@ hop 's ' age of innocence ' . ” 
 = = Lyricism = = 
 Illmatic has been noted by music writers for Nas 's unique style of delivery and lyrical & poetic substance . His lyrics contain layered rhythms , multi @-@ syllabic compounded rhymes , internal half rhymes , assonance , and ear @-@ bending <unk> . Music critic Marc Lamont Hill of PopMatters elaborates on Nas 's lyricism and delivery throughout the album , stating " Nas ' complex rhyme patterns , clever word play , and impressive <unk> took the art [ of rapping ] to previously unprecedented heights . Building on the pioneering work of Kool G Rap , Big Daddy Kane , and Rakim , tracks like ' Halftime ' and the laid back ' One Time 4 Your Mind ' demonstrated a [ high ] level of technical precision and rhetorical dexterity . " Hill cites " Memory Lane ( Sittin ' in da Park ) " as " an exemplar of flawless lyricism " , while critic Steve Juon wrote that the lyrics of the album closer , " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " , are " just as quotable if not more @-@ so than anything else on the LP – what album could end on a higher note than this ? " : 
 Focusing on poetic forms found in his lyrics , Princeton University professor Imani Perry describes Nas 's performance as that of a " poet @-@ musician " indebted to the conventions of jazz poetry . She suggests that Nas 's lyricism might have been shaped by the " black art poetry album genre , " pioneered by Gil Scott @-@ Heron , The Last Poets , and Nikki Giovanni . Chicago @-@ based poet and music critic Kevin Coval attributes Nas 's lyricism to his unique approach to rapping , which he describes as a " fresh @-@ out @-@ the @-@ rhyme @-@ book presentation " : " It 's as if Nas , the poet , reporter , brings his notebook into the studio , hears the beat , and weaves his portraits on top with ill precision . " Coval also comments on the rapper 's vignettes of inner @-@ city life , which are depicted using elaborate rhyme structures : " All the words , faces and bodies of an abandoned post @-@ industrial , urban dystopia are framed in Nas 's tightly packed stanzas . These portraits of his brain and community in handcuffs are beautiful , brutal and extremely complex , and they lend themselves to the complex and brillantly compounded rhyme schemes he employs . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Illmatic also garnered praise for its production . According to critics , the album 's four major producers ( Large Professor , DJ Premier , Pete Rock , and Q @-@ Tip ) extensively contributed to the cohesive atmospheric aesthetic that permeated the album , while still retaining each 's individual , trademark sound . ' For instance , DJ Premier 's production on the album is noted by critics for his minimalist style , which featured simple loops over heavy beats . Charles Aaron of Spin wrote of the producers ' contributions , " nudging him toward Rakim @-@ like @-@ rumination , they offer subdued , slightly downcast beats , which in hip hop today means jazz , primarily of the ' 70s keyboard @-@ vibe variety " . Q magazine noted that " the musical backdrops are razor sharp ; hard beats but with melodic hooks and loops , atmospheric background piano , strings or muted trumpet , and samples ... A potent treat . " One music critic wrote that " Illmatic is laced with some of the finest beats this side of In Control Volume 1 " . 
 The majority of the album consists of vintage funk , soul , and jazz samples . Commenting on the album and its use of samples , Pitchfork ' s Jeff Weiss claims that both Nas and his producers found inspiration for the album 's production through the music of their childhood : " The loops rummage through their parent 's collection : Donald Byrd , Joe Chambers , Ahmad Jamal , Parliament , Michael Jackson . Nas invites his rolling stone father , Olu Dara to blow the trumpet coda on " Life 's a Bitch " . Jazz rap fusion had been done well prior , but rarely with such subtlety . Nas didn 't need to make the connection explicit — he allowed you to understand what jazz was like the first time your parents and grandparents heard it . " Similarly , journalist Ben Yew comments on the album 's nostalgic sounds , " The production , accentuated by infectious organ loop [ s ] , vocal sample [ s ] , and synthesizer @-@ like pads in the background , places your mind in a cheerful , reminiscent , mood . " 
 = = Content = = 
 = = = Tracks 1 – 5 = = = 
 The intro , " The Genesis " , is composed as an aural montage that begins with the sound of an elevated train and an almost @-@ inaudible voice rhyming beneath it . Over these sounds , a snatch of dialogue , two men arguing . It samples Grand Wizard Theodore 's " Subway Theme " from the 1983 film Wild Style , the first major hip hop motion picture . Nas made another ode to Wild Style , while shooting the music video for his single , " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " , on the same stage as the finale scene for the film . His verse on " Live at the Barbeque " is played in the background of " The Genesis " . According to music writer Mickey Hess , in the intro , " Nas tells us everything he wants us to know about him . The train is shorthand for New York ; the barely discernible rap is , in fact , his " Live at the Barbeque " verse ; and the dialogue comes from Wild Style , one of the earliest movies to focus on hip hop culture . Each of these is a point of genesis . New York for Nas as a person , ' Live at the Barbeque ' for Nas the rapper , and Wild Style , symbolically at least , for hip hop itself . These are my roots , Nas was saying , and he proceeded to demonstrate exactly what those roots had yielded . " 
 Setting the general grimy , yet melodic , tone of the album , " N.Y. State of Mind " features a dark , jazzy piano sample by DJ Premier . It opens with high @-@ pitched guitar notes looped from jazz and funk musician Donald Byrd 's " Flight Time " ( 1972 ) , while the prominent groove of piano notes was sampled from the Joe Chambers composition " Mind Rain " ( 1978 ) . The lyrics of " N.Y. State of Mind " have Nas recounting his participation in gang violence and philosophizing that " Life is parallel to Hell , but I must maintain " , while his rapping spans over forty bars . " N.Y. State of Mind " focuses on a mind state that a person obtains from living in Nas 's impoverished environment in New York City . Critic Marc Hill of PopMatters wrote that the song " provides as clear a depiction of ghetto life as a Gordon Parks photograph or a Langston Hughes poem . " 
 In other songs on Illmatic , Nas celebrates life 's pleasures and achievements , acknowledging violence as a feature of his socio @-@ economic conditions rather than the focus of his life . " Life 's a Bitch " contains a sample of The Gap Band 's hit " Yearning for Your Love " ( 1980 ) , and has guest vocals from East New York @-@ based rapper AZ . It also features Nas 's father , legendary jazz player Olu Dara , playing trumpet as the music fades out . A columnist for OhWord.com wrote that Dara 's contribution to the song provides a " beautifully wistful end to a track that feels drenched in the dying rays of a crimson sunset over the city . " " The World Is Yours " provides a more optimistic narrative from Nas 's viewpoint , as he cites political and spiritual leader Gandhi as an influence in its verse , in contrast to the previous Scarface references of " N.Y. State of Mind " . While citing " Life 's a Bitch " as " possibly the saddest hip @-@ hop song ever recorded " , Rhapsody 's Sam Chennault wrote that " The World Is Yours " " finds optimism in the darkest urban crevices " . " The World Is Yours " was named the seventh greatest rap song by About.com. 
 = = = Tracks 6 – 10 = = = 
 The nostalgic " Memory Lane ( Sittin ' in da Park ) " contains a Reuben Wilson sample , which comprises the sound of a Hammond organ , guitar , vocals and percussion , and adds to the track 's ghostly harmonies . Spence D. of IGN wrote that the lyrics evoke " the crossroads of Old School and New School . " " One Love " is composed of a series of letters to incarcerated friends , recounting mutual acquaintances and events that have occurred since the receiver 's imprisonment , and address unfaithful girlfriends , emotionally tortured mothers , and underdog loyalty . The phrase " one love " signifies street loyalty in the song . After delivering " shout @-@ outs to locked down comrades " , Nas chastises a youth who seems destined for prison in the final verse , " Shorty 's laugh was cold blooded as he spoke so foul / Only twelve tryin to tell me that he liked my style [ ... ] Words of wisdom from Nas , try to rise up above / Keep a eye out for Jake , shorty @-@ wop , one love " . Produced by Q @-@ Tip , " One Love " samples the double bass and piano from the Heath Brothers ' " Smilin ' Billy Suite Part II " ( 1975 ) and the drum break from Parliament 's " Come In Out the Rain " ( 1970 ) , complementing the track 's mystical and hypnotic soundscape . 
 " One Time 4 Your Mind " features battle rhyme braggadocio by Nas . With a similar vibe as " N.Y. State of Mind " , the rhythmic " Represent " has a serious tone , exemplified by Nas ' opening lines , " Straight up shit is real and any day could be your last in the jungle / get murdered on the humble , guns will blast and niggaz tumble " While the majority of the album consists of funk , soul and jazz samples , " Represent " contains a sample of " Thief of Bagdad " by organist Lee Erwin from the 1924 film of the same name . Nas discusses his lifestyle in an environment where he " loves <unk> ' sins " and " life ain 't shit , but stress , fake niggas and crab stunts " , while describing himself as " The <unk> , crew de @-@ <unk> , accelerator / The type of nigga who be <unk> ' in your elevator " . " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " is a braggadocio rap : " Vocals 'll squeeze <unk> , MC 's eavesdrop / Though they need not to sneak / My poetry 's deep , I never fail / Nas 's raps should be locked in a cell " It opens with guitars and synths of Michael Jackson 's " Human Nature " ( 1983 ) ; the song 's vocals are sampled for the intro and chorus sections , creating a swirling mix of horns and tweaked @-@ out voices . Large Professor looped in drum samples from Stanley Clarke 's " Slow Dance " ( 1978 ) and saxophone from Kool & the Gang 's " <unk> " ( 1971 ) . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 On the vinyl and cassette pressings of Illmatic , Nas replaces the traditional Side A and Side B division with " 40th Side North " and “ 41st Side South , ” respectively – the main streets that form the geographic boundaries that divide the Queensbridge housing projects . Professor Sohail Daulatzai views this labeling as significant , since it transforms Illmatic into " a sonic map . " The album serves as the legend for Nas ’ s ghetto cartography , as he narrates his experiences and those who live in the Queensbridge ” In a 2009 interview with XXL , Nas discussed the purpose behind the album artwork among other promotional efforts , stating " Really the record had to represent everything Nasir Jones is about from beginning to end , from my album cover to my videos . My record company had to beg me to stop <unk> ' music videos in the projects . No matter what the song was about I had ' em out there . That 's what it was all about for me , being that kid from the projects , being a poster child for that , that didn ’ t exist back then . " 
 = = = Album cover = = = 
 The album cover of Illmatic features a picture of Nas as a child , which was taken after his father , musician Olu Dara , returned home from an overseas tour . The original cover was intended to have a picture of Nas holding Jesus Christ in a headlock , reflecting the religious imagery of Nas 's rap on " Live at the Barbeque " ; " When I was 12 , I went to hell for <unk> Jesus " . 
 The accepted cover , designed by Aimee Macauley , features a photo of Nas as a child superimposed over a backdrop of a New York city block , taken by Danny Clinch . In a 1994 interview , Nas discussed the concept behind the photo of him at age 7 , stating " That was the year I started to acknowledge everything [ around me ] . That 's the year everything set off . That 's the year I started seeing the future for myself and doing what was right . The ghetto makes you think . The world is ours . I used to think I couldn 't leave my projects . I used to think if I left , if anything happened to me , I thought it would be no justice or I would be just a dead slave or something . The projects used to be my world until I educated myself to see there 's more out there . " As yet , Nas has not pointed to any outside influence for the artwork of his album cover . Yet according to Ego Trip , the cover of Illmatic is " reputedly " believed to have been inspired by a jazz album , Howard Hanger Trio 's A Child Is Born ( 1974 ) -- whose cover also features a photograph of a child , superimposed on an urban landscape . 
 Since its release , the cover art of Illmatic has also gained an iconic reputation - having been subject to numerous parodies and tributes . Music columnist Byron Crawford later called the cover for Illmatic " one of the <unk> album covers ever in hip @-@ hop . " Commenting on the cover 's artistic value , Rob Marriott of Complex writes , " Illmatic 's poignant cover matched the mood , tone , and qualities of this introspective album to such a high degree that it became an instant classic , hailed as a visual full of meaning and nuance . " XXL magazine called the album cover a " high art photo concept for a rap album " and described the artwork as a " noisy , confusing streetscape looking through the housing projects and a young boy superimposed in the center of it all . " The XXL columnist also compared the cover to that of rapper Lil Wayne 's sixth studio album Tha Carter III ( 2008 ) , stating that it also " reflects the reality of disenfranchised youth today . " 
 On the song " Shark Niggas ( <unk> ) " from his debut album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx ... ( 1995 ) , rapper Raekwon with Ghostface Killah criticized the cover of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s Ready to Die ( 1994 ) , which was released a few months after Illmatic , for featuring a picture of a baby with an afro , implying that his cover had copied the idea from Nas . This generated longstanding controversy between the rappers , resulting in an unpublicized feud which Nas later references in his 2002 album God 's Son , on the song " Last Real Nigga Alive . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Illmatic was released on April 19 , 1994 through Columbia Records in the United States . The album also featured international distribution that same year in countries including France , the Netherlands , Canada and the United Kingdom . In its first week of release , Illmatic made its debut on the Billboard 200 albums chart at number 12 , while selling 59 @,@ 000 copies . In spite of this , initial record sales fell below expectations . The album 's five radio singles failed to obtain considerable Billboard success , as each single did not gain significant charting on the Billboard Hot 100 . The lead single " Halftime " only charted on the Hot Rap Singles chart at number 8 , while " Life 's a Bitch " did not chart at all . The album also suffered from extensive bootlegging prior to its release . " Regional demand was so high , " writes music critic Jeff Weiss , " that Serch claimed he discovered a garage with 60 @,@ 000 bootlegged copies . " While initial sales were low , the album was eventually certified gold in sales by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 17 , 1996 after shipping 500 @,@ 000 copies ; the RIAA later certified Illmatic platinum on December 11 , 2001 , following shipments in excess of one million copies . As of April 20 , 2014 , the album sold 1 @,@ 686 @,@ 000 copies in the US . In April 2002 , the album was also certified gold by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments in excess of 50 @,@ 000 copies in Canada . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Illmatic received universal acclaim from contemporary music critics , who hailed it as a hip hop masterpiece . NME called its music " rhythmic perfection " , and Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune cited it as the best hardcore hip hop album " out of the East Coast in years " . Dimitri Ehrlich of Entertainment Weekly credited Nas for giving his neighborhood " proper respect " while establishing himself and said that the clever lyrics and harsh beats " draw listeners into the borough 's lifestyle with poetic efficiency . " Touré , writing for Rolling Stone , hailed Nas as an elite rapper because of his articulation , detailed lyrics , and Rakim @-@ like tone , all of which he said " pair [ Illmatic 's ] every beautiful moment with its harsh antithesis . " 
 Christopher John Farley of Time praised the album as a " wake @-@ up call to [ Nas ' ] listeners " and commended him for rendering rather than glorifying " the rough world he comes from " . USA Today 's James T. Jones IV cited his lyrics as " the most urgent poetry since Public Enemy 's " and also commended Nas for honestly depicting dismal ghetto life without resorting to the sensationalism and misogyny of contemporary gangsta rappers . Richard Harrington of The Washington Post praised Nas for " balancing limitations and possibilities , distinguishing hurdles and springboards , and acknowledging his own growth from roughneck adolescent to a maturing adult who can respect and criticize the culture of violence that surrounds him " . 
 In a mixed review , Heidi Siegmund of the Los Angeles Times found most of Illmatic hampered by " tired attitudes and posturing " , and interpreted its acclaim from East Coast critics as " an obvious attempt to wrestle hip @-@ hop away from the West " . Charles Aaron of Spin felt that the comparisons to Rakim " will be more deserved " if Nas can expand on his ruminative lyrics with " something more personally revealing " . In his review for Playboy , Robert Christgau called it " New York 's typically spare and loquacious entry in the post @-@ gangsta sweepstakes " and recommended it to listeners who " crave full @-@ bore authenticity without brutal posturing " . 
 A February 19 , 2014 Village Voice cover story ranked Illmatic as the Most New York City album ever . 
 = = = The Source = = = 
 Upon its release , The Source gave Illmatic a five mic rating , their highest rating and a prestigious achievement at the time , given the magazine 's influence in the hip hop community . Jon <unk> , co @-@ founder of The Source , had received a copy of the album eight months before its scheduled release , after which he raved about it , and soon lobbied for it to receive a five mic rating . In his twitter blog , Schecter recounts hearing Illmatic in a meeting with editors on the staff : 
 It 's about 9pm … I get to the office and I gather all the heads in the conference room . I remember who was there : @ <unk> [ the twitter account of Matty C , then The Source 's " Unsigned Hype " editor ] @ <unk> [ twitter account of Chris Wilder , another editor ] , @ <unk> [ twitter account of Schott ' Free ' Jacobs , another contemporary editor ] . Everyone is nodding their heads , eyes wide , mouths open , it 's hip @-@ hop paradise . We had a pretty shitty system in there but it didn ’ t matter , I pop in the tape and the powerful musical magic emits from the speakers . When those funky / eerie / powerful xylophone notes from ' One Love ' come on , I remember @ <unk> is literally lying on the floor … He can ’ t comprehend how good it is . None of us can . It 's the best shit we ’ ve heard in our lives … Internally , we start debating how we ’ re gonna handle this . I say right away that it 's gotta get a " 5 " 
 Eventually , the review for Illmatic was handled by the magazine 's columnist Minya Oh ( then writing under the nom de plume , " <unk> " ) , who shared Schecter 's enthusiasm for Nas 's album . In her review of Illmatic , <unk> wrote , " I must maintain this is one of the best hip @-@ hop albums I have ever heard " and wrote of its content , " Lyrically , the whole shit is on point . No cliched metaphors , no gimmicks . Never too abstract , never superficial . " She also commented on the impact of Nas 's " poetic realism " writing : “ Nas ’ images remind me of the personal memories and people , both passed and present … All this may sound like melodrama but it not just me . I 've been hearing similar responses all over . While ' Memory Lane ' is my shit , my homies claim ' The World Is Yours , ' and if you 've got peoples doing time , then ' One Love ' may hit you the hardest . " . With the backing of Schecter and the other editors on the staff , Minya awarded Illmatic with the magazine 's highest rating . 
 = = = = Controversy = = = = 
 At the time , it was unheard of for a debuting artist to receive the coveted rating . Author Matthew Gasteier writes , “ It 's difficult to overestimate the impact of receiving the five out of five mics , the first such rating given to any new release by the magazine since its then @-@ editor Reginald Dennis put a moratorium on them . " Reginald Dennis , former music editor of the magazine and XXL co @-@ founder , later recounted , " Awarding records 5 mics – classic status – has always been , on some levels , troubling to me . I mean , we are not only saying that a particular piece of music is superior to everything that is out now , but it will be better than most things released in the future as well [ ... ] I only gave one 5 under my watch and it went to Nas 's Illmatic . " Dennis cited it as " the only time I ever broke the ' no 5 ' rule " and added , " I told Jon that we 'd work all of that stuff out when it was time to review the album . But everyday , Jon was like , ' yo , this album is 5 mics — seriously , Reg , 5 mics ! ' 
 The rating did not come without its share of controversy . Reginald Dennis described to the reaction that followed Minya Oh 's review : " I was happy , Jon was happy , Nas was happy , everybody was happy — except for all of the people who felt that The Chronic should have also gotten a 5 . " Only two years prior , Dr. Dre 's groundbreaking The Chronic failed to earn the coveted rating , despite redefining the musical landscape of hip hop . It was later revealed that while everybody at the magazine knew it was an instant classic , they decided to comply with the strict policy of staying away from a perfect rating . Subsequently , when Nas 's album was exempted from this moratorium , many fans pointed to this decision as a confirmation of journalistic bias towards East Coast hip hop . Despite receiving criticism over his staff 's earlier review of The Chronic , Reginald Dennis continues to defend the decision to award Illmatic with the magazine 's highest rating : " I ’ m just happy that Illmatic is universally acclaimed as a classic , so no one can accuse me of dropping the ball ... And if I hadn ’ t gone through what I did with The Chronic , I wouldn ’ t have had the flexibility to allow for the bending of my policy . So I think it all worked out well . ” 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 Since its initial reception , Illmatic has been viewed by music writers as one of the quintessential hip hop recordings of the 1990s , while its rankings near the top of many publications ' " best album " lists in disparate genres have given it a reputation as one of the greatest hip hop albums of all time . Jon Pareles of The New York Times cited Illmatic as a " milestone in trying to capture the ' street ghetto essence ' " . The album has been described by a number of writers and critics as " classic " . Chris Ryan , writing in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , called Illmatic " a portrait of an artist as a hood , loner , tortured soul , juvenile delinquent , and fledgling social critic , " and wrote that it " still stands as one of rap 's crowning achievements " . Similar to The Source 's initial sentiment , XXL later gave the album a classic " XXL " rating in a retrospective review . In a retrospective review for MSN Music , Christgau said the record was " better than I thought at the time for sure — as happens with aesthetes sometimes , the purists heard subtleties principled <unk> like me were disinclined to enjoy " , although he still found it inferior to The Notorious B.I.G. ' s debut album Ready to Die ( 1994 ) . In 2002 , Prefix Mag 's Matthew Gasteier re @-@ examined Illmatic and its musical significance , stating : 
 Illmatic is the best hip @-@ hop record ever made . Not because it has ten great tracks with perfect beats and flawless rhymes , but because it encompasses everything great about hip @-@ hop that makes the genre worthy of its place in music history . Stylistically , if every other hip @-@ hop record were destroyed , the entire genre could be reconstructed from this one album . But in spirit , Illmatic can just as easily be compared to Ready to Die , It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back , and Enter the Wu @-@ Tang as it can to Rites of Spring , A Hard Day 's Night , Innervisions , and Never Mind the Bollocks . In Illmatic , you find the meaning not just of hip @-@ hop , but of music itself : the struggle of youth to retain its freedom , which is ultimately the struggle of man to retain his own essence . 
 Illmatic has been included in numerous publications ' " best album " lists in disparate genres . Pitchfork listed the album at number 33 on its list of the Top 100 Albums of the 1990s , and the publication 's columnist Hartley Goldstein called the album " the meticulously crafted essence of everything that makes hip @-@ hop music great ; it 's practically a sonic strand of the genre 's DNA . " It was listed as one of 33 hip hop / R & B albums in Rolling Stone 's " Essential Recordings of the 90s " . It was ranked number five in " The Critics Top 100 Black Music Albums of All Time " and number three in Hip Hop Connection 's " Top 100 Readers Poll " . The album was also ranked number four in Vibe 's list of the Top 10 Rap Albums and number two on MTV 's list of The Greatest Hip Hop Albums of All Time . In 1998 , it was selected as one of The Source 's 100 Best Rap Albums . In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 400 on its list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time ; it was ranked number 314 in a revised list in 2012 . On March 30 , 2004 , Illmatic was remastered and re @-@ released with a bonus disc of remixes and new material produced by Marley Marl and Large Professor , in commemoration of its tenth anniversary . Upon its 2004 re @-@ release , Marc Hill of PopMatters dubbed it " the greatest album of all time " and stated , " Ten years after its release , Illmatic stands not only as the best hip @-@ hop album ever made , but also one of the greatest artistic productions of the twentieth century . " The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 = = = East Coast Hip @-@ Hop = = = 
 Illmatic has been noted as one of the most influential hip hop albums of all time , with pundits describing it as an archetypal East Coast hip hop album . Jeff Weiss of Pitchfork writes : " No album better reflected the sound and style of New York , 94 . The <unk> of soul jazz samples , SP @-@ 1200s , broken nose breaks , and raw rap distilled the Henny , no chaser ideal of boom bap . " Citing Illmatic as part of a string of notable albums released in 1994 , David Drake of Stylus Magazine writes " This was the critical point for the East Coast , a time when rappers from the New York area were releasing <unk> of thrilling work " . John Bush of Allmusic compares Illmatic to another DJ Premier production , The Sun Rises in the East ( 1994 ) , as " one of the quintessential East Coast records " . Along with the critical acclaim of the Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's debut album Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) ( 1993 ) and the success of The Notorious B.I.G. ' s debut Ready to Die ( 1994 ) , Illmatic was also instrumental in restoring interest in the East Coast hip hop scene . " Rarely has the birthplace of hip @-@ hop , " wrote Rob Marriott of Complex , " been so unanimous in praise of a rap record and the MC who made it . " As Nas later recounted : " It felt amazing to be accepted by New York City in that way ... at the time a lot of West Coast hip @-@ hop was selling ; East Coast wasn 't selling as much , especially for a new artist . So back then you couldn 't tell in the sales , but you could tell in the streets " . 
 = = = = Production = = = = 
 Illmatic has been noted as a creative high point for East Coast hip hop , since it featured production from renowned New York @-@ based producers Large Professor , Pete Rock and DJ Premier . The album solidified the reputation of these producers , whose contributions to Illmatic became influential in shaping the soundscape of New York 's regional scene . According to music writer Rob Marriott , Illmatic helped to establish DJ Premier as " the go @-@ to producer for the jazz @-@ and @-@ blues @-@ inflected knock that became so central to East Coast sound . " 
 Following the album 's release , hip hop artists increasingly began to draw upon a broad stable of producers for their projects . At the time , the assembly of big @-@ name producers was unprecedented , since most hip hop albums had primarily been the work of one dedicated producer and sometimes an embedded production team . Yet author Adam Mansbach reflects on the impact of Illmatic 's noteworthy producers , writing : " The psychological impact on the listener of having all these elite producers – some of whom , like Q @-@ Tip , really weren ’ t known yet for doing outside production work at all – coming together to lace the debut of this kid from Queensbridge was tremendous . " This same template would also be used by other successful East Coast rappers . In an article on New York hip hop , Mosi Reeves of Creative Loafing wrote that " Nas ' Illmatic . . . is the first to draw together top hip hop producers in the recording industry . That formula , most successfully mined by the late Notorious B.I.G. ( 1997 's Life After Death ) , Puff Daddy ( 1997 's No Way Out ) and Jay @-@ Z ( 1998 's Vol . 2 ... Hard Knock Life ) , is what most N.Y. prospects still use today . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times writes that after Illmatic 's release , “ [ I ] t became commonplace for rappers to search around for different producers who could enhance their sound . " 
 Yet while hip @-@ hop artists continue to draw upon this template for album production , the practice has earned some criticism . In an article titled , " How Nas ' " Illmatic " Ruined Hip @-@ Hop , " Insanul Ahmed of Complex argues that one " unintended consequence " of Illmatic was the overall decline in the cohesion and quality of rap albums : " Next thing you knew , rap albums started having a different producer for every song . And like a film that has a different director for every scene , albums became unfocused affairs . This also meant that producers weren ’ t tied to artists anymore . " 
 = = = = Queensbridge = = = = 
 Illmatic is also credited with reviving the Queensbridge rap scene . Once home to prestigious pioneers such as Marley Marl , MC Shan , Roxanne Shanté , Queensbridge had been one of the most productive hip hop scenes in the country during the 1980s . In an April 2006 article , an XXL columnist wrote of the history and impact of the Queensbridge hip hop scene , stating " Since the 1980s , New York City 's Queensbridge Housing Projects has been documented perhaps better than any other geographic location . Starting with super producer Marley Marl 's dominant Juice Crew in the ’ 80s all the way through ’ 90s mainstays like Nas , Cormega and Capone , the Bridge has produced the highest per @-@ capita talent of any ’ hood . " Yet during the early 1990s , the Queensbridge rap scene was otherwise stagnant . According to Nas : " I was coming from the legacy of Marley Marl , MC Shan , Juice Crew kind of vibe . Knowing these guys out in the neighborhood . At that time , the Queensbridge scene was dead . Dropping that album right there said a lot for me to carry on the legacy of the Queensbridge pioneers . " 
 Following Illmatic 's release , Queensbridge returned to prominence after years of obscurity , with the ascendancy of the influential hardcore rap group , Mobb Deep ( who gained credibility due to their affiliation with Nas ) and later with the emergence of the trend @-@ setting duo , Capone @-@ n @-@ Noreaga . Nas appeared on Mobb Deep 's critically acclaimed studio album The Infamous ( 1995 ) . Furthermore , the album is credited with launching the career of the East New York @-@ based rapper , AZ . AZ , who gained instant exposure and underground credibility due to his appearance on " Life 's a Bitch " , became a frequent collaborator of Nas , who appeared on his debut album Doe or Die ( 1995 ) . 
 = = = = Decline of Alternative Hip @-@ Hop = = = = 
 Illmatic was one of the first major recordings to emerge from New York 's burgeoning hardcore hip hop scene , at a time when much of East Coast hip hop was still dominated by alternative hip hop acts such as A Tribe Called Quest and De La Soul ( groups often known for their jazz @-@ inspired production and playful sensibilities ) . Adam Heimlich of The New York Press comments on the appeal of alternative hip @-@ hop in New York City 's music scene , and points out that , " In 1994 , there appeared likely to be more money ( and definitely more cultural rewards ) in working with Arrested Development or Digable Planets . " 
 Yet according to Heimlich , Illmatic provided an " explosive , explicit rejection of the cultural assimilation of most previous hip @-@ hop , " due to its rugged use of language and its uncompromising portrayal of crime . Heimlich cites Nas ' role in the resurgent hardcore movement , writing : " [ Nas ] came on the scene as hardcore 's golden child . Along with Wu @-@ Tang Clan , Nas and Mobb Deep . . . all but invented 90s New York rap , back when the notion of an ' East Coast gangsta ' still meant Schoolly D or Kool G. Rap . Those three ... designed the manner and style in which New York artists would address what Snoop and Dre had made rap 's hottest topics : drugs and violence . " Similarly , Duke University Professor , Mark Anthony Neal , writes , “ Nas was at the forefront of a renaissance of East Coast hip hop ” in which “ ... a distinct East Coast style of so @-@ called gangsta rap appeared , ” as heard in similarly styled recordings such as Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's “ C.R.E.A.M. ” and Notorious B.I.G. ' s " Everyday Struggle " . 
 According to Steve Huey of Allmusic , while Illmatic contains strong elements of jazz rap , it nonetheless signaled a major regional shift towards hardcore aesthetics , marking " the beginning of a shift away from Native Tongues @-@ inspired alternative rap . " Professor Sohail <unk> of the University of Southern California comments on Illmatic 's indebtedness to hardcore hip hop : “ [ B ] ecause in bridging the gap and embodying the street swagger of Kool G Rap , the metaphysics of Rakim , and the revolutionary lumpen philosophies of Ice Cube , Nas ... unified the disparate threads of urban rebellion that were <unk> from hip @-@ hop 's street corner ciphers . ” 
 = = = = West Coast Hip @-@ Hop = = = = 
 The critical acclaim surrounding the album also helped to shift attention away from the melodious , synth @-@ driven , and funk @-@ induced G @-@ funk subgenre , which dominated the charts for some time after Dr. Dre 's The Chronic ( 1992 ) . Citing the example of Snoop Dogg 's wildly popular Doggystyle ( released six months prior to Nas ' debut ) author Matthew Gasteier writes , " The first thing immediately noticeable about the [ Source magazine ] review , is that , like essentially every other review about Illmatic in publications like Vibe , Spin , Rolling Stones , and The New York Times , it mentions Snoop Doggy Dogg 's Doggystyle in the first paragraph . " That nearly every reviewer felt the need to contextualize their response to Illmatic within the frame of West Coast G @-@ Funk " is a reminder of just how pervasive the style was within the hip hop world and the music community as a whole . " 
 Yet according to writer Mickey Hess , Illmatic was among those East Coast records that helped " create sparse , rough and rugged soundscapes that clearly differed from Dre 's multi @-@ layered melodies . " As Allmusic 's Steve Huey writes , " It helped spearhead the artistic renaissance of New York hip hop in the post @-@ Chronic era , leading a return to street aesthetics . " Contrasting these aesthetics with the themes found in G @-@ Funk , writer and filmmaker Dream Hampton writes , " Illmatic was a dirty bomb thrown at the orchestral sonic soundtrack that was The Chronic ... This wasn ’ t a backyard bikini barbeque where the Ohio Players and DJ Quik were mashed up ; this was a three @-@ month bid on Rikers Island , a dirty dice game , blunts of brown Brooklyn sparked in the park after dark . " 
 Despite these regional differences , Hampton credits Illmatic with providing a common artistic ground for rappers on the West Coast and East Coast rap scenes . In the 2009 essay " Born Alone , Die Alone , " she recounts the album 's impact on West Coast artist , Tupac Shakur . While working as a journalist for The Source in 1994 , Hampton covered three court cases involving Tupac . Around this time , she received an advance @-@ copy of Illmatic and immediately dubbed a cassette version for Tupac , who became " an instant convert " of the album . The next day , she writes , Tupac " arrived in his assigned courtroom blasting Illmatic so loudly that the bailiff yelled at him to turn it off before the judge took his seat on the bench . " In her essay , Hampton implies that Nas ' lyricism might have influenced Tupac 's acclaimed album , Me Against the World , which was recorded that same year . 
 West Coast artist The Game also recounts the impact of Illmatic for fans like himself outside of New York . In his collaboration with Nas on " Hustlers " ( 2006 ) , he retells an episode taking place during his youth , where he decided to shoplift both Illmatic and The Chronic : " 1995 , eleven years from the day / I 'm in the record shop with choices to make Illmatic on the top shelf , The Chronic on the left , <unk> / Wanna cop both but only got a twenty on me / So fuck it , I stole both , spent the twenty on a dub @-@ sack / Ripped the package of Illmatic and bumped that / For my niggas it was too complex when Nas rhymed / I was the only Compton nigga with a New York State of Mind " 
 = = = Lyricism = = = 
 During the time of its release , Illmatic brought a renewed focus on lyricism to hip hop — hearkening back to the heyday of Kool G Rap , Big Daddy Kane , and Rakim . Music journalist Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times wrote of Illmatic , stating that Nas " perfected a dense , rat @-@ a @-@ tat rhyme style that built upon the legacy of 1980s pioneers like Rakim and Big Daddy Kane . " In his book To the Break of Dawn : A Freestyle on the Hip Hop Aesthetic , William Jelani Cobb writes of Nas ' impact on lyricism and the comparisons to eminent rapper Rakim at the time : 
 Nas , the poetic sage of the Queensbridge projects , was hailed as the second coming of Rakim — as if the first had reached his expiration date . [ ... ] Nas never became ' the next Rakim , ' nor did he really have to . Illmatic stood on its own terms . The sublime lyricism of the CD , combined with the fact that it was delivered into the crucible of the boiling East @-@ West conflict , quickly solidified [ his ] reputation as the premier writer of his time . 
 Despite its initial low sales , the album had a profound impact on the hip hop underground circuit , and marked a major stylistic change in hip hop music by introducing a new standard of lyricism . Before the album 's release , hip @-@ hop lyricism was mostly defined by two popular forms . One was characterized by a fast @-@ paced ragga @-@ flow accompanied with a whimsical , often nonsensical lyrical delivery , and had been popularized by the Brooklyn @-@ based groups Das EFX and The Fu @-@ <unk> . The other was characterized by a slurred " lazy drawl " that sacrificed lyrical complexity for clarity and rhythmic cadence , and was exemplified by West Coast hip hop emcees including Snoop Doggy Dogg and Warren G. However , Nas ' content , verbal pace , and intricate internal rhyme patterns inspired several rappers to modify their lyrical abilities . Music critic Rob Marriott notes , " [ R ] <unk> like Mobb Deep , Tragedy <unk> , Nature , Cormega , Noreaga , Capone , Raekwon , Ghostface , and even the Windy City wordsmith Common seemed to find new inspiration in Nas ' self awareness , internal rhyme schemes , and mastery of street detail . " Marriott also describes the impact of Illmatic 's " poetic approach " on Jay @-@ Z , writing : " The Brooklyn MC switched his style up from his fast @-@ talking Jaz @-@ O days enough to produce Reasonable Doubt , an album marked by Nas @-@ like introspection ... " 
 Many rappers have taken note of Illmatic 's influence on their lyricism . Ghostface Killah recounted , “ When I used to listen to Nas back in the days , it was like , ‘ Oh shit ! He murdered that . ’ That forced me to get my pen game up ... The whole Illmatic album forced you to go ahead and do shit ... It was inspiration . " Detroit rapper <unk> states , " [ A ] round the time Nas did Illmatic , it made me wanna step my game up ... He 's one of the reasons I did go off into storytelling because his pictures were so vivid . When he displayed his rhyme schemes and his word play and his songs , it made me wanna create visual pictures as well . " Casey Veggies also recounts the impact Nas ' lyricism had on his own work as an underground rapper in the 2000s : “ I [ got into ] Illmatic when I was 14 , 15 . I didn ’ t get onto to it till late , but when I did , that 's probably the only thing I listened to for six months to a year ... After I got heavy on Illmatic , I put out Sleeping In Class ( 2010 ) . That 's when I really tried to sharpen my skills and get better . ” 
 = = = = Hip @-@ Hop poetry = = = = 
 In addition to his rapping , Nas achieved significance for his poetic use of language . Professor <unk> Nama of California State University Northridge writes , “ With Illmatic , hip @-@ hop witnessed the birth of an urban griot telling hard @-@ boiled tales of ghetto alienation and triumph like a spoken @-@ word of a Chester Himes novel " Author and music writer Todd Boyd wrote of Nas ' urban realism , stating that his " poetic lyrics are some of the most poignant words ever to describe the postindustrial urban experience . His spoken @-@ word like delivery and his vivid use of metaphor placed him at the top of the game in terms of overall skills as an MC and as a cultural commentator . " An OhWord.com columnist similarly described Nas as a " genius introvert who rose out of the rubble of Reaganomics to bless the mic with a forward brand of introspective , redemptive street poetry " . Princeton University professor Imani Perry also describes Illmatic as " ars <unk> , a definitive statement for the art of hip @-@ hop poetry . " 
 According to author and poet Kevin Coval , Nas “ raise [ d ] the bar for MCs ” by advancing his lyricism “ from punch lines and hot lines to whole thought pictures manifest in rhyme form . ” Together with Paul Beatty ’ s seminal collection of poems , Joker Joker Deuce ( 1994 ) Coval cites the release of Illmatic as a " generational moment " that marked the development of hip hop poetry . Just as hip @-@ hop poetics were being written and published for the first time on paper , Nas provided a sonic production that definitively captured " the poetic response " to hip hop music . “ It is from this point on , ” he writes , “ that style , technique and craft merge with collage / pastiche , braggadocio , stark portrait @-@ painting from the margins , frenetic , fun and funny wordplay , and the rupture of linear storytelling schemes . These become tropes in a burgeoning school of American letters that 's moving toward an aesthetics of hip @-@ hop poetics . " 
 Many of the poetic tropes found in Illmatic have also become terms and phrases within hip @-@ hop lexicon . " ' The World Is Yours , ' Nas ' reference to the blimp in Scarface , " writes Rob Marriott , " has remained a trope hip @-@ hop has taken to heart ... Even the word " Illmatic " itself [ ... ] became synonymous with anything surprisingly excellent , street @-@ born and / or out of left field . " In 2013 , music writer Jeff Weiss commented on the extensive vernacular usage of Illmatic , writing : " The phrases and images are so deeply rooted in rap consciousness to have become cliché . Over the last 19 years , a million secret handshakes and scratched hooks have been executed to lines from Illmatic . " 
 = = = Hip @-@ Hop artists = = = 
 Many respected mainstream and underground rappers have acknowledged Illmatic 's influence . These wide range of artists include the battle rappers , <unk> and Reef The Lost <unk> , conscious rappers Talib Kweli and Lupe Fiasco , the producers Just Blaze and 9th Wonder , as well as the platinum @-@ selling artists Wiz Khalifa , Alicia Keys and The Game , who makes references to the album on his debut , The Documentary In 2006 , Illmatic was featured in a list of acclaimed hip hop albums , compiled by Clipse . Malice , a member of the hip hop duo , claimed : " Illmatic captured the whole New York state of mind for me . It embraced everything I knew New York to be . The album had 10 songs , all of them flawless . Me and my homies got great memories of rolling around listening to that , <unk> ' , smokin ' , <unk> ' . That embodied everything that was right with hip @-@ hop . That CD never came out my deck . " Speaking in 2012 , British producer , DJ Semtex described Illmatic as " an exemplary album of perfection that forced the evolution of lyricism and production values within hip hop . Eighteen years later it remains omnipotent . " 
 In 2006 , Marc Mac of the electronic music duo <unk> , produced a cover version of " The World Is Yours " as part of his jazz and hip @-@ hip fusion project , The <unk> . Lyrics from Illmatic have also been sampled by other rappers , most notably Big L 's " <unk> " ( which samples " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " ) , <unk> 's " Keep It Real " ( which samples " Life 's a Bitch " ) , Real Live 's " Real Live Shit " ( which samples " It Ain 't Hard to Tell " ) , Damu the <unk> 's " Prosper " ft . Raw Poetic ( which samples " N.Y. State of Mind " ) , Blu & Exile 's " In Remembrance " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " and " One Love " ) , Mac Miller 's " Nikes On My Feet " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " ) and Jay @-@ Z 's " Rap Game / Crack Game " ( which samples " Represent " ) and " Dead Presidents II " ( which samples " The World Is Yours " ) . 
 = = = = Legacy and tributes = = = = 
 Since its release , Illmatic has become a benchmark for upcoming rappers whose albums are widely anticipated by critics . Hip hop pundits have viewed debut albums as crucial in generating publicity and shaping the legacy of an artist 's career . Given the historic anticipation and acclaim surrounding Nas ' debut , Illmatic has become a byword for this sort of phenomenon . As one columnist for the Complex Magazine writes , " Think about the question that pops into your head whenever a new rapper drops his first album : ' Is it the next Illmatic ? ' " In 2012 , the release of Kendrick Lamar 's album , Good Kid , M.A.A.D City , drew comparisons to Illmatic from critics and journalists . In an interview with 2 Dope Boyz , Lamar commented on these comparisons , stating : 
 “ Illmatic ? For people to even put my album in the light of that , is an accomplishment . It 's crazy to even be mentioned with it but it 's scary at the same time ... That era – I wanna say the age range now would be 30 , 30 to 40 – they can recognize this was the album . Illmatic ’ s the album for the ’ 90s era when I was growing up ... it 's just a weird feeling to be in that same type of light , ‘ <unk> it takes a whole lot of responsibility to keep that up in the long run and longevity , and that 's something I don ’ t have yet … so Illmatic will always be # 1 . ” 
 Illmatic has also been cited as a musical template for other hip hop artists . Common 's critically acclaimed album Be ( 2005 ) has been said to have been molded after Illmatic . In 2010 , underground hip hop artist <unk> released the mixtape Ode to Illmatic to " pay homage , ' cause Illmatic was one of them kinda albums that really impacted my life ” . Detroit rapper <unk> released a remake of Illmatic titled <unk> ( 2011 ) . Taking note of a trend of tributes to Illmatic in 2011 , Richard Watson of The Guardian wrote , " To quote Nasir Jones himself ... ' It Ain 't Hard To Tell ' why today 's rappers are paying tribute to his debut album . Illmatic has become a totem , a work that both looked back into hip @-@ hop history and pointed towards its future . " 
 = = = Intellectual response = = = 
 Illmatic has also received notable attention from scholars and authors outside the music industry . Since its release , the album has become the subject of scholarship within academic and literary circles . In 2009 , as part of the 33 ⅓ book series , author Matthew Gasteier published a deconstruction of Illmatic , that focuses on the dualities that inform its narratives . In 2012 , playwright Shaun <unk> created a tribute play titled Homage 3 : Illmatic , which tells the story of an aspiring artist and explores the themes found in Nas ' debut . " [ A ] s its title suggests , " writes one reviewer , " ... the play is completely based on and acts as a tribute to Nas ’ Illmatic album . The rappers ’ bars come alive on stage through Homage 3 , which deliberately shows how intellectually well @-@ versed Nas truly is , and much bigger than that , how much Hip @-@ Hop has to offer , culturally , outside of the radio , clubs and the street . " 
 Illmatic is also the focus of a significant work of hip @-@ hop scholarship , Born to Use Mics : Reading Nas 's Illmatic ( 2009 ) , edited by Michael Eric Dyson and Sohail Daulatzai . With contributions from figures such as Greg Tate , Adam Mansbach , Eddie <unk> , Dream Hampton , Marc Lamont Hill , and <unk> Hammad , Born to Use Mics ... is the first academic project to assemble a group of scholars , poets , filmmakers , journalists , novelists , and musicians to reflect on a specific hip hop album . In the introduction , Daulatzai explains the singular focus on Illmatic , writing : 
 [ S ] ome might ask , why Illmatic ? Why not Boogie Down Productions ’ Criminal Minded , Public Enemy ’ s It Takes a Nation to Hold Us Back , or Ice Cube ’ s <unk> 's Most Wanted ? No doubt these were great albums , coming at a moment when hip hop was cutting its teeth on social commentary and refining its ear on dusty breaks , hard snares , and sonic mayhem . But there is something about Illmatic that transcends the categories that have ever existed about hip @-@ hop . Something complex about its simplicity , something elusive that we felt we wanted to explore . Straight up though , Illmatic is just a dope album , embodying everything that is hip @-@ hop while mastering what matters most : beats and rhymes . 
 = = = = Hip @-@ Hop debates = = = = 
 Illmatic has also helped to shape the attitudes and perceptions of hip hop fans , who cherish it as a music template that defines the genre 's conventions . As music critic Jeff Weiss writes , “ Illmatic is the gold standard that boom @-@ bap connoisseurs refer to in the same way that Baby Boomers talk about Highway 61 Revisited . The evidence they point to when they want to say : this is how good it can be . ” New York Times columnist Jon Caramanica also credits the album with inadvertently spawning hip hop 's counterculture . " Illmatic " he writes , " mobilized a national network of dissidents craving something true to the streets but eager to distance themselves from what was beginning to be perceived as a scourge – gangster rap . " According to Caramanica , Nas ' debut was received by these fans as a " rebuke " towards trends that were beginning to shape mainstream rap : " the pop crossover , the exuberant production values , [ and ] the splintering of rap into blithe and concerned wings . " 
 For this reason , Caramanica considers Illmatic to be " unusually significant to the intellectual development of the [ hip @-@ hop ] genre " yet he also remains critical of the divisiveness spawned by its " zealots . " In his essay , " ' Night Time is More <unk> Than Ever ' : The Many <unk> of Nas , " he writes : " Illmatic is responsible for countless pointless ' rap versus hip @-@ hop debates , ' a shocking amount of hip @-@ hop self @-@ righteousness , the emergence of the backpack movement as something more than a regional curio , and the persistence of the idea that lyricism is the only standard great rap music should be held to . " Commenting on these polarized debates , Jeff Weiss suggests that Illmatic is " best heard by ignoring the dogma , culture wars , Nas clones , and would @-@ be saviors that have accreted since April of 1994 . Who cares whether it 's the greatest rap album of all @-@ time or not ? It 's an example of how great rap can be , but not necessarily the way it should be . " ' 
 = = = Subsequent work by Nas = = = 
 While its success helped Nas ' career immeasurably , hip hop aficionados have cited the album as his inextricable " gift and curse " . Due to its critical fame , Nas ' subsequent studio albums have been weighed against Illmatic , despite all of them outselling his debut . Against this standard , they are often critically deemed as mediocre follow @-@ ups . After manager Steve Stoute convinced Nas to aim his efforts in a more commercial direction for his follow @-@ up album It Was Written ( 1996 ) , he enlisted the production team Trackmasters , who were known for their mainstream work at the time . It was criticized for its embrace of gangsta / mafioso themes and materialistic subject matter , but proved to be a commercial success , selling over three million copies . Critics gave it mixed reviews , and general consensus was that it failed to live up to the classic status of Illmatic . Many fans of Illmatic labeled his subsequent efforts as ' selling out ' , due to his crossover sensibilities ( e.g. his participation with the hip hop group The Firm ) and radio @-@ friendly hits aimed at the pop charts , such as " If I Ruled the World ( Imagine That ) " ( 1996 ) and " Hate Me Now " ( 1999 ) . 
 When he released his third and fourth studio albums , I Am … and Nastradamus ( 1999 ) , which underwent editing due to bootlegging of the recording sessions , many fans and critics feared that his career was deteriorating , as both albums received further criticism for their commercially oriented sound . Reflecting this widespread perception in the hip hop community and adding to his ongoing feud with Nas at the time , Jay @-@ Z mocked him in the song " Takeover " ( 2001 ) for having a " one hot album [ Illmatic ] every ten year average " . A journalist writing for The Source commented on the demanding legacy of Nas ' debut : " Blame excellence , blame perfection and aggression . Blame one of hip @-@ hop 's most beautiful moments for the prison that traps Nasir Jones today – blame Illmatic . " Nas , however , made something of a comeback with his fifth album Stillmatic ( 2001 ) and the acclaimed follow @-@ up God 's Son ( 2002 ) , as well as The Lost Tapes ( 2002 ) , a compilation of previously unreleased tracks from the I Am … and Nastradamus sessions . Afterwards , his subsequent albums have all been well received by critics . Nevertheless , most fans have regarded Illmatic as his definitive album . 
 In 2011 , Nas performed the album in its entirety at Rock the Bells music festival . The show featured the album 's personnel , including Pete Rock , DJ Premier , and AZ , and a stage design depicting the urban landscape of Queensbridge , with graffiti @-@ lined streets , a subway entrance , and models of Queensbridge 's housing project . In 2012 , he also performed the album in its entirety at South by Southwest music festival , with the same personnel and stage design . Illmatic will be reissued as a deluxe CD bundled with a 48 @-@ page hardcover book featuring photos , reproduced artwork , lyrics , and liner notes courtesy of The Source founder Jon Schecter . 
 In 2014 Nas announced Illmatic XX , the 20th Anniversary Edition of the original album Illmatic , released April 15 , 4 days prior to the 20th Anniversary of the original 's release date ( April 19 ) . Illmatic XX includes a remastered version of Illmatic , an extra disc of demos , remixes , and unreleased records from that era of Nas ' career . He also announced his plans for a tour where he will perform the whole album front to back on each stop . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Samples = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Faith N. - Executive Producer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Illmatic is adapted from Acclaimed Music . 
 = Siege of Constantinople ( 717 – 718 ) = 
 The Second Arab siege of Constantinople in 717 – 718 ( 98 – 100 AH ) was a combined land and sea offensive by the Muslim Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate against the capital city of the Byzantine Empire , Constantinople . The campaign marked the culmination of twenty years of attacks and progressive Arab occupation of the Byzantine borderlands , while Byzantine strength was sapped by prolonged internal turmoil . In 716 , after years of preparations , the Arabs , led by Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik , invaded Byzantine Asia Minor . The Arabs initially hoped to exploit Byzantine civil strife and made common cause with the general Leo III the Isaurian , who had risen up against Emperor Theodosius III . Leo , however , tricked them and secured the Byzantine throne for himself . 
 After wintering in the western coastlands of Asia Minor , the Arab army crossed into Thrace in early summer 717 and built siege lines to blockade the city , which was protected by the massive Theodosian Walls . The Arab fleet , which accompanied the land army and was meant to complete the city 's blockade by sea , was neutralized soon after its arrival by the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire . This allowed Constantinople to be resupplied by sea , while the Arab army was crippled by famine and disease during the unusually hard winter that followed . In spring 718 , two Arab fleets sent as reinforcements were destroyed by the Byzantines after their Christian crews defected , and an additional army sent overland through Asia Minor was ambushed and defeated . Coupled with attacks by the Bulgars on their rear , the Arabs were forced to lift the siege on 15 August 718 . On its return journey , the Arab fleet was almost completely destroyed by natural disasters and Byzantine attacks . 
 The siege 's failure had wide @-@ ranging repercussions . The rescue of Constantinople ensured the continued survival of Byzantium , while the Caliphate 's strategic outlook was altered : although regular attacks on Byzantine territories continued , the goal of outright conquest was abandoned . Historians consider the siege to be one of history 's most important battles , as its failure postponed the Muslim advance into Southeastern Europe for centuries . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the first Arab siege of Constantinople ( 674 – 678 ) , the Arabs and Byzantines experienced a period of peace . After 680 , the Umayyad Caliphate was in the throes of the Second Muslim Civil War and the consequent Byzantine ascendancy in the East enabled the emperors to extract huge amounts of tribute from the Umayyad government in Damascus . In 692 , as the Umayyads emerged as victors from the Muslim Civil War , Emperor Justinian II ( r . 685 – 695 and 705 – 711 ) re @-@ opened hostilities . The result was a series of Arab victories that led to the loss of Byzantine control over Armenia and the Caucasian principalities , and a gradual encroachment upon Byzantine borderlands . Year by year , the Caliphate 's generals , usually members of the Umayyad family , launched raids into Byzantine territory and captured fortresses and towns . After 712 , the Byzantine defensive system began to show signs of collapse : Arab raids penetrated further and further into Asia Minor , border fortresses were repeatedly attacked and sacked , and references to Byzantine reaction in the sources become more and more scarce . In this , the Arabs were aided by the prolonged period of internal instability that followed the first deposition of Justinian II in 695 , in which the Byzantine throne changed hands seven times in violent coups . In the words of the Byzantinist Warren Treadgold , " the Arab attacks would in any case have intensified after the end of their own civil war ... With far more men , land and wealth than Byzantium , the Arabs had begun to concentrate all their strength against it . Now they threatened to extinguish the empire entirely by capturing its capital . " 
 = = Opening stages of the campaign = = 
 The Arab successes opened the way for a second assault on Constantinople , an undertaking already initiated under Caliph al @-@ Walid I ( r . 705 – 715 ) . Following his death , his brother and successor Sulayman ( r . 715 – 717 ) took up the project with increased vigour , according to Arab accounts because of a prophecy that a Caliph bearing the name of a prophet would capture Constantinople ; Sulayman ( Solomon ) was the only member of the Umayyad family to bear such a name . According to Syriac sources , the new Caliph swore " to not stop fighting against Constantinople before having exhausted the country of the Arabs or to have taken the city " . The Umayyad forces began assembling at the plain of Dabiq north of Aleppo , under the direct supervision of the Caliph . As Sulayman was too sick to campaign himself , however , he entrusted command to his brother Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik . The operation against Constantinople came at a time when the Umayyad state was undergoing a period of continuous expansion to the east and west . Muslim armies advanced into Transoxiana , India and the Visigothic Kingdom of Hispania . 
 Arab preparations , especially the construction of a large fleet , did not go unnoticed by the worried Byzantines . Emperor Anastasios II ( r . 713 – 715 ) sent an embassy to Damascus under the patrician and urban prefect , Daniel of Sinope , ostensibly in order to plea for peace , but in reality to spy on the Arabs . Anastasios , in turn , began to prepare for the inevitable siege : the fortifications of Constantinople were repaired and equipped with ample artillery ( catapults and other siege weapons ) , while food stores were brought into the city . In addition , those inhabitants who could not stockpile food for at least three years were evacuated . Anastasios strengthened his navy and in early 715 dispatched it against the Arab fleet that had come to Phoenix — usually identified with modern <unk> in Lycia , it may also be modern <unk> across Rhodes , or perhaps Phoenicia ( modern Lebanon ) , famed for its cedar forests — to collect timber for their ships . At Rhodes , however , the Byzantine fleet , encouraged by the soldiers of the Opsician Theme , rebelled , killed their commander John the Deacon and sailed north to <unk> . There , they acclaimed a reluctant tax collector , Theodosius , as emperor . Anastasios crossed into Bithynia in the Opsician Theme to confront the rebellion , but the rebel fleet sailed on to Chrysopolis . From there , it launched attacks against Constantinople , until , in late summer , sympathizers within the capital opened its gates to them . Anastasios held out at Nicaea for several months , finally agreeing to resign and retire as a monk . The accession of Theodosios , who from the sources comes across as both unwilling and incapable , as a puppet emperor of the <unk> provoked the reaction of the other themes , especially the Anatolics and the Armeniacs under their respective strategoi ( generals ) Leo the Isaurian and Artabasdos . 
 In these conditions of near @-@ civil war , the Arabs began their carefully prepared advance . In September 715 , the vanguard , under general Sulayman ibn Mu 'ad , marched over Cilicia into Asia Minor , taking the strategic fortress of <unk> on its way . They wintered at <unk> , an unidentified location near the western exit of the Cilician Gates . In early 716 , Sulayman 's army continued into central Asia Minor . The Umayyad fleet under Umar ibn Hubayra cruised along the Cilician coast , while Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik awaited developments with the main army in Syria . 
 The Arabs hoped that the disunity among the Byzantines would play to their advantage . Maslama had already established contact with Leo the Isaurian . French scholar Rodolphe Guilland theorized that Leo offered to become a vassal of the Caliphate , although the Byzantine general intended to use the Arabs for his own purposes . In turn , Maslama supported Leo hoping to maximize confusion and weaken the Empire , easing his own task of taking Constantinople . 
 Sulayman 's first objective was the strategically important fortress of Amorium , which the Arabs intended to use as a base the following winter . Amorium had been left defenceless in the turmoil of the civil war and would have easily fallen , but the Arabs chose to bolster Leo 's position as a counterweight to Theodosios . They offered the city terms of surrender if its inhabitants would acknowledge Leo as emperor . The fortress capitulated , but still did not open its gates to the Arabs . Leo came to the vicinity with a handful of soldiers and executed a series of ruses and negotiations to garrison 800 men in the town . The Arab army , thwarted in its objective and with supplies running low , withdrew . Leo escaped to Pisidia and , in summer , supported by Artabasdos , was proclaimed and crowned as Byzantine emperor , openly challenging Theodosios . 
 Leo 's success at Amorium was fortunately timed , since Maslama with the main Arab army had in the meantime crossed the Taurus Mountains and was marching straight for the city . In addition , as the Arab general had not received news of Leo 's double @-@ dealing , he did not devastate the territories he marched through — the Armeniac and Anatolic themes , whose governors he still believed to be his allies . On meeting up with Sulayman 's retreating army and learning what had transpired , Maslama changed direction : he attacked Akroinon and from there marched to the western coastlands to spend the winter . On his way , he sacked Sardis and Pergamon . The Arab fleet wintered in Cilicia . Leo , in the meantime , began his own march on Constantinople . He captured Nicomedia , where he found and captured , among other officials , Theodosios 's son , and then marched to Chrysopolis . In spring 717 , after short negotiations , he secured Theodosios 's resignation and his recognition as emperor , entering the capital on 25 March . Theodosios and his son were allowed to retire to a monastery as monks , while Artabasdos was promoted to the position of kouropalates and received the hand of Leo 's daughter , Anna . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 From the outset , the Arabs prepared for a major assault on Constantinople . The late 8th @-@ century Syriac <unk> Chronicle reports that the Arabs were " innumerable " , while the 12th @-@ century Syriac chronicler Michael the Syrian mentions a much @-@ inflated 200 @,@ 000 men and 5 @,@ 000 ships . The 10th @-@ century Arab writer al @-@ Mas 'udi mentions 120 @,@ 000 troops , and the account of Theophanes the Confessor 1 @,@ 800 ships . Supplies for several years were hoarded , and siege engines and incendiary materials ( naphtha ) were stockpiled . The supply train is said to have numbered 12 @,@ 000 men , 6 @,@ 000 camels and 6 @,@ 000 donkeys , while according to the 13th @-@ century historian Bar Hebraeus , the troops included 30 @,@ 000 volunteers ( mutawa ) for the Holy War ( jihad ) . Whatever the true numbers , the attackers were considerably more numerous than the defenders ; according to Treadgold , the Arab host may have outnumbered the entire Byzantine army . Little is known on the detailed composition of the Arab force , but it appears that it mostly consisted of and was led by Syrians and <unk> of the elite ahl al @-@ Sham ( " People of Syria " ) , the main pillar of the Umayyad regime and veterans of the struggle against Byzantium . Alongside Maslama , Umar ibn Hubayra , Sulayman ibn Mu 'ad , and <unk> ibn al @-@ Hasan are mentioned as his lieutenants by Theophanes and Agapius of Hierapolis , while the later Kitab al- ' Uyun replaces <unk> with Abdallah al @-@ Battal . 
 Although the siege consumed a large part of the Caliphate 's manpower and resources , it was still capable of launching raids against the Byzantine frontier in eastern Asia Minor during the siege 's duration : in 717 , Caliph Sulayman 's son Daud captured a fortress near Melitene and in 718 Amr ibn Qais raided the frontier . On the Byzantine side , the numbers are unknown . Aside from Anastasius II 's preparations ( which may have been neglected following his deposition ) , the Byzantines could count on the assistance of the Bulgars , with whom Leo concluded a treaty that may have included alliance against the Arabs . 
 = = Siege = = 
 In early summer , Maslama ordered his fleet to join him and with his army crossed the Hellespont ( Dardanelles ) at Abydos into Thrace . The Arabs began their march on <unk> , thoroughly devastating the countryside , gathering supplies , and sacking the towns they encountered . In mid @-@ July or mid @-@ August , the Arab army reached Constantinople and isolated it completely on land by building a double siege wall of stone , one facing the city and one facing the Thracian countryside , with their camp positioned between them . According to Arab sources , at this point Leo offered to ransom the city by paying a gold coin for every inhabitant , but Maslama replied that there could not be peace with the vanquished , and that the Arab garrison of Constantinople had already been selected . 
 The Arab fleet under Sulayman ( often confused with the Caliph himself in the medieval sources ) arrived on 1 September , anchoring at first near the Hebdomon . Two days later , Sulayman led his fleet into the Bosphorus and the various squadrons began anchoring by the European and Asian suburbs of the city : one part sailed south of Chalcedon to the harbours of <unk> and <unk> to watch over the southern entrance of the Bosporus , while the rest of the fleet sailed into the strait , passed by Constantinople and began making landfall on the coasts between Galata and Kleidion , cutting the Byzantine capital 's communication with the Black Sea . But as the Arab fleet 's rearguard , twenty heavy ships with 2 @,@ 000 marines , was passing the city , the southerly wind stopped and then reversed , drifting them towards the city walls , where a Byzantine squadron attacked them with Greek fire . Theophanes reported that some went down with all hands , while others , burning , sailed down to the Princes ' Islands of <unk> and <unk> . The victory encouraged the Byzantines and dejected the Arabs , who , according to Theophanes , had originally intended to sail to the sea walls during the night and try to scale them using the ships ' steering paddles . The same night , Leo drew up the chain between the city and Galata , closing the entrance to the Golden Horn . The Arab fleet became reluctant to engage the Byzantines , and withdrew to the safe harbour of <unk> further north on the European shore of the Bosporus . 
 The Arab army was well @-@ provisioned , with Arab accounts reporting high mounds of supplies piled up in their camp , and had even brought along wheat to sow and harvest the next year . The failure of the Arab navy to blockade the city , however , meant that the Byzantines too could ferry in provisions . In addition , the Arab army had already devastated the Thracian countryside during its march and could not rely on it for foraging . The Arab fleet and the second Arab army , which operated in the Asian suburbs of Constantinople , were able to bring in limited supplies to Maslama 's army . As the siege drew into winter , negotiations opened between the two sides , extensively reported by Arab sources but ignored by Byzantine historians . According to the Arab accounts , Leo continued to play a double game with the Arabs . One version claims that he tricked Maslama into handing over most of his grain supplies , while another claims that the Arab general was persuaded to burn them altogether , so as to show the inhabitants of the city that they faced an imminent assault and induce them to surrender . The winter of 718 was extremely harsh ; snow covered the ground for over three months . As the supplies in the Arab camp ran out , a terrible famine broke out : the soldiers ate their horses , camels , and other livestock , and the bark , leaves and roots of trees . They swept the snow of the fields they had sown to eat the green shoots , and reportedly resorted to cannibalism and eating their own excrement . Consequently , the Arab army was ravaged by epidemics ; with great exaggeration , the Lombard historian Paul the Deacon put the number of their dead of hunger and disease at 300 @,@ 000 . 
 The situation looked set to improve in spring when the new Caliph , Umar II ( r . 717 – 720 ) , sent two fleets to the besiegers ' aid : 400 ships from Egypt under a commander named Sufyan and 360 ships from Africa under <unk> , all laden with supplies and arms . At the same time , a fresh army began marching through Asia Minor to assist in the siege . When the new fleets arrived in the Sea of Marmara , they kept their distance from the Byzantines and anchored on the Asian shore . The Egyptians were in the Gulf of Nicomedia near modern Tuzla and the Africans south of Chalcedon ( at <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ) . Most of the Arab fleets ' crews were composed of Christian Egyptians , however , and they began deserting to the Byzantines upon their arrival . Notified by the Egyptians of the advent and disposition of the Arab reinforcements , Leo launched his fleet in an attack against the new Arab fleets . Crippled by the defection of their crews , and helpless against Greek fire , the Arab ships were destroyed or captured along with the weapons and supplies they carried . Constantinople was now safe from a seaborne attack . On land too the Byzantines were victorious : their troops managed to ambush the advancing Arab army under a commander named <unk> and destroy it in the hills around Sophon , south of Nicomedia . 
 Constantinople could now be easily resupplied by sea and the city 's fishermen went back to sea , as the Arab fleet did not sail again . Still suffering from hunger and pestilence , the Arabs lost a major battle against the Bulgars , who killed , according to Theophanes , 22 @,@ 000 . It is unclear , however , whether the Bulgars attacked the Arab encampment because of their treaty with Leo or whether the Arabs strayed into Bulgar territory seeking provisions , as reported by the Syriac Chronicle of 846 . Michael the Syrian mentions that the Bulgars participated in the siege from the beginning , with attacks against the Arabs as they marched through Thrace and subsequently on their encampment , but this is not corroborated elsewhere . The siege had clearly failed , and Caliph Umar sent orders to Maslama to retreat . After thirteen months of siege , on 15 August 718 , the Arabs departed . The date coincided with the feast of the Dormition of the Theotokos ( Assumption of Mary ) , and it was to her that the Byzantines ascribed their victory . The retreating Arabs were not hindered or attacked on their return , but their fleet lost more ships in a storm in the Marmara Sea while other ships were set afire by ashes from the volcano of Santorini , and some of the survivors were captured by the Byzantines , so that Theophanes claims that only five vessels made it back to Syria . Arab sources claim that altogether 150 @,@ 000 Muslims perished during the campaign , a figure which , according to the Byzantinist John Haldon , " while certainly inflated , is nevertheless indicative of the enormity of the disaster in medieval eyes " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The expedition 's failure weakened the Umayyad state . As historian Bernard Lewis commented , " Its failure brought a grave moment for Umayyad power . The financial strain of equipping and maintaining the expedition caused an aggravation of the fiscal and financial oppression which had already aroused such dangerous opposition . The destruction of the fleet and army of Syria at the sea walls of Constantinople deprived the regime of the chief material basis of its power " . The blow to the Caliphate 's might was severe , and although the land army did not suffer losses in the same degree as the fleet , Umar is recorded as contemplating withdrawing from the recent conquests of Hispania and Transoxiana , as well as a complete evacuation of Cilicia and other Byzantine territories that the Arabs had seized over the previous years . Although his advisors dissuaded him from such drastic actions , most Arab garrisons were withdrawn from the Byzantine frontier districts they had occupied in the lead @-@ up to the siege . In Cilicia , only Mopsuestia remained in Arab hands as a defensive bulwark to protect Antioch . The Byzantines even recovered some territory in western Armenia for a time . In 719 , the Byzantine fleet raided the Syrian coast and burned down the port of Laodicea and , in 720 or 721 , the Byzantines attacked and sacked Tinnis in Egypt . Leo also restored control over Sicily , where news of the Arab siege of Constantinople and expectations of the city 's fall had prompted the local governor to declare an emperor of his own , Basil <unk> . It was during this time , however , that effective Byzantine control over Sardinia and Corsica ceased . Besides this , the Byzantines failed to exploit their success in launching attacks of their own against the Arabs . In 720 , after a hiatus of two years , Arab raids against Byzantium resumed , although now they were no longer directed at conquest , but rather seeking booty . The Arab attacks would intensify again over the next two decades , until the major Byzantine victory at the Battle of Akroinon in 740 . Coupled with military defeats on the other fronts of the overextended Caliphate , and the internal instability which culminated in the Abbasid Revolution , the age of Arab expansion came to an end . 
 = = Historical assessment and impact = = 
 The second Arab siege of Constantinople was far more dangerous for Byzantium than the first as , unlike the loose blockade of 674 – 678 , the Arabs launched a direct , well @-@ planned attack on the Byzantine capital , and tried to cut off the city completely from land and sea . The siege represented a final effort by the Caliphate to " cut off the head " of the Byzantine Empire , after which the remaining provinces , especially in Asia Minor , would be easy to capture . The Arab failure was chiefly logistical , as they were operating too far from their Syrian bases , but the superiority of the Byzantine navy through the use of Greek fire , the strength of Constantinople 's fortifications , and the skill of Leo III in deception and negotiations also played important roles . 
 The failure of the Arab siege led to a profound change in the nature of warfare between Byzantium and the Caliphate . The Muslim goal of conquest of Constantinople was effectively abandoned , and the frontier between the two empires stabilized along the line of the Taurus and Antitaurus Mountains , over which both sides continued to launch regular raids and counter @-@ raids . In this incessant border warfare , frontier towns and fortresses changed hands frequently , but the general outline of the border remained unaltered for over two centuries , until the Byzantine conquests of the 10th century . Indeed , with the exception of the advance of the Abbasid army under Harun al @-@ Rashid up to Chrysopolis in 782 , no other Arab army would ever come within sight of the Byzantine capital again . Consequently , on the Muslim side the raids themselves eventually acquired an almost ritual character , and were valued mostly as a demonstration of the continuing jihad and sponsored by the Caliph as a symbol of his role as the leader of the Muslim community . 
 The outcome of the siege was of considerable <unk> importance . The Byzantine capital 's survival preserved the Empire as a bulwark against Islamic expansion into Europe until the 15th century , when it fell to the Ottoman Turks . Along with the Battle of Tours in 732 , the successful defence of Constantinople has been seen as instrumental in stopping Muslim expansion into Europe . As military historian Paul K. Davis wrote , " By turning back the Moslem invasion , Europe remained in Christian hands , and no serious Moslem threat to Europe existed until the fifteenth century . This victory , coincident with the Frankish victory at Tours ( 732 ) , limited Islam 's western expansion to the southern Mediterranean world . " Thus the historian John B. Bury called 718 " an ecumenical date " , while the Greek historian Spyridon <unk> likened the siege to the Battle of Marathon and Leo III to Miltiades . Consequently , military historians often include the siege in lists of the " decisive battles " of world history . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Among Arabs , the 717 – 718 siege became the most famous of their expeditions against Byzantium . Several accounts survive , but most were composed at later dates and are semi @-@ fictional and contradictory . In legend , the defeat was transformed into a victory : Maslama departed only after symbolically entering the Byzantine capital on his horse accompanied by thirty riders , where Leo received him with honour and led him to the Hagia Sophia . After Leo paid homage to Maslama and promised tribute , Maslama and his troops — 30 @,@ 000 out of the original 80 @,@ 000 that set out for Constantinople — departed for Syria . The tales of the siege influenced similar episodes in Arabic epic literature . A siege of Constantinople is found in the tale of Omar bin al @-@ Nu <unk> and his sons in the Thousand and One Nights , while both Maslama and the Caliph Sulayman appear in a tale of the Hundred and One Nights from the Maghreb . The commander of Maslama 's bodyguard , Abdallah al @-@ Battal , became a celebrated figure in Arab and Turkish poetry as " Battal Gazi " for his exploits in the Arab raids of the next decades . Similarly , the 10th @-@ century epic Delhemma , related to the cycle around Battal , gives a fictionalized version of the 717 – 718 siege . 
 Later Muslim and Byzantine tradition also ascribed the building of Constantinople 's first mosque , near the city 's praetorium , to Maslama . In reality , the mosque near the praetorium was probably erected in about 860 , as a result of an Arab embassy in that year . Ottoman tradition also ascribed the building of the Arap Mosque ( located outside Constantinople proper in Galata ) to Maslama , although it erroneously dated this to around 686 , probably confusing Maslama 's attack with the first Arab siege in the 670s . The passing of the Arab army also left traces at Abydos , where " Maslama 's Well " and a mosque attributed to him were still known in the 10th century . 
 Eventually , following their repeated failures before Constantinople , and the continued resilience of the Byzantine state , the Muslims began to project the fall of Constantinople to the distant future . Thus the city 's fall came to be regarded as one of the signs of the arrival of the end times in Islamic eschatology . The siege became a motif in Byzantine apocalyptic literature as well , with decisive final battles against the Arabs before the walls of Constantinople being featured in the early 8th @-@ century Greek translation of the Syriac Apocalypse of Pseudo @-@ Methodius and the Apocalypse of Daniel , written either at about the time of the siege or a century later . 
 = Denmark Street = 
 Denmark Street is a street on the edge of London 's West End running from Charing Cross Road to St Giles . It is near St Giles in the Fields Church and Tottenham Court Road station . The street was developed in the late 17th century and named after Prince George of Denmark . Since the 1950s it has been associated with British popular music , first via publishers and later by recording studios and music shops . A blue plaque was unveiled in 2014 commemorating the street 's importance to the music industry . 
 The street was originally residential , but became used for commercial purposes in the 19th century . At first , metalwork was a popular trade but it became most famous as Britain 's " Tin Pan Alley " housing numerous music publishers ' offices . This market declined in the 1960s to be replaced by music shops and independent recording studios . The Rolling Stones recorded at Regent Sound Studio at No. 4 and popular musicians often socialised around the Gioconda café at No. 9 , including David Bowie and the Small Faces . Elton John and Bernie Taupin wrote songs at offices on the street through the 1960s , while the Sex Pistols lived above No. 6 , and recorded their first demos there . The comic book store , Forbidden Planet and the Helter Skelter music bookshop have also been based on the street . In the 2010s , the surrounding area was redeveloped . Parts of Denmark Street are listed to protect them , but other parts , away from the street itself , are planned to be demolished . 
 = = Location = = 
 Denmark Street is located at the southern end of the London Borough of Camden , close to its boundary with the London Borough of Westminster . It is east of Soho Square , south of St Giles Circus and close to the St Giles in the Fields Church . 
 The street is 108 metres ( 354 ft ) long and connects Charing Cross Road with St Giles High Street . Vehicular traffic is now only allowed to travel westbound . The nearest London Underground station is Tottenham Court Road , between two and three minutes ' walk away . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The land on which Denmark Street lies was formerly part of the grounds for St Giles Hospital , founded as a house for lepers in the early 12th century by Henry I 's wife , Matilda ( Maud ) . In 1612 , it was recorded as being owned by Tristram Gibbs . The grounds were laid out for development during the reign of James II and developed by Samuel <unk> and Jacques Wiseman in the late 1680s . Historical evidence suggests the street was formed between 1682 and 1687 , as it was not shown on Morden and Lea 's Map of 1682 . It was named after Prince George of Denmark , who had married Princess Anne in 1683 . By 1691 , 20 houses had been completed , of which eight remain standing . 
 Dr John Purcell , a London physician who published A Treatise on <unk> or <unk> Fits , lived at number 10 in 1730 , while the Reverend Doctor John James <unk> – who became Canon of Windsor – lived there from 1758 to 1771 . The painter Johann Zoffany lived at number 9 . In the late 18th century , the Jacobite Sir John Murray , lived there until the day he was " carried off by a party of strange men " . 
 The area around the street was known as the rookery of St Giles , which developed in the 18th century as an unplanned slum to the west of the City , and described as a " Pandora 's box of pollution , plague and pestilence " . Though much of the area was cleared by the end of the 19th century , Denmark Street is the only street in London to retain 17th century terraced facades on both sides . In 2010 , a study by Camden London Borough Council suggested that only six other streets in London have a comparable heritage to Denmark Street . A small court connected by passages ( originally known as Dudley Court , then Denmark Court and now known as Denmark Place ) runs along the back of the north side of the street , connecting to it via an opening at No. 27 . 
 The street started being used for commercial purposes at the beginning of the 19th century and houses were converted for this use . Ground floors became used as shops , while upper floors and back rooms were used as workshops , particularly for metalwork . Augustus Siebe , the pioneer of the diving helmet , lived and worked on the street , and today there is an English Heritage blue plaque commemorating him on the house where he lived . 
 In the 1930s , several Japanese businesses were established in the street , which became known as " Little Tokyo " . <unk> and Co. at No. 6 sold books , newspapers , televisions and radios . The Tokiwa restaurant and hotel were based at No. 8 and No. 22 respectively having moved from Charing Cross Road in 1927 . Other businesses included a hairdresser , jewellers , tailor and gift shop . 
 = = = Tin Pan Alley = = = 
 = = = = 1920s – 50s = = = = 
 Lawrence Wright was the first music publisher to set up premises on Denmark Street in 1911 . He was initially based at No. 8 and moved to No. 11 after World War I. He subsequently founded the musicians ' journal Melody Maker in 1926 . The same year , another music publisher , Campbell Connelly , moved from their original offices in Tottenham Court Road to Denmark Street . The New Musical Express was founded at No. 5 in 1952 and remained there until 1964 . By the end of the 1950s , the street had established itself as Britain 's " Tin Pan Alley " and housed numerous music publishers and other venues connected with the business . 
 Larry Parnes became a successful manager and entrepreneur of pop singers during the mid @-@ 1950s , and regularly took material from songwriters and publishers based in Denmark Street . Lionel Bart , writer of the musical Oliver ! , started his writing career for publishers and was subsequently known as " the king of Denmark Street " . 
 = = = = 1960s = = = = 
 The music publishing trade on Denmark Street began to decline during the 1960s , as the traditional producers lost touch with changing tastes and groups like the Rolling Stones showed it was possible to write their own material . For example , Paul Simon was based in London at this time but Mills Music at number 20 , told him that his songs " Homeward Bound " and " The Sound of Silence " were uncommercial . 
 Recording studios began to be operated in the street . Regent Sound Studio at No. 4 was founded in July 1961 to serve as a unit for publishers to record their songs . The studio was based above the offices of Essex Music and was frequently used by then Stones manager Andrew Loog Oldham . The band recorded their first album at Regent in 1964 and the single " Not Fade Away " became their first major hit to be recorded there . Oldham liked the atmosphere in the studio as he could " stretch out a bit , experiment and learn from our mistakes " . The studios eventually expanded and moved into new premises on Tottenham Court Road , while the Denmark Street premises became the sales office . They were subsequently bought by Eddie <unk> at the end of the 1960s . Publishers Box & Cox had their offices at number 7 . Their greatest hit was " I 've Got a Lovely Bunch of Coconuts " . Southern Music , at No. 8 , also had a studio in the ground floor , which was used to record Donovan 's hit , " Catch The Wind " . 
 The Carter & Lewis songwriting partnership evolved when John Carter and Ken Lewis arrived in London in 1959 and decided " if you want to be in the music business , that [ Denmark Street ] was the place to be , that was the rule " . Session musicians such as Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones regularly played in Denmark Street studios . In 1964 , The Kinks with Page on guitar and Jon Lord ( later to form Deep Purple ) on piano , recorded " You Really Got Me " in one of the basement studios . 
 Musicians often socialised around the Gioconda café at No. 9 . David Bowie recruited his first backing band , The Lower Third , in the bar , while the Small Faces formed after the original members socialised around the Gioconda . Other regular patrons included David Bowie and Jimi Hendrix . In April 2014 , a number of music industry figures , including disc jockey Mike Read , unveiled a blue plaque above the premises that included a QR Code to access a multimedia presentation about the history of music . 
 = = = = 1970s = = = = 
 In 1970 Bernie Taupin and Elton John wrote " Your Song " , John 's first hit single , at No. 20 Denmark Street . John had started work at a music publisher in the street in 1963 , and Taupin wrote the lyrics while sitting on the roof ( " I sat on the roof and kicked off the moss " ) while waiting for John one morning . They mentioned the street in their 1974 song " Bitter Fingers " , on the semi @-@ autobiographical concept album Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy . Also in 1970 , a song named " Denmark Street " appeared on the Kinks ' album Lola versus Powerman and the Moneygoround , Part One . 
 Manager Malcolm McLaren asked architect Ben Kelly to refurbish a basement rehearsal room he had bought from Badfinger . The Sex Pistols rehearsed in this room , lived above No. 6 , and recorded their first demos there . Johnny Rotten drew cartoons of the members as graffiti which turned up later in an archaeological survey of the site . Scott Gorham bought his first guitar with Thin Lizzy on Denmark Street . He had turned up at the audition with a Japanese Les Paul Copy — when he got the job , Phil Lynott took him shopping on Denmark Street . After being told several guitars were too expensive , he settled on a Sunburst Gibson Les Paul Deluxe . Andy 's Guitars was established in 1978 at No. 27 and survived for many years before closing in 2007 because of increased shop rates . 
 The comic and science @-@ fiction bookshop , Forbidden Planet started at number 23 in 1978 before moving to New Oxford Street and becoming an international chain . When Douglas Adams attempted to attend a signing for the first The Hitch @-@ Hiker 's Guide to the Galaxy book in October 1979 , the queue to the shop was so long that Adams thought a demonstration was taking place elsewhere . 
 = = = = 1980s – present = = = = 
 By 1980 , there were a number of unlicensed nightclubs operating on Denmark Place , running adjacent to the street . The clubs were housed in buildings that had previously functioned as a hostel for musicians , which adjoined a music shop on the street , and the fire brigade had insisted that a fire escape be fitted . By the time the clubs were in operation , the shop had closed and the fire escape had fallen into disrepair . 18 Denmark Place was home to two such clubs ; on the first floor was " Rodo 's " , a salsa club popular with South American immigrants and above that " The Spanish Rooms " on the second floor which was a late night bar frequented by locals including Irish and Jamaican immigrants . On 14 August 1980 John Thompson , a local petty criminal , was ejected from The Spanish Rooms following a fight which may have been caused by a dispute about being overcharged . Thompson returned shortly thereafter and poured petrol into the ground floor of the building and ignited it . The inferno resulting from this act of arson killed 37 people from eight different nationalities and was described as the worst fire in London in terms of loss of life since World War II . Thompson was imprisoned having been convicted of murder and died in prison in 2008 on the anniversary of the tragedy . 
 Numbers 1 – 3 had become a Job Centre by the 1980s , specialising in vacancies for the catering industry . The serial killer Dennis Nilsen worked there and brought in a large cooking pot , in which he had boiled his victims heads , as a utensil for preparing a Christmas 1980 party . 
 The last major music publisher in the street , Peer Music , moved from No. 8 in 1992 , completing the gradual transformation of premises from publishers to instrument stores . In May 1990 , Andy Preston , owner of Andy 's Guitars , set up a traders association and attempted to have the street re @-@ branded as " Music Land " , similar to Drury Lane being marked <unk> and Gerrard Street as Chinatown . Helter Skelter was set up as a bookshop dedicated to music titles in 1995 by Sean Body . The shop operated at the old Essex Music and Regent Sound building at No. 4 until rising rents forced it to close in 2004 . 
 = = Redevelopment = = 
 In 2009 , Denmark Street was identified in English Heritage 's " Heritage at Risk " register as being at risk in view of the nearby development of Crossrail . Particular attention was drawn to No. 26 , which is a Grade II listed building . In 2010 , Camden London Borough Council identified the street and adjacent properties as a Conservation Area . 
 In 2013 , the council announced that Denmark Street would be redeveloped by the architectural firm <unk> as part of a major development in conjunction with the Crossrail construction work around Tottenham Court Road tube station and Centre Point . The proposed development includes the construction of an 800 @-@ seat subterranean performance venue . Numbers 1 – 6 and 17 – 21 Denmark Place , which run parallel along the back of the street , and the York and Clifton Mansions will be demolished , along with partial demolition of No. 21 Denmark Street . 
 The scheme has been condemned by the local music industry and shopkeepers . Writer Henry Scott @-@ Irvine launched a petition to stop the planned redevelopment , which has gathered 10 @,@ 000 signatures . In an interview to Mojo , Scott @-@ Irvine said " This should be stopped " , adding that Denmark Street " should be given full heritage status like Covent Garden Market , Hatton Garden and Savile Row " . He discovered that , although demolition was scheduled to start in late 2014 , the plans were approved by the newly elected borough council . Consolidated Developments , developers for the new site , stated they were " committed to preserving and enhancing the rich musical heritage of Tin Pan Alley " . 
 In January 2015 , following the closure of the 12 Bar Club and clearance of Enterprise Studios on Denmark Place , a group of musicians and supporters squatted in the club 's premises and staged a demonstration in the street , protesting against redevelopment . Former Oasis manager and head of Creation Records , Alan McGee supported the protestors , saying " you really couldn ’ t say a bad word against any of them . And they know the law , so they can 't just be thrown out of there . " However , a report in the Independent judged the protest to be misguided , as most shops along the street are still trading . 
 = = Current occupants = = 
 On the corner of the street with Charing Cross Road is Chris Bryant 's Musical Instruments . Denmark Street Guitars claims to have over 3 @,@ 000 instruments in stock and to have the largest selection of guitars in the UK . Regent Sounds , formerly the recording studio , which specialises in Fender and Gretsch guitars and Essex Music at No. 4 ; the <unk> Bar and Club sits in the basement below the store . <unk> Vintage and Classic Guitars has a store at No. 6 . <unk> , a guitar retailer , was established in 1958 and specialises in Gibson models . As well as their shop at No. 25 , they have an additional shop nearby on Charing Cross Road . 
 The sheet music shop <unk> is currently based at No. 19 . It was founded by The Zombies ' Rod Argent as a keyboard shop and was previously based next door , at No. 20 . Since then it has undergone two changes of owners and now specialises in sheet music and DVD sales , covering a wide variety of styles including jazz and classical . 
 Rose Morris have been established in Denmark Street since 1919 . Originally based at No. 11 , they now occupy No. 10 in the former offices of Southern Music Publishing . The company became the first British distributor of Rickenbacker guitars in 1962 , which had a surge in popularity after musicians noticed the Beatles ' John Lennon playing one . Rose Morris purchased instruments directly from Rickenbacker 's factory instead of their sales office , in order to keep up with demand . The British models carry unique serial numbers such as the 325 , the Rose Morris 1996 . The Early Music Shop 's London branch is based on the first floor of number 11 , above Rose Morris . The shop contains early music instruments including recorders and sheet music . 
 There has been a recording studio in the basement of No. 22 since Tin Pan Alley Studios was established in 1954 . It was originally founded by session violinist Ralph Elman , and was previously the premises of the Acid Jazz Records label . In 2013 , producer Guy <unk> took over management of the premises , renaming them Denmark Street Studios . 
 The 12 Bar Club was at No. 26 , a small live music venue with a capacity of about 100 people which was established in 1994 . The building was originally stables , built in 1635 , before becoming a blacksmiths until after World War I. It closed in January 2015 as part of the redevelopment work . 
 = = Listed buildings = = 
 Denmark Street has eight Grade II listed buildings . Though the refurbishment plans allow modernisation of these buildings , the council are keen to ensure that the affected properties remain solely in use for the music industry . A report added , " Music industry activities make a fundamental contribution to the special character of Denmark Street and support associated retail provision . " 
 = Pokey Mom = 
