 The NFLPA went on strike for a month in 1987 upon the expiration of the 1982 CBA ; the league 's free @-@ agent policy was the major matter in dispute . This time , however , the strike only canceled one week of the season . For three weeks , the NFL staged games with hastily assembled replacement teams , made up principally of players cut during training camp and players left out of work from the closure of the United States Football League two years prior ( along with , to a lesser extent , the Montreal Alouettes , who had folded just three months prior to the strike ) . They were joined by a few veterans who crossed the picket lines , including New York Jets defensive end Mark Gastineau , Dallas Cowboys defensive tackle Randy White , San Francisco 49ers quarterback Joe Montana , New England Patriots quarterback Doug Flutie , and Seattle Seahawks wide receiver Steve Largent . 
 Given the willingness of the players to cross the picket lines and networks to broadcast the replacement games , despite a 20 % drop in television viewership and even steeper drops in attendance , the union failed to achieve their demands . The strike ended on October 15 , 1987 , without a collective bargaining agreement in place . The union filed a new antitrust lawsuit on December 30 asking federal judge David Doty to overturn the league 's restricting free agent policies . 
 On November 1 , 1989 , the Court of Appeals rejected the suit on the grounds that the owners were covered by the labor exemption from antitrust law . The union 's next tactic , in November 1989 , was to disclaim any interest in representing NFL players in collective bargaining and to reform itself as a professional organization . Having done that , individual players , led by Freeman McNeil of the New York Jets , brought a new antitrust action , challenging the NFL 's so @-@ called " Plan B " free agency , which gave teams a right of first refusal to sign a player , as an unlawful practice under the antitrust acts . 
 The players ultimately prevailed after a jury trial on their claims . That verdict , the pendency of other antitrust cases and the threat of a class action lawsuit filed by Reggie White , then with the Philadelphia Eagles , on behalf of all NFL players caused the parties to settle the antitrust cases and to agree on a formula that permitted free agency . In return , the owners received a salary cap , albeit one tied to a formula based on the players ' share of total league revenues . The agreement also established a salary floor — minimum payrolls all teams were obliged to pay . The settlement was presented to and approved by Judge Doty , who had also heard the McNeil antitrust case in 1993 . Once the agreement was approved , the NFLPA reconstituted itself as a labor union and entered into a new collective bargaining agreement with the league . The NFLPA and the league extended the 1993 agreement five times . The final extension came in March 2006 when it was extended through the 2010 season after the NFL owners voted 30 – 2 to accept the NFLPA 's final proposal . 
 = = DeMaurice Smith era ( 2009 – present ) = = 
 Following the death of Gene Upshaw in 2008 , Richard <unk> was named interim executive director , serving from August 2008 until March 2009 . The NFLPA Board of Representatives elected DeMaurice Smith for a three @-@ year term as the executive director on March 16 , 2009 . Smith has been largely praised for his work ethic by the media , current and former players and colleagues as director and for making the union more professional despite the resentment of some players who found his leadership style to be too controlling . Smith 's contract was renewed for an additional three years in March 2012 . He was elected for a third term in March 2015 . The major issue of Smith 's tenure has been the 2011 lockout ; former offensive lineman Chester Pitts praised Smith for fiercely fighting for the players ' rights during negotiations . 
 = = = 2011 lockout = = = 
 In May 2008 , the owners decided to opt out of the 1993 arrangement , per the agreement with the players , with the termination to follow a year with no salary cap in 2010 . By the CBA 's expiration in March 2011 , the NFLPA and the NFL had not yet come to terms on a new agreement . The owners were expected to lock out the players upon termination of the agreement . However , the NFLPA filed papers to decertify as a union on March 11 , 2011 , and filed an antitrust suit to enjoin the lockout with lead plaintiffs quarterbacks Tom Brady , Peyton Manning , and Drew Brees . U.S. District Court judge Susan Richard Nelson granted the players ' request to end the owners ' lockout on April 25 . The league asked Nelson to stay the order while they appealed to the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals ; Nelson refused . On April 29 , the Eighth Circuit granted the league a temporary stay of Nelson 's ruling ; the league reinstated the lockout the same day . The Eighth Circuit vacated Nelson 's ruling on July 8 , affirming the legitimacy of the lockout . During the lockout , players were barred from using team facilities and contacting team coaches ; many organized their own workout regimens . 
 The parties settled the lawsuit on July 25 , 2011 , and a majority of players signed union authorization cards . The NFL officially recognized the NFLPA 's status as the players ' collective bargaining representative on July 30 , 2011 . The NFL and NFLPA proceeded to negotiate terms for a new collective bargaining agreement , and the agreement became effective after ratification by the players August 4 , 2011 . Under the agreement , which runs through 2021 , revenue sharing , the most contentious issue during the lockout , was re @-@ designed so that the players must receive at least 47 % of all revenue in salary for the term of the agreement . Additionally , a limit was placed on the amount of money given to rookies . Fifty million dollars was set aside annually for medical research and approximately $ 1 billion would be set aside for retired player benefits over the life of the agreement . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The NFLPA , on behalf of Will Smith , Scott Fujita and Anthony Hargrove , three players suspended due to the <unk> investigation by the NFL , filed a lawsuit against the league . The investigation found that New Orleans Saints players were allegedly paid bonuses for hits that injured opposing players . The players ' lawsuit claimed NFL commissioner Roger Goodell " had violated the league 's labor agreement by showing he had pre @-@ determined the guilt of the players punished in the bounty probe before serving as the arbitrator for their June 18 appeal hearing " . The suspensions were unanimously overturned by a three @-@ member appeals panel ; however , the ruling did not permanently void their suspensions . The NFL appointed former commissioner Paul Tagliabue to review the NFL 's sanctions against the players , which he overturned . 
 = = = Activate = = = 
 In April 2014 , the NFLPA partnered with <unk> to launch Activate , the first professional sports micro @-@ endorsement marketplace . The Activate platform allows for marketers to quickly find and contact athletes that best fit their endorsement campaigns . For athletes , Activate provides a monetary valuation of each player 's social media accounts that leads to an easier and more efficient negotiation process . 
 = = = New drug policy = = = 
 The league and the NFLPA approved updated substance abuse and performance @-@ enhancing substance policies in September 2014 . The regulations include human growth hormone testing and amended rules on DUIs and marijuana . Third @-@ party arbitration will handle appeals . The deal lifted suspensions for some players the week it was approved . The NFL began testing players for HGH the next month . 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to NFLPA 's Department of Labor records since 2006 , when membership classifications were first reported , around 60 % , or almost two thirds , of the union 's membership are classified as " former players , " and not eligible to vote in the union , " because , as a matter of federal law , they cannot be members of the collective bargaining unit . " The other , voting eligible , classifications are " active players " and " associates . " As of 2014 this accounts for 3 @,@ 130 " former player " members ( 59 % of total ) , 1 @,@ 959 " active players " ( 37 % ) , and 207 " associate " members ( 4 % ) . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 The current president of the NFLPA is Eric Winston and the executive director is DeMaurice Smith . As of 2014 , the executive committee consists of the following current and retired NFL players : Adam Vinatieri , Benjamin Watson , Brian Waters , Jay Feely , Lorenzo Alexander , Mark Herzlich , Matt Hasselbeck , Ryan Clark , Scott Wells and Zak <unk> . Each NFL team also has a player representative , along with two to three alternate representatives . 
 = <unk> = 
 The whinchat ( Saxicola rubetra ) is a small migratory passerine bird breeding in Europe and western Asia and wintering in central Africa . At one time considered to be in thrush family , Turdidae , it is now placed in the Old World flycatcher family , Muscicapidae . Both sexes have a strong supercilium , brownish upper parts mottled darker , a pale throat and breast , a pale buff to whitish belly , and a blackish tail with white bases to the outer tail feathers , but in the breeding season , the male has an orange @-@ buff throat and breast . 
 The whinchat is a solitary species , favouring open grassy country with rough vegetation and scattered small shrubs . It perches in elevated locations ready to pounce on the insects and other small invertebrates that form its diet . The nest is built by the female on the ground in coarse vegetation , with a clutch of four to seven eggs being laid . The hen incubates the eggs for about thirteen days and then both parents feed the nestlings . Fledging takes place about eighteen days after hatching and the parents continue to feed the young for another fortnight . Moulting takes place in late summer before the migration southwards , and again on the wintering grounds in Africa before the migration northwards in spring . The whinchat is a common species with a wide range and the International Union for Conservation of Nature has classified it as being of " least concern " . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 This species represents a fairly basal divergence of the genus Saxicola . It retains the supercilium found in many Muscicapidae but lost in the more derived Saxicola species such as the European stonechat or African stonechat ( S. torquatus ) . 
 As with other species of Saxicola , it was formerly considered a member of the thrush family ( Turdidae ) , but is now placed in the Old World flycatcher family Muscicapidae . It , and similar thrush @-@ like Muscicapidae species , are often called chats . Its scientific name means " small rock @-@ dweller " , in reference to its habitat . Saxicola derives from Latin <unk> ( " rock " ) + <unk> ( " dwelling " ) ; rubetra is a Latin term for a small bird . No subspecies are recognised . 
 Very rarely , hybridisation occurs between the whinchat and the Siberian stonechat ( Saxicola maurus ) , with a case being reported in Finland in 1997 . It has also been reported to hybridise with the European stonechat in western and southern Europe . 
 = = Description = = 
 The whinchat is a short @-@ tailed bird , moving on the ground with small , rapid hops and frequently bobbing and flicking its wings and tail . It is similar in size to its relative the European robin ( Erithacus rubecula ) , being 12 to 14 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 5 in ) long and weighing 13 to 26 g ( 0 @.@ 46 to 0 @.@ 92 oz ) . Both sexes have brownish upperparts mottled darker , a buff throat and breast , a pale buff to whitish belly , and a blackish tail with white bases to the outer tail feathers . 
 The male in breeding plumage has a blackish face mask almost encircled by a strong white supercilium and malar stripe , a bright orange @-@ buff throat and breast , and small white wing patches on the greater coverts and inner median coverts . The female is duller overall , in particular having browner face mask , pale buffy @-@ brown breast , and a buff supercilium and malar stripe , and smaller or no white wing patches . Males in immature and winter plumage are similar to females , except that adult males retain the white wing patches all year round . 
 Though fairly similar to females and immatures of the European stonechat ( S. rubicola ) , the whinchat can readily be distinguished by its conspicuous supercilium and whiter belly , and also in western Europe , by being paler overall than the western European stonechat subspecies S. rubicola hibernans . It also differs structurally in being slightly slimmer and less ' dumpy ' , and having longer wingtips ( an adaptation to its long @-@ distance migration ) . It is more easily confused with female or immature Siberian stonechat ( S. <unk> ) , which ( also being a long @-@ distance migrant ) shares the longer wingtips ; however , Siberian stonechat can be distinguished by its conspicuous unmarked pale orange @-@ buff rump ( in whinchat , the rump is the same mottled brown colour as the back ) . 
 Its main call is described as a hue @-@ tac @-@ tac , the ' tac ' softer and less grating than that of the European stonechat ; the call is used both for contact between birds and predator alarms . The male has a whistling , crackly but soft song used during the breeding season , consisting of a mixture of soft whistles , <unk> and more grating sounds ; it is often mimetic , including phrases from the songs of at least 12 other assorted bird species . It sings from a fence , bush , tree or wire , or occasionally from the ground or in flight , between about April and July . On the wintering grounds , it often gives alarm calls but only occasionally sings , being most likely to do so at the end of winter , when starting spring migration . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The whinchat is a migratory species breeding in Europe and western Asia from Ireland and northern Portugal east to the Ob River basin near Novosibirsk , and from northern Norway south to central Spain , central Italy , northern Greece , and the Caucasus Mountains . 
 Birds arrive on the breeding grounds between the end of April and mid May , and depart between mid August and mid September ( odd birds lingering to October ) . They winter primarily in tropical sub @-@ Saharan Africa from Senegal east to Kenya and south to Zambia , arriving in western Africa at the start of the dry season in late September to November , and leaving between February and March . Small numbers also winter in northwestern Africa in Morocco , northern Algeria and Tunisia . Vagrants have reached northwest of the breeding range to Iceland , west on migration to the Canary Islands and Cape Verde , and south of the wintering range to northern South Africa . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The whinchat is a largely solitary bird though it may form small family groups in autumn . It favours rough low vegetation habitats such as open rough pasture or similar minimally cultivated grassland with scattered small shrubs such as hawthorn ( Crataegus monogyna ) , and bracken ( Pteridium aquilinum ) or heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) stands on rock @-@ strewn ground . It also commonly inhabits new and clear @-@ felled conifer plantations until the new tree crop is about five to six years old and a metre or two tall . It always needs at least a few perching points ( shrubs , tall weeds , or fence posts ) to scan from for food and for use as song posts . 
 Breeding takes place in late April and May . The nest is built solely by the female , and is made of dried grasses and moss , and lined with hairs and fine bents . It is built on the ground , hidden in dense low vegetation , often at the foot of a bush . The female lays and incubates a clutch of four to seven eggs which hatch after eleven to fourteen days . Both parents bring food to the young which leave the nest ten to fourteen days later , while still too young to fly . The chicks fledge at seventeen to nineteen days after hatching and remain largely dependent on the parents for a further two weeks . <unk> are short @-@ lived , typically only surviving two years , to a maximum recorded of just over five years in the wild ; breeding starts when birds are a year old . Predators include weasels , stoats , and small raptors such as the merlin and nest predators such as crows and magpies . Nests are also lost due to agricultural operations such as silage cutting ( the main factor in the species ' decline in western Europe ) or trampling by livestock , and are sometimes parasitised by the common cuckoo . 
 <unk> are insectivorous , feeding largely ( about 80 – 90 % ) on insects , but also consume a wide range of other invertebrates including spiders , small snails and worms . They also eat small amounts of fruit such as blackberries , primarily in autumn . The birds like to perch on elevated spots such as shrubs , from where they make sallies to catch insects , mostly taken off the ground , but also flying insects . While so perched , males in particular frequently flick their tail and sometimes their wings to show the white tail and wing flashes , for display or territorial communication signals to other <unk> . 
 Adult <unk> have a single complex complete moult in late summer ( late July onward ) after breeding and mainly completed before southbound migration . Juveniles have a partial moult at the same time , growing new body feathering but retaining the flight feathers . All ages also have a partial moult in early spring on the wintering grounds before northbound migration . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 Fairly common across its wide range , the whinchat is classified as a species of " least concern " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature . Some populations are however in serious decline , particularly in the west of its range in Britain , Ireland , France , Belgium , the Netherlands , Denmark , and Germany , primarily due to agricultural intensification . In Britain it is amber @-@ listed with an unfavourable conservation status ; it had all but disappeared from former lowland breeding areas in the south and east between surveys in 1968 – 72 and 1988 – 91 , remaining common only in upland areas of the north and west where low @-@ intensity livestock rearing is the main land use . There has been a similar decline in Ireland , where it is now classified as " rare " . 
 = Thrud the Barbarian = 
 Thrud the Barbarian is a comics character created by Carl Critchlow in 1981 . Although Thrud himself is a parody of Conan the Barbarian , particularly as depicted in the Arnold Schwarzenegger films , inspiration for the character 's adventures and adversaries has been drawn from several fantasy sources . 
 During the 1980s , a Thrud comic strip was a regular and popular feature in the roleplay and wargame magazine White Dwarf with Thrud 's grotesque and comic antics forming a memorable part of the magazine 's golden age . In 2002 , continued interest in the character from role @-@ playing enthusiasts and a desire to be free to experiment with a new artistic style prompted Critchlow to self @-@ publish a series of award @-@ winning full @-@ length Thrud the Barbarian comics . 
 Since October 2002 , Critchlow has continued to develop his new artistic style in several different 2000 AD stories , contributing to the success of Lobster Random in particular . While Critchlow 's use of muted palettes has been criticised , his style has received praise for being highly recognisable and unique . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Initial publications = = = 
 The character of Thrud was created by the then 18 @-@ year @-@ old Critchlow in 1981 while he was at foundation art college . His graphic design tutor , Bryan Talbot , gave him the project of producing a comic strip . At the time , Critchlow was reading the Conan books by Robert E. Howard , and this inspired him to produce Thrud . The initial five @-@ page strip was published in comics fanzine Arken Sword . When Critchlow moved on to art college in Liverpool , Thrud made a further appearance in the comic Dead ' Ard , which Critchlow co @-@ authored with artist Euan Smith . Dead ' Ard also featured a strip titled The Black Currant , subsequently re @-@ published in the 26th and final issue of the Warrior comic anthology . The Black Currant would later appear as one of Thrud 's many enemies . 
 = = = White Dwarf = = = 
 On seeing an advertisement in White Dwarf magazine asking for cartoonists , Critchlow submitted some of his Thrud strips and was hired . Thrud the Barbarian became a monthly feature in White Dwarf between issue 45 in September 1983 and issue 105 in September 1988 . During this time , the black @-@ and @-@ white single @-@ page strip was voted " Most popular feature " for three consecutive years . 
 In 1987 , a collection of Thrud strips was published in a Thrud the Barbarian <unk> Novel by Games Workshop . In addition to strips that had been printed in White Dwarf , this anthology included a re @-@ drawn version of the original Arken Sword strip and an origin story for Thrud . 
 = = = Full @-@ length comic = = = 
 Once the Thrud strip had run its course in White Dwarf , Critchlow worked on other comics including the Judge Dredd / Batman crossover story The Ultimate Riddle , first published in 1995 . His work on this story was fully painted , and while considered impressive was also criticised as being forced , confused and muddy . Critchlow was developing a new style based on line @-@ drawings with computer colouring , but having been pigeon @-@ holed as a painter did not believe that he would be able to interest anyone in this very different style . 
 When attending gaming conventions , Critchlow found that he was often remembered for his work on Thrud and recognised that there was still an interest in the character . He therefore decided to create and self @-@ publish a full @-@ length Thrud the Barbarian comic as a way to get his new style noticed . A total of five Thrud the Barbarian comics were published : 
 Carborundum Capers – June 2002 
 Ice ' n ' a Slice – January 2003 
 Lava <unk> – June 2004 
 Thrud Rex ! – June 2005 
 Bungle in the Jungle – January 2007 
 Critchlow found that , by organising distribution through comic shops and a devoted Thrud website , he was able to break even financially . His new style was also noticed and received positive comments . 
 The cover images for each of the first four comics were hand @-@ painted in contrast to the computer @-@ coloured line art used in the comic itself . For issue 5 , Critchlow also used his new style for the cover image . 
 = = Fictional character biography = = 
 An origin story for Thrud was printed in the Thrud the Barbarian <unk> Novel . The story tells of a group of mercenaries who , lost and searching for a pub , stumble across an abandoned baby in a deserted village . The mercenaries decide to raise the baby as one of their own , teaching him how to fight and drink beer . 
 At the age of five , Thrud is sent to Crom the Destroyer Orthodox Pagan Infants School , where he towers above the teachers and his fellow students . When one of the children shoots him with a pea shooter , Thrud 's reaction is to kill and maim twenty @-@ seven pupils and three teachers , leading to his expulsion from the school . Choosing to return to the wilderness rather than his adoptive parents , Thrud lives alone until , one day , he stumbles across a hidden burial chamber . Finding a small helmet and a large axe , Thrud arms himself . Finding gold and gems , he decides to return to civilisation with his newfound wealth , quickly establishing himself a reputation as a violent warrior . 
 Many years later , Thrud the Barbarian becomes Thrud the King , but finds the mundane duties of kingship tiresome without opportunities to fight . To put a halt to Thrud 's constant <unk> of , " Kill ! Death ! <unk> ! <unk> ! Destroy ! " , the wise men of his kingdom collect stories of heroism from around the land and read them to him long into the night . 
 = = Characterisation = = 
 Endowed with the strength of a rhinoceros , the speed of a jungle cat and the intelligence of a garden snail , Thrud is a one @-@ dimensional character who engages in mindless slaughter and strikes Frank Frazetta @-@ style poses while remaining ignorant of plot points . Depicted as an 8 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) barbarian with a hugely exaggerated , muscular physique and a very small head , and dressed in large furry boots and a loincloth , Thrud is a caricature of Arnold Schwarzenegger 's Conan the Barbarian . 
 Thrud is also a heavy drinker , frequenting the The Hobbit 's <unk> tavern and regularly causing mayhem when he is unable to have his desired flavour of crisps . These and other annoyances often cause Thrud to invoke the author of the Conan the Barbarian books with the battle cry , " By the sacred <unk> of Robert E. Howard you 'll pay for this , <unk> ! " 
 = = Supporting characters = = 
 = = = The Black Currant = = = 
 First appearing in Dead ' Ard and Warrior , The Black Currant returned in a series of White Dwarf Thrud strips titled Thrud the Destroyer . In this story , The Black Currant is the leader of a horde of warriors who attack a small village , looting the homes , burning the women , raping the livestock and eating the babies . The Black Currant returned again in issue 3 of Critchlow 's self @-@ published Thrud the Barbarian comic as the leader of a group of bandits laying siege to a small town . The Black Currant is depicted in heavy black armour , wearing a helmet provided with a pair of exceedingly long , horizontally extending horns . 
 = = = Carl Critchlow = = = 
 Critchlow himself appears in a number of Thrud strips , occasionally as a narrator although more often as a drinking companion for Thrud . Critchlow depicts himself with lank hair and a large cap pulled down low over his eyes . 
 = = = Croneman the <unk> = = = 
 Croneman claims to be the mightiest barbarian of the northern tribes and honorary chief of the savage <unk> of <unk> . Known also as <unk> , the Wombat , he is a slayer , a reaver , a corsair , a usurper , and a conqueror . Depicted as resembling Schwarzenegger , he is also a bodybuilder with a very silly accent . On first meeting Croneman , Thrud slices him in half with a sword . When Croneman returns to join a group of mercenaries fighting The Black Currant in Thrud the Destroyer , he is depicted with a line of sutures running down the middle of his face and chest . 
 = = = Lymara , the She Wildebeeste = = = 
 Thrud first encounters Lymara when he sees her chasing away a wasp by waving a small cloth from her tower bedroom . Thinking her to be a damsel in distress , Thrud storms the tower , killing Lymara 's father , five brothers , two uncles , ten cousins and fiance in the process . Seeking revenge , Lymara attempts to poison Thrud with a bottle of Acme " Mammoth Poison " , but succeeds only in putting him to sleep as part of the The Three Tasks of Thrud series of strips . Subsequently , Lymara joins Thrud as one of the group of mercenaries brought in to fight The Black Currant in Thrud the Destroyer . In this latter series of strips , Lymara is depicted with oversized breasts barely covered by an off @-@ the @-@ shoulder leather bra . 
 = = = To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa = = = 
 To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa ( a name phonetically similar to that of British comedian Tommy Cooper ) is an evil necromancer who regularly crosses paths with Thrud and is depicted as a bald man wearing a large cloak . Thrud first encounters To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa in an early White Dwarf strip and is turned into a frog . Subsequently , in The Three Tasks of Thrud , To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa takes advantage of Thrud 's drugged state , following Lymara 's failed assassination attempt , to hypnotise him and force him to obtain three items necessary for a spell . 
 In Thrud the Destroyer , To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa is revealed as being in service to The Black Currant and is providing him with an army of warriors drawn from throughout time , including <unk> and Imperial stormtroopers . To @-@ Me Ku @-@ Pa also appears as the villain in issue 1 of the full @-@ length Thrud the Barbarian comic . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 A range of Thrud merchandise has been produced since the character 's inception , including a Thrud t @-@ shirt and badge as well as a series of miniatures . Citadel Miniatures produced five different metal miniatures of Thrud , starting in 1984 with a " White Dwarf Personality " miniature . Three numbered limited edition miniatures followed consisting of " <unk> , Thrud the Barbarian " , in 1986 , " <unk> , Thrud and Female Admirer " in 1987 , and " <unk> , Thrud scratching head " . Thrud was also introduced as a Blood Bowl player and Jervis Johnson commissioned an appropriate miniature . Heresy Miniatures has also produced three Thrud miniatures , including a limited edition " Strolling Thrud " that sold out within three weeks of release . On 29 March 2007 , another limited edition of 1000 resin miniatures was released . 
 = = Reception and awards = = 
 Thrud the Barbarian was one of the best loved pieces in White Dwarf over the five years that the strip ran , being voted " Most popular feature " for three consecutive years during the magazine 's golden age . Long @-@ term fans of Thrud were excited and nostalgic to see him return in his own full @-@ length comic , but were concerned that the idea would not stretch to 24 pages . In reviewing issue 1 , Jez Higgins , writing on <unk> , and Robert Clark of Strike to Stun , considered the comic a success that was more than one joke spread thin and which was not limited by the single page brevity of the original strip . Steven Maxwell of Bulletproof Comics , however , found that what worked well within the constraints of a single page seemed stretched when spun out over 24 . Issue 2 received similarly mixed reviews , with Clark criticising the comic for being much the same , with the same themes and joke as issue 1 while Glenn Carter of Comics Bulletin found it to be well written light reading with quite a few elements of humour . Overall , the comic was deemed a success , with even the more negative reviewers awarding it 6 out of 10 and looking forward to more issues . 
 Although the writing received mixed reviews , the reception of the artwork was almost entirely positive . Higgins , recalling the heavy blacks and bold outlines of the original strip , found Critchlow 's new style to be much more open and expressive . Maxwell also praised Critchlow 's development as an artist , judging the comic to be beautifully drawn and coloured with a clear line style . Carter thought that the art was a little flat in places , but nevertheless praised it for being unique with a lot of character . 
 Critchlow was also commended for the risky decision to write , draw and publish the comic himself . The comic was compared favourably with professional quality comics , with its lack of adverts viewed as an advantage over those offerings . The high production values were also praised , with the glossy cover and high quality paper used for the inner pages . 
 In 2004 , Thrud the Barbarian won the Eagle Award for " Favourite British Small Press Title " . In 2006 Thrud was nominated for the " Favourite Colour <unk> – British " Eagle Award , but lost out to 2000 AD . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In October 2002 , four months after Thrud issue 1 was published , Critchlow returned to 2000AD using his new computer @-@ drawn style . His first story was the Judge Dredd , Out of the Undercity story written by John Wagner . The new style was initially well received by 2000AD Review and seen as a marked improvement over his previous fully painted style with clearer figures and atmospheric colouring . As the Undercity story developed , however , Critchlow was criticised for using too narrow a palette , with too many greys and blues , although this might have been as a result of the story being set underground . 
 2000AD Review 's criticism of Critchlow 's subdued colouring continued with the 2003 Lobster Random story , No Gain , No Pain . By the conclusion , however , Critchlow 's style was recognised as being truly unique and even the previously criticised blues and greys were seen to work well when used with other coloured elements . The artwork in two further Lobster Random stories , Tooth & Claw in October 2004 and The Agony & the Ecstasy in April 2006 was again very well received . Tooth & Claw was praised for its character designs while Critchlow 's style in The Agony & the Ecstasy was said to be easily recognisable , having " volume , colour and verve " . 
 = Barry ( dog ) = 
 Barry der <unk> ( 1800 – 1814 ) , also known as Barry , was a dog of a breed which was later called the St. Bernard that worked as a mountain rescue dog in Switzerland for the Great St Bernard Hospice . He predates the modern St. Bernard , and was lighter built than the modern breed . He has been described as the most famous St. Bernard , as he was credited with saving more than 40 lives during his lifetime , hence his byname " <unk> " meaning people rescuer in German . 
 The legend surrounding him was that he was killed while attempting a rescue ; however , this is untrue . Barry retired to Bern , Switzerland and after his death his body was passed into the care of the Natural History Museum of Bern . His skin has been preserved through taxidermy although his skull was modified in 1923 to match the Saint Bernard of that time period . His story and name have been used in literary works , and a monument to him stands in the Cimetière des Chiens near Paris . At the hospice one dog has always been named Barry in his honor and since 2004 the Foundation Barry du Grand Saint Bernard has been set up to take over the responsibility for breeding dogs from the hospice . 
 = = History = = 
 The first mention in the Great St Bernard Hospice archives of a dog was in 1707 which simply said " A dog was buried by us . " The dogs are thought to have been introduced to the monastery as watchdogs at some point between 1660 and 1670 . Old skulls from the collection of the Natural History Museum of Bern show that at least two types of dog lived at the hospice . By 1800 , the year that Barry was born , it was known that a special kind of dog was being used for rescue work in the pass . This general variety of dog was known as a <unk> , or cowherd 's dog . 
 Measurements of his preserved body show that Barry was smaller than the modern Saint Bernard , weighing between 40 and 45 kilograms ( 88 and 99 lb ) whereas modern Bernards weigh between 80 and 130 kilograms ( 180 and 290 lb ) . His current mounted height is approximately 64 centimetres ( 25 in ) , but the living Barry would have been slightly smaller . 
 During Barry 's career , he was credited with saving the lives of more than forty people , although this number has sometimes varied over the years . Barry 's most famous rescue was that of a young boy . He found the child asleep in a cavern of ice . After warming up the boy 's body sufficiently by licking him , he moved the boy about and onto his back and carried the child back to the hospice . The child survived and was returned to his parents , although other sources say that the boy 's mother died in the avalanche that trapped the boy . The Museum of Natural History in Bern disputes the legend , attributing it to Peter <unk> , an animal psychologist . 
 The best of dogs , the best of animals is Barry . You used to leave the convent with a basket round your neck , into the storm , in the most insidious snow . Each and every day you examined the mountain searching for unfortunates buried under avalanches . You dug them out and brought them back to life by yourself and , when you couldn 't , you rushed back to the convent signalling the monks for help . You resurrected people . Your tenderness was so easy to communicate , that the boy you dug out had no fear to let you bring him , holding on to your back , to the Hospice . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 There is a plaque on a monument in the Cimetière des Chiens pet cemetery which states , " Il <unk> la vie à 40 <unk> . Il fut <unk> par le <unk> " : Barry saved the lives of forty people , but died while attempting to save his forty @-@ first . The story goes that news had come that a Swiss soldier was lost in the mountains . Barry was searching for the soldier and had picked up the scent , some forty @-@ eight hours old , and finally stopped before a large bank of ice . He dug until he reached the soldier , and then licked him as he was trained . The Swiss soldier awoke startled and mistook Barry for a wolf and fatally stabbed him with his bayonet . James Watson in his 1906 work The Dog Book attributed the rumour to fellow author <unk> , also known as Reverend Thomas Pearce . 
 However , the legend of his death is untrue . After twelve years of service at the monastery , Barry was brought by a monk to Bern , Switzerland so that he could live out the rest of his life . He died at the age of 14 . His body passed into the hands of the Natural History Museum of Bern . A special exhibit was held in his honor at the museum to commemorate his 200th Anniversary . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Hospice has always maintained one St. Bernard named Barry in the original 's honor . During Barry 's lifetime , his breed did not have one specific name . By 1820 , six years after his death , Barry was specifically referred to as being an Alpine Mastiff , while there was also a breed called the Alpine Spaniel which was recorded around the same time period . The English called the breed " sacred dogs " , while the German <unk> proposed the name " <unk> " in 1828 . Following his death and up until 1860 , the entire stock were called " Barry hounds " in the Canton of Bern after Barry himself . It was not until 1865 when the term " St. Bernard " was first used primarily for the breed . Under this name , the St. Bernard has been recognised since 1880 by the Swiss Kennel Club . 
 Barry is described as the most famous St. Bernard by the Natural History Museum of Bern . Following his death , his skin was preserved by a taxidermist for the museum , while the rest of his body was buried . He was originally given a humble and meek pose , as the taxidermist felt that this would serve as a reminder of servitude to future generations . In 1923 , his body was refurbished by Georg Ruprecht , as his coat had become brittle and had broken into more than 20 pieces . During the restoration , his body was re @-@ posed and his skull shape was modified to match the shape of the St. Bernard of that time , in a compromise between Ruprecht and the Museum 's director . His original head shape was rather flat with a moderate stop , with the modification resulting in a larger head with a more pronounced stop . A barrel was added hanging from his collar , following the popularization of the myth of the monastery 's dogs using these during the rescues , which was originally introduced by Edwin Landseer 's work Alpine Mastiffs <unk> a Distressed Traveller . The barrel was removed in 1978 by Professor Walter Huber , the director of the museum , although it has since been replaced . A monument to Barry is located opposite the entrance to the Cimetière des Chiens in Paris . 
 In literary works , Samuel Rogers ' poem The Great Saint Bernard is sometimes referred to as Barry , The Great St. Bernard . Henry Bordeaux praised Barry 's work in his 1911 novel La Neige sur les pas . Walt Disney Productions made a telemovie entitled Barry of the Great St. Bernard in 1977 , and Barry 's story has been featured in children 's books such as Barry : The Bravest Saint Bernard published by Random House Books for Young Readers . 
 Until September 2004 , 18 dogs still belonged to the hospice at any one time . The Foundation Barry du Grand Saint Bernard was established to create kennels in Martigny , a village further down the pass , to take over the breeding of St. Bernard puppies from the friars at Hospice . Around 20 puppies per year are born at the foundation . In 2009 , the St. Bernard Dog Museum was opened at the Foundation in Martigny and , to commemorate the occasion , Barry 's remains were lent from the museum in Bern . Each summer , the foundation leads dogs up the pass when it is open to the hospice , mainly for tourists , with rescue efforts on the pass now conducted by helicopters . 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 = Smoke Gets in Your Eyes ( Mad Men ) = 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " is the first episode of the first season of the American period drama television series Mad Men . It first aired on July 19 , 2007 , in the United States on AMC , and was written by creator Matthew Weiner and directed by Alan Taylor . " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was budgeted at US $ 3 million . Production for the episode took place in New York City and Los Angeles . 
 Weiner conceived of the script in 2000 while working as a writer for the television sitcom Becker . Before writing the pilot episode , Weiner studied American literature and cinema of the 1950s and 1960s to get a perspective on American culture during that period . Weiner sent the script to The Sopranos creator David Chase , who recruited Weiner to work with him on The Sopranos . Weiner shelved the project for seven years to focus on Chase 's program ; interest for Mad Men did not surface until the conclusion of The Sopranos ' final season . 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode attained a rating of 1 @.@ 4 ( 1 @.@ 2 million households ) upon initial airing . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1960 New York City , Don Draper ( Jon Hamm ) , creative director for advertising agency Sterling Cooper , is facing a professional dilemma : how to sell cigarettes in spite of increased public awareness of their health risks . He seeks input from customers and his girlfriend Midge Daniels ( Rosemarie DeWitt ) , but is unable to find a solution . He rejects company research which suggests that some customers will be drawn to smoke despite the health risks because of a collective " death wish . " 
 Meanwhile , Peggy Olson ( Elisabeth Moss ) begins a new career at Sterling Cooper as Don 's secretary . She finds herself overwhelmed by her new surroundings , and advice from office manager Joan Holloway ( Christina Hendricks ) proves more intimidating than helpful . A junior account executive named Pete Campbell ( Vincent Kartheiser ) makes crude comments about her appearance and clothing , causing Don to rebuke him . On her break , Peggy goes to a doctor 's office , where she gets a prescription for the pill . At the end of the day , she attempts to make a move on Don , but he rejects her advances . 
 Don and Roger Sterling ( John Slattery ) meet with Rachel Menken ( Maggie Siff ) , owner of a large department store . Rachel , looking to attract wealthier customers , is disappointed by the agency 's suggestions of coupons to attract frugal housewives . The meeting becomes heated and both Rachel and Don leave angry with each other . A later meeting with executives from Lucky Strike tobacco company also appears to go badly , as Don still struggles to find a new approach to cigarette advertising . Pete suggests the " death wish " idea put forth by the company 's research , but the executives reject his idea . Just when it seems that the meeting is over , Don comes up with a new tagline — " It 's toasted ! " — and a strategy of ignoring the question of health risks while claiming that Lucky Strikes are uniquely prepared . The client is impressed , but Don rebukes Pete for using the rejected research . 
 Don meets Rachel for dinner to make amends for the meeting . The two of them begin to bond , and she agrees to give Sterling Cooper another shot . Meanwhile , Pete and some of his co @-@ workers go to a gentlemen 's club to celebrate Pete 's impending wedding . There , a waitress rejects Pete 's advances . Dejected from this rejection and his professional problems , Pete arrives drunk at Peggy 's apartment , and she invites him in . Don takes a train to a large house in the suburbs , where he is greeted by his loving wife Betty ( January Jones ) , who he has made no mention of thus far in the episode . He checks on their two sleeping children as she watches admiringly from the doorway . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Creator Matthew Weiner conceived the script for " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " in 2000 , while he was working as a writer for the sitcom Becker . The first draft of the episode was written as a spec script and was titled The Division . Two years later , Weiner sent the script to David Chase , the creator of The Sopranos , although Weiner 's agents insisted that he not proceed with his plans . Chase later recruited him upon first glance . " It was what you ’ re always hoping to see , " he recalled . " It was lively and it had something new to say . Here was someone who had written a story about advertising in the 1960s , and was looking at recent American history through that prism . " Weiner set the pilot script aside for the next seven years to focus on The Sopranos . Neither HBO nor Showtime expressed interest in the project until the commencement of The Sopranos ' final season . During that time , AMC began looking into the television market for new programming . " The network was looking for distinction in launching its first original series , " according to AMC Networks president Ed Carroll , " and we took a bet that quality would win out over formulaic mass appeal . " 
 Prior to writing the pilot episode , Weiner studied American culture during the 1950s and 1960s , analyzing literary works such as The Feminine Mystique ( 1963 ) and Sex and the Single Girl ( 1962 ) while viewing such films as The Apartment ( 1960 ) and A Guide for the Married Man ( 1967 ) . He continued his endeavors when the series ' concept began to materialize , as he received a copy of the Richard Yates novel Revolutionary Road ( 1962 ) from the executives of AMC . Weiner discussed the look of Mad Men with production designer Bob Shaw and cinematographer Phil Abraham , whom Weiner had previously collaborated with in The Sopranos . Abraham wanted to establish a more genuine approach to portraying society in the 1960s , rather than " simply referencing the period as seen in movies of that time . We wanted to be more genuine than that . Movies were an influence . " In evoking historical accuracy of elements such as architecture and graphic design , Abraham sought inspiration from the buildings designed by the architecture firm Skidmore , Owings and Merrill . He said , " We noticed that in all the Skidmore , Owings & Merrill designs of contemporary buildings , the ceiling — the overhead grid of lights — was a strong graphic element in all the office spaces . In one design we loved , the whole ceiling was like a lightbox . It was a time of high modernism , and we embraced the notion of presenting the world in that way . These were new work spaces — sleek , not stuffy . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Jon Hamm was cast as Don Draper , the central character of the series . Hamm , who was relatively unknown at the time , competed with 80 other actors in the auditioning process . Weiner proclaimed that Hamm accurately portrayed the character , saying that he was " the only person who really had this great mix of empathy and masculinity and intelligence . Both Don and Jon have an inner life . So long as you have that kind of depth in a human being , people will root for him [ ... ] Jon walked out of the room and I said , ' That guy has lived . ' " Hamm admitted that he felt that he had a considerable disadvantage compared to his peers , and initially believed Thomas Jane would acquire the role . " I started , literally , on the very , very bottom , " he iterated . " I couldn 't have had less heat on me . Nobody knew who I was . The casting directors didn 't know who I was . I wasn 't on anybody 's lists . The funny thing was , I think they went to Thomas Jane for it , and they were told that Thomas Jane does not do television . " Hamm went through seven auditions ; his last one took place at the Hotel Gansevoort in the Meatpacking District of New York City . " When we were riding down on the elevator , the woman in charge of whatever the decision @-@ making process was told me , ' You got the job . ' " 
 John Slattery , who was later cast as Roger Sterling , originally auditioned to portray Don Draper . Slattery felt Don was the show 's biggest draw , and was disappointed upon hearing of his character 's sparse screen time . He recalled , " I really did prepare the thing and went in and I worked hard on it and then read for Don and they actually gave me adjustments and I went and I did it again . And then they sort of said , ' Well , look , here ’ s the deal . We have a guy . The reason we asked you to come in and read for Draper is because we didn 't think that you ’ d come in a read for Roger because there wasn ’ t that much Roger in the script . ' " During production of " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes , " Slattery admitted he was unsure of whether to continue working on Mad Men . " I was on the fence a little bit , even while shooting it . And I think Matt finally was like , ' Look man , we ’ re not jerking you around here . We ’ re serious about this and I ’ ve really thought this out . I promise you this will be a great character and it will be a big part of the show . ' " 
 Producers of Mad Men approached January Jones to portray Betty Draper , Don 's wife and mother of their two children . Jones avouched that portraying the character would give the audience an opportunity to see a dark side of her nature . She initially auditioned for the role of Peggy Olson , which was later given to fellow cast member Elisabeth Moss . " It got down between Elisabeth Moss and myself , and it was obviously more suited to her , but Matthew had said , you know , there ’ s this other role , of the wife . " Jones signed a seven @-@ year contract with the show , although her character originally had two lines in " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes . " Weiner eventually edited the script to accommodate her desires . " It ’ s such a testament to his ability , " Jones stated . " He just took something out of thin air , which makes me think now that he had to have had an idea that the wife was going to be part of the show , because I kind of took the job with the promise that Betty would be a part of the show . When you sign a seven @-@ year contract , you want to make sure you ’ re in the show . " Christina Hendricks was brought in to play Joan Holloway , the office manager and head of Sterling Cooper 's secretarial pool . While Hendricks had previously made recurring appearances on ER before being on the show , her acting career had been largely inactive , and Hendricks ' agent urged her not to participate in the project . " They said to me , ' AMC [ ... ] doesn 't have any other big shows — why would you do this instead of taking something that 's a better bet ? ' I said , ' Look , I 've gone with the one that 's the better bet in the past — let 's go with the really good script this time . ' " 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " features guest appearances from several actors and actresses , including Rosemarie DeWitt ( as Midge ) and Maggie Siff ( as Rachel Menken ) . DeWitt was given a recurring role in the season as Don 's mistress , which lasted for six episodes . She initially felt out of place while playing out her character . DeWitt stated , " They were at the end of casting , and hadn 't found the right Midge yet . Originally they had a scene where she opens the door wearing a red kimono , and I remember thinking ' I 'm not that ' , so I wasn ’ t sure I was right for the part . Maybe the fact that I wasn 't this ' vamp ' is what made Matt Weiner give me a shot . " Prior to working on Mad Men , Siff mainly worked in theatre and performing arts . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was budgeted at US $ 3 million , slightly more than the US $ 2 – 2 @.@ 5 million budgeted in typical Mad Men episodes . The pilot episode was mostly shot at various locations in and around New York City including the Silvercup Studios , where principal photography lasted for two days . Most of the production crew were previously part of The Sopranos . After filming concluded in New York , production moved to the Los Angeles Center Studios . Abraham collaborated with an entirely different production crew from the one in New York . According to Abraham , Los Angeles contained a continuity that was related to the show . " Once we moved to L.A. , there was a continuity of style that came from Alan and me , and that was important to Matt [ Weiner ] . " 
 In creating a practical effect , a grid consisting of fluorescent lights was installed onto the set that housed Sterling Cooper 's main office . The show 's art department bought several 2 @-@ by @-@ 2 four @-@ tube fixtures , which was determined to be accurate relative to the time period . The shipments arrived on the first day of filming the pilot . However , examination by the set @-@ lighting crew revealed the lightbulbs used were internally modernized , having been designed to hold T @-@ 8 bulbs measuring two feet each . " Getting more than 800 2 @-@ foot color @-@ corrected T @-@ 8 tubes became a major issue , and none of the regular suppliers had enough in stock , " recalled Mike Ambrose , the gaffer for the production team in Los Angeles . " Movietone stopped production of whatever bulbs it was making , retooled the plant and started manufacturing the T @-@ 8s we needed . The last shipment arrived the morning of our first day of shooting . " 
 Abraham created a light @-@ control system in an attempt to keep the overhead from being unflattering . However , after unsuccessfully attempting to implement the necessary wiring to control each light , the production team established controlling rows of light . Pat O 'Mara , the key grip during production , installed several <unk> and 2x2 blackout panels and frames that were retrofitted with small albeit strong magnets . During a scene when and actor or actresses stood under a fluorescent light , a panel or a frame was placed over the fixture , subsequently diffusing light onto their faces . " If somebody was walking through the office in a wide shot , I just turned the overhead lights on . But if Don was talking to someone at his desk and the office was the backdrop , I turned all the lights on and then selectively removed some ; then , I brought the key around with Kino Flo Image 80s through 4 @-@ by @-@ 8 frames of 250 or 216 , or sourced my key with a larger Fresnel through the window . " 
 The set containing Sterling Cooper 's corporate offices contained <unk> fitted with 5K bulbs onto the centers , which measured 8 inches apart . Ambrose collaborated with the production team to institute twenty @-@ five inch trusses on chain motors and to devise <unk> with Arri Alexa cameras that were eventually installed on aluminum I @-@ beams . Ambrose proclaimed that the flexibility of the trolleys and chain motors enabled production to move more efficiently in concentrating on the design of the window . He added : " We also had four <unk> and a few more T @-@ 12s on stands that could be rolled around the office floor . For tungsten close @-@ ups , we often used Barger @-@ <unk> six- and three @-@ light units with <unk> , soft cloth , diaper baffles and 60- and 90 @-@ degree honeycomb grids for control . " In comparison , Ambrose used traditional lighting when creating the housing for the character , as he favored the color spectrum of a household lightbulb . For example , Don 's home required four to five rooms to be lit simultaneously . " We used a lot of batten strips with 100 @-@ watt household bulbs , " noted Ambrose . " The bulbs are so close they 're almost touching , so they create a single source that doesn 't cast multiple shadows . Over time , we built housings for them with channels into which you can slide diffusion frames or egg crates . We call them ' Whiteys ' because the guy who knocked these shells out of tin back in New York was named Whitey ; I used them extensively on The Sopranos and felt they suited the homes in Mad Men as well . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 In the days leading to the " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " premiere , the watchdog group Commercial Alert filed a complaint against producers to the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States . Commentators from the group criticized distillery brand Jack Daniel 's for its decision to sponsor Mad Men , citing that it violates industry codes that prohibit alcohol marketing , as well " depictions of irresponsible drinking , overt sexual activity or sexually lewd images " . Robert Weissman , the director for Commercial Alert , stated that based on AMC 's website , " it appears that the sponsorship arrangement will violate numerous provisions of the industry 's self @-@ regulatory marketing code . " He continued : " There is no reason why a company should be able to escape normal enforcement and implementation of the Code simply because it chooses to violate the code in such brazen manner that curing the violation would cause non @-@ trivial complications for a major television series . " In association with the complaint , Weissman urged in his letter that the Distilled Spirits Council of the United States become more proactive in regulating the distilleries ' initiatives in the entertainment industry . " Our complaint in this instance is not with the portrayal of heavy alcohol consumption , or even with the glorification of such heavy consumption ; it is specific to industry sponsorship of and entwinement with such portrayals . Quite different issues are raised where artists choose to depict such activities in the absence of industry sponsorship . " 
 = = = Ratings and critical response = = = 
 " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was originally broadcast on July 19 , 2007 in the United States on AMC . Upon airing , the episode acquired a 1 @.@ 4 rating ( 1 @.@ 2 million households ) according to the Nielsen Media Research . Total viewership was 75 percent higher than all television programming airing on Thursdays on AMC . 
 Television commentators praised the pilot episode . Heather Havrilesky of Salon declared that " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " raised expectations for future competition at the time , and added that it emulated some of the best episodes of The Sopranos . Chicago Tribune journalist Maureen Ryan said that it was an " intelligently made character drama " . In his four star review , Adam Buckman of New York Post described it as " stunning " and suggested that Mad Men " just happens to be the finest new TV series of the summer and possibly the entire year " . Tim Goodman of the San Francisco Chronicle and Variety 's Brian Lowry lauded the episode for its historical accuracy ; " Just because they 're on the cusp of a new decade does not mean they can see what viewers already know is around the corner , " stated Goodman . " That impending change gives an extra dimension of perspective to the series . " Lowry addressed that despite the subtle approach of Mad Men , it managed to provoke a profound meaning . " In that context , the show illustrates that period 's own form of excess without wagging fingers , while reminding us that before sex , drugs and rock ' n ' roll , there was sexual harassment , free @-@ flowing cocktails and bluesy ballads , invariably sung by white guys . " USA Today writer Robert Bianco echoed synonymous sentiment ; " Mad Men is a joy to watch — the clothes , the clocks , the furniture , it 's like a mid @-@ century night 's dream . But this is no mere period piece . It 's a smart , complex drama that attempts to get through the facades that have always hidden the truth . " 
 Troy Patterson of Slate drew comparisons to the HBO comedy @-@ drama Sex and the City , and affirmed that it introduced a lewd and cynical perspective of the so @-@ called " golden age " of advertisement . Nancy Franklin of The New Yorker concluded that " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was " smart and tremendously attractive " , while Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer journalist Melanie McFarland felt that it was a rarity compared to other television installments . Writing for the Boston Globe , Matthew Gilbert remarked that the setting and design was immediately distinguishable . Gilbert wrote , " This is a gorgeously fashioned period piece , from its IBM typewriters and rotary phones to the constant fog of cigarette smoke hanging over every scene . The show has a subtle color palette , to match the ivory metal Venetian blinds at the Sterling Cooper ad agency offices , but it may sit in your memory as if it had been filmed in black and white . " Citing its authenticity as an episode highlight , Randy Cordova from the Arizona Republic noted that " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " was well @-@ constructed . 
 Some critics were less enthusiastic than the general consensus . Although The New Republic 's Sacha Zimmerman stated that the episode 's aesthetic features were comparable to cinematic works , she affirmed that Mad Men lacked any substance , ultimately criticizing the cultural references and the character development presented in the episode . Mad Men seems to be attempting satire without a plan , " Zimmerman said . " The mood is serious , not campy , and there aren 't laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments , just a lot of <unk> — at which point , the show simply becomes a reflection of its characters : depressing . It turns out that watching moody , cruel men and unsatisfied , put @-@ upon women for an hour just isn 't that much fun . " Similarly , Tim Shale of The Washington Post concluded that despite the evocative nature of the program , " Smokes Gets in Your Eyes " fell flat ; " The people in and around them spoil the show , gum up the works and shatter veracity . " To New York 's John Leonard , the installment felt like a " fifties leftover " . 
 Commentators praised the performances of several cast members , specifically Hamm 's portrayal of Don Draper . Goodman asserted that the acting from the cast members was one of the aspects that carried the show . Gilbert evaluated that Hamm played his character to " slick perfection " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards , " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " won Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series ( Matthew Weiner ) . The episode also won Creative Arts Emmys for Art Direction for a Single @-@ Camera Series and Cinematography for a One Hour Series . " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes " also received a nomination for Outstanding Directing in a Drama Series ( Alan Taylor ) as well as Outstanding Costumes for a Series ( John A. Dunn , costume designer and Lisa Padovani , assistant costume designer ) . The episode also won a Casting Society of America Artios Award for Outstanding Casting in a Television Pilot , Drama . Alan Taylor won a 2007 Directors Guild of America Award for Drama Series directing the episode . The episode also earned a Motion Picture Sound Editors Golden Reel Award nomination in Best Sound Editing - Dialogue and ADR for Short Form Television for Jason George ( supervising sound editor ) , Jed M. Dodge ( supervising dialogue editor ) , Julie Altus ( ADR editor ) , Dale <unk> ( dialogue editor ) , and Charlie <unk> ( dialogue editor ) . 
 = River Torrens = 
 The River Torrens / <unk> / is the most significant river of the Adelaide Plains and was one of the reasons for the siting of the city of Adelaide , capital of South Australia . It flows 85 kilometres ( 53 mi ) from its source in the Adelaide Hills near Mount Pleasant , across the Adelaide Plains , past the city centre and empties into Gulf St Vincent between Henley Beach South and West Beach . The upper stretches of the river and the reservoirs in its watershed supply a significant part of the city 's water supply . The river 's long linear parks and a constructed lake in the lower stretch are iconic of the city . 
 At its 1836 discovery an inland bend was chosen as the site of the Adelaide city centre and North Adelaide . The river is named after Colonel Robert Torrens , chairman of the colonial commissioners and a significant figure in the city 's founding . The river is also known by its native Kaurna name Karra <unk> @-@ <unk> . The river and its tributaries are highly variable in flow , and together drain an area of 508 square kilometres ( 196 sq mi ) . They range from sometimes raging torrents , damaging bridges and flooding city areas , to <unk> and completely dry in summer . Winter and spring flooding has prompted the construction of flood reduction works . A constructed sea outlet , landscaped linear parks and three holding reservoirs contain peak flow . 
 The river 's flora and fauna have been both deliberately and accidentally impacted since settlement . In the 19th century , native forests were cleared , gravel removed for construction and many foreign species introduced . With construction of the linear parks , many species native to the river have been replanted , and introduced species have been controlled as weeds . Since European settlement the river has been a frequently touted tourist attraction . During the early years of settlement , the river acted as both the city 's primary water source and main sewer , leading to outbreaks of typhus and cholera . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The River Torrens runs largely westward from the Adelaide Hills , through the centre of Adelaide to the Gulf St Vincent . It originates close to the eastern fault scarp of the Mount Lofty Ranges , near Mount Pleasant , approximately 480 metres ( 1 @,@ 575 ft ) above sea level . It runs predominantly along faulted north @-@ south ground structures , which were formed over 250 million years ago during the Paleozoic era then further dislocated during the Cretaceous and earliest Tertiary . There is a 400 metre subsidence along the Para Fault which also affects the rivers flow . This subsidence was formed in the last two million years , after the Pliocene era . 
 From its origin to Birdwood the river follows rolling , relatively level country before entering a hilly section that continues to Gumeracha . The river then follows sedimentary rock strata before entering a gorge after <unk> Creek . It flows through the gorge to Athelstone , passing over the Eden Fault Zone of the Adelaide Hills face and associated escarpment . After the scarp it flows over sedimentary rocks of varying resistance to erosion , which has led to interspersed narrows and broad basins . From the base of the Adelaide Hills to Adelaide 's central business district it runs in a shallow valley with a terraced floor , then down the slope of its own alluvial fan . The structure of this fan shows that the river formerly entered Gulf St Vincent via the Port River . Over time the Torrens deposited sediment , choking its own outflow ; becoming locked behind coastal sand dunes and forming the swampy areas of the <unk> Plains and the reedbeds . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 The Torrens is fed by numerous seasonal creeks , which are dry for most of the year . There are five main creeks that join from the south side as it crosses the Adelaide Plains east of Adelaide , and at least five more in its path through the Adelaide Hills . The plains tributaries , known as First to Fifth Creeks , with First being the closest to Adelaide 's city @-@ centre and the rest numbered consecutively eastward , were originally named Greenhill , Hallett , Todd , Anstey and <unk> rivulets respectively . They flow vigorously in winter and spring but are otherwise dry , except for small flows in limited areas upstream . " <unk> " a Kaurna word meaning " ever flowing " is now the official name of Fourth Creek . This name has been adapted to Morialta which is now the name of an electoral district , school and the Morialta Conservation Park through which the creek flows . 
 First , Second and Third Creeks have been particularly heavily modified . Some sections have been converted to concrete channels ; others run through landscaped private gardens and some run in underground pipes . Much of the original vegetation has disappeared from the creeks , particularly those closest to the city . Introduced species including Olives , bamboo , <unk> , <unk> and blackberries have displaced native flora . 
 The largest catchment of the Torrens is Sixth Creek in the Adelaide Hills , which joins the Torrens at <unk> on Gorge Road . 
 = = = Water flow = = = 
 At the time of European settlement the river was a summertime chain of waterholes bounded by large gum trees . Flowing through the area where the city of Adelaide is sited the river was sometimes invisible beneath its gravel stream bed . It frequently flooded in winter and did not reach the sea , instead ending at coastal dunes where its waters created a vast but shallow freshwater wetlands . These wetlands , known as The Reedbeds after the dominant vegetation , occupied a large area of the western Adelaide Plains and was also fed by other waterways . The river only flowed to the sea through the Port River , Barker Inlet , and <unk> River following heavy rain . 
 The river 's catchment area of approximately 500 km2 ( 193 sq mi ) is the largest of any waterway within the Adelaide region . The upper reaches are used to create a potable water supply for metropolitan Adelaide with the river supplying three of Adelaide 's eight reservoirs . The upper catchment has an average annual rainfall of between 575 millimetres ( 22 @.@ 6 in ) at its eastern end to 1 @,@ 025 millimetres ( 40 @.@ 4 in ) near Uraidla . The Torrens has a very variable flow leaving early settlers to use trial and error in determining bridge heights , with many bridges consequently being washed away . Due to the variability of Adelaide 's climate , flow rates can change from a trickle to flood conditions quickly . On 5 June 1889 , prior to major flooding , the flow rate before it entered the suburbs was 0 @.@ 7 m ³ / s ( cubic metres per second ) , rising to 129 @.@ 1 m ³ / s , 8 days later . 
 What the River Torrens may be capable of performing for a week or two of the rainy season beyond sweeping down to the swamp the summer filth of Adelaide we cannot guess ; but the Torrens at other times is not a river at all , but merely a chain of fresh water pools . At the present moment , its running water may be spanned with the hand and sounded with the forefinger 
 Since settlement it has repeatedly flooded , sometimes with disastrous consequences . Adelaide 's western suburbs were especially prone to flooding due to their location on the river 's alluvial fan . As development of Adelaide progressed the amount of rainfall required for flooding decreased and consequent damage increased . Increased stormwater runoff , modification of the river 's banks and other changes all served to exacerbate the problem . Work done by various groups to minimise flooding was often counter productive with the creation of levees , moving and widening channels and other works simply shifting the flooding elsewhere . 
 Two early floods were , 18 September 1841 which resulted in two people drowning while trying to cross the river at Klemzig , and 22 September 1844 , the largest recorded since settlement began , when " Shands ' Brewery " was washed away after the river undermined its foundations . The 1899 flood was particularly widespread with extensive flooding of both the river and its tributaries , after a year with 785 @.@ 6 millimetres of rain compared to the Adelaide average of 530 millimetres . The river flooded market gardens and farms throughout its hills course causing extensive damage . Norwood was inundated to The Parade , Adelaide to Pirie and Rundle Streets , and many areas west of the city were left in a shallow lake . The river ran 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) deep over the weir near Thorndon Park Reservoir , 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) over the Torrens Lake Weir and 1 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) over the Morphett Street Bridge . The <unk> ( or <unk> ) Bridge was destroyed , the Torrens Lake weir 's bridge damaged , and the <unk> Bridge over the Fourth Creek washed away . 
 = = " Discovery " and naming = = 
 The first European sighting of the river was in November 1836 by an exploration party comprising Lieutenant W.G. Field , John Morphett and George Strickland Kingston . The river was named " The Yatala " by the party but later renamed by Surveyor General Colonel William Light after Colonel Robert Torrens , chairman of the South Australian colonisation commissioners . On 29 December 1836 Light announced the location of the new city of Adelaide , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) inland on the river 's banks . The first Europeans to explore the Torrens Gorge to the headwaters and sources of the river were Dr George Imlay and John Hill in January 1838 . 
 In recent years the river has been dually known by the indigenous Kaurna people 's name of Karra <unk> @-@ <unk> ( meaning river of the Red Gum forest ) , referring to the dense eucalyptus forest that lined its banks prior to clearing by early settlers . This name , alternatively Karra @-@ <unk> , only referred to the lake section of the river , between Adelaide and North Adelaide . It was known as <unk> @-@ <unk> at Hindmarsh , <unk> near the reed beds , and <unk> everywhere when in flood . <unk> has been translated as " water running by the side of a river " and has survived as Yatala in the naming of various places in Adelaide . 
 = = Changes after 1836 = = 
 During early years of colonisation , the surrounding trees were cut down and the river 's gravel used in road making and construction of buildings . As the natural environment was removed , the banks were eroded and the riverbed gradually levelled as waterholes filled . By 1878 the river was noted to be a malodorous , black sewer rather than the sylvan stream of the 1830s . 
 ... anything in the guise of a river more ugly than the Torrens would be impossible to either see or describe ... 
 Much of the river 's catchment area consists of cleared farmland with run @-@ off captured in private dams to sustain farming over Adelaide 's dry summer . Combined with the river 's use for potable water this has greatly reduced the overall flow especially in the lower river . 
 = = = Flood mitigation = = = 
 A flood mitigation bill was passed in 1917 to not only combat the damage caused by floods but also the public health risk due to the lack of mains sewerage in the western suburbs . Popular opinion favoured diverting the flood waters into their " natural " outlets of the Port and <unk> Rivers . The chief engineer of the department of works favoured a cutting through sand dunes near Henley Beach , allowing the river an outlet , mitigating floods and preventing silting of the Port River . He also advocated the construction of a reservoir where the Kangaroo Creek Reservoir is now , to both mitigate floods and provide summer irrigation water for market gardens . Unfortunately the bill lapsed with no action as the government and local councils were unwilling to fund the works . The Millbrook Reservoir opened in 1918 as a summer water source , and flood <unk> if required . A bill was passed in 1923 to enact the earlier plan of cutting through the dunes and adding an upstream regulating weir . Again the bill lapsed due to a lack of commitment from parties on payment . 
 A major flood in 1931 and another in 1933 led to the latest in a series of government enquiries . In 1934 the " Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works " recommended that an outlet for the river be created to accommodate flows of up to 370 m ³ / s ( cubic metres per second ) ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ³ / s ) , covering a 1 in 60 year flood . The work was partly financed by a Commonwealth Government grant with the State Government arranging for the balance . The State Government , western and eastern local councils and the Municipal Tramways Trust shared interest costs . The scheme was enacted in 1935 and largely completed by 1939 with the creation of the " Breakout Creek " channel . The scheme involved diversion of the river at <unk> ( near Adelaide Airport ) , with the original channel blocked and a new channel created to the sea . The reedbeds and swamps were subsequently drained and some of their area is now the site for the suburb of West Lakes . 
 Based on recommendations in a 1925 report on flood mitigation , work began in the 1960s on the building of the Kangaroo Creek Reservoir , opened in 1969 with a capacity of 24 @.@ 4 megalitres It remains the only reservoir damming the river rather than being fed from weirs . The " River Torrens Committee " was formed in 1964 to advise the minister of works on preserving and enhancing the river 's natural beauty , and developing it for recreational uses . The " River Torrens Acquisition Act 1970 @-@ 72 " was passed , authorising the purchase of land , in some cases 60 metres back from the top of the river 's banks . 
 By 1980 , further development along the riverbanks and removal of <unk> had reduced the outlet 's capacity to a 1 in 35 year flood . A study showed that a 1 in 200 year flood would inundate 13 @,@ 000 properties ; so the Kangaroo Creek dam 's level was raised , its spillway modified , the breakout creek channel capacity increased and some bridges reinforced . A development plan was approved in 1981 to purchase land along the length of the river , create a flood mitigating linear park and also to modify the Kangaroo Creek dam further . The sea outlet was enlarged to a capacity of 410 m ³ / s which now covered a 1 in 200 year flood . When the O @-@ Bahn Busway was opened , the bridges were designed to cope with this scale of flood , although the two bridges in St Peters would likely be awash . 
 = = = Torrens Lake = = = 
 The 470 megalitre Torrens Lake was created in 1881 with the construction of a weir , landscaping of Elder Park and modification of the river 's bank and surrounds into an English formal park . The lake forms a centrepiece of many Adelaide events and postcard scenes . Elder Park with its iron rotunda was opened on 28 November 1882 . The Rotunda is a largely Glasgow built 9 metre high iron bandstand which was funded by Sir Thomas Elder Smith , the park being named after him . 
 In 1867 , prison labour from Adelaide Gaol was used to build a wooden dam near the site of the current weir . The dam was poorly constructed and almost immediately the Torrens washed it away . Construction of a permanent concrete weir was begun in November 1880 and completed , at a cost of £ 7 @,@ 000 , in 1881 . The sluice gates were closed to begin filling the 12 @-@ hectare ( 30 @-@ acre ) Torrens Lake on 1 July 1881 . At the lake 's official opening on 21 July 1881 an estimated 40 @,@ 000 , almost the entire population of Adelaide , attended . During the 1889 flood , the weir was overwhelmed , its gates jammed , and in trying to free them the weir 's designer John Langdon was crippled . The weir was rebuilt from 1928 to 1929 with its footbridge relocated and the centre section replaced . The gates can now be fully raised and the river allowed to flow unimpeded . 
 The " Popeye " boats are privately owned recreational ferries that operate on the lake between Elder Park and the Adelaide Zoo . The first boat was launched on the Torrens Lake by Gordon Watts in 1935 . It was a 25 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) boat , built on the banks of the Torrens to hold up to 20 passengers and named Popeye 1 . Watts purchased a former Glenelg cruise boat in 1948 and placed it in service as Popeye 2 . Over the next two years three new jarrah hulled boats were built at Port Adelaide ; carrying 40 passengers each they were numbered Popeye 3 through Popeye 5 . Trips on the Popeyes from Elder Park to the zoo became a treasured family outing and the boats hosted weddings and other events . In March 1962 Keith Altman , owner of riverside eatery " Jolley 's Boathouse " , took over the Popeyes and introduced recreational paddle boats to the river . The Popeyes had a brush with royalty in March 1977 with Popeye 5 ferrying Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip followed by a choir in Popeye 4 . Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser officially launched three new fibreglass models named Popeyes I , II and III in 1982 as the wooden boats ' replacements . 
 = = = Water use = = = 
 In the early days of Adelaide , the Torrens was used for bathing , stock watering , rubbish disposal , water supply and as a de facto sewer and drainage sump . This led to a range of health issues until finally , in 1839 , when a dysentery outbreak killed 5 children in one day , Governor Gawler forbid bathing , clothes washing and the disposal of animal carcases in the Torrens within 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) of town . The quality of the river 's water was not helped by water supply methods . Carters used to drive water carts into the Torrens to refill . To prevent this the State Government built a facility with steam powered pumps and water storage in 1852 , from which the carters then filled . 
 The " Waterworks Act " of 1856 was passed to enable damming of the upstream Torrens for water supply purposes . The resulting " Water Commission " arranged the following year for foundations to be laid for a water supply weir 7 miles ( 11 km ) from Adelaide near Campbelltown . Unsuitable geology and shoddy work by contractors Frost & Watson led to it being washed away in July 1858 and the site abandoned . Engineer Hamilton was replaced by John England . Government then created a Waterworks Department , which started construction of a weir 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the city and reservoir at Thorndon Park in 1859 . The weir was completed on 4 June 1860 and the reservoir began supplying piped water in December . Engineer England was found by a Select Committee to have overpaid the contractors and forced to resign . The water was captured at the weir , piped for storage to the Thorndon Park Reservoir then to a water tower at Kent Town . Water from Kent Town storage was distributed via a manually controlled water system , <unk> for its first six years . Within six years 20 @,@ 000 citizens in Adelaide and Port Adelaide were connected to reticulated water from the Torrens . By 1872 , the <unk> megalitre Hope Valley Reservoir in the foothills of the Adelaide Hills was completed as a storage reservoir , supplied via an aqueduct and tunnel . 
 Public baths were built in 1861 just north of the current Parliament House . They were supplied with reticulated water from the Torrens and progressively upgraded with the last change a 1940 remodelling including an Olympic size swimming pool and diving tower . The baths were demolished in 1970 to make way for the Adelaide Festival Centre . The 16 @,@ 500 megalitre Millbrook Reservoir was constructed high in the Adelaide Hills from 1913 to 1918 submerging the town of Millbrook . An earth bank dam fed by mile long tunnel from a weir on the river at Gumeracha , its elevation allows gravity supply of water to Adelaide 's eastern suburbs . 
 = = = Bridges = = = 
 Due to the river 's path through the centre of Adelaide , transport necessitated the construction of many bridges . Prior to the bridges all crossings had been via fords which proved a dangerous practice in winter and spring . The first bridge was one of timber built in 1839 approximately 500 metres west of the current City bridge , but destroyed by floods in September 1844 . In 1849 £ 6000 was allocated to bridge the Torrens . Within four years three wooden bridges had been built and subsequently destroyed in floods . In June 1856 the English manufactured , iron City Bridge was opened , extending King William Street to North Adelaide . It was widened in 1877 then converted into a two @-@ lane bridge in 1884 . In 1929 a new wider , concrete bridge was proposed , to be the same width as King William Road and would relieve congestion , particularly on match days at the Adelaide Oval . The bridge was duly replaced in 1931 with the concrete arch structure proposed in 1929 . The distinctive lamp fittings and their pylons were designed by South Australian artist John C. Goodchild . 
 The Victoria Bridge extends from Morphett Street and crosses the rail lines from the Adelaide railway station and the river . The first bridge was opened on 21 June 1871 , and over time various bridges have been built on the same site . The current bridge , a prestressed concrete box girder bridge , was opened in March 1968 by then Premier of South Australia Don Dunstan , and Adelaide Lord Mayor Walter Lewis <unk> . The bridge is constructed as two bridges joined to appear continuous . The first spans North Terrace and the rail lines , and the second the river . The bridge was designed without a central pillar in the river , allowing three lanes of rowers to compete without interference . 
 The Albert Bridge is adjacent to the Adelaide Zoo and carries Frome Road over the river . A timber bridge was constructed in 1859 , west of the current bridge , and named the Old Frome Bridge . The current bridge was named after Prince Albert , royal consort to Queen Victoria , on 7 May 1879 . The wrought iron structure is made from three parallel , scalloped girders that were manufactured in England . It is 120 feet ( 36 @.@ 6 m ) long with a cantilevered span of 60 feet ( 18 m ) . The bridge is 43 feet ( 13 m ) wide and originally had a timber deck , which was replaced with concrete in 1922 . The coats of arms on the inside of the bridge contains the city 's motto , Ut <unk> Omnibus <unk> which translates as " united for the common good . " The bridge is listed on the " City of Adelaide Heritage Register " , the " South Australian Heritage Register " and the " Register of the National Estate " . A complete restoration was finished in 1982 , with the bridge now appearing as it did at the 1879 opening . 
 Torrens River Park Pedestrian Bridge east of the zoo , was opened in late 2009 and is well patronised by cyclists . 
 The Hackney Bridge was first known as the " Second Company Bridge " as the South Australia Company built it . It was built so that wheat farmers from the northern side could access the South Australian Company 's flour mill which stood where the Hackney Hotel was later built . The current bridge is the third at the same site ; in 1845 " Prescott 's Crossing " was built as a timber beam bridge , 1860 saw it replaced with a four span , trussed timber bridge and 5 December 1885 with a 126 @-@ foot ( 38 m ) long , 34 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) wide truss arch bridge . 
 University Footbridge connects Victoria Drive , at the rear of University of Adelaide , with University Oval , War Memorial Drive . The bridge was conceived in 1928 by an engineering undergraduate at the university and funded with a £ 26 @,@ 000 grant from Adelaide City Council . It was designed by university staff under the supervision of Robert Chapman , chief engineer of the South Australian Railways . Construction was delayed until 1937 due to the economic effects of the Great Depression . The bridge has an arch spanning 152 ft ( 46 m ) , 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) over the river , and was the first welded bridge in South Australia . A murder that occurred in the vicinity of the bridge on 10 May 1972 resulted in calls to reform South Australia 's laws regarding homosexuality . University of Adelaide law lecturer Dr George Duncan was thrown into the river . A plaque on the bridge commemorates his death and the subsequent decriminalisation of homosexuality in South Australia . 
 Various other bridges have spanned the Torrens including : 
 Railway Bridge , Built in 1856 to carry the Port and Gawler Town railway lines . The bridge was constructed 1 @.@ 5 km from Adelaide railway station . 
 Felixstowe Bridge , built in 1873 on OG Road and reconstructed in 1892 , 1901 , 1924 and 1961 . The first bridge was narrow , and hay @-@ laden carts often damaged posts while brushing past them . 
 Tennyson Bridge , built 1877 on Stephen Terrace , St Peters , replacing a ford at the same site . 
 Ascot Bridge , built in 1970 to connect Ascot Avenue and Lower Portrush Road . 
 Dickson 's Crossing , built on Darley Road in 1977 to replace a ford . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 The river was formerly a food source with yabbies , mussels and small fish , however the reduction in water quality , changing of the river 's habitat , and introduction of European fish species has led to a reduction in fauna quantity and diversity . Exotic pest species such as the European carp , redfin perch and trout have greatly reduced native fish populations like the big headed gudgeon ( <unk> <unk> ) but native waterfowl are common along the river with Pacific black ducks , Australian wood ducks , black swans , ibis , egrets and herons amongst the more than 100 species seen . The number of exotic waterfowl species such as mallards has reduced in recent years . In places the steep banks of the river are an ideal habitat for long @-@ necked tortoises . 
 The river , and its tributaries , had a population of water rats ( <unk> chrysogaster ) and Australian swamp rats ( Rattus <unk> ) . Water rats remain in reduced numbers , but the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) and brown rat ( Rattus norvegicus ) have largely supplanted the natives . The house mouse ( Mus musculus ) is now the most common mammal of the Torrens <unk> . 
 Widely found native reeds , sedges and rushes along the upper river are bulrush , knobby club rush , spike rush , common reed , sea rush and pale rush . River red gum ( Eucalyptus camaldulensis ) and blue gum ( Eucalyptus leucoxylon ) trees are found along the riverbanks , although sparser than the forest that was seen by European discoverers . Still present are many of the original vegetation species like : Sheoak ( Casuarina stricta ) , native cherry ( Exocarpos <unk> ) , native pine ( Callitris preissii ) and Australia 's floral emblem the golden wattle ( Acacia pycnantha ) 
 = = Today 's river = = 
 From its source the river flows westwards through Birdwood and Gumeracha . It then continues down through Torrens Gorge entering suburban Adelaide at Athelstone with some of its path paralleled by the O @-@ Bahn Busway . It passes between the city @-@ centre and North Adelaide , forming the Torrens Lake between the Adelaide Zoo and a weir opposite Adelaide Gaol . The river then continues the remaining eight kilometres to the sea at Henley Beach South , emptying into Gulf St Vincent via a constructed outlet . 
 Hope Valley , Millbrook and Kangaroo Creek Reservoirs , which provide water storage for Adelaide , capture the river 's flow . These reservoirs form part of the Adelaide Hills catchment , which supplies 60 % of Adelaide 's water needs in an average year . Adelaide City Council uses water from the lower river to irrigate the city 's surrounding parklands . Rubbish accumulation in the lower river is controlled with numerous collection racks , and sediments and other pollutants are filtered through constructed wetlands . 
 The earliest linear river park in Australia bounds the suburban end of the river . The park is 35 km long with numerous playgrounds walkways and bicycle tracks . On the south bank of the lake , adjacent to the Adelaide Festival Centre , Elder Park is used for the annual Tasting Australia festival , mass singing of <unk> carols at the annual " Carols by Candlelight " , and other public events throughout the year . The Popeye tourist boats , small paddle boats and Black Swans of the lake are icons of the area and frequently featured in postcard photographs of the city . Due to now @-@ limited natural river flow and stormwater born organic material , the lower river , ( particularly the lake ) , is often polluted with algal blooms and significant levels of E. coli bacteria in spring and summer . Numerous <unk> have been formed to improve the river 's water quality , including one created in 2006 by the Minister for the Environment and Conservation . 
 The river is a used by many for recreation , with the footpaths on the riverbanks often filled with cyclists and joggers . Rowers use the lake for training all year round , and many clubs such as the Adelaide University Boat Club , the Adelaide Rowing Club , and the boat houses of the secondary schools which participate in the annual Head of the River are located upon its banks . Several rowing regattas are held on the Torrens Lake course in the summer months of each year , contested by both club and school crews . 
 = Alan Julian = 
 Alan John Julian ( born 11 March 1983 ) is a semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for National League club Bromley . 
 Julian started his career at Brentford , progressing through the youth side and making his first @-@ team debut in 2002 . After failing to cement a place as Brentford 's number one goalkeeper , he left to join Stevenage Borough in February 2005 . Julian was a regular fixture in the side , helping the club win the FA Trophy in May 2007 . He left Stevenage to join Gillingham on a free transfer in May 2008 . Julian was released by Gillingham in May 2011 , having played 80 games for the club during his three @-@ year tenure . He spent a season at his former club , now called simply Stevenage , before being released in May 2012 , and subsequently joined Newport County a month later . He was released by the club in May 2013 , and subsequently joined Dartford on a free transfer . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Julian joined Brentford aged nine , following a successful trial . He progressed through the various youth ranks and eventually signed his first professional contract in 2002 . He made his debut for the club in the Brentford 's 1 – 0 victory over Plymouth Argyle in the Football League Trophy on 12 November 2002 . During the match , Julian was " forced into numerous good saves . His best stop came in the 21st minute when he managed to claw away a stinging drive from <unk> <unk> , and moments later he also denied Blair Sturrock with a low block " . He made a further three appearances during the 2002 – 03 season , keeping a clean sheet in a 1 – 0 win over Mansfield Town . At the end of the season , Julian signed a new contract with Brentford , keeping him contracted to the club until 2005 . Julian remained at Brentford during the club 's 2003 – 04 campaign , playing his first match of the season in a 4 – 0 away defeat to West Bromwich Albion . He made a total of 14 appearances for Brentford during the season . Julian left Brentford in February 2005 , claiming " the time had come " for him to experience first @-@ team football on a regular basis . 
 = = = Stevenage Borough = = = 
 He signed for Stevenage Borough on a free transfer on 4 February 2005 , making his debut in Stevenage 's 1 – 0 win over Scarborough . Julian kept seven clean sheets for Stevenage in 17 appearances during the second half of the club 's 2004 – 05 campaign , including in a 1 – 0 victory against Hereford United at Edgar Street in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final second leg – a win that meant Stevenage were one game away from reaching the Football League for the first time in their history . He played in the play @-@ off final against Carlisle United at the Britannia Stadium , which Stevenage lost 1 – 0 . He remained at Stevenage during the 2005 – 06 season , " attracting interest from scouts " as a result of Stevenage 's strong start to the season . Stevenage kept 12 clean sheets during the season , although failed to make the play @-@ offs following a 2 – 0 defeat at Forest Green Rovers , finishing sixth . Julian made 45 appearances for Stevenage during the campaign and was voted ' Supporters Association Player of the Year ' . 
 At the end of the 2005 – 06 season , Graham Westley , the man that had brought Julian to Stevenage , left the club and was replaced by Mark Stimson . Stimson signed goalkeeper Danny Potter and stated that Potter would be the club 's first choice goalkeeper . Julian was subsequently an unused substitute for Stevenage 's first two games of the season . However , after Potter was sent @-@ off in Stevenage 's home game against Crawley Town , Julian made his first appearance of the season , coming on as a 63rd @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 2 defeat . Julian remained first choice goalkeeper from then onwards , making 53 appearances for the club during the 2006 – 07 season as Stevenage finished eighth in the Conference National . Eight of Julian 's appearances during the season came in the club 's successful FA Trophy campaign , keeping four clean sheets in the process . He also made a number vital saves in the club 's semi @-@ final second leg against Grays Athletic , which Stevenage went on to win by a 3 – 1 aggregate scoreline . Julian started in the Final , which Stevenage won 3 – 2 against Kidderminster Harriers at Wembley Stadium in front of a crowd of 53 @,@ 262 . The win meant that Julian was part of the first team to win a competitive final at the new stadium . 
 Julian remained at Stevenage for a fourth consecutive season , starting in the club 's first game of the 2007 – 08 season , a 2 – 1 defeat at Crawley Town . He kept his first clean sheet of the season in Stevenage 's 3 – 0 home win against Weymouth . This served as the catalyst for a run of eight games without conceding a goal , equalling a Conference National record when they beat Farsley Celtic 4 – 0 at Broadhall Way . Julian went a total of 778 minutes without conceding a goal . After manager Mark Stimson left Stevenage to join Gillingham , Julian refused to sign a new contract , stating he wanted to " keep his options open for the summer " . As a result , he was transfer @-@ listed in January 2008 . Despite being on the transfer @-@ list , Julian remained first choice goalkeeper under new manager Peter Taylor until Stevenage 's 3 – 1 home defeat to Torquay United on 12 April 2008 , his final appearance of the season . He made 44 appearances during the 2007 – 08 season . During his three and a half @-@ year tenure at Stevenage , Julian made a total of 159 appearances in all competitions . 
 = = = Gillingham = = = 
 Julian joined Gillingham on a free transfer on 21 May 2008 , joining up with former Stevenage manager Mark Stimson . He made his debut for Gillingham in the club 's League Cup first round 1 – 0 home defeat against Colchester United on 12 August 2008 . Four days later , Julian made his first league start for Gillingham , playing the whole match in a 1 – 0 home loss to Luton Town . He did not make another first @-@ team appearance until November 2008 , when he kept a clean sheet in a 1 – 0 away win at Macclesfield Town . A week later , he kept another clean sheet as Gillingham beat Bury 1 – 0 at Gigg Lane in the FA Cup . After six weeks without a first @-@ team appearance , Julian played in Gillingham 's 2 – 0 away loss at Dagenham & Redbridge . His next first @-@ team appearance was five months later , playing in a 1 – 0 away victory at Rochdale , with Gillingham having already secured a play @-@ off place . It was Julian 's last appearance of the 2008 – 09 campaign as Gillingham secured promotion back to League One after a 1 – 0 play @-@ off Final win against Shrewsbury Town . He made six appearances during his first season with the club , keeping three clean sheets . 
 Ahead of the 2009 – 10 campaign , manager Mark Stimson admitted he was undecided as to whether Julian or Simon Royce would start in the club 's opening fixture of the season . Julian ultimately started in the club 's 5 – 0 home win against Swindon Town on the first day of the season . After three straight defeats in the space of a week with Gillingham conceding seven goals , Julian was replaced by Royce ahead of the club 's League Cup game against Blackburn Rovers . After the game , Julian only featured twice in the space of four months , both appearances coming in Football League Trophy fixtures . Julian handed in a transfer request in November 2009 as a result of a lack of first @-@ team appearances . However , Gillingham received no offers for the player , with manager Mark Stimson saying " I haven 't had a phone call . He 's been on the loan circuit for four to six weeks and I haven 't had a call . You don 't just say I 'm on the transfer list and six teams come in for you " . He remained at Gillingham , and after appearing in Gillingham 's 2 – 1 away loss at Huddersfield Town in December 2009 , Julian remained as a first choice goalkeeper until the end of the season . The club went the whole season without an away victory , and were relegated back to League Two on the final day of the season following a 3 – 0 defeat to Wycombe Wanderers . Julian made 33 appearances during the 2009 – 10 season , keeping eight clean sheets . 
 Under the new management of Andy Hessenthaler , Julian started the 2010 – 11 season as first choice goalkeeper , starting in the club 's first game of the season , a 1 – 1 draw with Cheltenham Town on 7 August 2010 . However , similarly to the 2009 – 10 season , Julian lost his first @-@ team place after a winless run at the start of the campaign . New signing Lance Cronin impressed in an away draw against Morecambe , and kept Julian out of the first @-@ team for five weeks . After Gillingham 's 7 – 4 away loss at Accrington Stanley , Julian regained his first @-@ team place , playing in a 2 – 1 home win against Stockport County on 9 October 2010 . Julian was part of the side that ended Gillingham 's 35 game winless away streak when they won 1 – 0 against Oxford United at the Kassam Stadium on 20 November 2010 , making a number of key saves during the game . He remained as first choice goalkeeper throughout the season as Gillingham finished in eighth position in League Two , narrowly missing out on a play @-@ off place after losing three out of their last four games . Julian made 41 appearances for Gillingham in all competitions during the 2010 – 11 season , keeping 12 clean sheets . Despite being the club 's first choice goalkeeper during the campaign , Julian was told that he no longer featured in the club 's plans , and was subsequently released on 11 May 2011 . He made 80 appearances in all competitions for Gillingham during the three years he spent at the club . 
 = = = Return to Stevenage = = = 
 In June 2011 , Julian re @-@ joined his former club , now renamed simply Stevenage , on a free transfer , three years after leaving the club . The move meant that Julian would be playing under the management of Graham Westley once more , who first brought Julian to Stevenage in 2005 – Westley said " Alan sees the opportunity in the long term and we all know how much quality he will bring into the squad . He is a different type of character but another man that you would happily go into the trenches with " . On signing for Stevenage , Julian said " I had a great time at Stevenage before and coming back now and we are in League One , it is a dream come true " . As a result of Chris Day dislocating his finger , Julian started in the club 's first game of the 2011 – 12 campaign , keeping a clean sheet in Stevenage 's 0 – 0 home draw against Exeter City . He played the first three games of the season , before first choice goalkeeper Chris Day returned from injury . Julian made just two further appearances during the campaign ; in a 2 – 2 draw with AFC Wimbledon in the Football League Trophy , and an appearance as a second @-@ half substitute in Stevenage 's 2 – 2 home draw against Huddersfield Town . He was released by Stevenage when his contract expired in May 2012 . 
 = = = Newport County = = = 
 In June 2012 , Julian joined Conference National side Newport County on a free transfer . In Newport 's first pre @-@ season game ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , away to Caldicot Town , Julian suffered a knee ligament injury . He subsequently missed the first three months of the season , before eventually making his first @-@ team debut for Newport on 17 November 2012 , in a 3 – 1 home defeat to Hyde . Julian went on to make eleven appearances during a campaign in which Newport would return to the Football League after a 25 @-@ year absence following the club 's 2 – 0 play @-@ off final victory over Wrexham in May 2013 . 
 = = = Dartford = = = 
 He was released by Newport at the end of the season , and subsequently signed for Dartford . On securing the signing of Julian , Dartford manager Tony Burman stated — " After meeting Alan a couple of times , I was impressed with his professionalism and I am looking forward to having someone of his experience here at Dartford " . Julian was voted Dartford 's player of the season for the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = = Sutton United = = = 
 Following his departure from Dartford , Julian signed for Sutton United . However , following an injury in pre @-@ season , Julian found opportunities limited , before eventually making 14 league appearances . He eventually left the club along with fellow goalkeeper Tom Lovelock in January 2015 . 
 = = = Bromley = = = 
 Soon after , he joined Sutton 's league rivals Bromley . He made his debut for the club in a 2 – 1 away win over Basingstoke Town . 
 = = International career = = 
 Julian has played once for the Northern Ireland U21 side , playing in a 0 – 0 draw against Switzerland U21 in August 2004 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Stevenage 
 FA Trophy ( 1 ) : 2006 – 07 
 Newport County 
 Conference National play @-@ offs ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 Individual 
 Stevenage Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 Dartford Player of the Year ( 1 ) : 2013 – 14 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 9th May 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Raoul Wallenberg = 
 Raoul Gustaf Wallenberg ( 4 August 1912 – disappeared 17 January 1945 ) was a Swedish architect , businessman , diplomat and humanitarian . He is widely celebrated for saving tens of thousands of Jews in Nazi @-@ occupied Hungary during the Holocaust from German Nazis and Hungarian Fascists during the later stages of World War II . While serving as Sweden 's special envoy in Budapest between July and December 1944 , Wallenberg issued protective passports and sheltered Jews in buildings designated as Swedish territory . 
 On 17 January 1945 , during the Siege of Budapest by the Red Army , Wallenberg was detained by SMERSH on suspicion of espionage and subsequently disappeared . He was later reported to have died on 17 July 1947 while imprisoned by communist authorities and KGB secret police in the Lubyanka , the KGB headquarters and affiliated prison in Moscow . The motives behind Wallenberg 's arrest and imprisonment by the Soviet government , along with questions surrounding the circumstances of his death and his possible ties to US intelligence , remain mysterious and are the subject of continued speculation . 
 Due to his courageous actions on behalf of the Hungarian Jews , Raoul Wallenberg has been the subject of numerous humanitarian honors in the decades following his presumed death . In 1981 , U.S. Congressman Tom Lantos , himself one of those saved by Wallenberg , sponsored a bill making Wallenberg an Honorary Citizen of the United States . He was the second person ever to receive this honor , after Winston Churchill ( and unlike Churchill , neither of his parents had been born in the United States ) . Wallenberg is also an honorary citizen of Canada , Hungary , Australia and Israel . Israel has also designated Wallenberg one of the Righteous Among the Nations . Monuments have been dedicated to him , and streets have been named after him throughout the world . A Raoul Wallenberg Committee of the United States was created in 1981 to " perpetuate the humanitarian ideals and the nonviolent courage of Raoul Wallenberg . " It gives the Raoul Wallenberg Award annually to recognize persons who carry out those goals . Postage stamps have been issued in his honour by Australia , Hungary , Sweden , Canada and the United States . On 26 July 2012 , he was awarded a Congressional Gold Medal by the United States Congress " in recognition of his achievements and heroic actions during the Holocaust . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wallenberg was born in 1912 in <unk> , near Stockholm , where his maternal grandparents , professor Per Johan Wising and his wife Sophie Wising , had built a summer house in 1882 . His paternal grandfather , Gustaf Wallenberg , was a diplomat and envoy to Tokyo , Istanbul and Sofia . 
 His parents , who married in 1911 , were Raoul Oscar Wallenberg ( 1888 – 1912 ) , a Swedish naval officer , and Maria " Maj " Sofia Wising ( 1891 – 1979 ) . His father died of cancer three months before he was born , and his maternal grandfather died of pneumonia three months after his birth . His mother and grandmother , now both suddenly widows , raised him together . In 1918 , his mother married Fredrik von Dardel ; they had a son , Guy von Dardel , and a daughter , Nina Lagergren . 
 After high school and his compulsory eight months in the Swedish military , Wallenberg 's paternal grandfather sent him to study in Paris . He spent one year there , and then , in 1931 , he matriculated at the University of Michigan in the United States to study architecture . Although the Wallenberg family was rich , he worked at odd jobs in his free time and joined other young male students as a passenger rickshaw handler at Chicago 's Century of Progress . He used his vacations to explore the United States , with hitchhiking being his preferred method of travel . About his experiences , he wrote to his grandfather saying , " When you travel like a hobo , everything ’ s different . You have to be on the alert the whole time . You ’ re in close contact with new people every day . <unk> gives you training in diplomacy and tact . " 
 Wallenberg was aware of his one @-@ sixteenth Jewish ancestry , and proud of it . It came from his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather ( his maternal grandmother 's grandfather ) Michael <unk> , who immigrated to Stockholm in 1780 . Professor <unk> <unk> ( one of the leading Swedish philosophers ) recalls a conversation with Raoul dating back to 1930 , when they were together in an army hospital during military service : 
 We had many long and intimate conversations . He was full of ideas and plans for the future . Although I was a good deal older - you could choose when to do your service - I was enormously impressed by him . He was proud of his partial Jewish ancestry and , as I recall , must have exaggerated it somewhat . I remember him saying , ' A person like me , who is both a Wallenberg and half @-@ Jewish , can never be defeated ' . 
 He graduated from university in 1935 , but upon his return to Sweden , he found his American degree did not qualify him to practice as an architect . Later that year , his grandfather arranged a job for him in Cape Town , South Africa , in the office of a Swedish company that sold construction material . After six months in South Africa , he took a new job at a branch office of the Holland Bank in Haifa . He returned to Sweden in 1936 and obtained a job in Stockholm with the help of his uncle and godfather , Jacob Wallenberg , at the Central European Trading Company , an export @-@ import company trading between Stockholm and central Europe , owned by <unk> Lauer , a Hungarian Jew . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Beginning in 1938 , the Kingdom of Hungary , under the regency of Miklós Horthy , passed a series of anti @-@ Jewish measures modeled on the so @-@ called Nuremberg Race Laws enacted in Germany by the Nazis in 1935 . Like their German counterparts , the Hungarian laws focused heavily on restricting Jews from certain professions , reducing the number of Jews in government and public service jobs , and prohibiting intermarriage . Because of this , Wallenberg 's business associate , Kalman Lauer , found it increasingly difficult to travel to his native Hungary , which was moving still deeper into the German orbit , becoming a member of the Axis powers in November 1940 and later joining the German @-@ led invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 . Out of necessity Wallenberg became Lauer 's personal representative , traveling to Hungary to conduct business on Lauer 's behalf and also to look in on members of Lauer 's extended family who remained in Budapest . He soon learned to speak Hungarian , and from 1941 made increasingly frequent travels to Budapest . Within a year , Wallenberg was a joint owner and the International Director of the company . In this capacity Wallenberg also made several business trips to Germany and Occupied @-@ France during the early years of World War II . It was during these trips that Wallenberg was able to closely observe the Nazis ' bureaucratic and administrative methods , knowledge which would prove quite valuable to him later . 
 Meanwhile , the situation in Hungary had begun to deteriorate as the tide of the war began to turn decisively against Germany and its allies . Following the catastrophic Axis defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad ( in which Hungarian troops fighting alongside German forces suffered a staggering 84 % casualty rate ) the regime of Miklos Horthy began secretly pursuing peace talks with the United States and the United Kingdom . Upon learning of Horthy 's duplicity , Adolf Hitler ordered the occupation of Hungary by German troops in March 1944 . The Wehrmacht quickly took control of the country and placed Horthy under house arrest . A pro @-@ German puppet government was installed in Budapest , with actual power resting with the German military governor , SS @-@ Brigadeführer Edmund Veesenmayer . With the Nazis now in control , the relative security from the Holocaust enjoyed by the Jews of Hungary came to an end . In April and May 1944 the Nazi regime and its accomplices began the mass deportation of Hungary 's Jews to extermination camps in Nazi @-@ occupied Poland . Under the personal leadership of SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Adolf Eichmann , who would later be tried and hanged in Israel for his major role in the implementation of the Nazis ' Final Solution , deportations took place at a rate of 12 @,@ 000 individuals per day . 
 = = = Recruitment by the War Refugee Board = = = 
 The persecution of the Jews in Hungary soon became well known abroad , unlike the full extent of the Holocaust . At the end of May 1944 , George Mantello publicized two important reports . One of the reports was probably Rabbi Chaim Michael Dov Weissmandl 's five @-@ page abridged version of the 33 @-@ page Auschwitz Protocols : both the Vrba – Wetzler report and Rosin @-@ Mordowicz report . The reports described in detail the operations of the Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau extermination camp . The second was a 6 @-@ page Hungarian report , that detailed the <unk> and deportation of 435 @,@ 000 already deported Hungarian Jews , updated to 19 June 1944 , town by town , to Auschwitz . The report 's publication resulted in Winston Churchill 's letter : " There is no doubt that this persecution of Jews in Hungary and their expulsion from enemy territory is probably the greatest and most horrible crime ever committed in the whole history of the world .... " 
 Following the report 's publication , the administration of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt turned to the newly created War Refugee Board ( WRB ) established as a result of activism by the " Bergson Group " led by Hillel Kook and later by Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau , Jr and team in search of a solution to the humanitarian crisis in Hungary . In spring 1944 , President Roosevelt dispatched US Treasury Department official Iver C. Olsen to Stockholm as a representative of the WRB . Olsen was tasked specifically by the President with finding a way to aid the Hungarian Jews . This , however , was not the sole reason for Olsen being posted to Sweden . In addition to his duties with the WRB , Olsen was also secretly functioning as the chief of currency operations for the Stockholm branch of the Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) , the United States ' wartime espionage service . 
 In search of someone willing and able to go to Budapest to organize a rescue program for the nation 's Jews , Olsen established contact with a relief committee composed of many prominent Swedish Jews led by the Swedish Chief Rabbi Marcus Ehrenpreis to locate an appropriate person to travel to Budapest under diplomatic cover and lead the rescue operation . One member of the committee was Wallenberg 's business associate Kalman Lauer . 
 The committee 's first choice to lead the mission was Count Folke Bernadotte , the vice @-@ chairman of the Swedish Red Cross and a member of the Swedish Royal Family . When Bernadotte 's proposed appointment was rejected by the Hungarians , Lauer suggested Wallenberg as a potential replacement . Olsen was introduced to Wallenberg by Lauer in June 1944 and came away from the meeting impressed and , shortly thereafter , appointed Wallenberg to lead the mission . Olsen 's selection of Wallenberg was initially met with objections from some US officials who doubted his reliability , in light of existing commercial relationships between businesses owned by the Wallenberg family and the German government . These differences were eventually overcome and the Swedish Ministry for Foreign Affairs agreed to the American request to assign Wallenberg to its legation in Budapest as part of an arrangement in which Wallenberg 's appointment was granted in exchange for a lessening of American diplomatic pressure on neutral Sweden to curtail their nation 's free @-@ trade policies toward Germany . 
 = = Mission to Budapest = = 
 When Wallenberg reached the Swedish legation in Budapest in July 1944 , the campaign against the Jews of Hungary had already been underway for several months . Between May and July 1944 , Eichmann and his associates had successfully deported over 400 @,@ 000 Jews by freight train . Of those deported all but 15 @,@ 000 were sent directly to the German Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau concentration camp in southern Poland . By the time of Wallenberg 's arrival there were only 230 @,@ 000 Jews remaining in Hungary . Together with fellow Swedish diplomat Per Anger , he issued " protective passports " ( German : Schutz @-@ Pass ) , which identified the bearers as Swedish subjects awaiting repatriation and thus prevented their deportation . Although not legal , these documents looked official and were generally accepted by German and Hungarian authorities , who sometimes were also bribed . The Swedish legation in Budapest also succeeded in negotiating with the German authorities so that the bearers of the protective passes would be treated as Swedish citizens and be exempt from having to wear the yellow badge required for Jews . 
 With the money raised by the board , Wallenberg rented 32 buildings in Budapest and declared them to be extraterritorial , protected by diplomatic immunity . He put up signs such as " The Swedish Library " and " The Swedish Research Institute " on their doors and hung oversized Swedish flags on the front of the buildings to bolster the deception . The buildings eventually housed almost 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 Sandor Ardai , one of the drivers working for Wallenberg , recounted what Wallenberg did when he intercepted a trainload of Jews about to leave for Auschwitz : 
 .. he climbed up on the roof of the train and began handing in protective passes through the doors which were not yet sealed . He ignored orders from the Germans for him to get down , then the Arrow Cross men began shooting and shouting at him to go away . He ignored them and calmly continued handing out passports to the hands that were reaching out for them . I believe the Arrow Cross men deliberately aimed over his head , as not one shot hit him , which would have been impossible otherwise . I think this is what they did because they were so impressed by his courage . After Wallenberg had handed over the last of the passports he ordered all those who had one to leave the train and walk to the caravan of cars parked nearby , all marked in Swedish colours . I don 't remember exactly how many , but he saved dozens off that train , and the Germans and Arrow Cross were so dumbfounded they let him get away with it . 
 At the height of the program , over 350 people were involved in the rescue of Jews . Sister <unk> <unk> was caught sheltering Jewish women and was killed by members of the Arrow Cross Party . Swiss diplomat Carl Lutz also issued protective passports from the Swiss embassy in the spring of 1944 ; and Italian businessman Giorgio <unk> posed as a Spanish diplomat and issued forged visas . Portuguese diplomats Sampaio Garrido and Carlos de Liz @-@ <unk> <unk> rented houses and apartments to shelter and protect refugees from deportation and murder and issued safe conducts to approximately 1 @,@ 000 Hungarian Jews . Berber Smit ( Barbara Hogg ) , the daughter of <unk> Smit ( 1892 – 1961 ) , director of N.V. Philips Budapest and a Dutch spy working for the British MI6 , also assisted Wallenberg . According to her son , she had a romance with him . Smit 's other daughter , <unk> Petronella ( 1922 – 1945 ) , died on 18 August 1945 in Bucharest . 
 Wallenberg started sleeping in a different house each night , to guard against being captured or killed by Arrow Cross Party members or by Adolf Eichmann 's men . Two days before the Soviet Army occupied Budapest , Wallenberg negotiated with both Eichmann and Major @-@ General Gerhard <unk> , the supreme commander of German forces in Hungary . Wallenberg bribed Arrow Cross Party member Pál <unk> to deliver a note in which Wallenberg persuaded the occupying Germans to prevent a Fascist plan to blow up the Budapest ghetto and kill an estimated 70 @,@ 000 Jews and cancel a final effort to organize a death march of the remaining Jews in Budapest by threatening to have them prosecuted for war crimes once the war was over . 
 People saved by Wallenberg include biochemist Lars <unk> , who was housed in the Swedish embassy , and Tom Lantos , later a member of the United States House of Representatives , who lived in one of the Swedish protective houses . 
 = = Disappearance = = 
 On 29 October 1944 , elements of the 2nd Ukrainian Front under Marshal Rodion Malinovsky launched an offensive against Budapest and by late December the city had been successfully encircled by Soviet forces . Despite this the German commander of Budapest , SS Lieutenant General Karl Pfeffer @-@ <unk> , refused all offers to surrender , setting in motion a protracted and bloody siege of Budapest . At the height of the fighting , on 17 January 1945 , Wallenberg was called to General Malinovsky 's headquarters in Debrecen to answer allegations that he was engaged in espionage . Wallenberg 's last recorded words were , " I 'm going to Malinovsky 's ... whether as a guest or prisoner I do not know yet . " Documents recovered in 1993 from previously secret Soviet military archives and published in the Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet show that an order for Wallenberg 's arrest was issued by Deputy Commissar for Defence ( and future Soviet Premier ) Nikolai Bulganin and transmitted to Malinovsky 's headquarters on the day of Wallenberg 's disappearance . In 2003 , a review of Soviet wartime correspondences indicated that Vilmos Böhm , a Hungarian politician who was also a Soviet intelligence agent , may have provided Wallenberg 's name to the SMERSH as a person to detain for possible involvement in espionage . 
 Information about Wallenberg after his detention is mostly speculative ; there were many witnesses who claim to have met him during his imprisonment . Wallenberg was transported by train from Debrecen , through Romania , to Moscow . The Soviet authorities may have moved him to Moscow in the hope of exchanging him for defectors in Sweden . Vladimir Dekanozov notified the Swedish government on 16 January 1945 that Wallenberg was under the protection of Soviet authorities . On 21 January 1945 , Wallenberg was transferred to Lubyanka prison and held in cell 123 with fellow prisoner Gustav Richter , formerly a police attaché at the German embassy in Romania . Richter testified in Sweden in 1955 that Wallenberg was interrogated once for about an hour and a half , in early February 1945 . On 1 March 1945 , Richter was moved from his cell and never saw Wallenberg again . 
 On 8 March 1945 , Soviet @-@ controlled Hungarian radio announced that Wallenberg and his driver had been murdered on their way to Debrecen , suggesting that they had been killed by the Arrow Cross Party or the Gestapo . Sweden 's foreign minister , <unk> <unk> , and its ambassador to the Soviet Union , <unk> Söderblom , wrongly assumed that they were dead . In April 1945 , W. Averell Harriman then of the U.S. State Department offered the Swedish government help in inquiring about Wallenberg ’ s fate , but the offer was declined . Söderblom met with Vyacheslav Molotov and Stalin in Moscow on 15 June 1946 . Söderblom , still believing Wallenberg to be dead , ignored talk of an exchange for Russian defectors in Sweden . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 6 February 1957 , the Soviet government released a document dated 17 July 1947 , which stated " I report that the prisoner Wallenberg who is well @-@ known to you , died suddenly in his cell this night , probably as a result of a heart attack or heart failure . Pursuant to the instructions given by you that I personally have Wallenberg under my care , I request approval to make an autopsy with a view to establishing cause of death ... I have personally notified the minister and it has been ordered that the body be cremated without autopsy . " The document was signed by <unk> , then the head of the Lubyanka prison infirmary , and addressed to Viktor <unk> , the Soviet minister of state security . In 1989 , Wallenberg 's personal belongings were returned to his family , including his passport and cigarette case . Soviet officials said they found the materials when they were upgrading the shelves in a store room . 
 In 1991 , Vyacheslav Nikonov was charged by the Russian government to investigate Wallenberg 's fate . He concluded that Wallenberg died in 1947 , executed while a prisoner in Lubyanka . He may have been a victim of the C @-@ 2 poison ( <unk> @-@ choline @-@ chloride ) tested at the poison laboratory of the Soviet secret services . 
 In Moscow in 2000 , Alexander Nikolaevich Yakovlev announced that Wallenberg had been executed in 1947 in Lubyanka prison . He claimed that Vladimir Kryuchkov , the former Soviet secret police chief , told him about the shooting in a private conversation . The statement did not explain why Wallenberg was killed or why the government had lied about it . General Pavel <unk> claimed that Raoul Wallenberg died after being poisoned by Grigory <unk> , a notorious NKVD assassin . In 2000 , Russian prosecutor Vladimir Ustinov signed a verdict posthumously rehabilitating Wallenberg and his driver , <unk> , as " victims of political repression " . A number of files pertinent to Wallenberg were turned over to the chief rabbi of Russia by the Russian government in September 2007 . The items were slated to be housed at the Jewish Museum and Tolerance Center in Moscow , which opened in 2012 . 
 = = = Disputes regarding his death = = = 
 Several former prisoners have claimed to have seen Wallenberg after his reported death in 1947 . In February 1949 , former German Colonel Theodor von <unk> , a prisoner of war , provided evidentiary statements concerning Wallenberg . While in the transit camp in Kirov , en route to <unk> , <unk> encountered a prisoner with his own special guard and dressed in civilian clothes . The prisoner claimed that he was a Swedish diplomat and that he was there " through a great error " . 
 Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal searched for Wallenberg and collected several testimonies . For example , British businessman Greville Wynne , who was imprisoned in the Lubyanka prison in 1962 for his connection to KGB defector Oleg <unk> , stated he talked to , but could not see the face of , a man who claimed to be a Swedish diplomat . Efim ( or Yefim ) <unk> claims to have seen Wallenberg on Wrangel Island in 1962 . An eyewitness asserted that she had seen Wallenberg in the 1960s in a Soviet prison . 
 During a private conversation about the conditions of detention in Soviet prisons at a party reception in the mid @-@ 1970s , a KGB general is reported to have said that " conditions could not be that harsh , given that in Lubyanka prison there is some foreign prisoner who had been there now for almost three decades . " 
 The last reported sightings of Wallenberg were by two independent witnesses who said they had evidence that he was in a prison in November 1987 . John Farkas was a resistance fighter during World War II and was the last man claiming to have seen Wallenberg alive . Farkas ' son has stated that there have been sightings of Wallenberg " up into the 1980s in Russian prisons and psychiatric hospitals . " 
 Raoul Wallenberg 's half @-@ brother , Professor Guy von Dardel , a well @-@ known physicist , retired from CERN , was dedicated to finding out his half @-@ brother 's fate . He traveled to the Soviet Union about fifty times for discussions and research , including an examination of the Vladimir prison records . Over the years , Professor von Dardel had compiled a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ page archive of interviews , journal articles , letters , and other documents related to his quest . In 1991 , he initiated a Swedish @-@ Russian working group to search eleven separate military and government archives from the former Soviet Union for information about Wallenberg 's fate , but the group was not able to find conclusive information . Many , including Professor von Dardel and his daughters Louise and Marie , do not accept the various versions of Wallenberg 's death . They continue to request that the archives in Russia , Sweden and Hungary be opened to impartial researchers . 
 In 2012 Russian lieutenant @-@ general Vasily <unk> , head of the registration branch of the Russian Federal Security Service said that the Wallenberg case is still open . He dismissed allegations of a continuing coverup ; referring to the legacy Soviet agency from which his department sprang , <unk> said : " This is another state and a different special service . " 
 = = = Declared death in absentia = = = 
 On 29 March 2016 , an announcement was made by the Swedish Tax Agency that a petition to have Wallenberg declared dead in absentia had been submitted . It stated that if he does not report to the Tax Agency before 14 October 2016 , he will be declared dead legally : " Raoul Wallenberg <unk> <unk> 7 § ( 2005 : 130 ) om <unk> att <unk> den 14 <unk> 2016 <unk> sig hos <unk> . " 
 = = Connection to US intelligence = = 
 In May 1996 the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) released thousands of previously classified documents regarding Raoul Wallenberg , in response to requests filed under the Freedom of Information Act . The documents , along with an investigation conducted by the newsmagazine US News and World Report , appeared to confirm the long @-@ held suspicion that Wallenberg was an American intelligence asset during his time in Hungary . In addition to Wallenberg 's name appearing on a roster found in the National Archives which listed the names of operatives associated with the CIA 's wartime predecessor , the Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) , the documents also included a 1954 memo from an anonymous CIA source that identified a Hungarian @-@ exile living in Stockholm who , according to the author : " assisted … in inserting <unk> [ sic ] Wallenberg into Hungary during WWII as an agent of OSS . " Another declassified memorandum written in 1990 by the curator of the CIA 's Historical Intelligence Collection William <unk> , characterized the conclusion that Wallenberg was working for the OSS while in Budapest as being " essentially correct " . 
 More telling was a communique sent on 7 November 1944 by the OSS , Secret Intelligence Branch in Bari , Italy which apparently acknowledged that Wallenberg was acting as an unofficial liaison between the OSS and the Hungarian Independence Movement ( MFM ) , an underground anti @-@ Nazi resistance organization . The OSS message notes Wallenberg 's contacts with Geza Soos , a high @-@ ranking MFM leader and further explains that Soos " may only be contacted " through the Swedish legation in Budapest , which was Wallenberg 's workplace and also served as the operational center for his attempts to aid the Hungarian Jews . The same message 's assertion that Wallenberg " will know if he ( Soos ) is not in Budapest " is also curious , in that by November 1944 Soos was in hiding and knowledge of his whereabouts would only have been available to individuals closely involved with the MFM . This conclusion is given further weight by additional evidence suggesting that communications from the MFM to US intelligence were transmitted first to Stockholm and then relayed to Washington via Iver C. Olsen , the American OSS operative who initially recruited Wallenberg to go to Budapest in June 1944 . 
 This particular disclosure has given rise to speculation as to whether , in addition to his efforts to rescue the Hungarian Jews , Wallenberg may have also been pursuing a parallel clandestine mission aimed at politically destabilizing Hungary ’ s pro @-@ Nazi government on behalf of the OSS . This would also seem to add some credence to the potential explanation that it was his association with US intelligence that led to Wallenberg being targeted by Soviet authorities in January 1945 . Several other humanitarians who had helped refugees during World War II disappeared behind the Iron Curtain in the period 1949 / 50 , several years after Wallenberg ’ s disappearance . OSS ties may have been of interest to the Soviets , but are not a complete explanation because some of those detained , i.e. Hermann Field and Herta Field , had not worked for the OSS . All of these humanitarians , however , like Wallenberg , had interacted with a large number of anti @-@ fascist and socialist refugees during the War , and this experience was used in the Stalin regime ’ s factional politics and show trials . 
 = = Family = = 
 In 2009 , reporter Joshua Prager wrote an article in the Wall Street Journal profiling the long @-@ term toll that Raoul Wallenberg 's disappearance had on his family . His mother Maj and his stepfather Fredrik von Dardel spent the rest of their lives searching for their son . They both committed suicide by overdosing on pills two days apart in 1979 . Their daughter Nina Lagergren , Raoul 's half @-@ sister , attributed their suicide to their despair about never finding their son . Lagergren and Raoul 's half @-@ brother Guy von Dardel established organizations and worked to find their brother or confirmation of his death . At the request of their parents , they were to assume he was alive until the year 2000 . 
 Nina 's daughter , <unk> Maria Lagergren , married Kofi Annan , former secretary general of the United Nations , and is active in many humanitarian efforts . Another of Wallenberg 's nieces , Louise von Dardel , is the main activist in the family and dedicates much of her time to speaking about Wallenberg and lobbying various countries to help uncover information about her uncle . The extended Wallenberg family remains an influential part of Swedish society as major shareholders in banks and corporations including Saab and Scandinavian Airlines . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Wallenberg was nominated twice for the Nobel Peace Prize , in 1948 by more than 50 qualified nominators and in 1949 by a single nominator At the time , the prize could be awarded posthumously , but the concept of such awards was controversial . 
 = = = Argentina = = = 
 In Buenos Aires , there is a monument in honour of Wallenberg at a park . It is a replica of the London monument by Philip Jackson , was unveiled in 1998 and can be seen from the Figueroa <unk> Avenue , in Recoleta neighbourhood . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 In Melbourne , a small memorial in honour of Wallenberg stands at the Jewish Holocaust Museum and Research Centre ; a monument by the sculptor Karl Duldig dedicated to him is at Kew Junction on the corner of Princess Street and High Street , Kew ; and a tree and memorial seat are in Carlisle St at St Kilda Town Hall . The Australian Centre for Clinical <unk> in Melbourne adopted the name ' The Raoul Wallenberg Centre ' on the occasion of Raoul Wallenberg 's 89th birthday . In Sydney are a Raoul Wallenberg garden and sculpture in Woollahra , and a statue inside the Jewish Museum of Australia . Commemorative trees have been planted in front of the federal Parliament and in many other locations . 
 Established in 1985 , Raoul Wallenberg Unit of B 'nai B 'rith in Melbourne , Australia , together with Max Stern & Co , a leading stamp dealer in Melbourne , and Australia Post , released a limited edition Raoul Wallenberg Stamp Sheet and Envelope Set to mark the Unit 's 25th anniversary in 2010 . The Stamp Sheet shows a photo of Raoul Wallenberg together with a brief outline of his life , a monument in honour of Raoul Wallenberg by artist , Karl Duldig , in the Raoul Wallenberg Garden at Kew Junction , Melbourne , and ten 60 cent Australia Post stamps with tabs of Raoul Wallenberg from early childhood to adult soldier . The Envelope has a transparent front to show the Stamp Sheet ; a <unk> is shown on the back accompanied by an explanation . 
 To commemorate the Centenary Year , a limited number of the Raoul Wallenberg Stamp Sheet were stamped with a special Centenary cancellation . These are available from Raoul Wallenberg Unit of B 'nai B 'rith in Melbourne . 
 Raoul Wallenberg Unit requested clergy around the world to speak about Raoul Wallenberg and his heroic deeds - ' One Person can Make a Difference ' - from their pulpits over the weekend 3 – 5 August 2012 which coincided with the date of his 100th birthday , 4 August 2012 . 
 Raoul Wallenberg Reserve in the neighbourhood of <unk> in Perth was dedicated in honour of Raoul Wallenberg . The small park is located in close proximity to many of Perth 's Jewish institutions including a Jewish Day School , aged care facility , community centre , sports club and orthodox synagogue . 
 Wallenberg was named Australia 's first honorary citizen in April 2013 , during his centenary year . Frank Vajda AM was saved by Wallenberg in 1944 from the pro @-@ Nazi Arrow Cross Party and campaigned for decades for him to be recognised with the award . A ceremony at Government House , Canberra , to mark the occasion was held on 6 May 2013 , and was attended by Governor @-@ General Quentin Bryce AC CVO , Prime Minister Julia Gillard , and Opposition Leader Tony Abbott . Vajda also attended the ceremony , as did the son of World War II resistance fighter John Farkas , who was the last person known to have seen Wallenberg alive . George Farkas described the award as " recognition that some people can do unbelievable good in the face of reprehensible evil " . 
 A 70 cent Raoul Wallenberg postage stamp and associated philatelic items were released by Australia Post on 5 October 2015 , one of three to by honoured in this manner by Australia ; the other two are Mother Teresa and Nelson Mandela . 
 = = = Austria = = = 
 In the 22nd district of Vienna a street was named " Raoul @-@ Wallenberg @-@ <unk> " . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Wallenberg was made the first Honorary Citizen of Canada in 1985 ; and the government declared 17 January , the day he disappeared , as " Raoul Wallenberg Day " in Canada . 
 Numerous memorials , parks , and monuments honouring Wallenberg can be found across Canada , including the Raoul Wallenberg Memorial in Queen Elizabeth Park in Vancouver , Raoul Wallenberg Corner in Calgary , Raoul Wallenberg Park in Saskatoon , Parc Raoul Wallenberg in Ottawa , Ontario , and a memorial behind Christ Church Cathedral in downtown Montreal , where a bust of Wallenberg and a caged metal box , styled as a barbed @-@ wire gate , stand beside each other . The main entrance to Earl Bales Park in Toronto , Ontario is named Raoul Wallenberg Road . 
 On 17 January 2013 , which marked the 68th anniversary of Wallenberg 's arrest by Soviet troops , Canada released a postage stamp in honour of Wallenberg . 
 In 2008 , the Tanenbaum Community Hebrew Academy of Toronto added " Wallenberg " to the name of the school , thus spawning the moniker , <unk> CHAT Wallenberg Campus . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 In the center of Batumi a street was named " Raoul Wallenberg street " . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Streets were named after Wallenberg in both East and West Germany . 
 = = = Hungary = = = 
 Budapest named Wallenberg as an honorary citizen in 2003 . Several sites honor him , including Raoul Wallenberg Memorial Park , which commemorates those who saved many of the city 's Jews from deportation to extermination camps , and the building that housed the Swedish Embassy in 1945 . 
 In July 2012 , Hungary paid tribute to Raoul Wallenberg in a ceremony at Budapest 's Holocaust museum , marking 100 years since his birth . Zoltan <unk> , minister for human resources and social affairs , said that " evil must be rejected " . 
 = = = Israel = = = 
 Israel granted Wallenberg honorary citizenship in 1986 and honored him at the Yad Vashem memorial as one of the Righteous Among the Nations . Other tributes to Wallenberg in Israel include at least five streets named after him . On Raoul Wallenberg Street in Tel Aviv , a statue identical to one in Budapest was installed in 2002 ( see below ) , made by the sculptor Imre Varga . 
 = = = Peru = = = 
 A memorial to his name was made in 2013 in the capital city of Lima . Taking the form of a park , it is situated on the coast of the San Miguel District . 
 = = = Russia = = = 
 A memorial to him stands in the courtyard of the Russian <unk> Library of Foreign Languages in Moscow . In Saint Petersburg , the Institute of Special Pedagogy and Psychology bears Wallenberg 's name . 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 In 2001 , a memorial was created in Stockholm to honor Wallenberg . It was unveiled by King Carl XVI Gustaf , at a ceremony attended by then UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and his wife <unk> Maria Annan , Wallenberg 's niece At the unveiling , King Carl XVI Gustaf said Wallenberg is " a great example to those of us who want to live as fellow humans " . Kofi Annan praised him as " an inspiration for all of us to act when we can and to have the courage to help those who are suffering and in need of help " . The memorial 's design ( see photo ) has been considered inappropriate by some critics . 
 A memorial to Wallenberg was installed in Gothenburg , near <unk> ( Haga Church ) . Kofi Annan attended the unveiling ceremony . 
 = = = United Kingdom = = = 
 A monument to Raoul Wallenberg by Scottish sculptor Philip Jackson is located at Great Cumberland Place in London 's Marble Arch district , outside the Western Marble Arch Synagogue . It was unveiled by Queen Elizabeth II in 1997 , in the presence of the President of Israel , Ezer Weizman , the Secretary General of the United Nations , Kofi Annan , and survivors of the Holocaust . A separate monument stands near the Welsh National War Memorial in Cathays Park , Cardiff . A bronze briefcase monument by Gustav <unk> with the initials RW is located in the garden of the Beth Shalom Holocaust Centre near <unk> in Nottinghamshire . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The US Congress made Wallenberg an Honorary Citizen of the United States in 1981 , the second person to be so honored , after Winston Churchill . In 1985 , the portion of 15th Street , SW in Washington , D.C. on which the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum is located , was renamed Raoul Wallenberg Place by Act of Congress . 
 In 1997 , the United States Postal Service issued a stamp in his honor . Representative Tom Lantos , one of those saved by Wallenberg 's actions , said : " It is most appropriate that we honor [ him ] with a U.S. stamp . In this age devoid of heroes , Wallenberg is the archetype of a hero – one who risked his life day in and day out , to save the lives of tens of thousands of people he did not know whose religion he did not share . " 
 In Manhattan , a monument honoring him was installed on Raoul Wallenberg Walk , named in his honor , across from the headquarters of the United Nations . The Swedish consulate commissioned the piece , created by Swedish sculptor Gustav <unk> . The sculpture , Hope , is a replica of Wallenberg ’ s briefcase , a sphere , five pillars of black granite , and paving stones ( setts ) which were formerly used on the streets of the Budapest ghetto . There is also Wallenberg Forest in Riverdale , Bronx , established in 1990 and named Wallenberg Forest in 1996 . 
 Another memorial stands in front of the Art and Architecture building at the University of Michigan , where he received his architecture degree in 1935 . 
 Places named after Wallenberg include Raoul Wallenberg Traditional High School in San Francisco , the PS 194 Raoul Wallenberg School in Brooklyn , New York , Raoul Wallenberg Avenue in Trenton , New Jersey , and Raoul Wallenberg Blvd in Charleston , South Carolina . 
 Since 2005 , the International Raoul Wallenberg Foundation has campaigned to establish 5 October as Raoul Wallenberg Day throughout the United States , as this was the day Wallenberg was awarded Honorary U.S. Citizenship . By 2010 , Raoul Wallenberg Day was being observed by the states of Colorado , Connecticut , Illinois , Iowa , Maine , Maryland , Michigan , Nebraska , Nevada , New Jersey , New Mexico , West Virginia , and Wyoming . 
 Wallenberg was posthumously awarded the Train Foundation 's Civil Courage Prize , which recognizes " extraordinary heroes of conscience " . 
 On 26 July 2012 , Wallenberg was posthumously awarded a Congressional Gold Medal by the United States Congress " in recognition of his achievements and heroic actions during the Holocaust " . 
 = = Awards in his name = = 
 The Raoul Wallenberg Committee of the United States bestows the Raoul Wallenberg Award " on individuals , organizations and communities that reflect Raoul Wallenberg 's humanitarian spirit , personal courage and nonviolent action in the face of enormous odds " . 
 The University of Michigan awards the Wallenberg Medal annually to outstanding humanitarians who embody the humanitarian values and commitment of its distinguished alumnus . The first Wallenberg Medal was presented in 1990 to Elie Wiesel . The twentieth Wallenberg Medal was awarded in October 2010 to Dr. Denis <unk> . Recently , the University also established the " Wallenberg Fellowship " , which grants students $ 25 @,@ 000 to pursue humanitarian projects to better humanity . The University 's Taubman College of Architecture and Urban Planning also awards Wallenberg Scholarships to exceptional undergraduate students in their final Senior @-@ Year studio class , which is given to enable students to broaden their study of architecture to include work in distant locations , following Wallenberg 's Grandfather 's wish for him to be a " citizen of the world " . The projects which won the scholarship in recent years addressed Chinese relations , nuclear accident cleanup , and the recent thaw of US @-@ Cuban relations . The Scholarship gives out on average anywhere between $ 10 @,@ 000 to $ 20 @,@ 000 for travel @-@ related expenses . 
 The Raoul Wallenberg Academy has created the Raoul Wallenberg Prize , financed by Sweden 's Ministry of Employment . In 2013 , the jury was chaired by Olle <unk> , and the award was presented by Minister for Integration Erik <unk> . The winner of the 2013 Raoul Wallenberg Award was <unk> <unk> , who founded ' Young People against Antisemitism and Xenophobia ' , an organization dedicated to promoting collaboration and respect for all . 
 = = Schools named after him = = 
 = = = Argentina = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg Educational Center 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 The Raoul Wallenberg Integral High School 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 The Anne & Max Tanenbaum Community Hebrew Academy of Toronto Wallenberg Campus 
 Wallenberg Academy ( formerly <unk> High School ) , Montreal , Quebec . 
 = = = Ecuador = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg Kindergarten & Primary School 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Raoul @-@ Wallenberg Schule , Dorsten 
 Raoul @-@ Wallenberg @-@ Oberschule , Berlin 
 = = = Hungary = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg <unk> <unk> és Gimnázium 
 = = = Sweden = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg School Bromma 
 Raoul Wallenberg Preschool Bromma 
 Raoul Wallenberg Preschool <unk> 
 Raoul Wallenberg School Uppsala 
 Raoul Wallenberg Institute of Human Rights and Humanitarian Law ( Lund University ) 
 = = = Uruguay = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg Lyceum 
 = = = United States = = = 
 P.S. 194 Raoul Wallenberg School in Brooklyn , New York 
 Raoul Wallenberg Traditional High School in San Francisco 
 Raoul Wallenberg Avenue , Trenton , New Jersey . 
 Raoul Wallenberg Playground , Washington Heights NYC 
 = = = Venezuela = = = 
 Raoul Wallenberg Pre @-@ School Educational Unit 
 = = Films = = 
 A number of films have been made of Wallenberg 's life , including the 1985 made @-@ for @-@ television movie Wallenberg : A Hero 's Story ( 1985 ) , starring Richard Chamberlain , the 1990 Swedish production Good Evening , Mr. Wallenberg , featuring Stellan Skarsgård , and various documentaries , such as Raoul Wallenberg : Buried Alive ( 1984 ) , the AFI Award winning Raoul Wallenberg , Between The Lines ( 1985 ) and Searching for Wallenberg ( 2003 ) . He also appears in the Spanish television series El <unk> de Budapest and is played by Iván <unk> . In 2006 , the film " Raoul Wallenberg @-@ l 'ange de Budapest " ( translated by Nigel Spencer as " Raoul Wallenberg : the Angel of Budapest " ) , featuring relatives and the Winnipeg lawyer still piloting inquiries into his case , was released in Canada and broadcast on the Bravo ! network . 
 = = Art = = 
 He is featured prominently in the work of esteemed painter and Holocaust survivor Alice Lok <unk> . Her father was saved by Wallenberg . 
 = = Operas = = 
 Wallenberg . Opera premiered at the <unk> Dortmund on 5 May <unk> Erkki @-@ Sven <unk> , Libretto of Lutz Hübner 
 Raoul . Opera premiered at the Theater Bremen on 21 February <unk> Gershon Kingsley , Libretto of Michael <unk> 
 = = Song = = 
 Irish musician Andy Irvine wrote the song " Raoul Wallenberg " which features on his album Rude Awakening . 
 = The Time Traveler 's Wife = 
 The Time Traveler 's Wife is the debut novel of American author Audrey Niffenegger , published in 2003 . It is a love story about a man with a genetic disorder that causes him to time travel unpredictably , and about his wife , an artist , who has to cope with his frequent absences and dangerous experiences . Niffenegger , frustrated in love when she began the work , wrote the story as a metaphor for her failed relationships . The tale 's central relationship came to her suddenly and subsequently supplied the novel 's title . The novel , which has been classified as both science fiction and romance , examines issues of love , loss , and free will . In particular , it uses time travel to explore miscommunication and distance in relationships , while also investigating deeper existential questions . 
 As a first @-@ time novelist , Niffenegger had trouble finding a literary agent . She eventually sent the novel to MacAdam / Cage unsolicited and , after an auction took place for the rights , Niffenegger selected them as her publishers . The book became a bestseller after an endorsement from author and family friend Scott Turow on The Today Show , and as of March 2009 had sold nearly 2 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States and the United Kingdom . Many reviewers were impressed with Niffenegger 's unique perspectives on time travel . Some praised her characterization of the couple , applauding their emotional depth ; others criticized her writing style as melodramatic and the plot as emotionally trite . The novel won the Exclusive Books <unk> Prize and a British Book Award . A film version was released in August 2009 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Using alternating first @-@ person perspectives , the novel tells the stories of Henry <unk> ( born 1963 ) , a librarian at the Newberry Library in Chicago , and his wife , Clare Anne Abshire ( born 1971 ) , an artist who makes paper sculptures . Henry has a rare genetic disorder , which comes to be known as Chrono @-@ Impairment , that causes him to involuntarily travel through time . When 20 @-@ year @-@ old Clare meets 28 @-@ year @-@ old Henry at the Newberry Library in 1991 at the opening of the novel , he has never seen her before , although she has known him most of her life . 
 Henry begins time traveling at the age of five , jumping forward and backward relative to his own timeline . When he leaves , where he goes , or how long his trips will last are all beyond his control . His destinations are tied to his subconscious — he most often travels to places and times related to his own history . Certain stimuli such as stress can trigger Henry 's time traveling ; he often goes jogging to keep calm and remain in the present . He also searches out pharmaceuticals in the future that may be able to help control his time traveling . He also seeks the advice of a geneticist , Dr. Kendrick . Henry cannot take anything with him into the future or the past ; he always arrives naked and then struggles to find clothing , shelter , and food . He amasses a number of survival skills including lock @-@ picking , self @-@ defense , and pickpocketing . Much of this he learns from older versions of himself . 
 Once their timelines converge " naturally " at the library — their first meeting in his chronology — Henry starts to travel to Clare 's childhood and adolescence in South Haven , Michigan , beginning in 1977 when she is six years old . On one of his early visits ( from her perspective ) , Henry gives her a list of the dates he will appear and she writes them in a diary so she will remember to provide him with clothes and food when he arrives . During another visit , he inadvertently reveals that they will be married in the future . Over time they develop a close relationship . At one point , Henry helps Clare frighten and humiliate a boy who abused her . Clare is last visited in her youth by Henry in 1989 , on her eighteenth birthday , during which they make love for the first time . They are then separated for two years until their meeting at the library . 
 Clare and Henry marry , but Clare has trouble bringing a pregnancy to term because of the genetic anomaly Henry may presumably be passing on to the fetus . After six miscarriages , Henry wishes to save Clare further pain and has a vasectomy . However a version of Henry from the past visits Clare one night and they make love ; she subsequently gives birth to a daughter , Alba . Alba is diagnosed with Chrono @-@ Impairment as well but , unlike Henry , she has some control over her destinations when she time travels . Before she is born , Henry travels to the future and meets his ten @-@ year @-@ old daughter on a school field trip and learns that he dies when she is five years old . 
 When he is 43 , during what is to be his last year of life , Henry time travels to a Chicago parking garage on a frigid winter night where he is unable to find shelter . As a result of the hypothermia and frostbite he suffers , his feet are amputated when he returns to the present . Henry and Clare both know that without the ability to escape when he time travels , Henry will certainly die within his next few jumps . On New Year 's Eve 2006 Henry time travels into the middle of the Michigan woods in 1984 and is accidentally shot by Clare 's brother , a scene foreshadowed earlier in the novel . Henry returns to the present and dies in Clare 's arms . 
 Clare is devastated by Henry 's death . She later finds a letter from Henry asking her to " stop waiting " for him , but which describes a moment in her future when she will see him again . The last scene in the book takes place when Clare is 82 years old and Henry is 43 . She is waiting for Henry , as she has done most of her life . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Niffenegger is an artist who teaches at the Center for Book and Paper Arts at Columbia College Chicago , where she prepares editions of handpainted books . She produced some of her earlier works in editions of ten copies , which were sold in art galleries . However , she decided that The Time Traveler 's Wife would have to be a novel : " I got the idea for the title , and when I draw I have this big drawing table covered with brown paper , and I write ideas down on the paper . So I wrote down this title and after a while I started to think about it . I couldn 't think of a way to make it a picture book because still pictures don 't represent time very well , so I decided to write a novel . " She was intrigued by the title because " it immediately defined two people and their relationship to each other " . Niffenegger said that its source was an epigraph to J. B. Priestley 's 1964 novel Man and Time : " Clock time is our bank manager , tax collector , police inspector ; this inner time is our wife . " Drawing her central theme from this image , she says , " Henry is not only married to Clare ; he 's also married to time . " Other authors whom Niffenegger has cited as influencing the book include Richard Powers , David Foster Wallace , Henry James , and Dorothy Sayers . 
 She has said the story is a metaphor for her own failed love affairs and that " I had kind of got the idea that there 's not going to be some fabulous perfect soulmate out there for me , so I 'll just make him up . " She also drew on her parents ' marriage for inspiration — her father spent the bulk of each week traveling . Despite the story 's analogies to her own life , Niffenegger has forcefully stated that Clare is not a self @-@ portrait ; " She 's radically different . I am much more willful and headstrong . ... I don 't think I could go through a lifetime waiting for someone to appear , no matter how fascinating he was . " 
 Niffenegger began writing the novel in 1997 ; the last scene , in which an aged Clare is waiting for Henry , was written first , because it is the story 's focal point . The narrative was originally structured thematically . Responding to comments from readers of early drafts of the manuscript , Niffenegger reorganized the narrative so that it largely followed Clare 's timeline . The work was finished in 2001 . With no history of commercial publication , Niffenegger had trouble finding interested literary agents — 25 rejected the manuscript . In 2002 , she sent it unsolicited to the small , San Francisco @-@ based publisher MacAdam / Cage , where it reached Anika <unk> . <unk> , who became Niffenegger 's editor , " thought it was incredible . Right from the very beginning you feel like you are in capable hands , that this is someone who has a story to tell and who knows how to tell it . " She gave it to David Poindexter , the founder of the publishing firm , " who read it overnight and decided to buy the book " . However , Niffenegger had acquired an agent by this time , and several publishing houses in New York City were interested in the novel . The manuscript was put up for auction and MacAdam / Cage bid US $ 100 @,@ 000 , by far the largest sum it had ever offered for a book . Although another publisher outbid them , Niffenegger selected MacAdam / Cage because they were so dedicated to her work . Also , Niffenegger explains that her " own natural inclination is to go small . My background is in punk music — I 'd always pick the indie company over the giant corporation . " 
 = = Genre = = 
 Reviewers have found The Time Traveler 's Wife difficult to classify generically : some categorize it as science fiction , others as a romance . Niffenegger herself is reluctant to label the novel , saying she " never thought of it as science fiction , even though it has a science @-@ fiction premise " . In Niffenegger 's view , the story is primarily about Henry and Clare 's relationship and the struggles they endure . She has said that she based Clare and Henry 's romance on the " cerebral coupling " of Dorothy Sayers 's characters Lord Peter Wimsey and Harriet Vane . 
 Time travel stories to which the novel has been compared include Jack Finney 's Time and Again ( 1970 ) F.M. Busby 's short story " If This Is Winnetka , You Must Be Judy " and the film Somewhere in Time ( 1980 ) . Henry has been compared to Billy Pilgrim of Kurt Vonnegut 's Slaughterhouse @-@ Five ( 1969 ) . Science fiction writer Terence M. Green calls the novel a " <unk> romance " . The Time Traveler 's Wife is not as concerned with the paradoxes of time travel as is traditional science fiction . Instead , as critic Marc Mohan describes , the novel " uses time travel as a metaphor to explain how two people can feel as if they 've known each other their entire lives " . Robert Nathan 's Portrait of Jennie , as novel , or film , is another obvious comparison , although Jennie , as a ghost , travels time in one direction , not randomly . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Niffenegger identifies the themes of the novel as " mutants , love , death , amputation , sex , and time " . Reviewers have focused on love , loss , and time . As Charlie Lee @-@ Potter writes in The Independent , the novel is " an elegy to love and loss " . The love between Henry and Clare is expressed in a variety of ways , including through an analysis and history of the couple 's sex life . 
 While much of the novel shows Henry and Clare falling in love , the end is darker and " time travel becomes a means for representing arbitrariness , transience , [ and ] plain bad luck " , according to The Boston Globe 's Judith Maas . As Andrew Billen argues in The Times , " The book may even serve as a feminist analysis of marriage as a partnership in which only the male is conceded the privilege of absence . " Several reviewers noted that time travel represents relationships in which couples cannot quite communicate with each other . Natasha Walter of The Guardian describes the story 's attention to " the sense of slippage that you get in any relationship — that you could be living through a slightly different love story from the one your partner is experiencing . " She points , for example , to the section of the book which describes the first time Clare and Henry make love . She is 18 and he is 41 , already married to her in his present . After this interlude , he returns to his own time and his own Clare , who says , 
 Henry 's been gone for almost twenty @-@ four hours now , and as usual I 'm torn between thinking obsessively about when and where he might be and being pissed at him for not being here ... I hear Henry whistling as he comes up the path through the garden , into the studio . He stomps the snow off his boots and shrugs off his coat . He 's looking marvelous , really happy . My heart is racing and I take a wild guess : " May 24 , 1989 ? " " Yes , oh , yes ! " Henry scoops me up ... and swings me around . Now I 'm laughing , we 're both laughing . 
 The novel raises questions about determinism and free will . For example , critic Dan Falk asks , " Given that [ Henry 's ] journey has ' already happened , ' should he not simply be compelled to act precisely as he remembers seeing himself act ? ( Or perhaps he is compelled , and merely feels he has a choice ... ? ) . " Although Henry seemingly cannot alter the future , the characters do not become " cynical " and , according to Lee @-@ Potter , the novel demonstrates that people can be changed through love . Walter notes that there is a " quasi @-@ religious sense " to the inevitability of Henry 's and Clare 's lives and deaths . Niffenegger , however , believes that the novel does not depict destiny but rather " randomness and meaninglessness " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The hardback edition of The Time Traveler 's Wife was published in the United States in September 2003 by MacAdam / Cage and in the United Kingdom by Random House on 1 January 2004 . MacAdam / Cage initiated an " extensive marketing drive " , including advertising in The New York Times and The New Yorker and a promotional book tour by Niffenegger . As a result , the novel debuted at number nine on the New York Times bestseller list . After popular crime writer Scott Turow , whose wife is a friend of Niffenegger , endorsed it on The Today Show , the first print run of 15 @,@ 000 sold out and 100 @,@ 000 more copies were printed . In Britain , the book received a boost from its choice as a Richard & Judy book club recommendation — nearly 45 @,@ 000 copies were sold in one week . It was named the 2003 Amazon.com Book of the Year . A December 2003 article in The Observer reported that although " a tiny minority of American reviewers " felt that the novel was " gimmicky " , it was still " a publishing sensation " . At that point , the novel had been sold to publishers in 15 countries . As of March 2009 , it had sold almost 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States and 1 million in the United Kingdom . The success of The Time Traveler 's Wife prompted almost every major publishing firm to attempt to acquire Niffenegger 's second novel , Her Fearful Symmetry , which has been called " one of the most eagerly sought @-@ after works in recent publishing history " . It garnered her an advance of US $ 5 million from Scribner 's . 
 Reviewers praised Niffenegger 's characterization of Henry and Clare , particularly their emotional depth . Michelle Griffin of The Age noted that although Henry " is custom @-@ designed for the fantasy lives of bookish ladies " , his flaws , particularly his " violent , argumentative , depressive " nature , make him a strong , well @-@ rounded character . Charles <unk> wrote in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction that one of Niffenegger 's " greatest accomplishments " in the novel was her ability to convey the emotional growth of Clare and Henry in character arcs while at the same time alternating their perspectives . Stephen Amidon of The Times , however , questioned the selfishness of the central characters . 
 Most reviewers were impressed with the premise of the novel , but critical of its melodramatic style . While Griffin praised the plot and concept as " clever " , she complained that Niffenegger 's writing is usually " pedestrian " and the story at times contrived . Heidi <unk> of the National Post agreed , contending that the story has an excess of overwrought emotional moments " which never quite add up to a fully developed plot " . Writing in The Chicago Tribune , Carey Harrison praised the originality of the novel , specifically the intersection of child @-@ bearing and time travel . Despite appreciating the novel 's premise , Amidon complained that the implications of Henry 's time @-@ traveling were poorly thought out . For example , Henry has foreknowledge of the September 11 attacks but does nothing to try to prevent them . Instead , on 11 September 2001 , he gets up early " to listen to the world being normal for a little while longer " . Amidon also criticized the novel 's " overall clumsiness " , writing that Niffenegger is " a ham @-@ fisted stylist , long @-@ winded and given to sudden eruptions of cliche " . Miriam <unk> agreed to an extent , writing in The Jerusalem Post , " There are no original or even non @-@ cliched messages here . True love , Niffenegger seems to be telling us , is timeless , and can survive even the worst circumstances . ... And yet , the book is a page @-@ turner , delicately crafted and psychologically sound . " The Library Journal described the novel as " skillfully written with a blend of distinct characters and heartfelt emotions " ; it recommended that public libraries purchase multiple copies of the book . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 On September 23 , 2013 it was announced that a sequel to the novel is in the works . The sequel will focus on Henry and Clare 's daughter Alba as an adult . She finds herself in love with two different men : Zach , a normal man , and Oliver , a musician and fellow time @-@ traveler . The first 25 pages are currently available with the purchase of The Time Traveler 's Wife eBook . In February 2014 , Niffenegger estimated that the book " should be ready in 2018 or so " . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Audio book = = = 
 BBC Audio published an audio book of The Time Traveler 's Wife that was narrated by William Hope and Laurel Lefkow , described as " feisty readers " in one review . 
 <unk> also produced an unabridged version in 2003 , which is twelve hours long and narrated by Maggi @-@ Meg Reed and Christopher Burns ; their performance has been described as " sincere and passionate " . 
 The 2006 Audible / <unk> version is narrated by Fred Berman and Phoebe Strole and is 17 : 43 in length . 
 <unk> produced an unabridged version in 2008 , also narrated by Hope and Lefkow . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The film rights for The Time Traveler 's Wife were optioned by Brad Pitt 's production company Plan B Entertainment , in association with New Line Cinema , before the novel was even published . The adaptation was written by Bruce Joel Rubin and directed by Robert <unk> , and stars Rachel McAdams and Eric Bana . Filming began in September 2007 and the movie was released by Warner Bros. on 14 August 2009 . When asked about the prospect of her novel being turned into a film , Niffenegger said , " I 've got my little movie that runs in my head . And I 'm kind of afraid that will be changed or wiped out by what somebody else might do with it . And it is sort of thrilling and creepy , because now the characters have an existence apart from me . " In general , the film received mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews . For example , The New York Times wrote that the film was an " often ridiculous , awkward , unsatisfying and dour melodramatic adaptation " . 
 = Silba @-@ class landing ship @-@ minelayer = 
 The Silba class ( sometimes the Cetina class ) is a class of three landing ships , also used as minelayers , built for the Yugoslav ( JRM ) and Croatian Navy ( HRM ) during the 1980s and 1990s . The ships were built at the Brodogradilište specijalnih objekata shipyard in Split with slight differences in armament configuration between the last two ships . By the time the Croatian War of Independence started , one ship was in service with the JRM while another was being completed . 
 The one in JRM service was relocated to Montenegro where it would be commissioned with the Navy of the new FR Yugoslavia . The second ship that was captured unfinished was completed by Croatian forces and entered service with the HRM , followed by a third that was laid down by Croatia in 1993 . The two ships commissioned with the HRM remain in active service , providing assistance to civilian institutions aside from their regular military tasks . The fate of the first ship in the class remains unknown . 
 = = Development and building = = 
 The Silba class was developed by the Brodarski institut ( BI ) from Zagreb as a replacement for a large number of aging barge @-@ like landing craft based on German World War II designs ( <unk> and Siebel ) . All three ships were completed at the Brodogradilište specijalnih objekata ( BSO ) in Split , Croatia . The first one , Krk ( DBM @-@ 241 ) , was commissioned with the JRM sometime between 1986 and 1990 . The keel for the second ship that was to be named Rab ( DBM @-@ 242 ) was laid down in 1990 . As the Croatian War of Independence started , unfinished Rab was captured by Croatian forces . It was completed and launched as Cetina ( DBM @-@ 81 ) on 18 July 1992 . A third and final ship was launched on 17 September 1994 as Krka ( DBM @-@ 82 ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 These ferry @-@ like ships feature a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off design with two loading ramps located on the bow and the stern . Measuring 49 @.@ 69 m ( 163 ft 0 in ) in length , they have a 10 @.@ 2 m ( 33 ft 6 in ) beam with a 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 ft 6 in ) draft . Propulsion consists of two 1 @,@ 140 kW ( 1 @,@ 530 hp ) Burmeister & Wain Alpha Diesel <unk> <unk> VO engines mounted on two shafts , enabling them a maximum speed of 12 @.@ 5 knots ( 23 @.@ 2 km / h ; 14 @.@ 4 mph ) and a cruising speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Traveling at their cruise speed they have a range of 1 @,@ 200 – 1 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 200 – 2 @,@ 600 km ; 1 @,@ 400 – 1 @,@ 600 mi ) with a 12 @-@ day endurance . The ships are manned by a crew of 32 . 
 The Armament configuration differs between the first two ships and the last one ; DBM @-@ 241 and DBM @-@ 81 are armed with two AK @-@ 230 CIWS mounted on the sides , a single quadruple 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) M @-@ 75 gun on the stern and a single quadruple MTU @-@ 4 <unk> Strela @-@ 2M ( SA @-@ 7b " Grail " ) anti @-@ aircraft missile launcher . The interior , which features two mine rails , can be used to carry up to 152 different naval mines , six medium tanks or 300 troops with equipment , a total cargo capacity of 460 t ( 450 long tons ) . DBM @-@ 82 was completed with a different gun armament ; in place of the AK @-@ 230 , DBM @-@ 82 has two 20 mm M @-@ 71 guns on the sides and a single Bofors <unk> 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) gun on the bow . The ship was also completed as an auxiliary water carrier with a capacity of around 230 t ( 230 long tons ) of fresh water . The number of mines that DBM @-@ 82 can carry is a maximum of 114 . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 At the start of the Croatian War of Independence DBM @-@ 241 was relocated to Montenegro where it later entered service with the SR Yugoslav Navy . DBM @-@ 242 , now redesignated as DBM @-@ 81 was launched as Cetina and entered service with the Croatian Navy 19 February 1992 with Ivo <unk> in command . For the remainder of the war , Cetina was engaged in transporting troops and equipment along the coast , including supply runs for Croatian forces during Operation Maslenica in 1993 . The same year the ship participated in testing of the new MNS @-@ M90 naval mine . DBM @-@ 82 , the third and final ship of the class , was commissioned with the Croatian Navy on 9 March 1995 with Jerko <unk> in command . 
 According to publications and news reports , DBM @-@ 241 was reported operational as late as 2005 . An article published in October 2012 reported that the Egyptian Navy bought DBM @-@ 241 a year earlier . Although the advance was paid , the official handover of the ship has not happened by the time the article was published . As of March 2014 , the official website of the Armed Forces of Montenegro does not list DBM @-@ 241 among its fleet and the ships status remains unknown . The two Silba @-@ class in Croatian hands continue to see service the Navy Flotilla performing traditional naval tasks as well as support missions for civilian institutions such water supply and transporting firefighters . 
 In July 2006 Krka was damaged during an overhaul at the Šibenik Shipyard . While being lowered to the sea , the winch of the <unk> pulled out of the concrete causing the ship to fall down , creating a hole in the hull and sinking the stern . Early reports of significant damage proved to be false and the ship was repaired soon after . Out of ten crew members that were on board at the time , only one sustained minor injuries . 
 In 2015 , Krka and Cetina were tasked with transporting Croatian Army vehicles and personnel to Spain for the NATO " Trident Juncture " exercise . The ships departed the Lora Naval Base on 11 October 2015 , loaded with four Patria <unk> , two trucks , one motor vehicle and 14 soldiers scheduled to take part in the exercise . On 13 October they arrived in Catania where they rendezvoused with Andrija <unk> deployed in support of Operation Triton . The two ships made another stop at Cagliari before continuing to Spain , arriving in <unk> on 18 October after spending seven days at sea . The ships returned to the Lora Naval Base on 13 November , concluding their month long deployment during which they traversed a total of 2 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 000 kilometres ; 3 @,@ 100 miles ) . 
 = Arthur Gould ( rugby union ) = 
 Arthur Joseph " Monkey " Gould ( 10 October 1864 – 2 January 1919 ) was a Welsh international rugby union centre and fullback who was most associated as a club player with Newport Rugby Football Club . He won 27 caps for Wales , 18 as captain , and critics consider him the first superstar of Welsh rugby . A talented all @-@ round player and champion sprinter , Gould could side @-@ step and kick expertly with either foot . He never ceased practising to develop his fitness and skills , and on his death was described as " the most accomplished player of his generation " . 
 Following the withdrawal of their regular fullback , Newport RFC first selected Gould in 1882 , when he was 18 . He was never dropped from the side thereafter and played regularly until he retired in 1898 . Gould played for Newport during their " invincible " season of 1891 – 92 , when they did not lose a match , and scored a record 37 tries in Newport 's 24 @-@ game 1893 – 94 season , a club record that still stands . Gould frequently travelled due to his job as a public contractor , and consequently turned out for a number of other sides during his career , including the clubs Richmond and London Welsh , and the county side Middlesex . 
 Gould was first selected for Wales in 1885 when he played at fullback against England . He was awarded the captaincy in 1889 , by which time he was playing at centre , and led Wales to their first Home Nations Championship and Triple Crown titles in 1893 ; that tournament 's match against England established Gould as a great player and captain . By the time Gould retired he was the most capped Welsh centre , a record he held until 1980 , with 25 caps in the position . He ended his international career against England on 9 January 1897 . The game , played in front of 17 @,@ 000 supporters at Rodney Parade , was Gould 's 18th as Wales captain – a record eventually broken by Ieuan Evans in 1994 . 
 Towards the end of his career , Gould was at the centre of a controversy known as the " Gould affair " that saw Wales withdraw from international rugby for a year . The controversy centred on the support of the Welsh Football Union ( WFU ) for a testimonial for Gould on his retirement . The English Rugby Football Union and International Rugby Football Board ( IRFB ) argued that the testimonial constituted professionalism – which they claimed breached the sport 's by @-@ laws . The WFU withdrew from the IRFB in protest , rejoining a year later under the IRFB @-@ imposed condition that Gould would not represent Wales again . He worked as a brewery representative after retiring from rugby , and died of an internal haemorrhage in 1919 at the age of 54 . 
 = = Family and early years = = 
 Arthur Joseph Gould was born into a sporting family in Newport , Monmouthshire , on 10 October 1864 to Joseph and Elizabeth . His father , from Oxford , England , moved to Newport to find work , setting up his own brass foundry business . Joseph was also an ardent sportsman , playing for the local cricket team . 
 Gould 's five brothers were all notable rugby players and athletes . His brother Bob was a forward who played 136 times for Newport Rugby Football Club , whom he captained in the 1886 – 87 season . Bob was also capped 11 times for Wales between 1882 and 1887 , and captained his country once , versus Scotland in 1887 . A younger brother , Bert , was a centre who played three times for Wales – he appeared with Gould in the Welsh team that won the Triple Crown for the first time in 1893 . His other brothers – Harry , Gus and Wyatt – all played rugby for Newport . Wyatt captained Newport in 1905 – 06 , and Harry played for them in their inaugural season of 1875 – 76 . For the first 29 seasons of its existence , Newport RFC always had at least one of the Gould brothers in the team . Wyatt played for the club until 1907 ; he also ran the 400 m hurdles for Great Britain in the 1908 Summer Olympics . 
 The young Gould often climbed trees , and thus acquired the childhood nickname " Monkey " , which was soon contracted by most to " Monk " . Like his brother Wyatt , he was a keen athlete and made £ 1 @,@ 000 during his years as a rugby player by entering track and field meets . A county champion sprinter and hurdler , Gould finished third in the Amateur Athletic Association 120 @-@ yard hurdles in 1887 and 1893 . 
 = = Rugby career = = 
 = = = Club and county history = = = 
 At the age of 14 Gould captained the Newport Junior team , and later played a few games for the Third XV . Gould was drafted into the First XV – the senior team – as a fullback at the age of 18 . On 18 November 1882 Newport had a home fixture against Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare at Rodney Parade . The Newport groundsman , John Butcher , had been sent by the club to collect the regular fullback who had not appeared for the game . Gould , who was returning from a youth match , saw Butcher outside the missing fullback 's home and approached the groundsman to discover that the player was at a funeral . Butcher offered Gould the position instead , and then the groundsman successfully persuaded the club captain to play him . Gould ran in two of his team 's three tries after disregarding the instructions of his captain , Charlie Newman , who kept shouting for Gould to " Kick , kick ! " After this , he was not dropped by Newport until his retirement in 1898 . 
 As rugby was then an exclusively amateur sport , Gould and his brother Bob travelled Britain working as public works contractors . During this time he entered open athletic meets and played for various English rugby teams including the Southampton Trojans , and from 1887 was a regular member of the London side Richmond . In 1885 Gould was invited to play for the newly formed Welsh exiles team London Welsh . London Scottish F.C. had been founded for Scottish players working or studying in the city , but until this time a London club for Welsh players had not existed . The side 's first game , a trial match , was played on 21 October 1885 at Putney , and three days later the first team played London Scottish at the Saracens ' Palmerston Road ground in Walthamstow . Gould played at half @-@ back , and was joined in the team by Martyn Jordan , Thomas Judson , Rowley Thomas , Charles Taylor and T. Williams – all past or future Welsh internationals . During the 1885 – 86 season London Welsh were invited to form a combined " exiles " team with London Scottish , to face a London XV in a charity match at The Oval . Gould was one of six Welsh players selected to play in front of a crowd of 8 @,@ 000 that included the Prince of Wales . 
 In the 1885 – 86 season he was moved up to play as a threequarter for Newport . As he was frequently travelling and playing in England between 1885 and 1890 , Gould was not a regular member of the team . After playing just a handful games during the three seasons preceding it , in the 1889 – 90 season he managed 15 games for the club – scoring ten tries and five dropped goals . 
 In June 1890 Gould left Britain to complete a works contract in the West Indies , but returned to Newport in time for the 1891 – 92 season . Newport were unbeaten throughout that campaign , which was later dubbed their " invincible " season . Gould captained Newport between 1893 – 94 , when the team lost only three games , and in the 1894 – 95 season , in which the club lost only to Llanelli . During his first period as captain , 1893 – 94 , Gould scored 37 tries in 24 games , a club record that still stands as of 2013 . Although records before 1886 are incomplete , Newport RFC acknowledge Gould 's scoring record at the club between the 1882 – 83 and 1898 – 99 seasons as 159 tries , 66 conversions , 61 dropped goals and a single penalty , over 231 appearances . 
 Gould also turned out for the Middlesex county side , and was a mainstay during their " invincible " season of 1887 – 88 . He also played for them against the New Zealand Native team in 1888 . The match , hosted by the Earl of Sheffield , was an invitation only event . The Middlesex side won 9 – 0 , and scored three tries in the match , the second one resulting from a smart pass by Gould . In addition to Gould , the Middlesex backline of the time regularly fielded a number of English and Scottish internationals – this earned the side the sarcastic nickname " the Imperial team " . 
 = = = International career = = = 
 = = = = 1885 – 89 = = = = 
 Gould was first capped for Wales against England in the opening game of the 1885 Home Nations Championship . He joined his brother Bob in the side , and played at fullback , his preferred position at the time . Played under the captaincy of Newport team @-@ mate Charlie Newman , this was Wales ' eighth @-@ ever international and fourth encounter with England . The Welsh lost by a goal and a try to a goal and four tries . Wing Martyn Jordan of London Welsh scored both Welsh tries , with one successfully converted into a goal . Some accounts award the conversion to Charles Taylor , though it is now generally credited to Gould . Gould was selected for the second game of the tournament , an away draw to Scotland , in which both teams played a pair of brothers ; George and Richard Maitland for Scotland , and Arthur and Bob Gould for Wales . 
 By 1886 the four threequarter system had spread throughout Wales . First instituted by Cardiff RFC in 1884 , the system was designed to allow Cardiff centres Frank Hancock and Tom Williams to play at the same time , and involved dropping the ninth forward to include a second centre . Newport were reluctant to adopt this style of play , mainly due to Gould 's excellent kicking and covering abilities , which allowed the club to continue with the advantage of the extra forward . 
 For the 1885 – 86 season Gould switched from fullback at Newport to the centre position ; this tactic was adopted by Wales and Gould replaced Cardiff 's Hancock at centre for their first match of the 1886 Home Nations Championship against England . The match resulted in a Welsh loss . In Wales ' next game , against Scotland , Wales became the first country to trial the four threequarter system . They did this by bringing back Hancock as captain and having him play at centre alongside Gould . The experiment was a tactical disaster – the eight Welsh forwards struggled against the nine Scottish forwards . Hancock duly regrouped the team at half @-@ time and readopted the standard formation , bringing Harry Bowen from fullback into the pack , and pushing Gould from centre into Bowen 's vacant position . Wales lost by two goals to nil , the system was deemed a failure and Hancock never represented Wales again . The whole affair had a negative effect on Gould , who initially disliked the strategy , stating that he was " prejudiced against the four three @-@ quarters . " Gould even went as far as persuading the Welsh selectors to revert to the old formation . The next time Wales trialled the system was in the 1888 encounter with the touring New Zealand Natives , a match in which Gould was unavailable to play . 
 In the next season , Wales completed their first full Home Nations Championship ; Gould played as the lone centre in all three games . It was a fairly successful Championship for the Welsh , with a draw , a win and a loss , leaving them second in the table . Of note during the series was Bob Gould 's captaincy in the second match , against Scotland , and Gould 's first ever international dropped goal – which gave Wales a win over Ireland and made up for him missing a dropped goal by just a yard in their draw against England . Due to work commitments , Gould only played one of the two Wales games of the 1888 Home Nations Championship , in the country 's first victory over Scotland , thanks to a single try from Thomas Pryce @-@ Jenkins . In the second game , played away to Ireland , George Bowen was given the centre position in the last match Wales would play with a three threequarter system . Gould then missed the first Welsh international against an overseas touring side , when the New Zealand Natives were beaten at St. Helen 's in Swansea , and was still absent two months later for the opening game of the 1889 Championship . Gould returned in time for the clash with Ireland where he was given the captaincy and played alongside Llanelli centre Tom Morgan . Gould lost his first match as captain , losing by two tries to nil at home – this was the first of 18 caps he earned leading his country . 
 = = = = 1890 – 93 = = = = 
 Gould appeared in Wales ' three matches of the 1890 Home Nations Championship where he partnered Dickie Garrett , a coal <unk> who played for Penarth , at centre . Gould lost the team captaincy for the first match to Frank Hill , a game which Wales lost to Scotland 5 – 1 , though Gould did score his first international try . The game is also notable for featuring the first appearance of Billy Bancroft , the Swansea all @-@ round sportsman who would take over the captaincy from Gould on his retirement . Bancroft was fullback in Gould 's next 18 international games . Gould regained the captaincy for the next game , an encounter with England at Crown <unk> in Dewsbury , and from that point held the captaincy whenever he represented Wales . The encounter was an historic day for Wales , with the country 's first win over England , a single try from Buller <unk> giving Wales the victory . The campaign ended in a disappointing away draw with Ireland , which saw the introduction of Tom Graham , a Newport forward who would become Gould 's club captain during the 1891 – 92 " invincible " season . 
 Gould missed the entire 1891 campaign as he and his brother Bob had travelled to the West Indies to conduct civil engineering work . Gould regained his international place and the captaincy on his return for the 1892 Home Nations Championship . The tournament was a failure for Wales ; the team lost all three of their matches . There was little consistency for Gould at centre , with three different centre @-@ pairings in each of the matches ; Garrett against England , Conway Rees at home to Scotland and in the Irish encounter , Gould 's younger brother Bert . The 1892 Championship was soured by the aftermath of the Wales – Scotland encounter , which was played in Swansea at St. Helen 's . After Wales lost the game 7 – 2 , members of the crowd , angered by Jack Hodgson 's refereeing of the game , attacked him . The assailants by @-@ passed the police and the referee had to be rescued by members of the Welsh team . In the struggle , Gould was struck on the chin , and it was reported that Hodgson only reached the Mackworth Hotel because Gould accompanied him on the coach . 
 The Welsh performance during the 1893 Home Nations Championship was in stark contrast to the previous year . Under the captaincy of Gould , Wales not only won the Championship for the first time , but also the Triple Crown . The first match of the campaign was against England , and played at the Cardiff Arms Park . The pitch had been kept from freezing over the night before by 500 braziers dispersed across the playing field . This led to a slippery ground , with play further hampered by a strong wind . 
 The English played the first half with the wind behind them and their nine @-@ man scrum dominated the smaller Welsh pack . At half time Wales were 7 – 0 down following tries from Frederick <unk> and Howard Marshall and a conversion from England captain Andrew Stoddart . The second half started poorly for Wales when Marshall scored a second try following excellent English forward pressure . The game turned not long after : the English forwards could not maintain the pace they had set in the first half of the game , and began to slow . Then Welsh forward Charles Nicholl broke through a line @-@ out with the ball , transferred it to Hannan , who passed to Gould at the half way line . Gould evaded both Alderson and Lockwood before outpacing Edwin Field to score beneath the posts . Bancroft converted . A near identical move resulted in Conway Rees then releasing Cardiff wing Norman Biggs who scored with a run from the half @-@ way line , though this time the conversion missed . 
 The Welsh backs repeatedly exposed the three threequarter system used by the English , as once the Welsh backs broke through the pack there was little defensive @-@ cover to prevent run away scores . With the score at 9 – 7 to England , Marshall extended the lead with his third try of the match . This gave England an 11 – 7 lead with only ten minutes remaining . The game swung again when Percy Phillips received ball quickly before passing to Gould . Gould broke through the English defence and scored , though again Bancroft missed the conversion . With further Welsh pressure , a penalty was awarded to Wales on the English 25 @-@ yard line , but at a wide angle . Accounts differ as to what happened ; some say that Gould tried to place the ball for Bancroft , but failed on the frozen ground , another states that Bancroft defied his captain to take the penalty as a drop kick , while other accounts mention Bancroft and Gould arguing on the pitch before Bancroft 's attempt . Regardless , Bancroft kicked the penalty , the first penalty to be scored in an international match . It was the final score of the game and Wales were victorious , 12 – 11 . 
 At the final whistle the pitch was invaded by Welsh fans and Gould was carried shoulder @-@ high back to the Angel Hotel , cheered all the way . It was a defining moment for the Welsh style of play . England adopted the four threequarter system the following year . 
 Gould continued to captain the Wales team through victory over Scotland , with tries coming from Bert Gould , Biggs and William McCutcheon ; all the result of precision handling from the backs . This left the final encounter with Ireland , played at Stradey Park in Llanelli , as the deciding match for a Welsh Triple Crown . Despite an unconvincing Welsh display , an enthusiastic crowd of 20 @,@ 000 watched their country win the game and with it the title , decided by a single try from Bert Gould . 
 = = = = 1894 – 97 = = = = 
 The 1894 Championship began with a loss for the defending champions against England , during a game in which Welsh in @-@ fighting affected the result . Before the game , Gould instructed his forwards to heel the ball from the scrums swiftly , so it would get to the backs quickly and allow them to run at the English . Frank Hill decided that this was the wrong option and put all his might into wheeling the scrums instead , which worked against the efforts of Jim Hannan , who was trying to follow his captain 's wishes . In the next match Gould was partnered by Dai Fitzgerald in a win over Scotland , but was unavailable for the encounter with Ireland and was replaced by Jack Elliott from Cardiff RFC . 
 By 1895 the only backs remaining from the 1893 Championship @-@ winning team were Bancroft and Gould . Gould was now partnered with Owen Badger , who kept his place for the whole campaign . As the other teams adopted the Welsh style of play , Wales lost their advantage ; the livelier English forwards outplayed their Welsh counterparts to give England victory in the opening game of the 1895 Championship . This was followed by a close loss to Scotland at Raeburn Place and then a narrow win over Ireland at the Cardiff Arms Park . 
 1896 was Gould 's last full international tournament . The Championship started badly for Wales with a heavy defeat by England , during which Wales were reduced to 14 men after Badger broke his collar @-@ bone in the first 15 minutes . In the second game Wales beat Scotland 6 – 0 , with a try each for Gould and Cliff Bowen . The final game of the Championship was an away loss to Ireland , in which Gould scored his last international points with a dropped goal . At the end of 1896 Gould decided to retire from rugby . 
 In 1897 , Gould was enticed out of retirement for one last Championship . By now Gould was a household name throughout Britain , as much due to his personality and good looks as his brilliant centre play ; a testimonial fund had been started with contributions being made by the public . This caused a stir among the other Home Unions , who viewed this as an effort to pay Gould for playing , which would constitute professionalism . As the arguments continued , Gould played his final international game , a solid 11 – 0 win over England in early January . Wales played no further matches that season after the events behind Gould 's testimonial fund caused Wales to leave the International Rugby Football Board ( IRFB ) , in a situation now referred to as the " Gould affair " . 
 = = = = Matches played = = = = 
 = = Gould affair = = 
 By 1896 Gould had played more first class matches , scored more tries and dropped more goals than any other player on record . This led to South Wales Argus journalist W. J. Townsend Collins , to write in the paper : " ... as Arthur Gould is as pre @-@ eminent in football as W. G. Grace is in cricket , the footballing enthusiasts of Wales might recognise his services to the game ... by some national testimonial . " 
 A Welsh shipbroker , W. J. Orders , organised a collection fund on the floor of the Cardiff Coal Exchange and floated a public testimonial of one shilling . The national response was considerable and within weeks the total was into hundreds of pounds . This drew the Welsh Football Union ( WFU ) into a confrontation with the IRFB , as rule 2 on professionalism stated that no player was allowed to receive money from his club , or any member of his club , for services rendered to football . The fund could have been seen as a professional fee to Gould , henceforth making him ineligible to play for his country . The WFU argued that the money raised was not given by the club , but rather an outpouring of thanks from the Welsh public to a national hero . 
 By April 1896 the Welsh Football Union had sanctioned a subscription of 1 @,@ 000 shillings to be contributed to the Gould testimonial . The Rugby Football Union ( RFU ) complained and the IRFB reacted by informing the WFU that only a plate up to the value of a hundred pounds sterling could be given to Gould , and that the remaining funds should be donated to charity ; otherwise Wales would lose their international fixtures . The WFU stood down and withdrew their subscription . The reaction in Wales was one of anger , with the people feeling that the WFU had bowed to English pressure , and had been bullied into a decision against the people 's wishes . 
 In a move that was described as an act of hurt pride by social historian David Smith , but also as a manoeuvre to appease the Welsh supporters , in February 1897 the WFU wrote to the IRFB and withdrew their membership . The WFU claimed that they alone had authority over the matter because the IRFB did not have any rules regarding amateurism . The WFU then reinstated their subscription to Gould , and on Easter Monday 1897 a banquet was arranged at Drill Hall in Newport in Gould 's honour . Many civic and sporting worthies were in attendance to witness the WFU president Sir John Llewellyn present Gould with the title deeds of a gift house . The 250 guests , including David A. Thomas , were joined by a reed and string orchestra , the band of the Fourth Battalion of the South Wales Borderers , and galleries packed by members of the public . 
 Wales did not field an international team until the IRFB , supported by the RFU , recommended that the WFU be readmitted into the organisation in February 1898 . The WFU agreed that they would in future abide by all IRFB by @-@ laws , and that Gould not be allowed to play in any future internationals . Gould accepted the ruling but returned to rugby as a referee and Welsh international selector . The compromise prevented a long term split in the sport , and by 1901 the IRFB added laws to the game banning professionalism to clarify their authority on the issue . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After retiring from rugby , Gould became a brewery representative around Newport . He was still a very popular figure and was followed during his work by fans ; his image was still worth money , appearing on merchandise such as cigarette cards and <unk> . 
 Gould died in 1919 , at the age of 54 . Falling ill at work on 2 January , he was rushed home where he died later that day of an internal haemorrhage . His funeral was reported as the biggest ever seen in Wales up to that time ; it was surpassed three decades later by that of the former British Prime Minister David Lloyd George . Gould was buried at St <unk> Cemetery , Newport . In reporting his death , The Times stated : 
 To him more than anyone else is due the rise of Welsh football , and so football as we know it now . He did more than any one else to transform a game from one in which brute force and individual skill were the chief characteristics to one in which scientific combination became the main feature , without the sacrifice of individualism . 
 In 1923 a memorial fund was raised in Gould 's name , the donations of which were given to the Royal Gwent Hospital in Newport . The hospital recognised the gift with the Arthur Gould Memorial Bed , inscribed : " To the memory of Arthur Gould – Greatest of Rugby Football Players " . The bed was lost , however , when a portion of the hospital was demolished . Donations for the memorial , which totalled £ 1 @,@ 525 , were received from all over the world , and several matches were staged to raise funds , including a fixture between Newport and Cardiff . 
 Gould has been described as the first superstar of his sport by rugby historian Terry Godwin while David Smith in the Official History of the Welsh Rugby Union described him as the first player to surpass national recognition , becoming in both meanings of the word " an international " . The Welsh Academy 's Encyclopedia of Wales , published over 90 years after his death , records Gould as " Welsh rugby 's first superstar " , while a 1919 obituary described him as " the most accomplished player of his generation " . He set several long @-@ standing records for his country , including captaining Wales 18 times , a number eventually surpassed by Ieuan Evans in 1994 . Gould played 25 matches at centre for Wales , a record that stood until beaten by Steve Fenwick in 1980 . He was also the most capped Welsh player , with 27 , at the time of his retirement . 
 Gould was inducted into the Welsh Sports Hall of Fame in June 2007 ; members of Gould 's family were in attendance including his granddaughter Mary Hales . When Newport RFC set up their own hall of fame in 2012 the first person inaugurated was Gould . 
 = Majungasaurus = 
 Majungasaurus ( / <unk> / ; " Mahajanga lizard " ) is a genus of abelisaurid theropod dinosaur that lived in Madagascar from 70 to 66 million years ago , at the end of the Cretaceous Period . The genus contains a single species , Majungasaurus crenatissimus . This dinosaur was briefly called Majungatholus , a name which is now considered a junior synonym of Majungasaurus . 
 Like other abelisaurids , Majungasaurus was a bipedal predator with a short snout . Although the forelimbs are not completely known , they were very short , while the hind limbs were longer and very stocky . It can be distinguished from other abelisaurids by its wider skull , the very rough texture and thickened bone on the top of its snout , and the single rounded horn on the roof of its skull , which was originally mistaken for the dome of a pachycephalosaur . It also had more teeth in both upper and lower jaws than most abelisaurids . 
 Known from several well @-@ preserved skulls and abundant skeletal material , Majungasaurus has recently become one of the best @-@ studied theropod dinosaurs from the Southern Hemisphere . It appears to be most closely related to abelisaurids from India rather than South America or continental Africa , a fact that has important biogeographical implications . Majungasaurus was the apex predator in its ecosystem , mainly preying on sauropods like Rapetosaurus , and is also one of the few dinosaurs for which there is direct evidence of cannibalism . 
 = = Description = = 
 Majungasaurus was a medium @-@ sized theropod that typically measured 6 – 7 meters ( 20 – 23 ft ) in length , including its tail . Fragmentary remains of larger individuals indicate that some adults reached lengths of more than 8 meters ( 26 ft ) . Sampson and Witmer estimated an average weight for an adult Majungasaurus of 1 @,@ 100 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 400 lb ) . The specimen they based it on ( FMNH PR 2100 ) was not the largest one discovered . Larger specimens of Majungasaurus crenatissimus could have been similar in size to its relative Carnotaurus , which has been estimated to weigh 1 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 300 lb ) . 
 The skull of Majungasaurus is exceptionally well @-@ known compared to most theropods and generally similar to that of other abelisaurids . Like other abelisaurid skulls , its length was proportionally short for its height , although not as short as in Carnotaurus . The skulls of large individuals measured 60 – 70 centimeters ( 24 – 28 in ) long . The tall premaxilla ( frontmost upper jaw bone ) , which made the tip of the snout very blunt , was also typical of the family . However , the skull of Majungasaurus was markedly wider than in other abelisaurids . All abelisaurids had a rough , sculptured texture on the outside faces of the skull bones , and Majungasaurus was no exception . This was carried to an extreme on the nasal bones of Majungasaurus , which were extremely thick and fused together , with a low central ridge running along the half of the bone closest to the nostrils . A distinctive dome @-@ like horn protruded from the fused frontal bones on top of the skull as well . In life , these structures would have been covered with some sort of integument , possibly made of keratin . Computed tomography ( CT scanning ) of the skull shows that both the nasal structure and the frontal horn contained hollow sinus cavities , perhaps to reduce weight . The teeth were typical of abelisaurids in having short crowns , although Majungasaurus bore seventeen teeth in both the maxilla of the upper jaw and the dentary of the lower jaw , more than in any other abelisaurid except Rugops . 
 The postcranial skeleton of Majungasaurus closely resembles those of Carnotaurus and Aucasaurus , the only other abelisaurid genera for which complete skeletal material is known . Majungasaurus was bipedal , with a long tail to balance out the head and torso , putting the center of gravity over the hips . Although the cervical ( neck ) vertebrae had numerous cavities and excavations ( pleurocoels ) to reduce their weight , they were robust , with exaggerated muscle attachment sites and ribs that interlocked for strength . Ossified tendons attached to the cervical ribs , giving them a forked appearance , as seen in Carnotaurus . All of these features resulted in a very strong and muscular neck . Uniquely , the cervical ribs of Majungasaurus had long depressions along the sides for weight reduction . The humerus ( upper arm bone ) was short and curved , closely resembling those of Aucasaurus and Carnotaurus . Also like related dinosaurs , Majungasaurus had very short forelimbs with four extremely reduced digits , first reported with only two very short external fingers and no claws . The hand and finger bones of Majungasaurus , like other <unk> , lacked the characteristic pits and grooves where claws and tendons would normally attach , and its finger bones were fused together , indicating that the hand was immobile . In 2012 , a better specimen was described , showing that the lower arm was robust , though short , and that the hand contained four metatarsals and four , probably inflexible and very reduced , fingers , with small claws on the second and third finger . The phalanx formula was 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 @-@ 0 . 
 Like other abelisaurids , the hindlimbs were stocky and short compared to body length . The tibia ( lower leg bone ) of Majungasaurus was even stockier than that of its relative Carnotaurus , with a prominent crest on the knee . The astragalus and calcaneum ( ankle bones ) were fused together , and the feet bore three functional digits , with a smaller first digit that did not contact the ground . 
 = = Classification and systematics = = 
 Majungasaurus is classified as a member of the theropod clade Abelisauridae , which is considered a family in Linnaean taxonomy . Along with the family Noasauridae , abelisaurids are included in the superfamily Abelisauroidea , which is in turn a subdivision of the infraorder Ceratosauria . Abelisaurids are known for their tall skulls with blunt snouts , extensive sculpturing on the outer surfaces of the facial bones ( convergent with carcharodontosaurids ) , very reduced ( atrophied ) forelimbs ( convergent with tyrannosaurids ) , and stocky hindlimb proportions , among other features . 
 As with many dinosaur families , the systematics ( evolutionary relationships ) within the family Abelisauridae are confused . Several cladistic studies have indicated that Majungasaurus shares a close relationship with Carnotaurus from South America , while others were unable to firmly place it in the phylogeny . The most recent analysis , using the most complete information , instead recovered Majungasaurus in a clade with Rajasaurus and Indosaurus from India , but excluding South American genera like Carnotaurus , Ilokelesia , Ekrixinatosaurus , Aucasaurus and Abelisaurus , as well as Rugops from mainland Africa . This leaves open the possibility of separate clades of abelisaurids in western and eastern Gondwana . 
 A cladogram by Tortosa et al . 2013 places Majungasaurus in a new subfamily , Majungasaurinae . A simplified version showing the taxa within the group is shown below . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 French paleontologist Charles Depéret described the first theropod remains from northwestern Madagascar in 1896 . These included two teeth , a claw , and some vertebrae discovered along the <unk> River by a French army officer and deposited in the collection of what is now the Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1 . Depéret referred these fossils to the genus Megalosaurus , which at the time was a wastebasket taxon containing any number of unrelated large theropods , as the new species M. crenatissimus . This name is derived from the Latin word <unk> ( " notched " ) and the suffix <unk> ( " most " ) , in reference to the numerous serrations on both front and rear edges of the teeth . Depéret later reassigned the species to the North American genus Dryptosaurus , another poorly known taxon . 
 Numerous fragmentary remains from Mahajanga Province in northwestern Madagascar were recovered by French collectors over the next 100 years , many of which were deposited in the Muséum National d 'Histoire Naturelle in Paris . In 1955 , René Lavocat described a theropod dentary ( <unk> 1 ) with teeth from the Maevarano Formation in the same region where the original material was found . The teeth matched those first described by Depéret , but the strongly curved jaw bone was very different from both Megalosaurus and Dryptosaurus . Based on this dentary , Lavocat created the new genus Majungasaurus , using an older spelling of Mahajanga as well as the Greek word σαυρος / sauros ( meaning " lizard " ) . Hans @-@ Dieter Sues and Philippe Taquet described a dome @-@ shaped skull fragment ( <unk> 4 ) as a new genus of pachycephalosaur ( Majungatholus atopus ) in 1979 . This was the first report of a pachycephalosaur in the Southern Hemisphere . 
 In 1993 , scientists from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and the University of Antananarivo began the Mahajanga Basin Project , a series of expeditions to examine the fossils and geology of the Late Cretaceous sediments near the village of Berivotra , in Mahajanga Province . Among these scientists was paleontologist David W. Krause of Stony Brook . The first expedition turned up hundreds of theropod teeth identical to those of Majungasaurus , some of which were attached to an isolated premaxilla that was described in 1996 . The following seven expeditions would turn up tens of thousands of fossils , many of which belonged to species new to science . The Mahajanga Basin Project claims credit for <unk> the known diversity of fossil taxa in the region . 
 Fieldwork in 1996 turned up a spectacularly complete theropod skull preserved in exquisite detail ( FMNH PR 2100 ) . On top of this skull was a dome @-@ shaped swelling nearly identical to the one described by Sues and Taquet as Majungatholus atopus . Majungatholus was redescribed as an abelisaurid rather than a pachycephalosaur in 1998 . Although the name Majungasaurus crenatissimus was older than Majungatholus atopus , the authors judged the type dentary of Majungasaurus too fragmentary to confidently assign to the same species as the skull . Further fieldwork over the next decade turned up a series of less complete skulls , as well as dozens of partial skeletons of individuals ranging from juveniles to adults . Project members also collected hundreds of isolated bones and thousands of shed Majungasaurus teeth . Taken together , these remains represent nearly all the bones of the skeleton , although most of the forelimbs , most of the pelvis and the tip of the tail are still unknown . This fieldwork culminated in a 2007 monograph consisting of seven scientific papers on all aspects of the animal 's biology , published in the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology Memoirs . The papers are in English , although each has an abstract written in Malagasy . In this volume , the dentary described by Lavocat was re @-@ evaluated and determined to be diagnostic for this species . Therefore , the name Majungatholus was replaced by the older name Majungasaurus . Although the monograph is comprehensive , the editors noted that it describes only material recovered from 1993 through 2001 . A significant quantity of specimens , some very complete , were excavated in 2003 and 2005 and await preparation and description in future publications . The dentary was made the neotype specimen after a 2009 petition to the ICZN . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Skull ornamentation = = = 
 Majungasaurus is perhaps most distinctive for its skull ornamentation , including the swollen and fused nasals and the frontal horn . Other ceratosaurs , including Carnotaurus , Rajasaurus , and Ceratosaurus itself bore crests on the head . These structures are likely to have played a role in intraspecific competition , although their exact function within that context is unknown . The hollow cavity inside the frontal horn of Majungasaurus would have weakened the structure and probably precluded its use in direct physical combat , although the horn may have served a display purpose . While there is variation in the ornamentation of Majungasaurus individuals , there is no evidence for sexual dimorphism . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Scientists have suggested that the unique skull shape of Majungasaurus and other abelisaurids indicate different predatory habits than other theropods . Whereas most theropods were characterized by long , low skulls of narrow width , abelisaurid skulls were taller and wider , and often shorter in length as well . The narrow skulls of other theropods were well equipped to withstand the vertical stress of a powerful bite , but not as good at withstanding torsion ( twisting ) . In comparison to modern mammalian predators , most theropods may have used a strategy similar in some ways to that of long- and narrow @-@ snouted canids , with the delivery of many bites weakening the prey animal . 
 Abelisaurids , especially Majungasaurus , may instead have been adapted for a feeding strategy more similar to modern felids , with short and broad snouts , that bite once and hold on until the prey is subdued . Majungasaurus had an even broader snout than other abelisaurids , and other aspects of its anatomy may also support the bite @-@ and @-@ hold hypothesis . The neck was strengthened , with robust vertebrae , interlocking ribs and ossified tendons , as well as reinforced muscle attachment sites on the vertebrae and the back of the skull . These muscles would have been able to hold the head steady despite the struggles of its prey . Abelisaurid skulls were also strengthened in many areas by bone mineralized out of the skin , creating the characteristic rough texture of the bones . This is particularly true of Majungasaurus , where the nasal bones were fused and thickened for strength . On the other hand , the lower jaw of Majungasaurus sported a large fenestra ( opening ) on each side , as seen in other ceratosaurs , as well as synovial joints between certain bones that allowed a high degree of flexibility in the lower jaw , although not to the extent seen in snakes . This may have been an adaptation to prevent the fracture of the lower jaw when holding onto a struggling prey animal . The front teeth of the upper jaw were more robust than the rest , to provide an anchor point for the bite , while the low crown height of Majungasaurus teeth prevented them from breaking off during a struggle . Finally , unlike the teeth of Allosaurus and most other theropods , which were curved on both the front and back , abelisaurids like Majungasaurus had teeth curved on the front edge but straighter on the back ( cutting ) edge . This structure may have served to prevent slicing , and instead holding the teeth in place when biting . 
 Majungasaurus was the largest predator in its environment , while the only known large herbivores at the time were sauropods like Rapetosaurus . Scientists have suggested that Majungasaurus , and perhaps other abelisaurids , specialized on hunting sauropods . Adaptations to strengthen the head and neck for a bite @-@ and @-@ hold type of attack might have been very useful against sauropods , which would have been tremendously powerful animals . This hypothesis may also be supported by the hindlegs of Majungasaurus , which were short and stocky , as opposed to the longer and more slender legs of most other theropods . While Majungasaurus would not have moved as fast as other similar @-@ sized theropods , it would have had no trouble keeping up with slow @-@ moving sauropods . The robust hindlimb bones suggest very powerful legs , and their shorter length would have lowered the animal 's center of gravity . Thus Majungasaurus may have sacrificed speed for power . Majungasaurus tooth marks on Rapetosaurus bones confirm that it at least fed on these sauropods , whether or not it actually killed them . 
 = = = Cannibalism = = = 
 Although sauropods may have been the prey of choice for Majungasaurus , discoveries published in 2007 detail finds in Madagascar that indicate the presence of other Majungasaurus in their diet . Numerous bones of Majungasaurus have been discovered bearing tooth marks identical to those found on sauropod bones from the same localities . These marks have the same spacing as teeth in Majungasaurus jaws , are of the same size as Majungasaurus teeth , and contain smaller notches consistent with the serrations on those teeth . As Majungasaurus is the only large theropod known from the area , the simplest explanation is that it was feeding on other members of its own species . Suggestions that the Triassic Coelophysis was a cannibal have been recently disproven , leaving Majungasaurus as the only non @-@ avian theropod with confirmed cannibalistic tendencies , although there is some evidence that cannibalism may have occurred in other species as well . 
 It is unknown if Majungasaurus actively hunted their own kind or only scavenged their carcasses . However , some researchers have noted that modern Komodo monitors sometimes kill each other when competing for access to carcasses . The lizards will then proceed to cannibalize the remains of their rivals , which may suggest similar behavior in Majungasaurus and other theropods . 
 = = = Respiratory system = = = 
 Scientists have reconstructed the respiratory system of Majungasaurus based on a superbly preserved series of vertebrae ( UA <unk> ) recovered from the Maevarano Formation . Most of these vertebrae and some of the ribs contained cavities ( pneumatic foramina ) that may have resulted from the infiltration of avian @-@ style lungs and air sacs . In birds , the neck vertebrae and ribs are hollowed out by the cervical air sac , the upper back vertebrae by the lung , and the lower back and sacral ( hip ) vertebrae by the abdominal air sac . Similar features in Majungasaurus vertebrae imply the presence of these air sacs . These air sacs may have allowed for a basic form of avian @-@ style ' flow @-@ through ventilation , ' where air flow through the lungs is one @-@ way , so that oxygen @-@ rich air inhaled from outside the body is never mixed with exhaled air laden with carbon dioxide . This method of respiration , while complicated , is highly efficient . 
 The recognition of pneumatic foramina in Majungasaurus , besides providing an understanding of its respiratory biology , also has larger @-@ scale implications for evolutionary biology . The split between the ceratosaur line , which led to Majungasaurus , and the tetanuran line , to which birds belong , occurred very early in the history of theropods . The avian respiratory system , present in both lines , must therefore have evolved before the split , and well before the evolution of birds themselves . This provides further evidence of the dinosaurian origin of birds . 
 = = = Brain and inner ear structure = = = 
 Computed tomography , also known as CT scanning , of a complete Majungasaurus skull ( FMNH PR 2100 ) allowed a rough reconstruction of its brain and inner ear structure . Overall , the brain was very small relative to body size , but otherwise similar to many other non @-@ coelurosaurian theropods , with a very conservative form closer to modern crocodilians than to birds . One difference between Majungasaurus and other theropods was its smaller flocculus , a region of the cerebellum that helps to coordinate movements of the eye with movements of the head . This suggests that Majungasaurus and other abelisaurids like Indosaurus , which also had a small flocculus , did not rely on quick head movements to sight and capture prey . 
 <unk> about behavior can also be drawn from examination of the inner ear . The semicircular canals within the inner ear aid in balance , and the lateral semicircular canal is usually parallel to the ground when the animal holds its head in an alert posture . When the skull of Majungasaurus is rotated so that its lateral canal is parallel to the ground , the entire skull is nearly horizontal . This contrasts with many other theropods , where the head was more strongly downturned when in the alert position . The lateral canal is also significantly longer in Majungasaurus than in its more basal relative Ceratosaurus , indicating a greater sensitivity to side @-@ to @-@ side motions of the head . 
 = = = Pathology = = = 
 A 2007 report described pathologies in the bones of Majungasaurus . Scientists examined the remains of at least 21 individuals and discovered four with noticeable pathologies . While pathology had been studied in large tetanuran theropods like <unk> and tyrannosaurids , this was the first time an <unk> had been examined in this manner . No wounds were found on any skull elements , in contrast to tyrannosaurids where sometimes gruesome facial bites were common . One of the specimens was a phalanx ( toe bone ) of the foot , which had apparently been broken and subsequently healed . 
 Most of the pathologies occurred on the vertebrae . For example , a dorsal ( back ) vertebra from a juvenile animal showed an exostosis ( bony growth ) on its underside . The growth probably resulted from the conversion of cartilage or a ligament to bone during development , but the cause of the ossification was not determined . <unk> A and bone spurs were ruled out , and an <unk> ( benign bone tumor ) was deemed unlikely . Another specimen , a small caudal ( tail ) vertebra , was also found to have an abnormal growth , this time on the top of its neural spine , which projects upwards from the vertebrae , allowing muscle attachment . Similar growths from the neural spine have been found in specimens of Allosaurus and <unk> , probably resulting from the ossification of a ligament running either between the neural spines ( <unk> ligament ) or along their tops ( <unk> ligament ) . 
 The most serious pathology discovered was in a series of five large tail vertebrae . The first two vertebrae showed only minor abnormalities with the exception of a large groove that extended along the left side of both bones . However , the next three vertebrae were completely fused together at many different points , forming a solid bony mass . There is no sign of any other vertebrae after the fifth in the series , indicating that the tail ended there prematurely . From the size of the last vertebrae , scientists judged that about ten vertebrae were lost . One explanation for this pathology is severe physical trauma resulting in the loss of the tail tip , followed by osteomyelitis ( infection ) of the last remaining vertebrae . Alternatively , the infection may have come first and led to the end of the tail becoming necrotic and falling off . This is the first example of tail truncation known in a non @-@ avian theropod dinosaur . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 All specimens of Majungasaurus have been recovered from the Maevarano Formation in the Mahajanga Province in northwestern Madagascar . Most of these , including all of the most complete material , came from the <unk> Member , although Majungasaurus teeth have also been found in the underlying <unk> Member and the overlying <unk> Member . While these sediments have not been dated radiometrically , evidence from biostratigraphy and <unk> suggest that they were deposited during the Maastrichtian stage , which lasted from 70 to 66 Ma ( million years ago ) . Majungasaurus teeth are found up until the very end of the Maastrichtian , when all non @-@ avian dinosaurs became extinct . 
 Then as now , Madagascar was an island , having separated from the Indian subcontinent less than 20 million years earlier . It was drifting northwards but still 10 – 15 ° more southerly in latitude than it is today . The prevailing climate of the time was semi @-@ arid , with pronounced seasonality in temperature and rainfall . Majungasaurus inhabited a coastal flood plain cut by many sandy river channels . Strong geological evidence suggests the occurrence of periodic debris flows through these channels at the beginning of the wet season , burying the carcasses of organisms killed during the preceding dry season and providing for their exceptional preservation as fossils . Sea levels in the area were rising throughout the Maastrichtian , and would continue to do so into the Paleocene Epoch , so Majungasaurus may have roamed coastal environments like tidal flats as well . The neighboring Berivotra Formation represents the contemporaneous marine environment . 
 Besides Majungasaurus , fossil taxa recovered from the Maevarano include fish , frogs , lizards , snakes , seven distinct species of crocodylomorphs , five or six species of mammals , <unk> and several other birds , the possibly flighted dromaeosaurid Rahonavis , the noasaurid <unk> and two titanosaurian sauropods , including Rapetosaurus . Majungasaurus was by far the largest carnivore and probably the dominant predator on land , although large crocodylomorphs like <unk> and <unk> might have competed with it closer to water . 
 = = Documentaries = = 
 Majungasaurus was a main focus of the fifth episode of the mini @-@ series When Dinosaurs Ruled hosted by Jeff Goldblum . It also featured in the pilot episode of Jurassic Fight Club , in which its cannibalistic behavior was explored . In both series , the animal was referred to as Majungatholus . It was properly referred to as Majungasaurus in the third episode of BBC 's Planet Dinosaur , in which its killing technique as well as its cannibalistic nature were explored . 
 = Blame Game = 
 " Blame Game " is a song by American hip @-@ hop recording artist Kanye West from his fifth studio album , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . The song features recording artist John Legend and was produced by West , Justin Franks , and Mike Dean . The song features a hip hop skit provided by comedian Chris Rock . It contains a sample of " Avril 14th " , written by Richard D. James , known primarily by his pseudonym , Aphex Twin . Lyrically , the song contains West 's thoughts on past break @-@ ups and explores themes of unrequited love , heartbreak , and spousal abuse . Midway through the song , Rock delivers an extended monologue as the new boyfriend of West 's past lover . 
 Critics were generally complimentary and praised Legend 's vocal delivery . The appearance by Rock was widely noted as a surprising element of the song and received mixed criticism , though some critics described it as a highlight . It charted on the South Korean Gaon Chart at position 81 . West and Legend performed " Blame Game " together on Vevo Presents GOOD Music at SXSW . The song was featured in West 's 2010 short film Runaway . West planned to produce a music video for the song featuring Amber Rose but she declined the offer of appearing and West scrapped the video . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Blame Game " was recorded in Oahu , Hawaii , where most of the sessions for My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy took place . West opted to work with more familiar songwriters to maintain artistic privacy and keep a low profile after several of his publicized controversies . West recorded the song with vocalist John Legend , a frequent collaborator of his since West 's 2004 debut album The College Dropout . During an appearance on Ustream , West announced that Legend was set to appear on a song from his currently upcoming album , titled " Blame Game " . During the announcement , West cited " Blame Game " as his favorite song from the album , which was at the time unfinished . The song developed from Legend and West 's brainstorming , which also led to several other tracks , including " All of the Lights " . Rapper Pusha T was erroneously reported to have provided backing vocals on the song . 
 West asked comedian Chris Rock to appear on the song . Rock , a fan of West 's , mused that he was more than happy to collaborate with West , and said , " you 'd be amazed at how many people want to work with you if you just ask , if you just make a call . " He had previously collaborated on other hip hop songs , such as with rappers Ludacris , Ol ' Dirty Bastard , and Ice Cube on the track " You Ain 't Gotta Lie ( Ta Kick It ) " . Rock described his collaboration with West as exciting in nature , commenting that he was always open to working on unusual ventures . In an interview with The New York Times , Rock went into detail about the composition of the song : 
 “ I did that quicker than I read scripts that they offer me money to do ... I thank [ Kanye ] so much it probably freaks him out . Especially at this late date , to get on something , the album of the moment , that stuff is priceless , you can ’ t put a price tag on that . I felt invigorated by it . I ’ ve still got my fastball . " 
 The song is partly inspired by West 's relationship with model Amber Rose . West originally met Rose in 2008 , and they subsequently developed a romantic relationship , before having a dramatic break @-@ up in 2010 ; Rose cited allegations of adultery . Rose also said that West had written the song about their relationship , commenting that West " talked reckless about me on his album " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The track is built on a recreation of electronic musician Aphex Twin 's piano composition " Avril 14th " . The song begins with a minute long introduction sung by Legend . " Blame Game " has a lush , cello @-@ driven production with predominant piano . After Legend 's introduction , West raps his verses in a highly melodic manner , almost singing his lines . West 's forceful delivery expresses hurt and contempt . The song 's soulful sound juxtaposes West 's angry lyrics : " been a long time since I spoke to you in a bathroom , ripping you up , fuckin ' and <unk> ' you " . He subsequently raps less antagonistically and repeatedly confesses " I can 't love you this much " . 
 West 's vocals are substantially manipulated throughout the song from " naturally clear @-@ sounding and ominously pitched @-@ down as it pans back and forth " , as they are slowed down , sped up , edited substantially , and altered in various ways , giving the song a brooding , ominous mood . Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal wrote that this effect " bottoms out with a verse in which Kanye 's voice is sped up , slowed down and stretched out ... The effect is almost psychotic , suggesting three or four inner monologues fighting over smashed emotions . " AbsolutePunk 's Drew Beringer commented that the vocal altercations gives the sense of the " multiple personalities and paranoia he tries to overcome . " 
 On " Blame Game " , West attempts to call his past lover , but he receives a call back instead and he hears a conversation between her and Chris Rock , who begins an extended monologue approximately five minutes into the song . Chris Rock performs a vulgar , profanity @-@ ridden sketch in which he compliments his lover 's dress sense and sexual technique , and asks her who taught her these skills . Each time he asks , the answer is the same : " Yeezy taught me . " . Andy Gill of The Independent commented that a similar " alliance of aristocratic piano and cello with less rarefied elements underpins ' Blame Game ' , a brutal rumination on West 's sexual appetite " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Blame Game " generally pleased contemporary critics . The Village Voice 's Sean Fennessey said that it is " not the flashiest or most forward @-@ thinking song on the album , but certainly the most earthbound . And therefore the most important . " Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Thomas Conner complimented Rock 's " hilarious , X @-@ rated spiel " and cited the song as the best example of West 's ability " to contrast the light and dark pieces against each other , the profane and the sacred " , writing that it utilizes " Legend 's soft , pretty voice to sing a smooth , troubling refrain . " Rolling Stone writer Rob Sheffield called it one of the funniest of West 's career , a " confessional " song where he " honestly struggles to figure out why he has to be such a douchebag . " Steve Jones of USA Today cited the song as the album 's pièce de résistance that " plays out with growing hostility over John Legend 's moody piano work . " Nitsuh Abebe of New York mused that the song successfully showcased a " gloomy and elegiac " presentation . 
 David Browne of Time called it " that rare , effortless fusion of penthouse @-@ boudoir R & B and hip hop grit " , but was ambivalent about its segue " into an interminable , decidedly unfunny skit in which a guy keeps asking a woman how she learned such mind @-@ boggling bedroom moves . " In contrast , Kitty Empire of The Guardian felt that " comedian Chris Rock is hilariously foul @-@ mouthed at the end of Blame Game . " Becky Bain of Idolator called the song epic , but felt that Rock 's appearance served as a detriment to the song , writing ; " we ’ d kill the last two minutes with Rock ’ s unfocused , not @-@ as @-@ funny @-@ as @-@ we @-@ think @-@ it ’ s @-@ supposed @-@ to @-@ be rambling , but otherwise , this is quite a beautiful track . " " Blame Game " charted on South Korean Gaon Chart at position 81 . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The song was also featured in Runaway , a 35 @-@ minute music video directed by West set to music from My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . After a traumatic dinner sequence , the song is played during a tense moment between West and the phoenix . At the Vevo Presents GOOD Music musical presentation , the song was performed by both West and Legend together . The two performed a few song together before Legend performed his own single " Ordinary People " separately . 
 A planned music video for the song was going to feature an appearance by Amber Rose , however she declined the offer . Rose commented that she passed on the video because she " just felt like Chris Rock 's part was disrespectful " , believing that the song painted her in a negative light . Another reason for her declining to appear in the video because of her then @-@ current relationship with rapper Wiz Khalifa , feeling that appearing in an ex @-@ boyfriend 's musical venture would be disrespectful to Khalifa . West told Rose that both " Blame Game " and the Runaway film were partially inspired by his relationship with her . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from liner notes for My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy ( 2010 ) . 
 Chris " Hitchcock " Chorney – cello 
 Andrew Dawson – engineer , mixing 
 Mike Dean – additional production , bass , composer , mixing , piano 
 DJ Frank E – composer , producer 
 Ryan Gilligan – engineer 
 Richard D. James – composer ( sample ) 
 Phil Joy – engineer 
 John Legend – composer , featured artist 
 Salma <unk> – additional vocals 
 Anthony Kilhoffer – mixing 
 Chloe Mitchell – composer ( poem ) 
 Chris Rock – additional vocals 
 Kanye West – composer , producer , primary artist 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Kosta Pećanac = 
 Konstantin " Kosta " Milovanović Pećanac ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; 1879 – 1944 ) was a Serbian Chetnik commander ( vojvoda ) during the Balkan Wars , World War I and World War II . Pećanac fought on the Serbian side in both Balkan Wars and World War I , joining the forces of Kosta Vojinović during the Toplica uprising of 1917 . Between the wars he was an important leader of Chetnik veteran associations , and was known for his strong hostility to the Yugoslav Communist Party , which made him popular in conservative circles . As president of the Chetnik Association , he transformed the association during the 1930s into an aggressively partisan Serb political organisation with over half a million members . During World War II , Pećanac collaborated with both the German military administration and their Serbian puppet government in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia . 
 Just before the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , the Yugoslav government provided Pećanac with funds and arms to raise guerrilla units in southern Serbia , Macedonia and Kosovo . He formed a detachment of about 300 men , mostly in the Toplica river valley in southern Serbia , which avoided destruction during the invasion . In the first three months after the surrender , Pećanac gathered more troops from Serb refugees fleeing Macedonia and Kosovo . However , his Chetniks fought only Albanian groups in the region , and did not engage the Germans . Following the uprising in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia in early July 1941 , Pećanac quickly resolved to abandon resistance against the Axis , and by the end of August had concluded agreements with the German occupation forces and the puppet government of Milan Nedić to collaborate with them and fight the communist @-@ led Partisans . In July 1942 , rival Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović arranged for the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile to denounce Pećanac as a traitor , and his continuing collaboration with the Germans ruined what remained of the reputation he had developed in the Balkan Wars and World War I. 
 The Germans rapidly realised that Pećanac 's Chetniks , whose numbers had grown to 8 @,@ 000 , were inefficient and unreliable , and even the Nedić government had no confidence in them . They were completely disbanded by March 1943 . Pećanac himself was interned by the Nedić regime for some time , and was assassinated by agents of Mihailović in May or June 1944 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kosta Milovanović was born in a village near Dečani in 1879 , although some sources mistakenly identify the year as 1871 . His father Milovan was a guardian of the Visoki Dečani monastery . Pećanac 's father and his brother <unk> fought in the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 1878 . In 1883 , both of his parents were killed in an attack by Albanians on the monastery . After that point , Pećanac was looked after by his uncle in the village of <unk> near Peć for an unknown amount of time . 
 He arrived in Serbia in 1892 at the age of 14 and worked as a mercenary . When he was 21 , he was called up for army service and served in the engineer corps , becoming a reserve officer . He later worked with the border gendarmerie near <unk> as a corporal . Pećanac was discharged at some point for reasons unknown and later joined the Chetniks . While serving with them he was given the nickname " Pećanac " , derived from the name of the town in which he grew up . 
 = = Macedonia and the Balkan Wars = = 
 In 1895 , war broke out in Macedonia against the Ottoman Empire . Pećanac joined the Serbian Chetnik Organization in 1903 , and fought against the Ottoman army in several significant battles including that of <unk> Stena ( near Pčinja ) and <unk> ( near Staro <unk> ) . The deacon of the <unk> of <unk> and commander ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : vojvoda , вoјвода ) Jovan <unk> @-@ <unk> suggested awarding Pećanac the title of vojvoda ; at a Christmas @-@ day meeting in 1904 , Pećanac received the title at the age of 25 . In the period between 1905 and 1907 , he led several major battles against the Ottoman army in the Skopje region . In 1908 , Pećanac married Sofia Milosavljević from the town of Aleksinac . He went on to father four children with her . In 1910 , as the struggles in Macedonia intensified , he left his children and pregnant wife , and returned to the battlefield . 
 In the First Balkan War , fought from October 1912 to May 1913 , Pećanac was mobilised in the Serbian Third Army , holding the rank of sergeant in the Morava Division . He took part in the defeat of the Albanians in <unk> , the Battle of Kumanovo and the liberation of Metohija . During the Second Balkan War , fought from 29 June to 10 August 1913 , Pećanac is believed to have been stationed at the front at <unk> on <unk> Mountain along the <unk> and Bregalnica rivers . There , his division took part in the Battle of Bregalnica with the Bulgarians . After the Bulgarian attacks failed , they sent parliamentarians to seek a truce , but the Serbian side refused and the fighting continued . After his division had endured six days of heavy fighting , the Bulgarians were defeated at <unk> near Vinica . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Following the disastrous end to the Serbian campaign in late 1915 , Pećanac escaped to Corfu along with the retreating Serbian army and government , and ultimately joined the Salonika front . In 1915 , Pećanac had received various medals for his " merit in fighting " including three gold medals for bravery , one for military virtue , and the Order of the Star of Karađorđe ( 4th Class ) for his service in World War I and possibly also for his prior military accomplishments . 
 In September 1916 , the Serbian High Command sent then @-@ Lieutenant Pećanac by air to <unk> ( south @-@ west of Niš in the Toplica region ) to prepare a guerrilla uprising in support of a planned Allied offensive . There , Pećanac contacted several groups of guerrillas , known as <unk> . Pećanac joined forces with local leader Kosta Vojinović , and they both established headquarters on Mount Kopaonik . Rivalry quickly developed between the two leaders , mainly because Pećanac only had orders to prepare to support the planned Allied offensive , but Vojinović was conducting operations that might result in pre @-@ emptive action by the Bulgarian occupation forces . Matters came to a head in January – February 1917 when the Bulgarians began conscripting local Serbs for military service . At a meeting of guerrilla leaders to discuss whether they should commence a general uprising , Pećanac was outvoted . However , events had overtaken the leaders , and they were essentially joining a popular uprising that was already underway . After guerrillas under Pećanac 's command engaged the Bulgarians , he was hailed as a leader of the resistance , although he had serious reservations about the eventual outcome once the Bulgarians and Austro @-@ Hungarians committed large numbers of troops to subdue the uprising . The guerrillas were closing on Niš in early March when the occupying forces went on the offensive . Pećanac advised his fighters to hide out in the woods and mountains , while Vojinović ordered his to fight to the death . By 25 March , the uprising had been crushed . Pećanac 's participation in the rebellion came at a great personal cost ; three of his children died whilst in Bulgarian internment . 
 In April 1917 , Pećanac re @-@ emerged with his guerrillas , attacking a railway station , destroying a bridge and raiding a Bulgarian village on the border . Pećanac avoided a further offensive by the occupation forces in July by disappearing into the mountains once again . After emerging for a short time , in September – October 1917 Pećanac again dispersed his guerrillas and infiltrated the Austro @-@ Hungarian occupied zone , where he remained in hiding until mid @-@ 1918 . During his period in hiding , he met with the Kosovar Albanian leader <unk> <unk> to discuss joint actions against the occupation forces . 
 = = Interwar period = = 
 Pećanac was the most prominent figure in the Chetnik movement during the interwar period . During the 1920 Constitutional Assembly elections , Prime Minister Nikola Pašić sent Pećanac to the Sandžak with orders to intimidate the local Muslim population in the hope of keeping the turnout low . In the same year , attempts by the Yugoslav government to disarm and conscript Kosovo Albanians were met by revolts . Pećanac was sent to Kosovo to form detachments made up of local Serbs to fight the rebels . This resulted in rebel attacks on Serb villages . 
 Pećanac had a leading role in the Association against Bulgarian Bandits , an organisation that arbitrarily terrorised Bulgarians in the Štip region . He also served as a commander with the Organization of Yugoslav Nationalists ( ORJUNA ) . Pećanac was present as a member of parliament at the assassination of Croatian Peasant Party ( HSS ) leader Stjepan Radić and HSS deputies Pavle Radić and Đuro Basariček on 20 June 1928 . Prior to the shooting , he was accused by HSS deputy Ivan Pernar of being responsible for a massacre of 200 Muslims in 1921 . 
 Pećanac became the president of the Chetnik Association in 1932 . By opening membership of the Chetnik Association to new younger members that had not served in World War I , he grew the organisation during the 1930s from a nationalist veterans ' association focused on protecting veterans ' rights to an aggressively partisan Serb political organisation with 500 @,@ 000 members throughout the Kingdom of Yugoslavia . During this period , Pećanac formed close ties with the far @-@ right Yugoslav Radical Union government of Milan Stojadinović . Pećanac was known for his hostility to the Communist Party of Yugoslavia , which made him popular with conservatives , especially those in Stojadinović 's party . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Shortly before the Axis invasion of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , Pećanac was requested by the Yugoslav Ministry of the Army and Navy to prepare for guerrilla operations and guard the southern area of Serbia , Macedonia , and Kosovo from pro @-@ Bulgarians and pro @-@ Albanians rebels . He was given money and weapons , and managed to arm several hundred men in the Toplica River valley in southern Serbia . Pećanac 's force remained intact after the German occupation of Serbia and supplemented its strength from Serb refugees fleeing Macedonia and Kosovo . Pećanac 's detachments fought against Albanian bands in the early summer of 1941 . At this time and for a considerable time after , only detachments under Pećanac were identified by the term " Chetnik " . With the rise of the communist Partisans , Pećanac gave up any interest in resistance and by late August reached agreements with both the Serbian puppet government and the German authorities to carry out attacks against the Partisans . 
 While he was concluding arrangements with the Germans , on 18 August 1941 Pećanac received a letter from Draža Mihailović requesting an agreement be reached where Pećanac would control the Chetniks south of the Western Morava River while Mihailović would control the Chetniks in all other areas . Pećanac declined his request and suggested that he might offer Mihailović the chief of staff position and recommended Mihailović 's detachments disband and join his detachments . In the meantime , Pećanac had arranged for the transfer of several thousand of his Chetniks to the Serbian Gendarmerie to act as German auxiliaries . 
 On 27 August , Pećanac issued an open " Proclamation to the Dear People " , in which he portrayed himself as a defender and protector of Serbs and called " on detachments that have been formed without his approval " to come together under his command . He demanded that individuals hiding in the forests immediately return to their homes and that acts of sabotage against the occupiers cease or the perpetrators would face death . 
 In September 1941 , some of Pećanac 's subordinates broke ranks to join with the Partisans in fighting the Germans and their Serbian auxiliaries . In the Kopaonik region , a previously loyal subordinate of Pećanac began attacking local gendarmerie stations and clashing with armed bands of Albanian Muslims . By the end of October , the Germans decided to stop arming the " unreliable " elements within Pećanac 's Chetniks , and attached the remainder to their other Serbian auxiliary forces . 
 On 7 October 1941 , Pećanac sent a request to Milan Nedić , the head of the Serbian puppet government , for stronger organisation , supplies , arms , salary funds , and more . Over time , his requests were fulfilled and a German liaison officer was appointed at Pećanac 's headquarters to help coordinate actions . According to German data , on 17 January 1942 72 Chetnik officers and 7 @,@ 963 men were being provided for by the Serbian Gendarmerie Command . This fell short of the maximum authorized size of 8 @,@ 745 men and included two or three thousand of Mihailović 's Chetniks who were legalized in November 1941 . In the same month , Pećanac sought permission from the Italians for his forces to move into eastern Montenegro , but was refused over Italian concerns that the Chetniks would move into the Sandžak . 
 In April 1942 , the German Commanding General in Serbia , General der Artillerie ( General ) Paul Bader , issued orders giving unit numbers C – 39 to C – 101 to the Pećanac Chetnik detachments , which were put under the command of the local German division or area command post . These orders also required the deployment of a German liaison officer with all detachments engaged in operations , and limited their movement outside their assigned area . Supply of arms and ammunition was also controlled . In July 1942 , Mihailović arranged for the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile to denounce Pećanac as a traitor . His continuing collaboration ruined what remained of the reputation he had developed in the Balkan Wars and World War I. 
 The Germans soon found that Pećanac 's units were inefficient , unreliable , and of little military use . Pećanac 's Chetniks regularly clashed and had rivalries with other German auxiliaries , such as the Serbian State Guard and Serbian Volunteer Command , as well as with Mihailović 's Chetniks . The Germans and the puppet government commenced disbanding them in September 1942 , and all but one were dissolved by the end of 1942 . The last detachment was dissolved in March 1943 . Pećanac 's followers were dispersed to other German auxiliary forces , German labour units , and prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps . Many deserted to join Mihailović . Nothing is known of Pećanac 's activities in the months that followed except that he was interned for some time by the Serbian puppet government . 
 = = Death = = 
 Accounts of Pećanac 's capture and death vary . According to one account , Pećanac , four of his leaders and 40 of their followers were captured by forces loyal to Mihailović in February 1944 . All were killed within days except Pećanac , who remained in custody to write his war memoirs before being executed on 5 May 1944 . Another source states he was assassinated on 6 June 1944 by Chetniks loyal to Mihailović . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Journals = = = 
 = = = Online sources = = = 
 = Trial of Lord George Gordon = 
 The Trial of Lord George Gordon for high treason occurred on 5 February 1781 before Lord Mansfield in the Court of King 's Bench , as a result of Gordon 's role in the eponymously named riots . Gordon , President of the Protestant Association , had led a protest against the Papists Act 1778 , a Catholic relief bill . Intending only to hand in a petition to Parliament , Gordon riled the crowd by announcing the postponement of the petition , denouncing Members of Parliament and launching " anti @-@ Catholic harangues " . The crowd of protesters fragmented and began looting nearby buildings ; by the time the riots had finished a week later , 300 had died , and more property had been damaged than during the entire French Revolution . Gordon was almost immediately arrested , and indicted for levying war against the King . 
 Defended by Thomas Erskine and Lloyd Kenyon , Gordon was accidentally assisted by the Attorney General , James Wallace , who managed to " ridicule " some of his own evidence before Gordon was set back by Kenyon 's lacklustre and confusing speech . However , an impassioned speech by Erskine , which argued that Gordon 's actions were only crimes under the illegally extended law of constructive treason , led to the jury finding him not guilty . This result , which met with pleasure due to the popular disquiet with the idea of constructive treason , left juries unwilling to apply the extended law of constructive treason ; as a result , the government was forced to incorporate it into statute law . Erskine became renowned as an excellent , albeit unorthodox , advocate ; Gordon , on the other hand , was later excommunicated and imprisoned , dying in jail in 1793 . Kenyon was chosen to replace Wallace as Attorney General at the next change of ministry . 
 = = Background = = 
 Lord George Gordon , third and youngest son of the third duke of Gordon , and brother of the fourth duke , an " ignorant young nobleman , almost simple @-@ minded in his attitude to Catholics " , was the President of the Protestant Association . This body was dedicated to the repeal of the Papists Act 1778 , a Roman Catholic relief bill . Prior to the passage of the Act , Catholics were legally forbidden from voting , inheriting land , saying mass , serving in public office or academia , bearing arms or serving in the military , although these prohibitions were frequently overlooked , particularly those regarding military enlistment . The 1778 Act explicitly removed the bans on saying mass , land inheritance or academic standing , and involved several other implicit concessions , made to encourage Catholics to serve in the military . This was made necessary by the ongoing course of the American Revolution , which was going poorly for British forces – it was felt that Catholic relief would both directly strengthen the armed forces and prevent the repeat of revolution in Ireland , a mostly Catholic nation , which politicians thought a distinct possibility given their " trade grievances and troubled politics " . 
 On 2 June 1780 , approximately 60 @,@ 000 people gathered in St George 's Fields , London , to hear an address from Gordon . He and the mob were there to hand in a petition to Parliament ( of which he was a Member ) decrying the Papists Act . After marching to Parliament and reassembling , the mob became incensed by a declaration from Gordon that consideration of the petition was to be postponed , and fragmented . Gordon himself encouraged the crowd with " anti @-@ Catholic harangues " , denouncing approaching Members of Parliament , and groups began destroying and looting Catholic buildings or buildings owned by those they alleged to support Catholic relief . Several Members of Parliament were attacked , the house of Lord Chief Justice Lord Mansfield was destroyed , and several prisons were broken into . At least 300 died in the week it took the military to quash the riots ; Emma Mason writes that more property was damaged during this week than in the entire French Revolution . 450 were arrested , including Gordon himself , who was charged with high treason . His indictment stated that he " most wickedly , maliciously , and <unk> did ordain , prepare , and levy public war against our said lord , the King " . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Gordon retained two barristers for his defence , Thomas Erskine and Lloyd Kenyon , and was arraigned by the Attorney General before Lord Mansfield in the Court of King 's Bench on 5 February 1781 , pleading not guilty . The Attorney General opened , managing to accidentally reduce the evidence of some of his own witnesses to ridicule ; this was offset by Kenyon 's confusing and poor speech in Gordon 's defence . Kenyon , an equity barrister with little experience of public speaking , was noted as " a curious choice for the defence " , and seeing the reaction of the jury to his speech , Erskine asked for leave to delay giving his speech , which was granted . 
 Following the testimony of 12 witnesses , who stated that Gordon was of excellent character and was loyal to both the king and the constitution , Erskine rose , and instead of arguing that Gordon had not been involved instead took the line that his crimes did not constitute treason . High treason was at the time still based on the Treason Act 1351 , which mandated that the definition of treason could not be extended by judges . Notwithstanding this , the judiciary had extended this to include constructive treason . Erskine was successful in showing that Gordon 's motives had only been to defend his nation , not to harm it , and that without the intention to commit treason , no treason could be committed . The original law required the act to be treasonous in nature , not in consequence , and Gordon 's crimes fell into the second category . 
 Erskine 's speech was replied to by the Solicitor General , James Mansfield , and the summing @-@ up by Lord Mansfield was not favorable to Gordon . However , Erskine 's reasoning carried the day with the jury , who found Lord George not guilty . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The verdict was received with pleasure by the majority of the populace , with the principle of constructive treason " widely regarded as highly threatening and injurious to public freedoms " ; as a result , juries became far less willing to convict people for constructive treason , and the government resorted to amending the Treason Act to incorporate the judicially invented concept of constructive treason into statute law . Erskine 's speech , more than anything else , is considered to be the source of this acquittal ; Lloyd Paul Stryker in his biography of Erskine notes that he " had held his jury spellbound @-@ not the jury only , but the whole courtroom also . His logic , his sincerity , and his fire had driven in his close @-@ knit arguments with hammer blows " . Erskine later became Lord Chancellor in the Ministry of All the Talents and was renowned as an excellent , albeit unorthodox , advocate . Kenyon , on the other hand , became Lord Chief Justice . Gordon , the defendant in the case , had a less successful subsequent career ; he was later excommunicated and sent to prison , where he died of typhoid in 1793 . 
 = Æthelbald of Mercia = 
 Æthelbald ( also spelled <unk> , or Aethelbald ) ( died 757 ) was the King of Mercia , in what is now the English Midlands from 716 until he was killed in 757 . Æthelbald was the son of Alweo and thus a grandson of Eowa , who was the brother of Penda . Æthelbald came to the throne after the death of his cousin , King Ceolred , who had driven him into exile . During his long reign , Mercia became the dominant kingdom of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , and recovered the position of pre @-@ eminence it had enjoyed during the seventh century under the strong Mercian kings Penda and Wulfhere . 
 When Æthelbald came to the throne , both Wessex and Kent were ruled by stronger kings , but within fifteen years the contemporary chronicler Bede describes Æthelbald as ruling all England south of the river Humber . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle does not list Æthelbald as a bretwalda , or " Ruler of Britain " , though this may be due to the West Saxon origin of the Chronicle . 
 St. Boniface wrote to Æthelbald in about 745 , reproving him for various dissolute and irreligious acts . The subsequent 747 council of Clovesho and a charter Æthelbald issued at Gumley in 749 — which freed the church from some of its obligations — may have been responses to Boniface 's letter . Æthelbald was killed in 757 by his bodyguards . He was succeeded briefly by Beornred , of whom little is known , but within a year , Offa , the grandson of Æthelbald 's cousin Eanwulf , had seized the throne , possibly after a brief civil war . Under Offa , Mercia entered its most prosperous and influential period . 
 = = Early life and accession = = 
 Æthelbald came of the Mercian royal line , although his father , Alweo , was never king . Alweo 's father was Eowa , who may have shared the throne for some time with his brother , Penda of Mercia . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle does not mention Eowa ; though it does date Penda 's reign as the thirty years from 626 to 656 , when Penda was killed at the battle of the Winwaed . However , two later sources name Eowa as king as well : the Historia Brittonum and the Annales Cambriae . The Annales Cambriae is the source for Eowa 's death in 644 at the battle of Maserfield , where Penda defeated Oswald of Northumbria . Details on Penda 's reign are scarce , and it is a matter for speculation whether Eowa was an underking , owing allegiance to Penda , or if instead Eowa and Penda had divided Mercia between them . If they did divide the kingdom , it is likely that Eowa ruled northern Mercia , as Penda 's son Peada was established later as the king of southern Mercia by the Northumbrian Oswiu , who defeated the Mercians and killed Penda in 656 . It is possible that Eowa fought against Penda at Maserfield . 
 During Æthelbald 's youth , Penda 's dynasty ruled Mercia ; Ceolred , a grandson of Penda and therefore a second cousin of Æthelbald , was king of Mercia from 709 to 716 . An early source , Felix 's Life of Saint Guthlac , reveals that it was Ceolred who drove Æthelbald into exile . Guthlac was a Mercian nobleman who abandoned a career of violence to become first a monk at Repton , and later a hermit living in a barrow at Crowland , in the East Anglian fens . During Æthelbald 's exile he and his men also took refuge in the Fens in the area , and visited Guthlac . Guthlac was sympathetic to Æthelbald 's cause , perhaps because of Ceolred 's oppression of the monasteries . Other visitors of Guthlac 's included Bishop <unk> of Lichfield , an influential Mercian , and it may be that Guthlac 's support was politically useful to Æthelbald in gaining the throne . After Guthlac 's death , Æthelbald had a dream in which Guthlac prophesied greatness for him , and Æthelbald later rewarded Guthlac with a shrine when he had become king . 
 When Ceolred died of a fit at a banquet , Æthelbald returned to Mercia and became ruler . It is possible that a king named Ceolwald , perhaps a brother of Ceolred , reigned for a short while between Ceolred and Æthelbald . Æthelbald 's accession ended Penda 's line of descent ; Æthelbald 's reign was followed , after a brief interval , by that of Offa , another descendant of Eowa . 
 Other than his father , Alweo , little of Æthelbald 's immediate family is known , although in the witness list of two charters a leading ealdorman named <unk> is recorded as his brother . 
 = = Mercian dominance = = 
 Æthelbald 's reign marked a resurgence of Mercian power , which would last until the end of the eighth century . With the exception of the short reign of <unk> , who succeeded Æthelbald for less than a year , Mercia was ruled for eighty years by two of the most powerful Anglo @-@ Saxon kings , Æthelbald and Offa . These long reigns were unusual at this early date ; during the same period eleven kings reigned in Northumbria , many of whom died violent deaths . 
 By 731 , Æthelbald had all the English south of the Humber under his overlordship . There is little direct evidence of the relationship between Æthelbald and the kings who were dependent on him . Generally , a king subject to an overlord such as Æthelbald would still be regarded as a king , but would have his independence curtailed in some respects . Charters are an important source of evidence for this relationship ; these were documents which granted land to followers or to churchmen , and were witnessed by the kings who had power to grant the land . A charter granting land in the territory of one of the subject kings might record the names of the king as well as the overlord on the witness list appended to the grant ; such a witness list can be seen on the Ismere Diploma , for example . The titles given to the kings on these charters could also be revealing : a king might be described as a " subregulus " , or underking . 
 Enough information survives to suggest the progress of Æthelbald 's influence over two of the southern kingdoms , Wessex and Kent . At the start of Æthelbald 's reign , both Kent and Wessex were ruled by strong kings ; Wihtred and Ine , respectively . Wihtred of Kent died in 725 , and Ine of Wessex , one of the most formidable rulers of his day , abdicated in 726 to go on a pilgrimage to Rome . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Ine 's successor , Aethelheard , fought that year with an ealdorman named Oswald , whom the Chronicle provides with a genealogy showing descent from Ceawlin , an early king of Wessex . Aethelheard ultimately succeeded in this struggle for the throne , and there are subsequent indications that he ruled subject to Mercian authority . Hence it may be that Æthelbald helped establish both Aethelheard and his brother , Cuthred , who succeeded Aethelheard in 739 . There is also evidence of South Saxon territory breaking away from West Saxon dominance in the early 720s , and this may indicate Æthelbald 's increasing influence in the area , though it could have been Kentish , rather than Mercian , influence that was weakening West Saxon control . 
 As for Kent , there is evidence from Kentish charters that shows that Æthelbald was a patron of Kentish churches . There is , however , no charter evidence showing Æthelbald 's consent to Kentish land grants ; and charters of Aethelberht and Eadberht , both kings of Kent , survive in which they grant land without Æthelbald 's consent . It may be that charters showing Æthelbald 's overlordship simply do not survive , but the result is that there is no direct evidence of the extent of Æthelbald 's influence in Kent . 
 Less is known about events in Essex , but it was at about this time that London became attached to the kingdom of Mercia rather than that of Essex . Three of Æthelbald 's predecessors — Æthelred , Coenred , and Ceolred — had each confirmed an East Saxon charter granting Twickenham to Waldhere , the bishop of London . From Kentish charters it is known that Æthelbald was in control of London , and from Æthelbald 's time on , the transition to Mercian control appears to be complete ; an early charter of Offa 's , granting land near Harrow , does not even include the king of Essex on the witness list . For the South Saxons , there is very little charter evidence , but as with Kent , what there is does not show any requirement for Æthelbald 's consent to land grants . The lack of evidence should not obscure the fact that Bede , who was after all a contemporary chronicler , summarized the situation of England in 731 by listing the bishops in office in southern England , and adding that " all these provinces , together with the others south of the river Humber and their kings , are subject to Æthelbald , King of the Mercians . " 
 There is evidence that Æthelbald had to go to war to maintain his overlordship . In 733 Æthelbald undertook an expedition against Wessex and captured the royal manor of Somerton . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle also tells how when Cuthred succeeded Aethelheard to the throne of Wessex , in 740 , he " boldly made war against Aethelbald , king of Mercia " . Three years later , Cuthred and Æthelbald are described as fighting against the Welsh . This could have been an obligation placed on Cuthred by Mercia ; earlier kings had similarly assisted Penda and Wulfhere , two strong seventh @-@ century Mercian rulers . In 752 , Æthelbald and Cuthred are again on opposite sides of the conflict , and according to one version of the manuscript , Cuthred " put him [ Æthelbald ] to flight " at Burford . Æthelbald seems to have reasserted his authority over the West Saxons by the time of his death , since a later West Saxon king , Cynewulf , is recorded as witnessing a charter of Æthelbald at the very beginning of his reign , in 757 . 
 In 740 , a war between the Picts and the Northumbrians is reported . Æthelbald , who might have been allied with Óengus , the king of the Picts , took advantage of Eadberht 's absence from Northumbria to ravage his lands , and perhaps burn York . 
 = = Titles and <unk> = = 
 Earlier in Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People chronicle , he lists seven kings who governed the southern provinces of the English , with reigns dating from the late fifth to the late seventh century . Subsequently , the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle — another important source for the period — describes these seven as bretwaldas or <unk> , a title translated as " Britain @-@ ruler " or " Wide @-@ ruler " . The Chronicle adds just one king to the list : Egbert of Wessex , who reigned in the ninth century . The resulting list of eight bretwaldas omits several strong Mercian kings . It is possible that the chronicler was merely adding Egbert 's name to Bede 's original list of seven , rather than claiming that no other kings achieved similar powers in England . The chronicler was almost certainly a West Saxon , and since neither Æthelbald nor Offa were kings of Wessex it is possible the chronicler does not mention them out of regional pride . The meaning of the term " bretwalda " , and the nature of the power that these eight kings wielded , has had much academic scrutiny . One suggested interpretation is that since Bede was writing during Æthelbald 's reign , the original seven he listed were essentially those kings who could be seen as prototypes of Æthelbald in their domination of England south of the Humber . 
 Further evidence of Æthelbald 's power , or at least his titles , is provided by an important charter of 736 , the Ismere Diploma , which survives in a contemporary ( and possibly original ) copy . It starts by describing Æthelbald as " king not only of the Mercians but also of all the provinces which are called by the general name South English " ; in the witness list he is further named " Rex Britanniae " , " King of Britain " . One historian described this title as " a phrase which can only be interpreted as a Latin rendering of the English title Bretwalda " ; but it may be that at that time these titles would not have been acknowledged much beyond Worcester , where this and other documents from the 730s that use similar titles were written . 
 = = Relations with the church = = 
 In 745 – 746 , the leading Anglo @-@ Saxon missionary in Germany , St Boniface , along with seven other bishops , sent Æthelbald a scorching letter reproaching him for many sins — stealing ecclesiastical revenue , violating church privileges , imposing forced labour on the clergy , and fornicating with nuns . The letter implored Æthelbald to take a wife and abandon the sin of lust : 
 We therefore , beloved son , beseech Your Grace by Christ the son of God and by His coming and by His kingdom , that if it is true that you are continuing in this vice you will amend your life by penitence , purify yourself , and bear in mind how vile a thing it is through lust to change the image of God created in you into the image and likeness of a vicious demon . Remember that you were made king and ruler over many not by your own merits but by the abounding grace of God , and now you are making yourself by your own lust the slave of an evil spirit . 
 Boniface first sent the letter to Ecgberht , the archbishop of York , asking him to correct any inaccuracies and reinforce whatever was right ; and he requested <unk> , a priest whom Æthelbald had listened to in the past , to read and explain it to the king in person . Though Boniface 's letter praises Æthelbald 's faith and alms @-@ giving , its criticisms have strongly coloured subsequent opinion of Æthelbald . A claim made in a ninth @-@ century list of donations from the abbey of Gloucester that Æthelbald had " stabbed — or smitten " to death the kinsman of a Mercian abbess has also contributed negatively to his reputation . 
 Æthelbald may have influenced the appointment of successive archbishops of Canterbury in <unk> , Nothelm , and Cuthbert , the latter probably the former bishop of Hereford ; and despite Boniface 's strong criticisms , there is evidence of Æthelbald 's positive interest in church affairs . A subsequent letter of Boniface 's to Cuthbert , Archbishop of Canterbury , provided a good deal of information about Frankish synods , especially one held in 747 , the decrees of which Boniface included in the letter . Boniface does not explicitly suggest to Cuthbert that he , too , should hold a synod , but it seems clear that this was Boniface 's intent . A council was , in fact , subsequently held at Clovesho ( the location of which is now lost ) ; Æthelbald attended and perhaps presided . The council was concerned with the relationship between the church and the secular world , and it condemned many excesses on the part of the clergy . The council limited relations between monks and laymen and ruled that secular activities were impermissible for monks : secular business and secular songs were both forbidden , especially " ludicrous songs " . 
 Two years after this , in 749 , at the synod of Gumley , Æthelbald issued a charter that freed ecclesiastical lands from all obligations except the requirement to build forts and bridges — obligations which lay upon everyone , as part of the <unk> necessitas . This charter was witnessed only by Mercian bishops , and it is possible it had no effect outside Mercia , but it is also possible that it was essentially part of a reform programme inspired by Boniface and instigated at Clovesho . 
 = = Death = = 
 In 757 , Æthelbald was killed at <unk> , Warwickshire , near the royal seat of Tamworth . According to a later continuation of Bede 's Ecclesiastical History , he was " treacherously murdered at night by his own bodyguards " , though the reason why is unrecorded . He was succeeded , briefly , by <unk> . Æthelbald was buried at Repton , in a crypt which still can be seen ; a contemporary is reported to have seen a vision of him in hell , reinforcing the impression of a king not universally well @-@ regarded . The monastery church on the site at that time was probably constructed by Æthelbald to house the royal mausoleum ; other burials there include that of Wigstan . 
 A fragment of a cross shaft from Repton includes on one face a carved image of a mounted man which , it has been suggested , may be a memorial to Æthelbald . The figure is of a man wearing mail armour and brandishing a sword and shield , with a diadem bound around his head . If this is Æthelbald , it would make it the earliest large @-@ scale pictorial representation of an English monarch . 
