 Joseph J. Seymour ( 2002 – 2004 ) 
 Kenneth J. Ringler , Jr . ( 2004 – 2006 ) 
 Anthony <unk> ( 2006 – 2008 ) 
 Christopher O. Ward ( 2008 – 2011 ) 
 Patrick J. Foye ( 2011 – Present ) 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey manages and maintains infrastructure critical to the New York / New Jersey region ’ s trade and transportation network — five of the region ’ s airports , the New York / New Jersey seaport , the PATH rail transit system , six tunnels and bridges between New York and New Jersey , the Port Authority Bus Terminal and George Washington Bridge Bus Station in Manhattan and The World Trade Center site . 
 = = = Seaports = = = 
 The Port of New York and New Jersey is the largest port complex on the East Coast of North America and is located at the hub of the most concentrated and affluent consumer market in the world , with immediate access to the most extensive interstate highway and rail networks in the region . In addition , The Port Authority directly oversees the operation of seven cargo terminals in the New York – New Jersey region . Each terminal offers comprehensive shipping services , rail and trucking services . 
 The Port Authority operates the following seaports : 
 Port Jersey Marine Terminal in Bayonne and Jersey City 
 Brooklyn Port Authority Marine Terminal comprising the Brooklyn Piers and Red Hook Container Terminal in Red Hook , Brooklyn 
 Howland Hook Marine Terminal on Staten Island . 
 Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth Marine Terminal in Newark and Elizabeth . 
 The Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth Marine Terminal was the first in the nation to <unk> , As of 2004 , Port Authority seaports handle the third largest amount of shipping of all U.S. ports , as measured in tonnage . 
 ExpressRail is a rail network supporting intermodal freight transport at the major container terminals including dockside trackage and railyards for <unk> . Various switching and terminal railroads , including the Conrail Shared Assets Operations ( <unk> ) on the Chemical Coast Secondary , connect to the East Coast rail freight network carriers Norfolk Southern ( NS ) , CSX Transportation ( CSX ) , and Canadian Pacific ( CP ) . From January through October 2014 the system handled 391 @,@ 596 rail lifts . As of 2014 , three ExpressRail systems ( Elizabeth , Newark , Staten Island ) were in operation with the construction of a fourth at Port Jersey underway . 
 New York New Jersey Rail , LLC ( <unk> ) is a switching and terminal railroad operates a car float operation across Upper New York Bay between the Greenville Yard in Jersey City and Brooklyn . 
 = = = Airports = = = 
 The Port Authority operates the following airports : 
 Atlantic City International Airport , ( Egg Harbor Township , New Jersey ) ( performs select management duties ) 
 John F. Kennedy International Airport ( Queens , New York ) 
 LaGuardia Airport ( Queens , New York ) 
 Newark Liberty International Airport ( Newark and Elizabeth , New Jersey ) 
 Stewart International Airport , ( Newburgh , New York ) 
 Teterboro Airport ( Teterboro , New Jersey ) 
 Both Kennedy and LaGuardia airports are owned by the City of New York and leased to the Port Authority for operating purposes . Newark Liberty is owned by the City of Newark and also leased to the Authority . In 2007 , Stewart International Airport , owned by the State of New York , was leased to the Port Authority . The Port Authority officially took over select management functions of the Atlantic City International Airport on July 1 , 2013 , in conjunction with the South Jersey Transportation Authority , which leases the airport site from the FAA . 
 JFK , LaGuardia , and Newark Liberty as a whole form the largest airport system in the United States , second in the world in terms of passenger traffic , and first in the world by total flight operations , with JFK being the 19th busiest in the world and the 6th busiest in the US . Unfortunately , the three airports also share the dubious distinction of being consistently rated as some of the worst in the US and even the world . Frommer 's recently picked JFK 's Terminal 3 as the worst airport terminal in the world . 
 = = = Heliports = = = 
 The Authority operates the Downtown Manhattan Heliport ( Manhattan , New York ) . 
 = = = Bridges and tunnels = = = 
 Other facilities managed by the Port Authority include the George Washington Bridge , the Lincoln Tunnel , and the Holland Tunnel , which all connect Manhattan and Northern New Jersey ; the Goethals Bridge , the Bayonne Bridge , and the Outerbridge Crossing which connect Staten Island and New Jersey . 
 = = = Bus and rail transit = = = 
 The Port Authority operates the PATH rapid transit system linking lower and midtown Manhattan with New Jersey , the AirTrain Newark system linking Newark International Airport with NJ Transit and Amtrak via a station on the Northeast Corridor rail line , and the AirTrain JFK system linking JFK with Howard Beach ( subway ) and Jamaica ( subway and Long Island Rail Road ) . 
 Major bus depots include the Port Authority Bus Terminal at 42nd Street , the George Washington Bridge Bus Station , and the Journal Square Transportation Center in Jersey City . 
 = = = Real estate = = = 
 The Port Authority also participates in joint development ventures around the region , including the Teleport business park on Staten Island , Bathgate Industrial Park in the Bronx , the Essex County Resource Recovery Facility , Newark Legal Center , Queens West in Queens , and the South Waterfront in Hoboken . However , by April 2015 , the agency was considering divesting itself of the properties to raise run and return to core mission of supporting transportation infrastructure . 
 = = = Current and future projects = = = 
 Major projects by the Port Authority include the One World Trade Center and other construction at the World Trade Center site . Other projects include a new passenger terminal at JFK International Airport , and redevelopment of Newark Liberty International Airport 's Terminal B , and replacement of the Goethals Bridge . The Port Authority also has plans to buy 340 new PATH cars and begin major expansion of Stewart International Airport . 
 As owner of the World Trade Center site , the Port Authority has worked since 2001 on plans for reconstruction of the site , along with Silverstein Properties , and the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation . In 2006 , the Port Authority reached a deal with Larry Silverstein , which ceded control of One World Trade Center to the Port Authority . The deal gave Silverstein rights to build three towers along the eastern side of the site , including 150 Greenwich Street , 175 Greenwich Street , and 200 Greenwich Street . Also part of the plans is the World Trade Center Transportation Hub , which will replace the temporary PATH station that opened in November 2003 . 
 = = Law enforcement = = 
 The Port Authority has its own police department . The department currently employs approximately 1 @,@ 700 police officers and supervisors who have full police status in New York and New Jersey . 
 = Flesh and Stone = 
 " Flesh and Stone " is the fifth episode of the fifth series of British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Written by showrunner Steven Moffat and directed by Adam Smith , the episode was first broadcast on 1 May 2010 on BBC One . It is the conclusion of a two @-@ episode story that began with " The Time of Angels " that features the Weeping Angels as primary villains and sees the return of the character River Song ( Alex Kingston ) . 
 Following the cliffhanger of the previous episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) , his companion Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) , River Song , and Father Octavian ( Iain Glen ) and his militarised clerics have escaped entrapment by the Weeping Angels , creatures who only move when unobserved by others . They take refuge inside the crashed starship Byzantium , but the Angels pursue them and Amy is on the brink of dying from the imprint of an Angel in her eye . Both the Angels and the Doctor 's team face danger from a widening crack in space and time which has the power to erase persons from history . 
 Moffat wrote the two @-@ part story as a more action @-@ packed sequel to his 2007 episode " Blink " , inspired by the relationship between the film Alien and its sequel , Aliens . The episode contains vital information concerning the main story arc of the cracks in time , and contains many instances which are character @-@ motivated . " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " were the first two episodes to be filmed ; filming for " Flesh and Stone " took place in late July , with location filming in Puzzlewood and Southerndown beach . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 495 million viewers in the United Kingdom and received mostly positive reviews from critics , though many commented that it did not live up to the quality to the first part and disagreed about the decision to show the Angels moving . Additionally , a scene in which Amy attempts to seduce the Doctor generated some complaints to the BBC . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Continuing from the cliffhanger of the previous episode , the destruction of the gravity globe allows the Doctor , Amy , Dr. River Song , and Father Octavian and his clerics to jump into the localised gravity well of the starship Byzantium and escape the horde of approaching Weeping Angels . The Angels follow them into the ship and the Doctor directs everyone into the ship 's oxygen factory , a forest contained within the starship . While in the secondary control room , the Doctor observes a familiar crack in the wall and realizes that it is the same one from Amy 's bedroom ( " The Eleventh Hour " ) . He determines that it is leaking time energy from which the Angels are attempting to feed . 
 In the forest , the Doctor and River find Amy struggling with an image of an Angel imprinted in her brain . Amy has been counting down backwards and is close to being killed by the Angel when The Doctor instructs her to keep her eyes closed to starve the angel . With Amy unable to move , The Doctor , River and Octavian attempt to reach the primary control room on the other side of the forest . River and Octavian reveal to the Doctor that she is a prisoner in Octavian 's custody , with a pardon promised should she help them complete their mission . Octavian is captured and killed by an Angel as the Doctor and River enter the control room . As Amy and the clerics wait for rescue , the crack in the secondary control room opens further and the Angels move away from it . When some of the clerics approach it to investigate , they disappear completely ; while Amy remembers them , the remaining clerics have no knowledge of their existence . Amy is soon left alone as the remaining clerics also disappear investigating the crack . The Doctor instructs Amy to begin moving towards the primary control room , keeping her eyes closed but acting as if she is still able to see in order to fool the Angels . Amy trips and reveals her blindness to the Angels , but before they can kill her River teleports her to the control room . 
 The Doctor reveals that the crack is due to an explosion somewhere in time , a date that he and River are able to determine . The Doctor warns that anything that falls into it is erased from time ; this is why the Angels fear the crack . The only way of temporarily closing the crack is to send a " complicated space @-@ time event " such as the Doctor himself or the whole of the Angels into the crack . The Angels continue to drain power from the Byzantium until they cause the artificial gravity to fail , dropping the Angels into the crack and sealing it while the Doctor , Amy , and River hang on to the controls . With the Angels gone , the Angel in Amy 's mind never existed , and she is able to recover . River is teleported away by the clerics ; she tells the Doctor that they will meet again soon when the " Pandorica " opens , which is dismissed by the Doctor as a fairy tale . 
 Aboard the TARDIS , Amy asks the Doctor to return her to Earth on the night they left because she wants to show him something . In her room , she shows the Doctor her engagement ring and wedding dress and tells him that she is to wed Rory the next day . Amy then attempts to seduce the Doctor . Alarmed by this , the Doctor tries to deter her by pointing out that kind of relationship she is suggesting will not work between them , and that she is engaged . He then realises that Amy 's wedding the next day , 26 June 2010 , happens on the same day as the time explosion epicenter and he takes Amy away so that he can figure out what is going on . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Writer Steven Moffat came up with the concept for " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " when he was thinking of the worst possible situations to be in with the Weeping Angels and thought of the inability to see . His first idea was blindness , though this developed into the situation that Amy ends up in . Moffat designed the two @-@ part story to be a more action @-@ oriented sequel to " Blink " , an episode he wrote for the third series that introduced the Weeping Angels . He was inspired by the relationship between the film Alien and its sequel , Aliens , which he referred to as " the best conceived movie sequel ever " , describing it as being more " highly coloured " as opposed to Alien 's more low @-@ key tone . He also intended for the Angels to have a plan that could become " almost like a war " , in contrast to the way they were struggling to survive in " Blink " . The title " Flesh and Stone " was suggested by Moffat 's son . 
 The episode is also important in the main story arc concerning the cracks in time and space . The idea of the crack was inspired by a similar crack in the wall of Moffat 's son . As the crack reappears , several facts about it are revealed . In the episode , the Doctor speculates that they are connected to the fact that Amy could not remember the events of several previous episodes , as well as events in history that had occurred in " The Next Doctor " . He also discovers that the time explosion that caused the crack is 26 June 2010 , which is also the original airdate of the final episode of the series , " The Big Bang " . Before the Doctor , River , and Octavian leave Amy and the other clerics , the Doctor briefly returns to console Amy and to ask her to trust him and remember what he told her when she was younger ; however , the Doctor in this scene is shown wearing his jacket , which he had lost to the Angels earlier in the episode , as well as a different wristwatch . It is revealed in " The Big Bang " that this was in fact the Doctor from later in his timeline , setting up events in Amy 's past to try to help her remember him after he has rebooted the universe . River Song tells the Doctor she will see him again when the Pandorica opens ; the Pandorica was previously referred to by Prisoner Zero in " The Eleventh Hour " and is revealed in " The Pandorica Opens " , which also sees the return of River Song . 
 Many instances in the episode were character @-@ driven . The action of the Angel to torture Amy " for fun " was met with anger from the Doctor but also gave him courage to defeat the Angels and save Amy . Moffat stated that in the scene in which the Doctor must figure out how to save Amy in a matter of seconds he was " very basic ... very pure , simple Doctor " and did not have time to comfort Amy because his compassion would get in the way of his thinking process . River was also meant to understand this and explain to Amy that he needed to think . Moffat believed that Amy was " passionate and a fighter and ... also really smart " which he showcased in the scene where Amy could not open her eyes for more than a second but was determined to do it for less than one . Moffat also believed that Amy 's decision to attempt to seduce the Doctor was consistent with the character he had built up from her first episode . It was also a reflection of how the two had just escaped from death and shared a hard time together , and Amy 's tendency to do things " in the heat of the moment " . The Doctor 's reaction was intended to be a reflection of how he often acted embarrassed and flustered when women behaved that way . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 " The Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " were the first two episodes to be produced in the series . The read @-@ through for " Flesh and Stone " took place on 15 July 2009 following the read @-@ through of " The Time of Angels " . The forest scenes in the Byzantium were filmed at Puzzlewood , in the Forest of Dean over nine nights in July 2009 . The final scenes on a beach were shot at Southerndown , Vale of Glamorgan in Wales during 20 – 21 July 2009 , the first filming done for the new series . 
 Most of the Weeping Angels are not statue props but young women wearing masks , costumes , and paint that took two to three hours to apply . Director Adam Smith called them " an absolute nightmare to film with " because it took a long time for them to get ready and they had to stand still for long periods of time . In the climactic scene Gillan had to walk with her eyes closed , which she said was difficult and challenging as the ground was uneven and muddy . She stated that " it was the most scary thing " when she had to trip over a step and fall , even though she was aware of the crash mat . As she was not able to express herself through her eyes , Gillan had to make herself more animated to convey emotion . The scene in which the Doctor , Amy and River are horizontal in mid @-@ air when the gravity field fails on the Byzantium was achieved by using wires and powerful wind machines . The blue in Amy 's bedroom was an idea of Adam Smith to show that it was inspired by the TARDIS from Amy 's encounter with the Doctor when she was young . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Flesh and Stone " was first broadcast on BBC One and simulcast on BBC HD on 1 May 2010 . Overnight figures showed that " Flesh and Stone " was watched by 6 @.@ 87 million viewers ; 6 @.@ 53 million watched on BBC One , with a further 0 @.@ 34 on BBC HD . This was a slight increase from the previous episode , but " Flesh and Stone " was still second for the night behind Britain 's Got Talent . Final consolidated ratings showed that 8 @.@ 495 million viewers had watched the episode , with 8 @.@ 019 on BBC One and 476 @,@ 000 on BBC HD , the fifth and first most @-@ watched programme on each channel respectively . It achieved an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 A Region 2 DVD and Blu @-@ ray containing " Flesh and Stone " together with the episodes " The Time of Angels " and " The Vampires of Venice " was released on 5 July 2010 . It was re @-@ released as part of the complete series five DVD on 8 November 2010 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Flesh and Stone " has received mostly positive reviews . Daniel Martin gave the episode a positive review on The Guardian 's guardian.co.uk , saying that it " can lay credible claim to being the greatest episode of Doctor Who there has ever been " . He went on to declare : " It 's just ridiculously good — so much that there 's scarcely any point in picking out moments because there was an iconic sequence every couple of seconds . " In particular he praised Father Octavian 's death scene , noting how " despair creeps over Matt Smith 's face as he realises he is going to have to leave him to die ; Octavian 's final speech weeps with honour and elegance " . IGN 's Matt Wales gave the episode a 10 out of 10 rating , saying it was " packed with huge , iconic moments " and stated , " by the end of it , we were left with more questions than answers and a far better sense of Moffat 's meticulous planning " . 
 Gavin Fuller , writing for The Daily Telegraph 's website , described the episode as " a rollercoaster ride of thrills and spills " . He praised the forest scenes , saying they were " easily the highlight of the episode , taking in a whole range of emotions as the nature and scale of the threat facing the Doctor , Amy , River and the clerics shifted as the episode progressed . " However he expressed uncertainty over Amy 's " attempted seduction of the Doctor " , claiming that it " did seem out of keeping with the usual tone of the series " , and that " Given the number of young children who watch , it may not have been the most appropriate of scenes to screen " . Patrick Mulkern , writing for the Radio Times , gave the episode a positive review , describing it and its predecessor " The Time of Angels " as " two episodes of Who that deserve 10 out of 10 in anybody 's <unk> " , although he felt that of the two " The Time of Angels " was " marginally more dazzling " , as he found the Angels in that episode more " macabre " , but he still thought that " Flesh and Stone " " bombards us with shudders and tension " . He also stated that he was " much amused by Amy 's amorous antics at the end " . 
 Steven Cooper of Slant Magazine called it " an exciting , action @-@ packed roller coaster " and praised director Adam Smith 's " top @-@ notch visuals " as well of the performances of Smith , Gillan , and Kingston . He noted the difference between Moffat 's more obvious story arc as opposed to others in the revived series , believing it to be possibly a " long @-@ overdue innovation " for the show . Though he praised the final defeat of the Angels for making use of what the viewer had forgotten , he thought that being able to see the Angels moving was " creepy and well @-@ done " , but made them " much less original and interesting " and the reason behind it weak , considering that the scene had " no significance at all " and was just to fill up time . SFX Magazine 's Dave Golder agreed , calling the scene " very creepy " and the Angels moving " effective " , but feeling that " these once great monsters come across a bit <unk> and stupid " . He also thought that it did not live up the " brilliant first part " , feeling " a bit one @-@ note " and lacking " a really good <unk> revelation " . However , he thought it was " a solid , exciting , pulse @-@ pounding 45 minutes " that was " tense , action @-@ packed , and stuffed with memorable one @-@ liners and touching character moments " , particularly praising Amy 's countdown and Octavian 's death , and gave the episode four out of five stars . 
 The Daily Mail claimed that the seduction scene led to complaints from some viewers who accused the BBC of trying to " ' sex up ' the show to attract more adult viewers . " The article quotes a representative from pressure group Mediawatch @-@ uk and an anonymous contributor to an internet message board . A BBC spokesman confirmed they had received 43 complaints of the scene out of the millions who watched the episode . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = HD 217107 b = 
 HD 217107 b is an extrasolar planet approximately 64 light @-@ years away from Earth in the constellation of Pisces ( the Fish ) . The planet was discovered orbiting the star HD 217107 approximately every seven days , classifying the planet as a hot Jupiter . Because of the planet 's somewhat eccentric orbit , scientists were able to confirm another planet within the system ( HD 217107 c ) . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 As with the majority of extrasolar planet discoveries so far , it was found by detecting small variations in the radial velocity of the star it orbits , caused by the tug of its gravity . A study of the radial velocity of HD 217107 carried out in 1998 revealed that its motion along the line of sight varied over a 7 @.@ 1 day cycle . The period and amplitude of this variation indicated that it was caused by a planetary companion in orbit around the star , with a minimum mass slightly greater than that of Jupiter . The planet 's mean distance from the star is less than one fifth of Mercury 's distance from the Sun . 
 = = = Indication of second planet = = = 
 While most planets with orbital periods of less than 10 days have almost circular orbits , HD 217107 b has a somewhat eccentric orbit , and its discoverers hypothesized that this could be due to the gravitational influence of a second planet in the system at a distance of several astronomical units ( AU ) . Confirmation of the existence of a second planet , HD 217107 c , followed in 2005 . 
 = Stephen Colbert at the 2006 White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner = 
 On April 29 , 2006 , American comedian Stephen Colbert appeared as the featured entertainer at the 2006 White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner , which was held in Washington , D.C. , at the Hilton Washington hotel . Colbert 's performance , consisting of a 16 @-@ minute podium speech and a 7 @-@ minute video presentation , was broadcast live across the United States on the cable television networks C @-@ SPAN and MSNBC . Standing a few feet from U.S. President George W. Bush , in front of an audience of celebrities , politicians , and members of the White House Press Corps , Colbert delivered a controversial , searing routine targeting the president and the media . He spoke in the persona of the character he played on Comedy Central 's The Colbert Report , a parody of conservative pundits such as Bill O 'Reilly and Sean Hannity . 
 Colbert 's performance quickly became an Internet and media sensation . Commentators remarked on the humor of Colbert 's performance , the political nature of his remarks , and speculated as to whether there was a cover @-@ up by the media in the way the event was reported . James Poniewozik of Time noted that whether or not one liked the speech , it had become a " political @-@ cultural touchstone issue of 2006 — like whether you drive a hybrid or use the term ' freedom fries ' " . 
 = = Performance at the dinner = = 
 American comedian Stephen Colbert was the featured entertainer at the White House Correspondents ' Association Dinner , held at the Hilton Washington hotel in Washington , D.C. on April 29 , 2006 . He was invited to speak by Mark Smith , the outgoing president of the White House Press Corps Association . Smith later told reporters that he had not seen much of Colbert 's work . Since 1983 , the event has featured well @-@ known stand @-@ up comics . Previous performances included President Gerald Ford and Chevy Chase making fun of Ford 's alleged clumsiness in 1975 , and Ronald Reagan and Rich Little performing together in 1981 . 
 Colbert gave his after @-@ dinner remarks in front of an audience described by the Associated Press as a " Who 's Who of power and celebrity " . More than 2 @,@ 500 guests attended the event , including First Lady Laura Bush , Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Peter Pace , U.S. Attorney General Alberto Gonzales , China 's Ambassador Zhou <unk> , AOL co @-@ founder Steve Case , model and tennis player Anna Kournikova , and actor George Clooney . Colbert spoke directly to President Bush several times , satirically praising his foreign policy , lifestyle , and beliefs , and referring to his declining approval rating and popular reputation . 
 Colbert spoke in the persona of the character he played on Comedy Central 's The Colbert Report , a parody of a conservative pundit in the fashion of Bill O 'Reilly and Sean Hannity . He began by satirizing mass surveillance , joking " If anybody needs anything else at their tables , just speak slowly and clearly into your table numbers . Someone from the NSA will be right over with a cocktail . " While many of his jokes were directed at President Bush , he also lampooned the journalists and other figures present at the dinner . Most of the speech was prepared specifically for the event , but several segments were lifted — largely unchanged — from The Colbert Report , including parts of the " truthiness " monologue from the first episode of the show , where Colbert advocated speaking from " the gut " rather than the brain and denounced books as " all fact , no heart " . Colbert framed this part of the speech as though he were agreeing with Bush 's philosophies , saying that he and Bush are " not <unk> on the nerd patrol " , implicitly criticizing the way Bush positioned himself as an anti @-@ intellectual . 
 Following this introduction to his style and philosophy , Colbert listed a series of absurd " beliefs that I live by " , such as " I believe in America . I believe it exists . " He alluded to outsourcing to China and satirized the traditional Republican opposition to " big government " by referencing the Iraq War . " I believe the government that governs best is the government that governs least . And by these standards , we have set up a fabulous government in Iraq . " 
 Colbert then mocked Bush 's sinking approval ratings : 
 Now , I know there are some polls out there saying this man has a 32 percent approval rating . But guys like us , we don 't pay attention to the polls . We know that polls are just a collection of statistics that reflect what people are thinking in reality . And reality has a well @-@ known liberal bias ... Sir , pay no attention to the people who say the glass is half empty , [ ... ] because 32 percent means it 's two @-@ thirds empty . There 's still some liquid in that glass , is my point . But I wouldn 't drink it . The last third is usually <unk> . 
 He continued his mock defense of Bush by satirizing Bush 's appearances aboard the USS Abraham Lincoln , at the site of the collapsed World Trade Center , and in cities devastated by Hurricane Katrina : 
 I stand by this man . I stand by this man because he stands for things . Not only for things , he stands on things . Things like aircraft carriers , and rubble , and recently flooded city squares . And that sends a strong message : that no matter what happens to America , she will always rebound — with the most powerfully staged photo ops in the world . 
 Colbert ended the monologue specifically directed at Bush by parodying his energy policy . He then used Laura Bush 's reading initiative as a springboard to mock @-@ criticize books for being " elitist " , and harshly criticized the White House Press Corps — hosts of the event — and the media in general . Addressing the audience , he remarked : 
 Over the last five years , you people were so good — over tax cuts , WMD intelligence , the effect of global warming . We Americans didn 't want to know , and you had the courtesy not to try to find out , [ ... ] And then you write , [ ... ] " Oh , they 're just rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic . " First of all , that is a terrible metaphor . This administration is not sinking . This administration is soaring . If anything , they are rearranging the deck chairs on the Hindenburg ! 
 Colbert also criticized the White House Press Corps for what was widely perceived as its reluctance to question the administration 's policies , particularly in regards to the lead up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq , saying : 
 But , listen , let 's review the rules . Here 's how it works . The President makes decisions . He 's the decider . The press secretary announces those decisions , and you people of the press type those decisions down . Make , announce , type . Just put ' em through a spell check and go home . Get to know your family again . Make love to your wife . Write that novel you got kicking around in your head . You know , the one about the intrepid Washington reporter with the courage to stand up to the administration ? You know , fiction ! 
 For the remainder of his speech , Colbert joked about other people in the audience , including Peter Pace , Antonin Scalia , John McCain , and Joe Wilson . During this section , he made another reference to global warming while talking about interviewing Jesse Jackson : " You can ask him anything , but he 's going to say what he wants , at the pace that he wants . It 's like boxing a glacier . Enjoy that metaphor , by the way , because your grandchildren will have no idea what a glacier is . " 
 Colbert received a chilly reception from the audience . His jokes were often met with silence and muttering , although some in the audience , such as Scalia , laughed heartily as Colbert teased them . This was in stark contrast to the warm reception accorded to a skit featuring Bush and his look @-@ alike , Steve Bridges , which immediately preceded Colbert 's monologue . 
 At the end of his monologue , Colbert introduced what he characterized as an " audition " video to become the new White House Press Secretary — Scott McClellan had recently left the position . The video spliced clips of difficult questions from the White House press corps with responses from Colbert as Press Secretary . Colbert 's podium included controls marked " eject " , " Gannon " ( a reference to erstwhile White House reporter Jeff Gannon , who was suspected of asking planted questions ) , and " volume " , which he used to silence a critical question from journalist David Gregory . The video continued with Colbert fleeing the briefing room and the White House , only to be pursued by White House correspondent Helen Thomas , who had been a vocal critic of the Bush administration . At one point , Colbert picks up an emergency phone and explains that Thomas " won 't stop asking why we invaded Iraq " . The dispatcher responds with , " Hey , why did we invade Iraq ? " The entire second half of the video is a spoof of horror film clichés , particularly the film Westworld , with melodramatic music accompanying Thomas 's slow , unwavering pursuit of Colbert , and Colbert loudly screaming " No ! " at intervals . Widely available online , a portion of the mock audition tape aired on The Colbert Report on May 2 , 2006 . 
 Although President Bush shook Colbert 's hand after his presentation , several of Bush 's aides and supporters walked out during Colbert 's speech , and one former aide commented that the President had " that look that he 's ready to blow " . Colbert recalled that " not a lot of people laughed in the front row " during the speech , and that " when it was over , no one was even making eye contact with me ... no one is talking to me in the whole damn room " ; only Scalia came to him afterward , praising Colbert 's imitation of a gesture the justice had recently been photographed doing . 
 = = Early press coverage and allegations of a media blackout = = 
 Cable channel C @-@ SPAN broadcast the White House Correspondents ' Dinner live , and rebroadcast the event several times in the next 24 hours , but aired a segment that excluded Colbert 's speech . The trade journal Editor & Publisher was the first news outlet to report in detail on Colbert 's performance , calling it a " blistering comedy ' tribute ' " that did not make the Bushes laugh . The reviewer noted that others on the podium were uncomfortable during the speech , " perhaps feeling the material was a little too biting — or too much speaking ' truthiness ' to power " . 
 The New York Times and the Chicago Tribune covered the dinner , but not Colbert 's remarks . The wire services Reuters and the Associated Press each devoted three paragraphs to discuss Colbert 's routine in their coverage of the event , and The Washington Post mentioned Colbert several times throughout its article . The most extensive print coverage came from USA Today , which dedicated more space to Colbert 's performance than to President Bush 's skit . The day after the dinner , Howard Kurtz played clips of Colbert 's performance on his CNN show Reliable Sources . On the Fox News show Fox & Friends , the hosts mentioned Colbert 's performance , criticizing him for going " over the line " . Tucker Carlson , a frequent target of The Colbert Report before and after the event , criticized Colbert as being " unfunny " on his MSNBC show Tucker . 
 Much of the initial coverage of the event highlighted the difference between the reaction to Bush and Bridges ( very positive ) and that for Colbert ( far more muted ) . " The president killed . He 's a tough act to follow — at all times , " said Colbert . On his show , Colbert joked that the unenthusiastic reception was actually " very respectful silence " and added that the crowd " practically carried me out on their shoulders " even though he was not ready to leave . On the May 1 , 2006 , episode of The Daily Show , on which Colbert had formerly been a correspondent , host Jon Stewart called Colbert 's performance " balls @-@ <unk> " and stated , " We 've never been prouder of our Mr. Colbert , and , ah — holy shit ! " 
 Lloyd Grove , gossip columnist for the New York Daily News , said that Colbert " bombed badly " , and BET founder Bob Johnson remarked , " It was an insider crowd , as insider a crowd as you 'll ever have , and [ Colbert ] didn 't do the insider jokes " . Congressional Quarterly columnist and CBS commentator Craig Crawford found Colbert 's performance hilarious , but observed that most other people at the dinner did not find the speech amusing . Time magazine TV critic James Poniewozik thought that Colbert 's critics missed the point : " Colbert wasn 't playing to the room , I suspect , but to the wide audience of people who would later watch on the Internet . If anything , he was playing against the room . " Poniewozik called the pained , uncomfortable reactions to Colbert 's jokes " the money shots . They were the whole point . " 
 Some commentators , while noting the popularity of Colbert 's dinner speech , were critical of the perceived snubbing he was receiving from the press corps , even though he was the featured entertainer for the evening . The Washington Post columnist Dan <unk> , calling it " The Colbert Blackout " , lambasted the traditional media for ignoring Colbert while focusing on the " much safer " topic of President Bush 's routine with Bridges . Amy Goodman of Democracy Now noted that initial coverage ignored Colbert entirely . Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism professor Todd Gitlin remarked , " It 's too hot to handle . [ Colbert ] was scathing toward Bush and it was absolutely devastating . [ The mainstream media doesn 't ] know how to handle such a pointed and aggressive criticism . " 
 Others saw no intentional snub of Colbert by the press . Responding to a question about why The Washington Post 's article about the dinner did not go into any detail about Colbert 's speech , Media <unk> writer Howard Kurtz responded , " The problem in part is one of deadline . The presses were already rolling by the time Colbert came on at 10 : 30 , so the story had to be largely written by then . " Asked why television news favored Bush 's performance over Colbert 's , Elizabeth Fishman , an assistant dean at the Columbia School of Journalism and a former 60 Minutes producer , told MTV that the " quick hit " for television news shows would have been to use footage of Bush standing beside his impersonator . " It 's an easier set up for visual effect " , she noted . Steve Scully , president of the White House Correspondents ' Association ( which hosted the dinner ) and political editor of C @-@ SPAN ( which broadcast the dinner ) , scoffed at the whole idea of the press intentionally ignoring Colbert : " Bush hit such a home run with Steve Bridges that he got all of the coverage . I think that exceeded expectations . There was no right @-@ wing conspiracy or left @-@ wing conspiracy . " Time columnist Ana Marie Cox dismissed allegations of a deliberate media blackout , because Colbert 's performance received coverage in The New York Times , The Washington Post , and the major wire services . Fellow commentator Kurtz concurred , noting that the video was carried on C @-@ SPAN and was freely available online ; he also played two clips on his own show . " Apparently I didn 't get the memo , " he said . 
 In an article published on May 3 , 2006 , The New York Times addressed the controversy . The paper acknowledged that the mainstream media — itself included — had been criticized for focusing on Bush 's act with Bridges while ignoring Colbert 's speech . The paper then quoted several passages of Colbert 's more substantial criticism of the president and discussed various reactions to the event . On May 15 , The New York Times ' public editor , Byron Calame , wrote on his blog that more than two hundred readers had written to complain about the exclusion of any mention of Colbert from the paper 's initial lengthy article covering the dinner . Calame quoted his deputy bureau chief in Washington , who said that a mention of Colbert in the first article could not have been long enough to do his routine justice . But he also noted that the paper should have printed an in @-@ depth article specifically covering Colbert 's speech in the same issue , rather than waiting until days after the fact . 
 = = Internet popularity = = 
 Even though Colbert 's performance " landed with a thud " among the live audience , clips of Colbert at the dinner were an overnight sensation , becoming viral videos that appeared on numerous web sites in several forms . Sites offering the video experienced massive increases in traffic . According to CNET 's News.com site , Colbert 's speech was " one of the Internet 's hottest acts " . Searches for Colbert on Yahoo ! were up 5 @,@ 625 percent . During the days after the speech , there were twice as many Google searches for " C @-@ SPAN " as for " Jennifer Aniston " — an uncommon occurrence — as well as a surge in Colbert @-@ related searches . Nielsen <unk> ranked the post of the video clip as the second most popular blog post for all of 2006 . Clips of Colbert 's comic tribute climbed to the number 1 , 2 , and 3 spots atop YouTube 's " Most Viewed " video list . The various clips of Colbert 's speech had been viewed 2 @.@ 7 million times in less than 48 hours . In an unprecedented move for the network , C @-@ SPAN demanded that YouTube and <unk> remove unauthorized copies of the video from their sites . Google Video subsequently purchased the exclusive rights to <unk> the video , and it remained at or near the top of Google 's most popular videos for the next two weeks . 
 Both Editor and Publisher and Salon , which published extensive and early coverage of the Colbert speech , drew record and near @-@ record numbers of viewers to their web sites . 70 @,@ 000 articles were posted to blogs about Colbert 's roast of Bush on the Thursday after the event , the most of any topic , and " Colbert " remained the top search term at Technorati for days . Chicago Sun @-@ Times TV critic Doug Elfman credited the Internet with promoting an event that would have otherwise been overlooked , stating that " Internet stables for liberals , like the behemoth <unk> , began rumbling as soon as the correspondents ' dinner was reported in the mainstream press , with scant word of Colbert 's <unk> address " . Three weeks after the dinner , audio of Colbert 's performance went on sale at the iTunes Music Store and became the No. 1 album purchased , outselling new releases by the Red Hot Chili Peppers , Pearl Jam , and Paul Simon . The CEO of Audible.com , which provided the recording sold at iTunes , explained its success by saying , " you had to not be there to get it " . It continued to be a top download at iTunes for the next five months . 
 = = Response = = 
 Colbert 's performance received a variety of reactions from the media . In Washington , the response from both politicians and the press corps was negative — both groups having been targets of Colbert 's satire . The Washington press corps felt that Colbert had bombed . The Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen found that Colbert 's jokes were " lame and insulting " and wrote that Colbert was " rude " and a " bully " . Politician Steny Hoyer felt that Colbert had gone too far , telling the newspaper The Hill that " [ Bush ] is the President of the United States , and he deserves some respect " . Conservative pundit Mary <unk> called Colbert 's performance a " predictable , Bush @-@ bashing kind of humor " . Columnist Ana Marie Cox chastised those who praised Colbert as a hero : " I somehow doubt that Bush has never heard these criticisms before " . She added , " Comedy can have a political point but it is not political action " . 
 On The Daily Show , Jon Stewart remarked , tongue in cheek , " apparently [ Colbert ] was under the impression that they 'd hired him to do what he does every night on television " . While comics were expected to tell jokes about the administration , the 2006 dinner was held at a time when the relationship between the administration and the media was under great strain , and the administration was sensitive to criticism . Attorney and columnist Julie Hilden concluded that Colbert 's " vituperative parody " might have been unfair under different circumstances , but noted that Bush 's record of controlling bad press created a heightened justification for people to criticize him when they got the chance . Media Matters and Editor & Publisher came to Colbert 's defense , calling his detractors hypocrites . They contrasted the critical reaction to Colbert to the praise that many in the press had for a controversial routine that Bush performed at a similar media dinner in 2004 , where Bush was shown looking for <unk> in the Oval Office and joking , " Those weapons of mass destruction must be somewhere ! " and " Nope , no weapons over there ! " 
 Canadian Broadcasting Corporation News Online columnist Heather <unk> wrote , " Colbert had the wit and raw courage to do to Bush what Mark Antony did to Brutus , murderer of Caesar . As the American media has self @-@ destructed , it takes Colbert to damn Bush with devastatingly ironic praise . " Comedian and eventual Democratic U.S. Senator Al Franken , who performed at similar dinners twice during the Bill Clinton administration , admired what Colbert had done . In its year @-@ end issue , New York magazine described Colbert 's performance as one of the most " brilliant " moments of 2006 . Time 's James Poniewozik noted that in the " days after Stephen Colbert performed at the White House Correspondents ' Dinner , this has become the political @-@ cultural touchstone issue of 2006 — like whether you drive a hybrid or use the term ' freedom fries ' " . 
 For the 2007 dinner , the White House Correspondents ' Association brought back the less controversial Rich Little . Arianna Huffington reported that Colbert told her he had specifically avoided reading any reviews of his performance , and remained unaware of the public 's reaction . On June 13 , 2007 , he was presented with a Spike TV Guys ' Choice Award for " Gutsiest Move " . He accepted the award via video conference . Six months later , New York Times columnist Frank Rich called Colbert 's after @-@ dinner speech a " cultural primary " , christening it the " defining moment " of the United States ' 2006 midterm elections . Three and a half years after the speech , Frank Rich referenced it again , calling it " brilliant " and " good for the country " , while columnist Dan Savage referred to it as " one of the things that kept people like me sane during the darkest days of the Bush years " . The editor of the The Realist , Paul Krassner , later put Colbert 's performance in historical context , saying that it stands out among contemporary US satire as the only example of the spirit of the satire by Lenny Bruce , George Carlin , and Richard Pryor , which took risks and broke barriers to free speech , " rather than just proudly exercising it as comedians do now . " 
 = Chrono Trigger = 
 Chrono Trigger ( Japanese : クロノ ・ <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square ( now Square Enix ) for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in 1995 . Chrono Trigger 's development team included three designers that Square dubbed the " Dream Team " : Hironobu Sakaguchi , the creator of Square 's Final Fantasy series ; Yuji Horii , a freelance designer and creator of Enix 's popular Dragon Quest series ; and Akira Toriyama , a freelance manga artist famed for his work with Dragon Quest and Dragon Ball . Kazuhiko Aoki produced the game , Masato Kato wrote most of the plot , while composer Yasunori Mitsuda scored most of the game before falling ill and deferring the remaining tracks to Final Fantasy series composer Nobuo Uematsu . The game 's story follows a group of adventurers who travel through time to prevent a global catastrophe . 
 Square re @-@ released a ported version by Tose in Japan for the PlayStation in 1999 , later repackaged with a Final Fantasy IV port as Final Fantasy Chronicles in 2001 for the North American market . A slightly enhanced Chrono Trigger , again ported by Tose , was released for the Nintendo DS on November 25 , 2008 , in North America and Japan , and went on sale in Australia on February 3 , 2009 , and in Europe on February 6 , 2009 . The game was never released in PAL territories before the Nintendo DS version . 
 Chrono Trigger was a critical and commercial success upon release and is frequently cited as one of the best video games of all time . Nintendo Power magazine described aspects of Chrono Trigger as revolutionary , including its multiple endings , plot @-@ related sidequests focusing on character development , unique battle system , and detailed graphics . Chrono Trigger was the third best @-@ selling game of 1995 , and the game 's SNES and PlayStation iterations have shipped 2 @.@ 65 million copies as of March 2003 . The version for the Nintendo DS sold 790 @,@ 000 copies as of March 2009 . Chrono Trigger was also ported to mobile phones , Virtual Console , the PlayStation Network , iOS devices , and Android devices . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Chrono Trigger features standard role @-@ playing video game gameplay . The player controls the protagonist and his companions in the game 's two @-@ dimensional fictional world , consisting of various forests , cities , and dungeons . Navigation occurs via an overworld map , depicting the landscape from a scaled @-@ down overhead view . Areas such as forests , cities , and similar places are depicted as more realistic scaled @-@ down maps , in which players can converse with locals to procure items and services , solve puzzles and challenges , or encounter enemies . Chrono Trigger 's gameplay deviates from that of traditional Japanese RPGs in that , rather than appearing in random encounters , many enemies are openly visible on field maps or lie in wait to ambush the party . Contact with enemies on a field map initiates a battle that occurs directly on the map rather than on a separate battle screen . 
 Players and enemies may use physical or magical attacks to wound targets during battle , and players may use items to heal or protect themselves . Each character and enemy has a certain number of hit points ; successful attacks reduce that character 's hit points , which can be restored with potions and spells . When a playable character loses all hit points , he or she faints ; if all the player 's characters fall in battle , the game ends and must be restored from a previously saved chapter , except in specific storyline @-@ related battles that allow or force the player to lose . Between battles , the player can equip his / her characters with weapons , armor , helmets , and accessories that provide special effects ( such as increased attack power or defense against magic ) , and various consumable items can be used both in and out of battles . Items and equipment can be purchased in shops or found on field maps , often in treasure chests . By exploring new areas and fighting enemies , players progress through Chrono Trigger 's story . 
 Chrono Trigger uses an Active Time Battle system — a staple of Square 's Final Fantasy game series designed by Hiroyuki Ito for Final Fantasy IV — named " Active Time Battle 2 @.@ 0 . " Each character can take action in battle once a personal timer dependent on the character 's speed statistic counts to zero . Magic and special physical techniques are handled through a system called " Techs . " Techs deplete a character 's magic points ( a numerical meter like hit points ) , and often have special areas of effect ; some spells damage huddled monsters , while others can harm enemies spread in a line . Enemies often change positions during battle , creating opportunities for tactical Tech use . A unique feature of Chrono Trigger 's Tech system is that numerous cooperative techniques exist . Each character receives eight personal Techs which can be used in conjunction with others ' to create Double and Triple Techs for greater effect . For instance , Crono 's sword @-@ spinning Cyclone Tech can be combined with Lucca 's Flame Toss to create Flame Whirl . When characters with compatible Techs have enough magic points available to perform their techniques , the game automatically displays the combo as an option . 
 Chrono Trigger features several other unique gameplay traits , including time travel . Players have access to seven eras of the game world 's history , and past actions affect future events . Throughout history , players find new allies , complete side quests , and search for keynote villains . Time travel is accomplished via portals and pillars of light called " time gates " , as well as a time machine named Epoch . The game contains thirteen unique endings ; the ending the player receives depends on when and how he or she reaches and completes the game 's final battle . Chrono Trigger DS features a new ending that can be accessed from the End of Time upon completion of the final extra dungeon and optional final boss . Chrono Trigger also introduces a New Game + option ; after completing the game , the player may begin a new game with the same character levels , techniques , and equipment , excluding money , with which he or she ended the previous play through . However , certain items central to the storyline are removed and must be found again , such as the sword Masamune . Square has since employed the New Game + concept in later titles , including Chrono Cross , Parasite Eve , Vagrant Story , Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , and Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Chrono Trigger takes place in a world familiar to Earth , with eras such as the prehistoric age , in which primitive humans and dinosaurs share the earth ; the Middle Ages , replete with knights , monsters , and magic ; and the post @-@ apocalyptic future , where destitute humans and sentient robots struggle to survive . The characters frequently travel through time to obtain allies , gather equipment , and learn information to help them in their quest . The party also gains access to the End of Time ( represented as year ∞ ) , which serves as a hub to travel back to other time periods . The party eventually acquires a time @-@ machine vehicle known as the Wings of Time , nicknamed the Epoch . The vehicle is capable of time travel between any time period without first having to travel to the End of Time . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Chrono Trigger 's six playable characters ( plus one optional character ) come from different eras of history . Chrono Trigger begins in AD 1000 with Crono , Marle and Lucca . Crono is the silent protagonist , characterized as a fearless young man who wields a katana in battle . Marle ( Princess Nadia ) lives in Guardia Castle ; though sheltered , at heart she 's a princess who enjoys hiding her royal identity . Lucca is a friend of Crono 's and a mechanical genius ; her home is filled with laboratory equipment and machinery . From the era of AD 2300 comes Robo , or Prometheus ( designation R @-@ <unk> ) , a robot with near @-@ human personality created to assist humans . Lying dormant in the future , Robo is found and repaired by Lucca , and joins the group out of gratitude . The fiercely confident Ayla dwells in 65 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 BC . Unmatched in raw strength , Ayla is the chief of <unk> Village and leads her people in war against a species of humanoid reptiles known as Reptites . 
 The last two playable characters are Frog and Magus . Frog originated in AD 600 . He is a former squire once named Glenn , who was turned into an anthropomorphic frog by Magus , who also killed his friend Cyrus . <unk> but mired in regret , Frog dedicates his life to protecting <unk> , the queen of Guardia , and avenging Cyrus . Meanwhile , Guardia in AD 600 is in a state of conflict against the Mystics ( known as Fiends in the US / DS port ) , a race of demons and intelligent animals who wage war against humanity under the leadership of Magus , a powerful sorcerer . Magus 's seclusion conceals a long @-@ lost past ; he was formerly known as Janus , the young prince of the Kingdom of Zeal , which was destroyed by Lavos in 12 @,@ 000 BC . The incident sent him forward through time , and as he ages , he plots revenge against Lavos and broods over the fate of his sister , Schala . Lavos , the game 's main antagonist who awakens and ravages the world in AD 1999 , is an extraterrestrial , parasitic creature that harvests DNA and the Earth 's energy for its own growth . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 In AD 1000 , Crono and Marle watch Lucca and her father demonstrate her new teleporter at the Millennial Fair . When Marle volunteers to be teleported , her pendant interferes with the device and creates a time portal into which she is drawn . After Crono and Lucca separately recreate the portal and find themselves in AD 600 , they find Marle only to see her vanish before their eyes . Lucca realizes that this time period 's kingdom has mistaken Marle for an ancestor of hers who had been kidnapped , thus putting off the recovery effort for her ancestor and creating a grandfather paradox . Crono and Lucca , with the help of Frog , restore history to normal by recovering the kidnapped queen . After the three part ways with Frog and return to the present , Crono is arrested on charges of kidnapping the princess and sentenced to death by the current chancellor of Guardia . Lucca and Marle help Crono to flee , haphazardly using another time portal to escape their pursuers . This portal lands them in AD 2300 , where they learn that an advanced civilization has been wiped out by a giant creature known as Lavos that appeared in 1999 . The three vow to find a way to prevent the future destruction of their world . After meeting and repairing Robo , Crono and his friends find Gaspar , an old sage at the End of Time , who helps them acquire magical powers and travel through time by way of several pillars of light . 
 Their party expands to include Ayla and Frog after they visit the prehistoric era to repair Frog 's sword . They return to AD 600 to challenge Magus , believing him to be the source of Lavos ; after the battle , a summoning spell causes a time gate that throws Crono and his friends to the past . In prehistory , the group battle the Reptites and witness the origin of Lavos . They learn that Lavos was an alien being that arrived on the planet millions of years in the past , and began to absorb DNA and energy from every living creature before arising and razing the planet 's surface in 1999 so that it could spawn a new generation . In 12 @,@ 000 BC , Crono and friends find that the Kingdom of Zeal recently discovered Lavos and seeks to drain its power to achieve immortality through the Mammon Machine . However Zeal 's leader , Queen Zeal imprisons Crono and friends . Though Zeal 's daughter Schala frees them , the Prophet , a mysterious figure who has recently begun advising the queen , forces her to banish them from the realm and seal the time gate they used to travel to the Dark Ages . They return next to AD 2300 to find a time machine called the Wings of Time ( or Epoch ) , which can access any time period without using a time gate . They travel back to Zeal for the Mammon Machine 's activation at the Ocean Palace . Lavos awakens , disturbed by the Mammon Machine , and the Prophet reveals himself to be Magus and tries to kill the creature . Crono stands up to Lavos but is vaporized by a powerful blast , after which Lavos destroys the Kingdom of Zeal . 
 Crono 's friends awake in a village and find Magus , who confesses that he used to be prince Janus of Zeal . In his memories , it is revealed that the disaster at the Ocean Palace scattered the Gurus of Zeal across time and sent him to the Middle Ages . Janus took the alias of Magus and gained a cult of followers while plotting to summon and kill Lavos in revenge for the death of his sister , Schala , but when Lavos appeared after his battle with Crono and his allies he was cast back to the time of Zeal and presented himself to them as a prophet . As Crono 's friends depart , the Ocean Palace rises into the air as the Black Omen . The group turns to Gaspar for help , and he gives them a " Chrono Trigger , " an egg @-@ shaped device that allows the group to replace Crono just before the moment of death with a <unk> Doll . Crono and his friends then gather power by helping people across time with Gaspar 's instructions . Their journeys involve defeating the remnants of the Mystics , stopping Robo 's maniacal AI creator , addressing Frog 's feelings towards Cyrus , locating and charging up the mythical Sun Stone , retrieving the Rainbow Shell , and helping restore a forest destroyed by a desert monster . The group enters the Black Omen and defeats Queen Zeal , then successfully battles Lavos , saving the future of their world . 
 If Magus joined the party , he departs to search for Schala . Crono 's mother accidentally enters the time gate at the fair before it closes , prompting Crono , Marle , and Lucca to set out in the Epoch to find her while fireworks light up the night sky . Alternatively , if the party used the Epoch to break Lavos 's outer shell , Marle will help her father hang Nadia 's bell at the festival and accidentally get carried away by several balloons . Crono jumps on to help her , but cannot bring them down to earth . Hanging on in each other 's arms , the pair travel through the cloudy , moonlit sky . 
 Chrono Trigger DS added two new scenarios to the game . In the first , Crono and his friends can help a " lost sanctum " of Reptites , who reward powerful items and armor . The second scenario adds ties to Trigger 's sequel , Chrono Cross . In a New Game + , the group can explore several temporal distortions to combat shadow versions of Crono , Marle , and Lucca , and to fight Dalton , who promises in defeat to raise an army in the town of Porre to destroy the Kingdom of Guardia . The group can then fight the Dream Devourer , a prototypical form of the Time Devourer — a fusion of Schala and Lavos seen in Chrono Cross . A version of Magus pleads with Schala to resist ; though she recognizes him as her brother , she refuses to be helped and sends him away . Schala subsequently erases his memories and Magus awakens in a forest , determined to find what he had lost . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chrono Trigger was conceived in 1992 by Hironobu Sakaguchi , producer and creator of the Final Fantasy series ; Yuji Horii , director and creator of the Dragon Quest series ; and Akira Toriyama , creator of the Dragon Ball comics series . Traveling to the United States to research computer graphics , the three decided to create something that " no one had done before " . After spending over a year considering the difficulties of developing a new game , they received a call from Kazuhiko Aoki , who offered to produce . The four met and spent four days brainstorming ideas for the game . Square convened 50 – 60 developers , including scenario writer Masato Kato , whom Square designated story planner . Development started in early 1993 . An uncredited Square employee suggested that the team develop a time travel @-@ themed game , which Kato initially opposed , fearing repetitive , dull gameplay . Kato and Horii then met several hours per day during the first year of development to write the game 's plot . Square intended to license the work under the Seiken Densetsu franchise and gave it the working title of " Maru Island " ; Hiromichi Tanaka ( the future director of Chrono Cross ) monitored Toriyama 's early designs . The team hoped to release it on Nintendo 's planned Super Famicom Disk Drive ; when Nintendo canceled the project , Square reoriented the game for release on a Super Famicom cartridge and rebranded it as Chrono Trigger . Tanaka credited the ROM <unk> platform for enabling seamless transition to battles on the field map . 
 Aoki ultimately produced Chrono Trigger , while director credits were attributed to Akihiko Matsui , Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita . Toriyama designed the game 's aesthetic , including characters , monsters , vehicles , and the look of each era . Masato Kato also contributed character ideas and designs . Kato planned to feature Gaspar as a playable character and Toriyama sketched him , but he was cut early in development . The development staff studied the drawings of Toriyama to approximate his style . Sakaguchi and Horii supervised ; Sakaguchi was responsible for the game 's overall system and contributed several monster ideas . Other notable designers include Tetsuya Takahashi , the graphic director , and Yasuyuki Honne , Tetsuya Nomura , and Yusuke Naora , who worked as field graphic artists . <unk> Kamata programmed graphics , and cited Ridley Scott 's visual work in the film Alien as an inspiration for the game 's lighting . Kamata made the game 's luminosity and color choice lay between that of Secret of Mana and the Final Fantasy series . Features originally intended to be used in Secret of Mana or Final Fantasy IV , also under development at the same time , were appropriated by the Chrono Trigger team . 
 Yuji Horii , a fan of time travel fiction ( such as the TV series The Time Tunnel ) , fostered a theme of time travel in his general story outline of Chrono Trigger with input from Akira Toriyama . Horii liked the scenario of the grandfather paradox surrounding Marle . Concerning story planning , Horii commented , " If there 's a fairground , I just write that there 's a fairground ; I don 't write down any of the details . Then the staff brainstorm and come up with a variety of attractions to put in . " Sakaguchi contributed some minor elements , including the character Gato ; he liked Marle 's drama and reconciliation with her father . Masato Kato subsequently edited and completed the outline by writing the majority of the game 's story , including all the events of the 12 @,@ 000 BC era . He took pains to avoid what he described as " a long string of errands ... [ such as ] ' do this ' , ' take this ' , ' defeat these monsters ' , or ' plant this flag ' . " Kato and other developers held a series of meetings to ensure continuity , usually attended by around 30 personnel . Kato and Horii initially proposed Crono 's death , though they intended he stay dead ; the party would have retrieved an earlier , living version of him to complete the quest . Square deemed the scenario too depressing and asked that Crono be brought back to life later in the story . Kato also devised the system of multiple endings because he could not branch the story out to different paths . Yoshinori Kitase and Takashi Tokita then wrote various subplots . Kato became friends with composer Yasunori Mitsuda during development , and they would collaborate on several future projects . Katsuhisa Higuchi programmed the battle system , which hosted combat on the map without transition to a special battleground as most previous Square games had done . Higuchi noted extreme difficulty in loading battles properly without slow @-@ downs or a brief , black loading screen . The game 's use of animated monster sprites consumed much more memory than previous Final Fantasy games , which used static enemy graphics . 
 Hironobu Sakaguchi likened the development of Chrono Trigger to " play [ ing ] around with Toriyama 's universe , " citing the inclusion of humorous sequences in the game that would have been " impossible with something like Final Fantasy . " When Square Co. suggested a non @-@ human player character , developers created Frog by adapting one of Toriyama 's sketches . The team created the End of Time to help players with hints , worrying that they might become stuck and need to consult a walkthrough . The game 's testers had previously complained that Chrono Trigger was too difficult ; as Horii explained , " It 's because we know too much . The developers think the game 's just right ; that they 're being too soft . They 're thinking from their own experience . The puzzles were the same . Lots of players didn 't figure out things we thought they 'd get easily . " Sakaguchi later cited the unusual desire of beta testers to play the game a second time or " travel through time again " as an affirmation of the New Game + feature : " Wherever we could , we tried to make it so that a slight change in your behavior caused subtle differences in people 's reactions , even down to the smallest details ... I think the second playthrough will hold a whole new interest . " The game 's reuse of locations due to time traveling made bug @-@ fixing difficult , as corrections would cause unintended consequences in other eras . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Chrono Trigger was scored primarily by Yasunori Mitsuda , with contributions from veteran Final Fantasy composer Nobuo Uematsu , and one track composed by Noriko Matsueda . A sound programmer at the time , Mitsuda was unhappy with his pay and threatened to leave Square if he could not compose music . Hironobu Sakaguchi suggested he score Chrono Trigger , remarking , " maybe your salary will go up . " Mitsuda composed new music and drew on a personal collection of pieces composed over the previous two years . He reflected , " I wanted to create music that wouldn 't fit into any established genre ... music of an imaginary world . The game 's director , Masato Kato , was my close friend , and so I 'd always talk with him about the setting and the scene before going into writing . " Mitsuda slept in his studio several nights , and attributed certain pieces — such as the game 's ending theme , To Far Away Times — to inspiring dreams . He later attributed this song to an idea he was developing before Chrono Trigger , reflecting that the tune was made in dedication to " a certain person with whom [ he ] wanted to share a generation " . He also tried to use leitmotifs of the Chrono Trigger main theme to create a sense of consistency in the soundtrack . Mitsuda wrote each tune to be around two minutes long before repeating , unusual for Square 's games at the time . Mitsuda suffered a hard drive crash that lost around forty in @-@ progress tracks . After Mitsuda contracted stomach ulcers , Uematsu joined the project to compose ten pieces and finish the score . Mitsuda returned to watch the ending with the staff before the game 's release , crying upon seeing the finished scene . 
 At the time of the game 's release , the number of tracks and sound effects was unprecedented — the soundtrack spanned three discs in its 1995 commercial pressing . Square also released a one @-@ disc acid jazz arrangement called " The Brink of Time " by Guido that year . The Brink of Time came about because Mitsuda wanted to do something that no one else was doing , and he noted that acid jazz and its related genres were uncommon in the Japanese market . Mitsuda considers Chrono Trigger a landmark title which helped mature his talent . While Mitsuda later held that the title piece was " rough around the edges " , he maintains that it had " significant influence on [ his ] life as a composer " . In 1999 , Square produced another one @-@ disc soundtrack to complement the PlayStation release of Trigger , featuring orchestral tracks used in cut scenes . Tsuyoshi Sekito composed four new pieces for the game 's bonus features which weren 't included on the soundtrack . Some fans were displeased by Mitsuda 's absence in creating the port , whose instruments sometimes aurally differed from the original game 's . Mitsuda arranged versions of music from the Chrono series for Play ! video game music concerts , presenting the main theme , Frog 's Theme , and To Far Away Times . He worked with Square Enix to ensure that the music for the Nintendo DS would sound closer to the Super NES version . Mitsuda encouraged feedback about the game 's soundtrack from contemporary children ( who he thought would expect " full symphonic scores blaring out of the speakers " ) . Fans who preordered Chrono Trigger DS received a special music disc containing two orchestral arrangements of Chrono Trigger music directed by Natsumi Kameoka ; Square Enix also held a random prize drawing for two signed copies of Chrono Trigger sheet music . Mitsuda expressed difficulty in selecting the tune for the orchestral medley , eventually picking a tune from each era and certain character themes . Mitsuda later wrote : 
 I feel that the way we interact with music has changed greatly in the last 13 years , even for me . For better or for worse , I think it would be extremely difficult to create something as " powerful " as I did 13 years ago today . But instead , all that I have learned in these 13 years allows me to compose something much more intricate . To be perfectly honest , I find it so hard to believe that songs from 13 years ago are loved this much . Keeping these feelings in mind , I hope to continue composing songs which are powerful , and yet intricate ... I hope that the extras like this bonus CD will help expand the world of Chrono Trigger , especially since we did a live recording . I hope there 's another opportunity to release an album of this sort one day . 
 Fans have heavily remixed the soundtrack , producing over 700 tributes and several cover performance albums released over the internet or sold at retail . These include Time & Space - A Tribute to Yasunori Mitsuda and Chrono Symphonic , the latter released by the remix website OverClocked ReMix . Japanese fans often sell their remix work in compilation albums popularly called " Dōjin " by Western fans . 
 Music from Chrono Trigger was performed live by the Tokyo Symphony Orchestra in 1996 at the Orchestral Game Concert in Tokyo , Japan . A suite of music including Chrono Trigger is a part of the symphonic world @-@ tour with video game music Play ! A Video Game Symphony , where Mitsuda was in attendance for the concert 's world @-@ premiere in Chicago on May 27 , 2006 . His suite of Chrono music , comprising " Reminiscence " , " Chrono Trigger " , " Chrono Cross ~ Time 's Scar " , " Frog 's Theme " , and " To Far Away Times " was performed . Mitsuda has also appeared with the Eminence Symphony Orchestra as a special guest . Video Games Live has also featured medleys from Chrono Trigger and Chrono Cross . A medley of Music from Chrono Trigger made of one of the four suites of the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in September 2009 which was produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series , conducted by Arnie Roth . Square Enix re @-@ released the game 's soundtrack , along with a video interview with Mitsuda in July 2009 . 
 = = = Original release = = = 
 The team planned to release Chrono Trigger in late 1994 , but release was pushed back to the following year . Early alpha versions of Chrono Trigger were demonstrated at the 1994 and 1995 V @-@ Jump festivals in Japan . A few months prior to the game 's release , Square shipped a beta version to magazine reviewers and game stores for review . An unfinished build of the game dated November 17 , 1994 , it contains unused music tracks , locations , and other features changed or removed from the final release — such as a dungeon named " Singing Mountain " and its eponymous tune . Some names also differed ; the character <unk> ( Slash in the US version ) was known as Wiener , while <unk> ( Flea in the US version ) was named <unk> . The ROM image for this early version was eventually uploaded to the internet , prompting fans to explore and document the game 's differences , including two unused world map NPC character sprites and presumed additional sprites for certain non @-@ player characters . Around the game 's release , Yuji Horii commented that Chrono Trigger " went beyond [ the development team 's ] expectations " , and Hironobu Sakaguchi congratulated the game 's graphic artists and field designers . Sakaguchi intended to perfect the " sense of dancing you get from exploring Toriyama 's worlds " in the event that they would make a sequel . 
 Chrono Trigger used a 32 @-@ megabit ROM cartridge with battery @-@ backed RAM for saved games , lacking special on @-@ cartridge <unk> . The Japanese release of Chrono Trigger included art for the game 's ending and running counts of items in the player 's status menu . Developers created the North American version before adding these features to the original build , inadvertently leaving in vestiges of Chrono Trigger 's early development ( such as the piece " Singing Mountain " ) . Hironobu Sakaguchi asked translator Ted Woolsey to localize Chrono Trigger for English audiences and gave him roughly thirty days to work . Lacking the help of a modern translation team , he memorized scenarios and looked at drafts of commercial player 's guides to put dialogue in context . Woolsey later reflected that he would have preferred two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months , and blames his rushed schedule on the prevailing attitude in Japan that games were children 's toys rather than serious works . Some of his work was cut due to space constraints , though he still considered Trigger " one of the most satisfying games [ he ] ever worked on or played " . Nintendo of America censored certain dialogue , including references to breastfeeding , consumption of alcohol , and religion . Square shipped Trigger with two world maps , and Japanese buyers who preordered received holographic foil cards . 
 The original SNES edition of Chrono Trigger was released on the Wii download service Virtual Console in Japan on April 26 , 2011 , in the US on May 16 , 2011 , and in Europe on May 20 , 2011 . Previously in April 2008 , a Nintendo Power reader poll had identified Chrono Trigger as the third @-@ most wanted game for the Virtual Console . It went on to receive a perfect score of 10 out 10 on IGN . 
 = = = PlayStation release = = = 
 Square released an enhanced port of Chrono Trigger developed by Tose in Japan for the Sony PlayStation in 1999 . Square timed its release before that of Chrono Cross , the 1999 sequel to Chrono Trigger , to familiarize new players with story leading up to it . This version included anime cut scenes created by original character designer Akira Toriyama 's Bird Studio and animated by Toei Animation , as well as several bonus features , accessible after achieving various endings in the game . <unk> Masato Kato attended planning meetings at Bird Studio to discuss how the ending cut scenes would illustrate subtle ties to Chrono Cross . The port was later released in North America in 2001 — along with a newly translated version of Final Fantasy IV — under the package title Final Fantasy Chronicles . Reviewers criticized Chronicles for its lengthy load times and an absence of new in @-@ game features . This same iteration was also re @-@ released as a downloadable game on the Playstation Network on October 4 , 2011 , for the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation Vita , and PlayStation Portable . 
 = = = Nintendo DS release = = = 
 On July 2 , 2008 , Square Enix announced that they were officially planning to bring Chrono Trigger to the Nintendo DS handheld platform . Composer Yasunori Mitsuda was pleased with the project , exclaiming " finally ! " after receiving the news from Square Enix and maintaining , " it 's still a very deep , very high @-@ quality game even when you play it today . I 'm very interested in seeing what kids today think about it when they play it . " Square retained Masato Kato to oversee the port , and Tose to program it . Kato explained , " I wanted it to be based on the original Super NES release rather than the PlayStation version . I thought we should look at the additional elements from the Playstation version , re @-@ examine and re @-@ work them to make it a complete edition . That ’ s how it struck me and I told the staff so later on . " Square Enix touted the game by displaying Akira Toriyama 's original art at the 2008 Tokyo Game Show . 
 The DS re @-@ release contains all of the bonus material from the PlayStation port , as well as other enhancements . The added features include a more accurate and revised translation by Tom Slattery , a dual @-@ screen mode which clears the top screen of all menus , a self @-@ completing map screen , and a default " run " option . It also featured the option to choose between two control schemes : one mirroring the original SNES controls , and the other making use of the DS 's touch screen . Masato Kato participated in development , overseeing the addition of the monster @-@ battling Arena , two new areas , the Lost Sanctum and the Dimensional Vortex , and a new ending that further foreshadows the events of Chrono Cross . One of the areas within the Vortex uses the " Singing Mountain " song that was featured on the original Chrono Trigger soundtrack . These new dungeons met with mixed reviews ; GameSpot called them " frustrating " and " repetitive " , while IGN noted that " the extra quests in the game connect extremely well . " It was a nominee for " Best RPG for the Nintendo DS " in IGN 's 2008 video game awards . The Nintendo DS version of Chrono Trigger was the 22nd best @-@ selling game of 2008 in Japan . 
 = = = Mobile release = = = 
 A cellphone version was released in Japan on i @-@ mode distribution service on August 25 , 2011 . An iOS version was released on December 8 , 2011 . This version is based on the Nintendo DS version , with graphics optimized for iOS . The game was later released for Android on October 29 , 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was a bestseller in Japan . The game 's SNES and PS1 iterations have shipped more than 2 @.@ 36 million copies in Japan and 290 @,@ 000 abroad . The first two million copies sold in Japan were delivered in only two months , and the game ended 1995 as the third best @-@ selling game of the year behind Dragon Quest VI : Realms of Revelation and Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest . The game was met with substantial success upon release in North America , and its rerelease on the PlayStation as part of the Final Fantasy Chronicles package topped the NPD TRSTS PlayStation sales charts for over six weeks . This version was later re @-@ released again in 2003 as part of Sony 's Greatest Hits line . Chrono Trigger DS has sold 490 @,@ 000 copies in Japan , 240 @,@ 000 in North America and 60 @,@ 000 in Europe as of March 2009 . 
 Chrono Trigger garnered much critical praise in addition to its brisk sales . Famicom Tsūshin gave Chrono Trigger first an 8 out of 10 and later a 9 out of 10 in their Reader Cross Review . Nintendo Power compared it favorably with Secret of Mana , Final Fantasy , and The Legend of Zelda : A Link to the Past , citing improved graphics , sound , story and gameplay over past RPG titles . GamePro praised the varied gameplay , the humor , the ability to replay the game with previously built @-@ up characters , and the graphics , which they said far exceed even those of Final Fantasy VI . They commented that combat is easier and more simplistic than in most RPGs , but argued that " Most players would choose an easier RPG of this caliber over a hundred more complicated , but less developed , fantasy role @-@ playing adventures . " They gave the game a perfect 5 out of 5 in all four categories : graphics , sound , control , and <unk> . Chrono Trigger won multiple awards from Electronic Gaming Monthly 's 1995 video game awards , including Best Role @-@ Playing Game , Best Music in a Cartridge @-@ Based Game , and Best Super NES Game . Official U.S. PlayStation Magazine described Trigger as " original and extremely captivating " , singling out its graphics , sound and story as particularly impressive . IGN commented that " it may be filled with every imaginable console RPG cliché , but Chrono Trigger manages to stand out among the pack " with " a [ captivating ] story that doesn 't take itself too serious [ sic ] " and " one of the best videogame soundtracks ever produced " . Other reviewers ( such as the staff of RPGFan and RPGamer ) have criticized the game 's short length and relative ease compared to its peers . Victoria Earl of Gamasutra praised the game design for balancing " developer control with player freedom using carefully @-@ designed mechanics and a modular approach to narrative . " 
 Overall , critics lauded Chrono Trigger for its " fantastic yet not overly complex " story , simple but innovative gameplay , and high replay value afforded by multiple endings . Online score aggregator GameRankings lists the original Super NES version as the 2nd highest scoring RPG and 24th highest scoring game ever reviewed . In 2009 , Guinness World Records listed it as the 32nd most influential video game in history . Nintendo Power listed the ending to Chrono Trigger as one of the greatest endings in Nintendo history , due to over a dozen endings that players can experience . Tom Hall drew inspiration from Chrono Trigger and other console games in creating Anachronox , and used the campfire scene to illustrate the dramatic depth of Japanese RPGs . 
 Chrono Trigger is frequently listed among the greatest video games of all time . It has placed highly on all six of multimedia website IGN 's " top 100 games of all time " lists — 4th in 2002 , 6th in early 2005 , 13th in late 2005 , 2nd in 2006 , 18th in 2007 , and 2nd in 2008 . Game Informer called it its 15th favourite game in 2001 . Its staff thought that it was the best non @-@ Final Fantasy title Square had produced at the time . GameSpot included Chrono Trigger in " The Greatest Games of All Time " list released in April 2006 , and it also appeared as 28th on an " All Time Top 100 " list in a poll conducted by Japanese magazine Famitsu the same year . In 2004 , Chrono Trigger finished runner up to Final Fantasy VII in the inaugural GameFAQs video game battle . In 2008 , readers of Dengeki Online voted it the eighth best game ever made . Nintendo Power 's twentieth anniversary issue named it the fifth best Super NES game . In 2012 , it came 32nd place on GamesRadar 's " 100 best games of all time " list , and 1st place on its " Best JRPGs " list . GamesRadar named Chrono Trigger the 2nd best Super NES game of all time , behind Super Metroid . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Add @-@ ons = = = 
 Chrono Trigger inspired several related releases ; the first were three titles released for the Satellaview on July 31 , 1995 . They included Chrono Trigger : Jet Bike Special , a racing video game based on a minigame from the original ; Chrono Trigger : Character Library , featuring profiles on characters and monsters from the game ; and Chrono Trigger : Music Library , a collection of music from the game 's soundtrack . The contents of Character Library and Music Library were later included as extras in the PlayStation rerelease of Chrono Trigger . Production I.G created a 16 @-@ minute OVA entitled " <unk> : Time and Space Adventures " which was shown at the Japanese V @-@ Jump Festival of July 31 , 1996 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 There have been two notable attempts by Chrono Trigger fans to unofficially remake parts of the game for PC with a 3D graphics engine . Chrono Resurrection , an attempt at remaking ten small interactive cut scenes from Chrono Trigger , and Chrono Trigger Remake Project , which sought to remake the entire game , were forcibly terminated by Square Enix by way of a cease and desist order . Another group of fans created a sequel via a ROM hack of Chrono Trigger called Chrono Trigger : Crimson Echoes ; developed from 2004 to 2009 ; although feature @-@ length and virtually finished , it also was terminated through a cease & desist letter days before its May 2009 release . The letter also banned the dissemination of existing Chrono Trigger ROM hacks and documentation . After the cease and desist was issued , an incomplete version of the game was leaked in May 2009 , though due to the early state of the game , playability was limited . This was followed by a more complete ROM leak in January 2011 , which allowed the game to be played from beginning to end . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 Square released a fourth Satellaview game in 1996 , named Radical Dreamers : Nusumenai Hōseki . Having thought that Trigger ended with " unfinished business " , scenarist Masato Kato wrote and directed the game . Dreamers functioned as a side story to Chrono Trigger , resolving a loose subplot from its predecessor . A short , text @-@ based game relying on minimal graphics and atmospheric music , the game never received an official release outside Japan — though it was translated by fans to English in April 2003 . Square planned to release Radical Dreamers as an easter egg in the PlayStation edition of Chrono Trigger , but Kato was unhappy with his work and halted its inclusion . 
 Square released Chrono Cross for the Sony PlayStation in 1999 . Cross is a sequel to Chrono Trigger featuring a new setting and cast of characters . Presenting a theme of parallel worlds , the story followed the protagonist Serge — a teenage boy thrust into an alternate reality in which he died years earlier . With the help of a thief named Kid , Serge endeavors to discover the truth behind his apparent death and obtain the Frozen Flame , a mythical artifact . Regarded by writer and director Masato Kato as an effort to " redo Radical Dreamers properly " , Chrono Cross borrowed certain themes , scenarios , characters , and settings from Dreamers . Yasunori Mitsuda also adapted certain songs from Radical Dreamers while scoring Cross . Radical Dreamers was consequently removed from the series ' main continuity , considered an alternate dimension . Chrono Cross shipped 1 @.@ 5 million copies and was almost universally praised by critics . 
 There are no plans for a new title , despite a statement from Hironobu Sakaguchi in 2001 that the developers of Chrono Cross wanted to make a new Chrono game . The same year , Square applied for a trademark for the names Chrono Break in the United States and Chrono Brake in Japan . However , the United States trademark was dropped in 2003 . Director Takashi Tokita mentioned " Chrono Trigger 2 " in a 2003 interview which has not been translated to English . Yuji Horii expressed no interest in returning to the Chrono franchise in 2005 , while Hironobu Sakaguchi remarked in April 2007 that his creation Blue Dragon was an " extension of [ Chrono Trigger ] . " During a Cubed ³ interview on February 1 , 2007 , Square Enix 's Senior Vice President Hiromichi Tanaka said that although no sequel is currently planned , some sort of sequel is still possible if the Chrono Cross developers can be reunited . Yasunori Mitsuda has expressed interest in scoring a new game , but warned that " there are a lot of politics involved " with the series . He stressed that Masato Kato should participate in development . The February 2008 issue of Game Informer ranked the Chrono series eighth among the " Top Ten Sequels in Demand " , naming the games " steadfast legacies in the Square Enix catalogue " and asking , " what 's the damn holdup ? ! " In Electronic Gaming Monthly 's June 2008 " Retro Issue " , writer Jeremy Parish cited Chrono as the franchise video game fans would be most thrilled to see a sequel to . In the first May Famitsu of 2009 , Chrono Trigger placed 14th out of 50 in a vote of most @-@ wanted sequels by the magazine 's readers . At E3 2009 , SE Senior Vice President Shinji Hashimoto remarked , " If people want a sequel , they should buy more ! " 
 In July 2010 , Feargus Urquhart , replying to an interview question about what franchises he would like to work on , said that " if [ he ] could come across everything that [ he ] played " , he would choose a Chrono Trigger game . At the time , Urquhart 's company Obsidian Entertainment was making Dungeon Siege III for Square Enix . Urquhart said : " You make RPGs , we make RPGs , it would be great to see what we could do together . And they really wanted to start getting into Western RPGs . And , so it kind of all ended up fitting together . " Yoshinori Kitase revealed in 2011 that he used the time travel mechanics of Chrono Trigger as a starting point for that of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . 
 = Battle of Belgium = 
 The Battle of Belgium or Belgian Campaign , often referred to within Belgium as the 18 Days ' Campaign ( French : Campagne des 18 jours , Dutch : <unk> <unk> ) , formed part of the greater Battle of France , an offensive campaign by Germany during the Second World War . It took place over 18 days in May 1940 and ended with the German occupation of Belgium following the surrender of the Belgian Army . 
 On 10 May 1940 , Germany invaded Luxembourg , the Netherlands , and Belgium under the operational plan Fall Gelb ( Case Yellow ) . The Allied armies attempted to halt the German Army in Belgium , believing it to be the main German thrust . After the French had fully committed the best of the Allied armies to Belgium between 10 and 12 May , the Germans enacted the second phase of their operation , a break @-@ through , or sickle cut , through the Ardennes , and advanced toward the English Channel . The German Army ( Heer ) reached the Channel after five days , encircling the Allied armies . The Germans gradually reduced the pocket of Allied forces , forcing them back to the sea . The Belgian Army surrendered on 28 May 1940 , ending the battle . 
 The Battle of Belgium included the first tank battle of the war , the Battle of Hannut . It was the largest tank battle in history up to that date but was later surpassed by the battles of the North African campaign and the Eastern Front . The battle also included the Battle of Fort Eben @-@ Emael , the first strategic airborne operation using paratroopers ever attempted . 
 The German official history stated that in the 18 days of bitter fighting , the Belgian Army were tough opponents , and spoke of the " extraordinary bravery " of its soldiers . The Belgian collapse forced the Allied withdrawal from continental Europe . The British Royal Navy subsequently evacuated Belgian ports during Operation Dynamo , allowing the British Army to escape and continue military operations . France reached its own armistice with Germany in June 1940 . Belgium was occupied by the Germans until the autumn of 1944 , when it was liberated by the Western Allies . 
 = = Pre @-@ battle plans = = 
 = = = Belgium 's strained alliances = = = 
 The Belgian strategy for a defence against German aggression faced political as well as military problems . In terms of military strategy , the Belgians were unwilling to stake everything on a linear defence of the Belgian – German border , in an extension of the Maginot Line . Such a move would leave the Belgians vulnerable to a German assault in their rear , through an attack on the Netherlands . Such a strategy would also rely on the French to move quickly into Belgium and support the garrison there . 
 Politically , the Belgians did not trust the French . Marshal Philippe Pétain had suggested a French strike at Germany 's Ruhr area using Belgium as a spring @-@ board in October 1930 and again in January 1933 . Belgium feared it would be drawn into a war regardless , and sought to avoid that eventuality . The Belgians also feared being drawn into a war as a result of the French – Soviet pact of May 1935 . The Franco @-@ Belgian agreement stipulated Belgium was to mobilise if the Germans did , but what was not clear was whether Belgium would have to mobilise in the event of a German invasion of Poland . 
 The Belgians much preferred an alliance with the United Kingdom . The British had entered the First World War in response to the German violation of Belgian neutrality . The Belgian Channel ports had offered the German Imperial Navy valuable bases , and such an attack would offer the German Kriegsmarine and the Luftwaffe bases to engage in strategic offensive operations against the United Kingdom in the coming conflict . But the British government paid little attention to the concerns of the Belgians . The lack of this commitment ensured the Belgian withdrawal from the Western Alliance , the day before the remilitarisation of the Rhineland . The lack of opposition to the remilitarisation served to convince the Belgians that France and Britain were unwilling to fight for their own strategic interests , let alone Belgium 's . The Belgian General Staff was determined to fight for its own interests , alone if necessary . 
 = = = Belgian place in Allied strategy = = = 
 The French were infuriated at King Leopold III 's open declaration of neutrality in October 1936 . The French Army saw its strategic assumptions undermined ; it could no longer expect closer cooperation with the Belgians in defending the latter 's eastern borders , enabling a German attack to be checked well forward of the French border . The French were dependent on how much cooperation they could extract from the Belgians . Such a situation deprived the French any prepared defences in Belgium to forestall an attack , a situation which the French had wanted to avoid as it meant engaging the German Panzer Divisions in a mobile battle . The French considered invading Belgium immediately in response to a German attack on the country . The Belgians , recognising the danger posed by the Germans , secretly made their own defence policies , troop movement information , communications , fixed defence dispositions , intelligence and air reconnaissance arrangements available to the French military attaché in Brussels . 
 The Allied plan to aid Belgium was the Dyle Plan ; the cream of the Allied forces , which included the French armoured divisions , would advance to the Dyle river in response to a German invasion . The choice of an established Allied line lay in either reinforcing the Belgians in the east of the country , at the Meuse – Albert Canal line , and holding the Scheldt Estuary , thus linking the French defences in the south with the Belgian forces protecting Ghent and Antwerp , seemed to be the soundest defensive strategy . The weakness of the plan was that , politically at least , it abandoned most of eastern Belgium to the Germans . Militarily it would put the Allied rear at right angles to the French frontier defences ; while for the British , their communications located at the Bay of Biscay ports , would be parallel to their front . Despite the risk of committing forces to central Belgium and an advance to the <unk> or Dyle lines , which would be vulnerable to an outflanking move , Maurice Gamelin , the French commander , approved the plan and it remained the Allied strategy upon the outbreak of war . 
 The British , with no army in the field and behind in rearmament , was in no position to challenge French strategy , which had assumed the prominent role of the Western Alliance . Having little ability to oppose the French , the British strategy for military action came in the form of strategic bombing of the Ruhr industry . 
 = = = Belgian military strategy = = = 
 Upon the official Belgian withdrawal from the Western Alliance , the Belgians refused to engage in any official staff meetings with the French or British military staff for fear of compromising its neutrality . The Belgians did not regard a German invasion as inevitable and were determined that if an invasion did take place it would be effectively resisted by new fortifications such as Eben Emael . The Belgians had taken measures to reconstruct their defences along the border with the German state upon Adolf Hitler 's rise to power in January 1933 . The Belgian government had watched with increasing alarm the German withdrawal from the League of Nations , its repudiation of the Treaty of Versailles and its violation of the Locarno Treaties . The government increased expenditure on modernising the fortifications at Namur and Liège . New lines of defence were established along the Maastricht – Bois @-@ le @-@ Duc canal , joining the Meuse , Scheldt and the Albert Canal . The protection of the eastern frontier , based mainly on the destruction of a number of roads , was entrusted to new formations ( frontier cyclist units and the newly formed Chasseurs Ardennais ) . By 1935 , the Belgian defences had been completed . Even so , it was felt that the defences were no longer adequate . A significant mobile reserve was needed to guard the rear areas , and as a result it was considered that the protection against a sudden assault by German forces was not sufficient . Significant manpower reserves were also needed , but a bill made for the provision of longer military service and training for the army was rejected by the public on the basis that it would increase Belgium 's military commitments as well as the request of the Allies to engage in conflicts far from home . 
 King Leopold III made a speech on 14 October 1936 in front of the Council of Ministers , in an attempt to persuade the people ( and its Government ) that the defences needed strengthening . He outlined three main military points for Belgium 's increased rearmament : 
 a ) German rearmament , following upon the complete re @-@ militarisation of Italy and Russia ( the Soviet Union ) , caused most other states , even those that were deliberately pacifistic , like Switzerland and the Netherlands , to take exceptional precautions . 
 b ) There has been such a vast change in the methods of warfare as a result of technical progress , particularly in aviation and mechanization , that the initial operations of armed conflict could now be of such force , speed and magnitude as to be particularly alarming to small countries like Belgium . 
 c ) Our anxieties have been increased by the lightning reoccupation of the Rhineland and the fact that bases for the start of a possible German invasion have been moved near to our frontier . 
 On 24 April 1937 , the French and British delivered a public declaration that Belgium 's security was paramount to the Western Allies and that they would defend their frontiers accordingly against aggression of any sort , whether this aggression was directed solely at Belgium , or as a means of obtaining bases from which to wage war against " other states " . The British and French , under those circumstances , released Belgium from her Locarno obligations to render mutual assistance in the event of German aggression toward Poland , while the British and French maintained their military obligations to Belgium . 
 Militarily , the Belgians considered the Wehrmacht to be stronger than the Allies , particular the British Army and engaging in overtures to the Allies would result in Belgium becoming a battleground without adequate Allies . The Belgians and French remained confused about what was expected of each other if or when , hostilities commenced . The Belgians were determined to hold the border fortifications along the Albert Canal and the Meuse , without withdrawing , until the French Army arrived to support them . Gamelin was not keen on pushing his Dyle plan that far . He was concerned that the Belgians would be driven out of their defences and would retreat to Antwerp , as in 1914 . In fact , the Belgian divisions protecting the border were to withdraw and retreat southward to link up with French forces . This information was not given to Gamelin . As far as the Belgians were concerned , the Dyle Plan had advantages . Instead of the limited Allied advance to the Scheldt , or meeting the Germans on the Franco @-@ Belgian border , the move to the Dyle river would reduce the Allied front in central Belgium by 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) , freeing more forces for use as a strategic reserve . It was felt it would save more Belgian territory , in particular the eastern industrial regions . It also had the advantage of absorbing Dutch and Belgian Army formations ( including some 20 Belgian divisions ) . Gamelin was to justify the Dyle Plan after the defeat using these arguments . 
 On 10 January 1940 , in an episode known as the Mechelen Incident , a German Army Major Hellmuth <unk> crash @-@ landed in a Messerschmitt Bf 108 near Mechelen @-@ aan @-@ de @-@ Maas . <unk> was carrying the first plans for the German invasion of western Europe which , as Gamelin had expected , entailed a repeat of the 1914 Schlieffen Plan and a German thrust through the Belgium ( which was expanded by the Wehrmacht to include the Netherlands ) and into France . 
 The Belgians suspected a ruse , but the plans were taken seriously . Belgian intelligence and the military attaché in Cologne correctly suggested the Germans would not commence the invasion with this plan . It suggested that the Germans would try an attack through the Belgian Ardennes and advance to Calais with the aim of encircling the Allied armies in Belgium . The Belgians had correctly predicted the Germans would attempt a <unk> ( literally " Cauldron battle " , meaning encirclement ) , to destroy its enemies . The Belgians had predicted the exact German plan as offered by Erich von Manstein . 
 The Belgian High Command warned the French and British of their concerns . They feared that the Dyle plan would put not just the Belgian strategic position in danger , but also the entire left wing of the Allied front . King Leopold and General Raoul Van Overstraeten , the King 's Aide de Camp , warned Gamelin and the French Army Command of their concerns on 8 March and 14 April . They were ignored . 
 = = = Belgian plans for defensive operations = = = 
 The Belgian plan , in the event of German aggression [ italics in original ] provided for : 
 ( a ) A delaying position along the Albert Canal from Antwerp to Liège and the Meuse from Liège to Namur , which was to be held long enough to allow French and British troops to occupy the line Antwerp – Namur – Givet . It was anticipated that the forces of the guarantor Powers would be in action on the third day of an invasion . 
 ( b ) Withdrawal to the Antwerp – Namur position . 
 ( c ) The Belgian Army was to hold the sector – excluding Leuven , but including Antwerp – as part of the main Allied defensive position . 
 In an agreement with the British and French Armies , the French 7th Army under the command of Henri Giraud was to advance into Belgium , past the Scheldt Estuary in Zeeland if possible , to Breda , in the Netherlands . The British Army 's British Expeditionary Force or BEF , commanded by General John Vereker , Lord Gort , was to occupy the central position in the Brussels – Ghent gap supporting the Belgian Army holding the main defensive positions some 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) east of Brussels . The main defensive position ringing Antwerp would be protected by the Belgians , barely 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) from the city . The French 7th Army was to reach the Zeeland or Breda , just inside the Dutch border . The French would then be in a position to protect the left flank of the Belgian Army forces protecting Antwerp and threaten the German northern flank . 
 Further east , delaying positions were constructed in the immediate tactical zones along the Albert Canal , which joined with the defences of the Meuse west of Maastricht . The line deviated southward , and continued to Liege . The Maastricht – Liège gap was heavily protected . Fort Eben @-@ Emael guarded the city 's northern flank , the tank country lying in the strategic depths of the Belgian forces occupying the city and the axis of advance into the west of the country . Further lines of defence ran south west , covering the Liege – Namur axis . The Belgian Army also had the added benefit of the French 1st Army , advancing toward Gembloux and Hannut , on the southern flank of the BEF and covering the Sambre sector . This covered the gap in the Belgian defences between the main Belgian positions on the Dyle line with Namur to the south . Further south still , the French 9th Army advanced to the Givet – Dinant axis on the Meuse river . The French 2nd Army was responsible for the last 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) of front , covering Sedan , the lower Meuse , the Belgian – Luxembourg border and the northern flank of the Maginot line . 
 = = = German operational plans = = = 
 The German plan of attack required that Army Group B would advance and draw in the Allied First Army Group into central Belgium , while Army Group A conducted the surprise assault through the Ardennes . Belgium was to act as a secondary front with regard to importance . Army Group B was given only limited numbers of armoured and mobile units while the vast majority of the Army Group comprised infantry divisions . After the English Channel was reached , all Panzer division units and most motorised infantry were removed from Army Group B and given to Army Group A , to strengthen the German lines of communication and to prevent an Allied breakout . 
 Such a plan would still fail if sufficient ground could not be taken quickly in Belgium to squeeze the allies against two fronts . Preventing this from happening were the defences of Fort Eben @-@ Emael and the Albert Canal . The three bridges over the canal were the key to allowing Army Group B a high operational tempo . The bridges at Veldwezelt , Vroenhoven and Kanne in Belgium , and Maastricht on the Dutch border were the target . Failure to capture the bridges would leave Reichenau 's German 6th Army , the southern @-@ most army of Group B , trapped in the Maastricht @-@ Albert Canal enclave and subjected to the fire of Eben @-@ Emael . The fort had to be captured or destroyed . 
 Adolf Hitler summoned Lieutenant @-@ General Kurt Student of the 7 . Flieger @-@ Division ( 7th Air Division ) to discuss the assault . It was first suggested that a conventional parachute drop be made by airborne forces to seize and destroy the forts ' guns before the land units approached . Such a suggestion was rejected as the Junkers Ju 52 transports were too slow and were likely to be vulnerable to Dutch and Belgian anti @-@ aircraft guns . Other factors for its refusal were the weather conditions , which might blow the paratroopers away from the fort and disperse them too widely . A seven @-@ second drop from a Ju 52 at minimum operational height led to a dispersion over 300 metres alone . 
 Hitler had noticed one potential flaw in the defences . The roofs were flat and unprotected ; he demanded to know if a glider , such as the DFS 230 , could land on them . Student replied that it could be done , but only by 12 aircraft and in daylight ; this would deliver 80 – 90 paratroopers onto the target . Hitler then revealed the tactical weapon that would make this strategic operation work , introducing the <unk> ( hollow @-@ charge ) – a 50 kilograms ( 110 lb ) explosive weapon which would destroy the Belgian gun emplacements . It was this tactical unit that would spearhead the first strategic airborne operation in history . 
 = = Forces involved = = 
 = = = Belgian forces = = = 
 The Belgian Army could muster 22 divisions , which contained 1 @,@ 338 artillery pieces but just 10 AMC 35 tanks . However , the Belgian combat vehicles included 200 T @-@ 13 tank destroyers . These had an excellent 47 mm antitank gun and a coaxial <unk> machine gun in a turret . The Belgians also possessed 42 T @-@ 15s . They were officially described as armoured cars but were actually fully tracked tanks with a 13 @.@ 2 mm turret machine gun . The standard Belgian anti @-@ tank gun was the 47 mm FRC , towed either by trucks or by fully tracked armoured <unk> B @-@ tractors . One report states that a round from a 47 mm gun went straight through a Sd <unk> 231 and penetrated the armour of the Panzer IV behind it . These Belgian guns were better than the 25 mm and 37 mm guns of respectively the French and the Germans . 
 The Belgians began mobilisation on 25 August 1939 and by May 1940 mounted a field army of 18 infantry divisions , two divisions of partly motorised Chasseurs Ardennais and two motorised cavalry divisions , a force totaling some 600 @,@ 000 men . Belgian reserves may have been able to field 900 @,@ 000 men . The army lacked armour and anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 After the completion of the Belgian Army 's mobilisation , it could muster five Regular Corps and two reserve Army Corps consisting of 12 regular infantry divisions , two divisions of Chasseurs Ardennais , six reserve infantry divisions , one brigade of Cyclist Frontier Guards , one Cavalry Corps of two divisions , and one brigade of motorised cavalry . The Army contained two anti @-@ aircraft artillery and four artillery regiments , and an unknown number of fortress , engineer , and signals force personnel . 
 The Belgian Naval Corps ( Corps de Marine ) was resurrected in 1939 . Most of the Belgian merchant fleet , some 100 ships , evaded capture by the Germans . Under the terms of a Belgian – Royal Navy agreement , these ships and their 3 @,@ 350 crewmen were placed under British control for the duration of hostilities . The General Headquarters of the Belgian Admiralty was at Ostend under the command of Major Henry <unk> . The First Naval Division was based at Ostend , while the Second and Third divisions were based at Zeebrugge and Antwerp . 
 The Aéronautique Militaire Belge ( Belgian Air Force - AéMI ) had barely begun to modernise their aircraft technology . The AéMI had ordered Brewster Buffalo , Fiat CR.42 , and Hawker Hurricane fighters , Koolhoven <unk> trainers , Fairey Battle and Caproni <unk> light bombers , and Caproni <unk> fighter @-@ reconnaissance aircraft , but only the <unk> , Hurricanes , and Battles had been delivered . The shortage of modern types meant single @-@ seat versions of the Fairey Fox light bomber were being used as fighters . The AéMI possessed 250 combat aircraft . At least 90 were fighters , 12 were bombers and 12 were reconnaissance aircraft . Only 50 were of reasonably modern standard . When liaison and transport aircraft from all services are included , the total strength was 377 ; however only 118 of these were serviceable on 10 May 1940 . Of this number around 78 were fighters and 40 were bombers . 
 The AéMI was commanded by Paul Hiernaux , who had received his pilot 's license just before the outbreak of World War I , and had risen to the position of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief in 1938 . Hiernaux organised the service into three <unk> d <unk> ( air regiments ) : the 1er with 60 aircraft , the 2ème with 53 aircraft , and the <unk> with 79 aircraft . 
 = = = French forces = = = 
 The Belgians were afforded substantial support by the French Army . The French 1st Army included General René Prioux 's Cavalry Corps . The Corps was given the 2nd Light Mechanized Division ( 2e Division Légère Mécanique , or 2e DLM ) and the 3rd Light Mechanized Division ( 3e DLM ) , which were allocated to defend the Gembloux gap . The armoured forces consisted of 176 of the formidable SOMUA <unk> and 239 Hotchkiss <unk> light tanks . Both of these types , in armour and firepower , were superior to most German types . The 3e DLM contained 90 <unk> and some 140 <unk> alone . 
 The French 7th Army was assigned to protect the northernmost part of the Allied front . It contained the 1st Light Mechanized Division ( <unk> DLM ) , the 25th Motorised Infantry Division ( 25e Division d 'Infanterie <unk> , or 25e DIM ) and the 9th Motorised Infantry Division ( 9e DIM ) . This force would advance to Breda in the Netherlands . 
 The third French army to see action on Belgian soil was the 9th . It was weaker than both the 7th and the 1st Armies . The 9th Army was allocated infantry divisions , with the exception of the 5th Motorised Infantry Division ( 5e DIM ) . Its mission was to protect the southern flank of the Allied armies , south of the Sambre river and just north of Sedan . Further south , in France , was the French 2nd Army , protecting the Franco @-@ Belgian border between Sedan and Montmédy . The two weakest French armies were thus protecting the area of the main German thrust . 
 = = = British forces = = = 
 The British contributed the weakest force to Belgium . The BEF , under the command of General Lord Gort VC , consisted of just 152 @,@ 000 men in two corps of two divisions each . It was hoped to field two armies of two Corps each , but this scale of mobilisation never took place . The I Corps was commanded by Lt @-@ Gen. John Dill , later Lt @-@ Gen. Michael Barker , who was in turn replaced by Major @-@ General Harold Alexander . Lt @-@ Gen. Alan Brooke commanded II Corps . Later the III Corps under Lt @-@ Gen. Ronald Adam was added to the British order of battle . A further 9 @,@ 392 Royal Air Force ( RAF ) personnel of the RAF Advanced Air Striking Force under the command of Air Vice @-@ Marshal Patrick Playfair was to support operations in Belgium . By May 1940 the BEF had grown to 394 @,@ 165 men , of whom more than 150 @,@ 000 were part of the logistical rear area organisations and had little military training . On 10 May 1940 , the BEF comprised just 10 divisions ( not all at full strength ) , 1 @,@ 280 artillery pieces and 310 tanks . 
 = = = German forces = = = 
 Army Group B was commanded by Fedor von Bock . It was allocated 26 infantry and three Panzer divisions for the invasion of the Netherlands and Belgium . Of the three Panzer Divisions , the 3rd and 4th were to operate in Belgium under the command of the 6th Army 's XVI Corps . The 9th Panzer Division was attached to the 18th Army which , after the Battle of the Netherlands , would support the push into Belgium alongside the 18th Army and cover its northern flank . 
 Armour strength in Army Group B amounted to 808 tanks , of which 282 were Panzer Is , 288 were Panzer IIs , 123 were Panzer IIIs and 66 were Panzer IVs ; 49 command tanks were also operational . The 3rd Panzer Division 's armoured regiments consisted of 117 Panzer Is , 128 Panzer IIs , 42 Panzer IIIs , 26 Panzer IVs and 27 command tanks . The 4th Panzer Division had 136 Panzer Is , 105 Panzer IIs , 40 Panzer IIIs , 24 Panzer IVs and 10 command tanks . The 9th Panzer , scheduled initially for operations in the Netherlands , was the weakest division with only 30 Panzer Is , 54 Panzer IIs , 123 , 66 Panzer IIIs and 49 Panzer IVs . The elements drawn from the 7th Air Division and the 22nd Airlanding Division , that were to take part in the attack on Fort Eben @-@ Emael , were named Sturmabteilung Koch ( Assault Detachment Koch ) ; named after the commanding officer of the group , Hauptmann Walter Koch . The force was assembled in November 1939 . It was primarily composed of parachutists from the 1st Parachute Regiment and engineers from the 7th Air Division , as well as a small group of Luftwaffe pilots . The Luftwaffe allocated 1 @,@ 815 combat , 487 transport aircraft and 50 gliders for the assault on the Low Countries . 
 The initial air strikes over Belgian air space were to be conducted by IV . Fliegerkorps under General der Flieger Generaloberst Alfred Keller . Keller 's force consisted of Lehrgeschwader 1 ( Stab . I. , II . , III . , IV . ) , Kampfgeschwader 30 ( Stab . I. , II . , III . ) and Kampfgeschwader 27 ( III . ) . On 10 May Keller had 363 aircraft ( 224 serviceable ) augmented by Generalmajor Wolfram von Richthofen 's VIII . Fliegerkorps with 550 ( 420 serviceable ) aircraft . They in turn were supported by Oberst Kurt @-@ Bertram von Döring 's Jagdfliegerführer 2 , with 462 fighters ( 313 serviceable ) . 
 Keller 's IV . Fliegerkorps headquarters would operate from Düsseldorf , LG 1 . Kampfgeschwader 30 which was based at Oldenburg and its III . Gruppe were based at Marx . Support for Döring and Von Richthofen came from present @-@ day North Rhine @-@ Westphalia and bases in <unk> , Mönchengladbach , Dortmund and Essen . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Luftwaffe operations : 10 May = = = 
 During the evening of 9 May , the Belgian Military attaché in Berlin intimated that the Germans intended to attack the following day . Offensive movement of enemy forces were detected on the border . At 00 : 10 on 10 May 1940 , at General Headquarters an unspecified squadron in Brussels gave the alarm . A full state of alert was instigated at 01 : 30 am . Belgian forces took up their deployment positions . The Allied armies had enacted their Dyle plan on the morning of 10 May , and were approaching the Belgian rear . King Leopold had gone to his Headquarters near <unk> , Antwerp . 
 The Luftwaffe was to spearhead the aerial battle in the low countries . Its first task was the elimination of the Belgian air contingent . Despite an overwhelming numerical superiority of 1 @,@ 375 aircraft , 957 of which were serviceable , the air campaign in Belgium had limited success overall on the first day . At roughly 04 : 00 , the first air raids were conducted against airfields and communication centres . It still had a tremendous impact on the AéMI , which had only 179 aircraft on 10 May . 
 Much of the success achieved was down to Richthofen 's subordinates , particularly Kampfgeschwader 77 and its commander Oberst Dr. Johann @-@ Volkmar Fisser whose attachment to VIII . Fliegerkorps , was noted by Generalmajor Wilhelm Speidel . He commented it " ... was the result of the well @-@ known tendency of the commanding general to conduct his own private war " . Fisser 's KG 77 destroyed the AéMI main bases , with help from KG 54 . Fighters from Jagdgeschwader 27 ( JG 27 ) eliminated two Belgian squadrons at <unk> , and during the afternoon , I. / St.G 2 destroyed nine of the 15 Fiat CR.42 fighters at <unk> . At Schaffen @-@ <unk> , three Hawker Hurricanes of Escadrille 2 / I / 2 were destroyed and another six damaged when a wave of He 111s caught them as they were about to take off . A further two were lost in destroyed hangars . At Nivelles airfield , 13 <unk> were destroyed . The only other success was KG 27s destruction of eight aircraft at <unk> . 
 In aerial combat the battles were also one @-@ sided . Two He 111s , two Do 17s and three Messerschmitt Bf 109s were shot down by Gloster Gladiators and Hurricanes . In return , eight Belgian Gladiators , five Fairey <unk> and one <unk> was shot down by JG 1 , 21 and 27 . No. 18 Squadron RAF sent two Bristol Blenheims on operations over the Belgian front , but lost both to Bf 109s . By the end of the 10 May , the official German figures indicate claims for 30 Belgian aircraft destroyed on the ground , and 14 ( plus the two RAF bombers ) in the air for 10 losses . The victory claims are likely an undercount . A total of 83 Belgian machines – mostly trainers and " squadron hacks " , were destroyed . The AéMI flew only 146 sorties in the first six days . Between 16 May and 28 May , the AéMI flew just 77 operations . It spent most of its time retreating and fuel withdrawing in the face of Luftwaffe attacks . 
 = = = 10 – 11 May : The border Battles = = = 
 The German planners had recognised the need to eliminate Fort Eben @-@ Emael if their army was to break into the interior of Belgium . It decided to deploy airborne forces ( Fallschirmjäger ) to land inside the fortress perimeter using <unk> special explosives ( and flamethrowers ) to disable the defences , the Fallschirmjäger then entered the fortress . In the ensuing battle , German infantry overcame the defenders of the I Belgian Corps ' 7th Infantry Division in 24 hours . The main Belgian defence line had been breached and German infantry of the 18th Army had passed through it rapidly . Moreover , German soldiers had established bridgeheads across the Albert Canal before the British were able to reach it some 48 hours later . The Chasseurs Ardennais further south , on the orders of their commander , withdrew behind the Meuse , destroying some bridges in their wake . The German airborne forces were assisted by Junkers Ju 87 Stukas of III . / Sturzkampfgeschwader 2 ( StG 2 ) and I. / Sturzkampfgeschwader 77 ( StG 77 ) helped suppress the defences . Henschel Hs <unk> of II . ( S ) . / Lehrgeschwader 2 ( LG 2 ) which assisted in the capture of the bridges at Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt in the immediate area . 
 Further successful German airborne offensive operations were carried out in Luxembourg which seized five crossings and communication routes leading into central Belgium . The offensive , carried out by 125 volunteers of the 34th Infantry Division under the command of Wenner <unk> , achieved their missions by flying to their objectives using Fieseler Fi 156 <unk> . The cost was the loss of five aircraft and 30 dead . With the fort breached , the Belgian 4th and 7th Infantry Divisions were confronted by the prospect of fighting an enemy on relatively sound terrain ( for armour operations ) . The 7th Division , with its 2nd and 18th Grenadier Regiments and 2nd Carabineers , struggled to hold their positions and contain the German infantry on the west bank . The Belgian tactical units engaged in several counterattacks . At one point , at <unk> , they succeeded in retaking the bridge and blowing it up . At the other points , Vroenhoven and Veldwezelt , the Germans had had time to establish strong bridgeheads and repulsed the attacks . 
 A little known third airborne operation , Operation <unk> , was also conducted on 10 May in southern Belgium . The objectives of this operation was to land two companies of the 3rd battalion Grossdeutschland Infantry Regiment by Fi 156 aircraft at <unk> and <unk> in the south of the country , in order to clear a path for the 1st and 2nd Panzer divisions which were advancing through the Belgian – Luxembourg Ardennes . The original plan called for the use of Junkers Ju 52 transport aircraft , but the short landing capability of the Fi 156 ( 27 metres ) saw 200 of these aircraft used in the assault . The operational mission was to : 
 1 . Cut signal communications and message links on the Neufchâteau – Bastogne and Neufchâteau – <unk> roads . [ Neufchâteau being the largest southern @-@ most city in Belgium ] 
 2 . Prevent the approach of reserves from the Neufchâteau area 
 3 . <unk> the capture of pillboxes and the advance by exerting pressure against the line of pillboxes along the border from the rear . 
 The German infantry were engaged by several Belgian patrols equipped with T @-@ 15 armoured cars . Several Belgian counterattacks were repulsed , among them an attack by the 1st Light Chasseurs Ardennais Division . Unsupported , the Germans faced a counterattack later in the evening by elements of the French 5th Cavalry Division , dispatched by General Charles Huntziger from the French 2nd Army , which had " massive " tank strength . The Germans were forced to retreat . The French , however , failed to pursue the fleeing German units , stopping at a dummy barrier . By the next morning , the 2nd Panzer Division had reached the area , and the mission had largely been accomplished . From the German perspective , the operation hindered rather than helped Heinz Guderian 's Panzer Corps . The regiment had blocked the roads and , against the odds , prevented French reinforcements reaching the Belgian – Franco @-@ Luxembourg border , but it also destroyed Belgian telephone communications . This inadvertently prevented the Belgian field command recalling the units along the border . The 1st Belgian Light Infantry did not receive the signal to retreat and engaged in a severe fire @-@ fight with the German armour , slowing down their advance . 
 The failure of the Franco – Belgian forces to hold the Ardennes gap was fatal . The Belgians had withdrawn laterally upon the initial invasion and had demolished and blocked routes of advance , which held up the French 2nd Army units moving north toward Namur and Huy . Devoid of any centre of resistance , the German assault engineers had cleared the obstacles unchallenged . The delay that the Belgian Ardennes Light Infantry , considered to be an elite formation , could have inflicted upon the advancing German armour was proved by the fight for <unk> , where the 1st Panzer Division was held up for a total of eight hours . This battle was a result of a breakdown in communications and ran contrary to the operational intentions of the Belgian Army . 
 Meanwhile , in the central Belgian sector , having failed to restore their front by means of ground attack , the Belgians attempted to bomb the bridges and positions that the Germans had captured intact and were holding on 11 May . Belgian Fairey Battles of 5 / III / 3 escorted by six Gloster Gladiators attacked the Albert Canal bridges . Bf 109s from I. / Jagdgeschwader 1 ( JG 1 ) and I. / JG 27 intercepted and JG 1 shot down four Gladiators and both units destroyed six Battles and heavily damaged the remaining three . Eight CR.42s were evacuated from <unk> to Grimbergen near Brussels but seven Gladiators and the last remaining Hurricanes from 2 / I / 2 Escadrille were destroyed at Beauvechain Air Base and Le Culot by He 111s and I. / JG 27 respectively . The RAF contributed to the effort to attack the bridges . The British dispatched Bristol Blenheims from 110 and 21 Squadron — the first squadron lost two , one to I. / JG 27 . 21 Squadron suffered damage to most of the bombers because of intense ground @-@ fire . The French Armée de l 'air dispatched LeO <unk> from GBI / 12 and <unk> / 12 escorted by 18 Morane @-@ Saulnier M.S.406 of <unk> / 3 and <unk> / 6 . The operation failed and one bomber was lost while four M.S.406s fell to <unk> 1 . The French claimed five . Meanwhile , 114 Squadron lost six Blenheims destroyed when Dornier Do 17s of Kampfgeschwader 2 bombed their airfield at <unk> . Another Battle of No. 150 Squadron RAF was lost in another raid . 
 The German counter @-@ air operations were spearheaded by Jagdgeschwader 26 ( JG 26 ) under the command of Hans @-@ Hugo Witt , which was responsible for 82 of the German claims in aerial combat between 11 and 13 May . Despite the apparent success of the German fighter units , the air battle was not one @-@ sided . On the morning of 11 May ten Ju 87s of StG 2 were shot down attacking Belgian forces in the Namur – Dinant gap , despite the presence of two Jagdgeschwader — 27 and 51 . Nevertheless , the Germans reported a weakening in Allied air resistance in northern Belgium by 13 May . 
 During the night of 11 May , the British 3rd Infantry Division under the command of General Bernard Law Montgomery , reached its position on the Dyle river at Leuven . As it did so the Belgian 10th Infantry Division , occupying the position , mistook them for German parachutists and fired on them . The Belgians refused to yield but Montgomery claimed to have got his way by placing himself under the command of the Belgian forces , knowing that when the Germans came within artillery range the Belgians would withdraw . 
 Alan Brooke , commander of the British II Corps sought to put the matter of cooperation right with King Leopold . The King discussed the matter with Brooke , who felt a compromise could be reached . Van Overstraeten , the King 's military aide , stepped in and said that the 10th Belgian Infantry Division could not be moved . Instead , the British should move further south and remain completely clear of Brussels . Brooke told the King that the 10th Belgian Division was on the wrong side of the Gamelin line and was exposed . Leopold deferred to his advisor and chief of staff . Brooke found <unk> to be ignorant of the situation and the dispositions of the BEF . Given that the left flank of the BEF rested on its Belgian ally , the British were now unsure about Belgian military capabilities . The Allies had more serious grounds for complaint about the Belgian anti @-@ tank defences along the Dyle line , that covered the Namur – <unk> gap which was not protected by any natural obstacles . Only a few days before the attack , General Headquarters had discovered the Belgians had sited their anti @-@ tank defences ( de <unk> defences ) several miles east of the Dyle between Namur – <unk> . 
 After holding onto the Albert Canal 's west bank for nearly 36 hours , the 4th and 7th Belgian infantry divisions withdrew . The capture of Eben @-@ Emael allowed the Germans to force through the Panzers of the 6th Army . The situation for the Belgian divisions was either to withdraw or be encircled . The Germans had advanced beyond Tongeren and were now in a position to sweep south to Namur , which would threaten to envelop the entire Albert Canal and Liège positions . Under the circumstances , both divisions withdrew . On the evening of 11 May , the Belgian Command withdrew its forces behind the Namur – Antwerp line . The following day , the French 1st Army arrived at Gembloux , between Wavre and Namur , to cover the " Gembloux gap " . It was a flat area , devoid of prepared or entrenched positions . 
 The French 7th Army , on the northern flank of the Belgian line , protected the Bruges – Ghent – Ostend axis and , covering the Channel ports , had advanced into Belgium and into the Netherlands with speed . It reached Breda in the Netherlands , on 11 May . But German parachute forces had seized the Moerdijk bridge on the Hollands Diep river , south of Rotterdam , making it impossible for the French to link up with the Dutch Army . The Dutch Army withdrew north to Rotterdam and Amsterdam . The French 7th Army turned east and met the 9th Panzer Division about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) east of Breda at Tilburg . The battle resulted in the French retiring , in the face of Luftwaffe air assaults , to Antwerp . It would later help in the defence of the city . The Luftwaffe had given priority to attacking the French 7th Army 's spearhead into the Netherlands as it threatened the Moerdijk bridgehead . Kampfgeschwader 40 and 54 supported by Ju 87s from VIII . Fliegerkorps helped drive them back . Fears of Allied reinforcements reaching Antwerp forced the Luftwaffe to cover the Scheldt estuary . KG 30 bombed and sank two Dutch gunboats and three Dutch destroyers , as well as badly damaging two Royal Navy destroyers . But overall the bombing had a limited effect . 
 = = = 12 – 14 May : Battles of the central Belgian plain = = = 
 During the night of 11 / 12 May , the Belgians were fully engaged in withdrawing to the Dyle line , covered by a network of demolitions and rearguards astride Tongeren . During the morning of 12 May , King Leopold III , General van Overstraeten , Édouard Daladier , General Alphonse Georges ( commander of the First Allied army Group , comprising the BEF , French 1st , 2nd , 7th and 9th Armies ) , General Gaston Billotte ( coordinator of the Allied Armies ) and General Henry Royds Pownall , Gort 's chief of staff , met for a military conference near Mons . It was agreed the Belgian Army would man the Antwerp – Leuven line , while its allies took up the responsibility of defending the extreme north and south of the country . 
 The Belgian III Corps , and its 1st Chasseurs Ardennais , 2nd Infantry and 3rd Infantry Divisions had withdrawn from the Liège fortifications to avoid being encircled . One regiment , the Liège Fortress Regiment , stayed behind to disrupt German communications . Further to the south , the Namur fortress , manned by VI Corps ' 5th Infantry Division and the 2nd Chasseurs Ardennais with the 12th French Infantry Division , fought delaying actions and participated in a lot of demolition work while guarding the position . As far as the Belgians were concerned , it had accomplished the only independent mission assigned to it : to hold the Liège – Albert Canal line long enough for the Allied units to reach friendly forces occupying the Namur – Antwerp – Givet line . For the remainder of the campaign , the Belgians would execute their operations in accordance with the overall Allied plan . 
 Belgian soldiers fought rearguard actions while other Belgian units already on the Dyle line worked tirelessly to organise better defensive positions in the Leuven – Antwerp gap . The 2nd Regiment of Guides and the 2nd Carabineers Cyclists of the 2nd Belgian Cavalry Division covered the retreat of the 4th and 7th Belgian divisions and were particularly distinguished at the Battle of Tirlemont and the Battle of Halen . 
 In support of Belgian forces in the area , the RAF and French flew air defence operations in the Tirlemont and Louvain area . The RAF Advanced Air Striking Force committed 3 , 504 , 79 , 57 , 59 , 85 , 87 , 605 , and 242 squadrons to battle . A series of air battles were fought with JG 1 , 2 , 26 , 27 and 3 . Messerschmitt Bf 110s from Zerstörergeschwader 26 ( ZG 26 ) , and bomber units LG 1 , 2 and KG 27 were also involved . Over Belgium and France , the day was disastrous for the British : 27 Hurricanes were shot down . In light of the withdrawal to the main defensive line , which was now being supported by the British and French Armies , King Leopold issued the following proclamation to improve morale after the defeats at the Albert Canal : 
 Soldiers 
 The Belgian Army , brutally assailed by an unparalleled surprise attack , grappling with forces that are better equipped and have the advantage of a formidable air force , has for three days carried out difficult operations , the success of which is of the utmost importance to the general conduct of the battle and to the result of war . 
 These operations require from all of us – officers and men – exceptional efforts , sustained day and night , despite a moral tension tested to its limits by the sight of the devastation wrought by a pitiless invader . However severe the trial may be , you will come through it gallantly . 
 Our position improves with every hour ; our ranks are closing up . In the critical days that are ahead of us , you will summon up all your energies , you will make every sacrifice , to stem the invasion . 
 Just as they did in 1914 on the Yser , so now the French and British troops are counting on you : the safety and honour of the country are in your hands . 
 Leopold . 
 To the Allies , the Belgian failure to hold onto its eastern frontiers ( they were thought to be capable of holding out for two weeks ) , was a disappointment . The Allied Chiefs of Staff had sought to avoid an encounter mobile battle without any strong fixed defences to fall back on and hoped Belgian resistance would last long enough for a defensive line to be established . Nevertheless , a brief lull fell on the Dyle front on 11 May which enabled the Allied armies to get into position by the time the first major assault was launched the following day . Allied cavalry had moved into position and infantry and artillery were reaching the front more slowly , by rail . Although unaware of it , the First Allied army Group and the Belgian Army outnumbered and outgunned Walther von Reichenau 's German 6th Army . 
 On the morning of 12 May , in response to Belgian pressure and necessity , the Royal Air Force and the Armée de l 'Air undertook several air attacks on the German @-@ held Maastricht and Meuse bridges to prevent German forces flowing into Belgium . 74 sorties had been flown by the Allies since 10 May . On 12 May , eleven out of eighteen French Breguet 693 bombers were shot down . The RAF Advanced Air Striking Force , which included the largest Allied bomber force , was reduced to 72 aircraft out of 135 by 12 May . For the next 24 hours , missions were postponed as the German anti @-@ aircraft and fighter defences were too strong . 
 The results of the bombing is difficult to determine . The German XIX Corps war diary 's situation summary at 20 : 00 on 14 May noted : 
 The completion of the military bridge at Donchery had not yet been carried out owing to heavy flanking artillery fire and long bombing attacks on the bridging point … Throughout the day all three divisions have had to endure constant air attack — especially at the crossing and bridging points . Our fighter cover is inadequate . Requests [ for increased fighter protection ] are still unsuccessful . 
 The Luftwaffe 's operations includes a note of " vigorous enemy fighter activity through which our close reconnaissance in particular is severely impeded " . Nevertheless , inadequate protection was given to cover RAF bombers against the strength of German opposition over the target area . In all , out of 109 Fairey Battles and Bristol Blenheims which had attacked enemy columns and communications in the Sedan area , 45 had been lost . On 15 May , daylight bombing was significantly reduced . Of 23 aircraft employed , four failed to return . Equally , owing to the Allied fighter presence , the German XIX Corps War Diary states , " Corps no longer has at its disposal its own long @-@ range reconnaissance … [ Reconnaissance squadrons ] are no longer in a position to carry out vigorous , extensive reconnaissance , as , owing to casualties , more than half of their aircraft are not now available . " 
 The most serious combat to evolve on 12 May 1940 was the beginning of the Battle of Hannut ( 12 – 14 May ) . While the German Army Group A advanced through the Belgian Ardennes , Army Group B 's 6th Army launched an offensive operation toward the Gembloux gap . Gembloux occupied a position in the Belgian plain ; it was an unfortified , <unk> space in the main Belgian defensive line . The Gap stretched from the southern end of the Dyle line , from Wavre in the north , to Namur in the south , 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) to 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) . After attacking out of the Maastricht bulge and defeating the Belgian defences at Liege , which compelled the Belgian I Corps to retreat , the German 6th Army 's XVI Panzer @-@ Motorized Corps , under the command of General Erich Hoepner and containing the 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions , launched an offensive in the area where the French mistakenly expected the main German thrust . 
 The Gembloux gap was defended by the French 1st Army , with six elite divisions including the 2nd ( 2e Division Légère Mécanique , or 2e DLM ) and 3rd Light Mechanized Divisions . The Prioux Cavalry Corps , under the command of Rene @-@ Jacques @-@ Adolphe Prioux , was to advance 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) beyond the line ( east ) to provide a screen for the move . The French 1st and 2nd Armoured Divisions were to be moved behind the French 1st Army to defend its main lines in depth . The Prioux Cavalry Corps was equal to a German Panzer Corps and was to occupy a screening line on the Tirlemont – Hannut – Huy axis . The operational plan called for the Corps to delay the German advance on Gembloux and Hannut until the main elements of the French 1st Army had reached Gembloux and dug in . 
 Hoepner 's Panzer Corps and Prioux ' Cavalry clashed head @-@ on near Hannut , Belgium , on 12 May . Contrary to popular belief , the Germans did not outnumber the French . Frequently , figures of 623 German and 415 French tanks are given . The German 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions numbered 280 and 343 respectively . The 2e DLM and 3e DLM numbered 176 <unk> and 239 Hotchkiss <unk> . Added to this force were the considerable number of Renault AMR @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> in the Cavalry Corps . The R35 was equal or superior to the Panzer I and Panzer IIs in armament terms . This applies all the more to the 90 Panhard 178 armoured cars of the French Army . Its 25mm main gun could penetrate the armour of the Panzer IV . In terms of tanks that were capable of engaging and surviving a tank @-@ vs @-@ tank action , the Germans possessed just 73 Panzer IIIs and 52 Panzer IVs . The French had 176 SOMUA and 239 <unk> . German tank units also contained 486 Panzer I and IIs , which were of dubious combat value given their losses in the Polish Campaign . 
 The German forces were able to communicate by radio during the battle and they could shift the point of the main effort unexpectedly . The Germans also practiced combined arms tactics , while the French tactical deployment was a rigid and linear leftover from the First World War . French tanks did not possess radios and often the commanders had to dismount to issue orders . Despite the disadvantages experienced by the Germans in armour , they were able to gain the upper hand in the morning battle on 12 May , encircling several French battalions . The combat power of the French 2e DLM managed to defeat the German defences guarding the pockets and freeing the trapped units . Contrary to German reports , the French were victorious on that first day , preventing a Wehrmacht break @-@ through to Gembloux or seizing Hannut . The result of the first day 's battle was : 
 The effect on the German light tanks was catastrophic . Virtually every French weapon from 25mm upward penetrated the 7 @-@ <unk> of the Panzer I. Although the Panzer II fared somewhat better , especially those that had been up @-@ armoured since the Polish Campaign , their losses were high . Such was the sheer frustration of the crews of these light Panzers in [ the ] face of heavier armoured French machines that some resorted to desperate expedients . One account speaks of a German Panzer commander attempting to climb on a Hotchkiss H @-@ 35 with a hammer , presumably to smash the machine 's periscopes , but falling off and being crushed by the tank 's tracks . Certainly by day 's end , Prioux had reason to claim that his tanks had come off best . The battlefield around Hannut was littered with knocked @-@ out tanks – the bulk of which were German Panzers – with by far and away the bulk of them being Panzer Is and IIs . 
 The following day , 13 May , the French were undone by their poor tactical deployment . They strung their armour out in a thin line between Hannut and Huy , leaving no defence in depth , which was the point of sending the French armour to the Gembloux gap in the first place . This left Hoepner with a chance to mass against one of the French Light Divisions ( the 3e DLM ) and achieve a breakthrough in that sector . Moreover , with no reserves behind the front , the French denied themselves the chance of a counterattack . The victory saw the Panzer Corps out @-@ manoeuvre the 2e DLM on its left flank . The Belgian III Corps , retreating from Liege , offered to support the French front held by the 3e DLM . This offer was rejected . 
 On 12 and 13 May , 2e DLM lost no AFVs , but the 3e DLM lost 30 <unk> and 75 <unk> . The French had disabled 160 German tanks . But as the poor linear deployment had allowed the Germans the chance of breaking through in one spot , the entire battlefield had to be abandoned , the Germans repaired nearly three quarters of their tanks ; 49 were destroyed and 111 were repaired . They had 60 men killed and another 80 wounded . In terms of battlefield casualties , the Hannut battle had resulted in the French knocking @-@ out 160 German tanks , losing 105 themselves . Prioux had achieved his tactical mission and withdrew . 
 Hoepner now pursued the retreating French . Being impatient , he did not wait for his infantry divisions to catch up . Instead , he hoped to continue pushing the French back and not give them time to construct a coherent defence line . German formations pursued the enemy to Gembloux . The Panzer Corps ran into retreating French columns and inflicted heavy losses on them . The pursuit created severe problems for the French artillery . The combat was so closely fought that the danger of friendly fire incidents were very real . Nevertheless , the French , setting up new anti @-@ tank screens and Hoepner , lacking infantry support , caused the Germans to attack positions head @-@ on . During the following Battle of Gembloux the two Panzer Divisions reported heavy losses during 14 May and were forced to slow their pursuit . The German attempts to capture Gembloux were repulsed . 
 Although suffering numerous tactical reverses , operationally the Germans diverted the Allied First Army Group from the lower Ardennes area . In the process his forces , along with the Luftwaffe depleted Prioux ' Cavalry Corps . When news of the German breakthrough at Sedan reached Prioux , he withdrew from Gembloux . With the Gembloux gap breached , the German Panzer Corps , the 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions , were no longer required by Army Group B and were handed over to Army Group A. Army Group B would continue its own offensive to force the collapse of the Meuse front . The Army Group was in a position to advance westward to Mons , outflank the BEF and Belgian Army protecting the Dyle – Brussels sector , or turn south to outflank the French 9th Army . German losses had been heavy at Hannut and Gembloux . The 4th Panzer Division was down to 137 tanks on 16 May , including just four Panzer IVs . The 3rd Panzer Division was down by 20 – 25 percent of its operational force , while the 4th Panzer Division 45 – 50 percent of its tanks were not combat ready . Damaged tanks were quickly repaired , but its strength was initially greatly weakened . The French 1st Army had also taken a battering and despite winning several tactical defensive victories it was forced to retreat on 15 May owing to developments elsewhere , leaving its tanks on the battlefield , while the Germans were free to recover theirs . 
 = = = 15 – 21 May : Counterattacks and retreat to the coast = = = 
 On the morning of 15 May , German Army Group A broke the defences at Sedan and was now free to drive for the English Channel . The Allies considered a wholesale withdrawal from the Belgian trap . The withdrawal would reflect three stages : the night of 16 / 17 May to the River Senne , the night of 17 / 18 May to the river <unk> and the night of 18 / 19 May to the river Scheldt . The Belgians were reluctant to abandon Brussels and Leuven , especially as the Dyle line had withstood German pressure well . The Belgian Army , the BEF and the French 1st Army , in a domino effect , was ordered / forced to retire on 16 May to avoid their southern flanks from being turned by the German armoured forces advancing through the French Ardennes and the German 6th Army advancing through Gembloux . The Belgian Army was holding the German Fourteenth Army on the KW @-@ line , along with the French 7th and British armies . Had it not been for the collapse of the French 2nd Army at Sedan , the Belgians were confident that they could have checked the German advance . 
 The situation called for the French and British to abandon the Antwerp – Namur line and strong positions in favour of improvised positions behind the Scheldt , without facing any real resistance . In the South , General <unk> of the Belgian VII Corps retreated from the Namur and Liège regions , the Liège fortress region put up stiff resistance to the German 6th Army . In the North , the 7th Army was diverted to Antwerp after the surrender of the Dutch on 15 May , but was then diverted to support the French 1st Army . In the centre , the Belgian Army and the BEF suffered little German pressure . On 15 May , the only sector to really be tested was around Leuven , which was held by the British 3rd Division . The BEF was not pursued vigorously to the Scheldt . 
 After the withdrawal of the French Army from the northern sector , the Belgians were left to guard the fortified city of Antwerp . Four infantry divisions ( including the 13th and 17th Reserve Infantry Divisions ) engaged the German Eighteenth Army 's 208th , 225th and 526th Infantry Divisions . The Belgians successfully defended the northern part of the city , delaying the German infantry forces while starting to withdraw from Antwerp on 16 May . The city fell on 18 / 19 May after considerable Belgian resistance . On 18 May the Belgians received word that Namur 's Fort <unk> had fallen ; <unk> fell on 19 May ; St. Heribert and <unk> on 21 May ; Dave , <unk> and <unk> on 23 May . 
 Between 16 and 17 May , the British and French withdrew behind the <unk> Canal , as the volume of Allied forces in Belgium fell and moved toward the German armoured thrust from the Ardennes . The Belgian I Corps and V Corps also retreated to what the Belgians called the Ghent bridgehead , behind the <unk> and Scheldt . The Belgian Artillery Corps and its infantry support defeated attacks by the Eighteenth Army 's infantry and in a communiqué from London , the British recognized the " Belgian Army has contributed largely toward the success of the defensive battle now being fought . Nevertheless , the now @-@ outnumbered Belgians abandoned Brussels and the Government fled to Ostend . The city was occupied by the German Army on 17 May . The very next morning , Hoepner , the German XVI Corps commander , was ordered to release the 3rd and 4th Panzer Divisions to Army Group A. This left the 9th Panzer Division attached to the Eighteenth Army as the only armoured unit on the Belgian front . 
 By 19 May , the Germans were hours away from reaching the French Channel coast . Gort had discovered the French had neither plan nor reserves and little hope for stopping the German thrust to the channel . He was concerned that the French 1st Army on its southern flank had been reduced to a disorganized mass of " fag @-@ ends " , fearing that German armour might appear on their right flank at Arras or Péronne , striking for the channel ports at Calais or Boulogne or north west into the British flank . Their position in Belgium massively compromised , the BEF considered abandoning Belgium and retreating to Ostend , Bruges or Dunkirk , the latter lying some 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) to 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) inside the French border . 
 The proposals of a British strategic withdrawal from the continent was rejected by the War Cabinet and the Chief of the Imperial General Staff ( CIGS ) . They dispatched General Ironside to inform Gort of their decision and to order him to conduct an offensive to the south @-@ west " through all opposition " to reach the " main French forces " in the south [ the strongest French forces were actually in the north ] . The Belgian Army was asked to conform to the plan , or should they choose , the British Royal Navy would evacuate what units they could . The British cabinet decided that even if the " Somme offensive " was carried out successfully , some units may still need to be evacuated , and ordered Admiral Ramsay to assemble a large number of vessels . This was the beginning of Operation Dynamo . Ironside arrived at British General Headquarters at 06 : 00 am on 20 May , the same day that continental communications between the France and Belgium were cut . When Ironside made his proposals known to Gort , Gort replied such an attack was impossible . Seven of his nine divisions were engaged on the Scheldt and even if it was possible to withdraw them , it would create a gap between the Belgians and British which the enemy could exploit and encircle the former . The BEF had been marching and fighting for nine days and was now running short of ammunition . The main effort had to be made by the French to the south . 
 The Belgian position on any offensive move was made clear by Leopold III . As far as he was concerned , the Belgian Army could not conduct offensive operations as it lacked tanks and aircraft ; it existed solely for defence . The King also made clear that in the rapidly shrinking area of Belgium still free , there was only enough food for two weeks . Leopold did not expect the BEF to jeopardize its own position in order to keep contact with the Belgian Army , but he warned the British that if it persisted with the southern offensive the Belgians would be overstretched and their army would collapse . King Leopold suggested the best recourse was to establish a beach @-@ head covering Dunkirk and the Belgian channel ports . The will of the CIGS won out . Gort committed just two infantry battalions and the only armoured battalion in the BEF to the attack , which despite some initial tactical success , failed to break the German defensive line at the Battle of Arras on 21 May . 
 In the aftermath of this failure , the Belgians were asked to fall back to the Yser river and protect the Allied left flank and rear areas . The King 's aide , General Overstraten said that such a move could not be made and would lead to the Belgian Army disintegrating . Another plan for further offensives was suggested . The French requested the Belgians withdraw to the Leie and the British to the French frontier between <unk> and <unk> , the Belgians were then to extend their front to free further parts of the BEF for the attack . The French 1st Army would relieve two more divisions on the right flank . Leopold was reluctant to undertake such a move because it would abandon all but a small portion of Belgium . The Belgian Army was exhausted and it was an enormous technical task that would take too long to complete . 
 At this time , the Belgians and the British concluded that the French were beaten and the Allied Armies in the pocket on the Belgian – Franco border would be destroyed if action was not taken . The British , having lost confidence in their Allies , decided to look to the survival of the BEF . 
 = = = 22 – 28 May : Last defensive battles = = = 
 The Belgian battle @-@ front on the morning of 22 May extended some 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) from north to south , beginning with the Cavalry Corps , which checked its advance at Terneuzen . V , II , VI , VII and IV Corps ( all Belgian ) were drawn up side by side . Two further signal Corps were guarding the coast . These formations were then largely holding the eastern front as the BEF and French forces withdrew to the west to protect Dunkirk , which was vulnerable to German assault on 22 May . The eastern front remained intact , but the Belgians now occupied their last fortified position at Leie . The Belgian I Corps , with only two incomplete divisions , had been heavily engaged in the fighting and their line was wearing thin . On that day , Winston Churchill visited the front and pressed for the French and British Armies to break out from the north @-@ east . He assumed that the Belgian Cavalry Corps could support the offensives ' right flank . Churchill dispatched the following message to Gort : 
 1 . That the Belgian Army should withdraw to the line of the Yser and stand there , the sluices being opened . 
 2 . That the British Army and French 1st Army should attack south @-@ west toward Bapaume and Cambrai at the earliest moment , certainly tomorrow , with about eight divisions , and with the Belgian Cavalry Corps on the right of the British . 
 Such an order ignored the fact that the Belgian Army could not withdraw to the Yser , and there was little chance of any Belgian Cavalry joining in the attack . The plan for the Belgian withdrawal was sound ; the Yser river covered Dunkirk to the east and south , while the La Bassée Canal covered it from the west . The ring of the Yser also dramatically shorted the Belgian Army 's area of operations . Such a move would have abandoned Passchendaele and Ypres and would have certainly meant the capture of Ostend while further reducing the amount of Belgian territory still free by a few square miles . And it would have meant the loss of all Belgian ports to the east of the Yser , such as Zeebrugge and Ostend . 
 On 23 May , the French tried to conduct a series of offensives against the German defensive line on the Ardennes – Calais axis but failed to make any meaningful gains . Meanwhile , on the Belgian front , the Belgians , under pressure , retreated further , and the Germans captured Terneuzen and Ghent that day . The Belgians also had trouble moving the oil , food and ammunition that they had left . The Luftwaffe had air superiority and made everyday life hazardous in logistical terms . Air support could only be called in by " wireless " and the RAF was operating from bases in southern England which made communication more difficult . The French denied the use of the Dunkirk , Bourbourg and Gravelines bases to the Belgians , which had initially been placed at its disposal . The Belgians were forced to use the only harbours left to them , at Nieuport and Ostend . 
 Churchill and Maxime Weygand , who had taken over command from Gamelin , were still determined to break the German line and extricate their forces to the south . When they communicated their intentions to King Leopold and van Overstraten on 24 May , the latter was stunned . A dangerous gap was starting to open between the British and Belgians between Ypres and Menen , which threatened what remained of the Belgian front . The Belgians could not cover it ; such a move would have overstretched them . Without consulting the French or asking permission from his government , Gort immediately and decisively ordered the British 5th and 50th Infantry Divisions to plug the gap and abandon any offensive operations further south . 
 On the afternoon of 24 May , von Bock had thrown four divisions , of Reichenau 's 6th Army , against the Belgian IV Corps position at the Kortrijk area of the Leie during the Battle of the Lys ( 1940 ) . The Germans managed , against fierce resistance , to cross the river at night and force a one @-@ mile penetration along a 13 @-@ mile front between <unk> and Kortrijk . The Germans , with superior numbers and in command of the air , had won the bridgehead . Nevertheless , the Belgians had inflicted many casualties and several tactical defeats on the Germans . The 1st , 3rd , 9th and 10th Infantry Divisions , acting as reinforcements , had counterattacked several times and managed to capture 200 German prisoners . Belgian artillery and infantry were then heavily attacked by the Luftwaffe , which forced their defeat . The Belgians blamed the French and British for not providing air cover . The German bridgehead dangerously exposed the eastern flank of the southward stretched BEF 's 4th Infantry Division . Montgomery dispatched several units of the 3rd Infantry Division ( including the heavy infantry of the 1st and 7th Middlesex battalions and the 99th Battery , 20th Anti @-@ Tank Regiment ) , as an improvised defence . 
 A critical point of the " Weygand Plan " and the British government and French Army 's argument for a thrust south , was the withdrawal of forces to see the offensive through which had left the Belgian Army over @-@ extended and was instrumental in its collapse . It was forced to cover the areas held by the BEF in order to enable the latter to engage in the offensive . Such a collapse could have resulted in the loss of the Channel ports behind the Allied front , leading to a complete strategic encirclement . The BEF could have done more to counterattack von Bock 's left flank to relieve the Belgians as von Bock attacked across the fortified British position at Kortrijk . The Belgian High Command made at least five appeals for the British to attack the vulnerable left flank of the German divisions between the Scheldt and the Leie to avert disaster . 
 Admiral Sir Roger Keyes transmitted the following message to GHQ : 
 Van Overstraten is desperately keen for strong British counterattack . Either north or south of Leie could help restore the situation . Belgians expect to be attacked on the Ghent front tomorrow . Germans already have a bridgehead over canal west of <unk> . There can be no question of the Belgian withdrawal to Yser . One battalion on march NE of Ypres was practically wiped out today in attack by sixty aircraft . Withdrawal over open roads without adequate fighter support very costly . Whole of their supplies are east of Yser . They strongly represent attempt should be made to restore the situation on Leie by British counter @-@ attack for which opportunity may last another few hours only . 
 No such attack came . The Germans brought fresh reserves to cover the gap ( Menen – Ypres ) . This nearly cut the Belgians off from the British . The 2nd , 6th and 10th Cavalry Divisions frustrated German attempts to exploit the gap in depth but the situation was still critical . On 26 May , Operation Dynamo officially commenced , in which large French and British contingents were to be evacuated to the United Kingdom . By that time , the Royal Navy had already withdrawn 28 @,@ 000 British non @-@ fighting troops . Boulogne had fallen and Calais was about to , leaving Dunkirk , Ostend and Zeebrugge as the only viable ports which could be used for evacuation . The advance of the 14th German Army would not leave Ostend available for much longer . To the west , the German Army Group A had reached Dunkirk and were 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from its centre on the morning of 27 May , bringing the port within artillery range . 
 The situation on 27 May had changed considerably from just 24 hours earlier . The Belgian Army had been forced from the Leie line on 26 May , and <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> had fallen on the western and central part of the Leie front . In the east , the Germans had reached the outskirts of Bruges , and captured Ursel . In the west , the Menen – Ypres line had broken at Kortrijk and the Belgians were now using railway trucks to help form anti @-@ tank defences on a line from Ypres – Passchendaele – Roulers . Further to the west the BEF had been forced back , north of Lille just over the French border and was now in danger of allowing a gap to develop between themselves and the Belgian southern flank on the Ypres – Lille axis . The danger in allowing a German advance to Dunkirk would mean the loss of the port which was now too great . The British withdrew to the port on 26 May . In doing so , they left the French 1st Army 's north @-@ eastern flank near Lille exposed . As the British moved out , the Germans moved in , encircling the bulk of the French Army . Both Gort and his Chief of Staff , General Henry Pownall , accepted that their withdrawal would mean the destruction of the French 1st Army , and they would be blamed for it . 
 The fighting of 26 – 27 May had brought the Belgian Army to the brink of collapse . The Belgians still held the Ypres – Roulers line to the west , and the Bruges – <unk> line to the east . However , on 27 May , the central front collapsed in the <unk> – <unk> sector . There was now nothing to prevent a German thrust to the east to take Ostend and Bruges , or west to take the ports at Nieuport or La Panne , deep in the Allied rear . The Belgians had practically exhausted all available means of resistance . The disintegration of the Belgian Army and its front caused many erroneous accusations by the British . In fact , on numerous occasions , the Belgians had held on after British withdrawals . One example was the taking over of the Scheldt line , where they relieved the British 44th Infantry Division , allowing it to retire through their ranks . Despite this , Gort and to a greater extent Pownall , showed anger at the Belgian King 's decision to surrender on 28 May , considering it undercut the war effort . . When it was inquired if any Belgians were to be evacuated , Pownall was reported to have replied , " We don 't care a bugger what happens to the Belgians " . 
 = = = Belgian surrender = = = 
 The Belgian Army was stretched from <unk> south to Menen on the river Leie , and west , from Menin , to Bruges without any sort of reserves . With the exception of a few RAF sorties , the air was exclusively under the control of the Luftwaffe , and the Belgians reported attacks against all targets considered an objective , with resulting casualties . No natural obstacles remained between the Belgians and the German Army , retreat was not feasible . The Luftwaffe had destroyed most of the rail networks to Dunkirk , just three roads were left : Bruges – <unk> – Dixmude , Bruges – <unk> – Nieuport and Bruges – Ostend – Nieuport . Using such axes of retreat was impossible without losses owing to German air supremacy ( as opposed to air superiority ) . Water supplies were damaged and cut off , gas and electricity supplies were also cut . Canals were drained and used as supply dumps for whatever ammunition and food @-@ stuffs were left . The total remaining area covered just 1 @,@ 700 km ² , and compacted military and civilians alike , of which the latter numbered some 3 million people . Under these circumstances Leopold deemed further resistance useless . On the evening of 27 May , he requested an armistice . 
 Churchill sent a message to Keyes the same day , and made clear what he thought of the request : 
 Belgian Embassy here assumes from King 's decision to remain that he regards the war as lost and contemplates [ a ] separate peace . It is in order to dissociate itself from this that the constitutional Belgian Government has reassembled on foreign soil . Even if present Belgian Army has to lay down its arms , there are 200 @,@ 000 Belgians of military age in France , and greater resources than Belgium had in 1914 which to fight back . By present decision the King is dividing the Nation and delivering it into Hitler 's protection . Please convey these considerations to the King , and impress upon him the disastrous consequences to the Allies and to Belgium of his present choice . 
 The Royal Navy evacuated General Headquarters at Middelkerke and Sint @-@ Andries , east of Bruges , during the night . Leopold III , and his mother Queen Mother Elisabeth , stayed in Belgium to endure five years of self @-@ imposed captivity . In response to the advice of his government to set up a government @-@ in @-@ exile Leopold said , " I have decided to stay . The cause of the Allies is lost . " The Belgian surrender came into effect at 04 : 00 on 28 May . <unk> abounded with the British and French claiming the Belgians had betrayed the alliance . In Paris , the French Premier Paul Reynaud denounced Leopold 's surrender , and the Belgian Premier Hubert Pierlot informed the people that Leopold had taken action against the unanimous advice of the government . As a result , the king was no longer in a position to govern and the Belgian government in exile that was located in Paris ( later moved to London following the fall of France ) would continue the struggle . The chief complaint was that the Belgians had not given any prior warning that their situation was so serious as to capitulate . Such claims were largely unjust . The Allies had known , and admitted it privately on 25 May through contact with the Belgians , that the latter were on the verge of collapse . 
 Churchill 's and the British response was officially restrained . This was due to the strong @-@ willed defence of the Belgian defensive campaign presented to the cabinet by Sir Roger Keyes at 11 : 30 am 28 May . The French and Belgian ministers had referred to Leopold 's actions as treacherous , but they were unaware of the true events : Leopold had not signed an agreement with Hitler in order to form a collaborative government , but an unconditional surrender as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Belgian Armed Forces . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 The casualty reports include total losses at this point in the campaign . The figures for the Battle of Belgium , 10 – 28 May 1940 , cannot be known with any certainty . 
 = = = Belgian = = = 
 Belgian casualties stood at : 
 Killed in action : 6 @,@ 093 and 2 @,@ 000 Belgian prisoners died in captivity 
 Missing : more than 500 
 Captured : 200 @,@ 000 
 Wounded : 15 @,@ 850 
 Aircraft : 112 destroyed 
 = = = French = = = 
 Numbers for the Battle of Belgium are unknown , but the French suffered the following losses throughout the entire western campaign , 10 May – 22 June : 
 Killed in action : 90 @,@ 000 
 Wounded : 200 @,@ 000 
 Prisoners of War : 1 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 Total French losses in aircraft numbered 264 from 12 to 25 May , and 50 for 26 May to 1 June . 
 = = = British = = = 
 Numbers for the Battle of Belgium are unknown , but the British suffered the following losses throughout the entire campaign , 10 May – 22 June : 
 68 @,@ 111 killed in action , wounded or captured . 
 64 @,@ 000 vehicles destroyed or abandoned 
 2 @,@ 472 guns destroyed or abandoned 
 RAF losses throughout the entire campaign ( 10 May – 22 June ) amounted to 931 aircraft and 1 @,@ 526 casualties . Casualties to 28 May are unknown . Total British losses in the air numbered 344 between 12 and 25 May , and 138 between 26 May and 1 June . 
 = = = German = = = 
 The consolidated report of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht regarding the operations in the west from 10 May to 4 June ( German : <unk> <unk> des <unk> der Wehrmacht über die <unk> im Westen vom 10 . Mai bis 4 . Juni ) reports : 
 Killed in action : 10 @,@ 232 officers and soldiers 
 Missing : 8 @,@ 463 officers and soldiers 
 Wounded : 42 @,@ 523 officers and soldiers 
 Losses of the Luftwaffe from 10 May to 3 June : 432 aircraft 
 Losses of the Kriegsmarine : none 
 = LW3 ( classification ) = 
 LW3 is a para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing skiing sport class defined by the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) for skiers with a disability affecting both legs , with double below knee amputation or a combined strength total for both legs of 60 , with 80 as the baseline for people without disabilities . For international skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing or IPC Nordic Skiing . The classification has two subclasses for para @-@ Alpine skiing : LW3.1 which is for people with double below the knee amputations or similar disabilities , and LW3.2 which is for people with cerebral palsy that involves moderate athetoid , moderate ataxic impairment or slight diplegic involvement . 
 Skiers in this classification compete with two skis and two ski poles in both para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing . In training , they may use different types of equipment depending on the type of disability the skier has . As this class includes skiers with paralysis , amputations and cerebral palsy , a variety of skiing techniques and training types are needed . For skiers with balance issues , ski bras are used to learn how to balance on skis . 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different sport classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring for LW3 alpine skiing classification during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season was 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , the percentage for the 2012 / 2013 ski season was 87 @-@ 94 % for classic and 80 @-@ 96 % for free . This class has been able to compete at the Paralympic Games and World Championships dating back to at least the 1990s . Skiers in this class include Australian Marty Mayberry and Canadian LW3.1 skier Lauren <unk> . 
 = = Definition = = 
 LW3 is as para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic standing skiing classification , where LW stands for Locomotor Winter . Competitors in this class have a disability affecting both legs , with double below knee amputation or a combined strength total for both of 60 , with 80 as the baseline for people without disabilities . For para @-@ Alpine skiing , the International Paralympic Committee ( IPC ) explicitly defines this sport class as " Competitors with disabilities in both lower limbs , and skiing with two normal skis and two poles or stabilizers ... Typical disability profile of the class is double below @-@ knee amputations . " The Australian Paralympic Committee summarized this classification in 2002 as a standing skiing classification with " Two skis , two poles , disability in both legs below the knees . " For para @-@ Nordic skiing , the IPC defines this classification as " those with impairment in two lower limbs , which includes whole and / or partial limb dysfunction . " Cross Country Canada summarized this classification as " Impairment in two lower limbs which include whole and or partial limb dysfunction . " A skier may be able to stand and jump on one leg depending on the nature of their disability . 
 For international para @-@ Alpine skiing competitions , classification is done through IPC Alpine Skiing . A national federation such as Alpine Canada handles classification for domestic competitions . For para @-@ Nordic skiing events , classification is handled by IPC Nordic Skiing Technical Committee on the international level and by the national sports federation such as Cross @-@ Country Canada on a country by country level . When being assessed into this sport class , a number of things are considered including reviewing the skiers medical history and medical information on the skier 's disability , having a physical and an in person assessment of the skier training or competing . 
 = = = LW3.1 = = = 
 LW3.1 is a para @-@ Alpine skiing subclass for people with double below the knee amputations or similar disabilities . It is defined by the IPC as " a . Double below @-@ knee amputation , minimal through the ankle <unk> b. disabilities of both lower limbs with a maximum of 60 muscle points ( normal 80 ) , i.e. , those competitors who are able to edge skis belong to class 3 @.@ 2 . " 
 = = = LW3.2 = = = 
 LW3.2 is a subclass for people with cerebral palsy that involves moderate athetoid , moderate ataxic impairment or slight diplegic involvement . The IPC defines this class for para @-@ Alpine skiing as " a . CP5 : moderate @-@ to @-@ slight diplegic involvement b . CP6 : moderate athetoid or ataxic impairment " . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 Skiers in this classification compete with two skis and two ski poles in both para @-@ Alpine and para @-@ Nordic skiing . During training , skiers may use prosthesis , cants , wedges , ski @-@ bras , outriggers or short skis . For skiers using a prosthesis , a special skiing prosthesis is used and they may also require the user of outriggers . The nature of their disability will dictate the type of equipment required . Ski bras are devices clamped to the tips of skis , which result in the skis being attached to each other . Outriggers are forearm crutches with a miniature ski on a rocker at the base . Cants are wedges that sit under the binding that are intended to more evenly distribute weight . They are customised for the specific needs of the skier . The ski boot for below the knee amputees often has the prosthetic built into it , though for all competitors in this class , FIS rules for para @-@ Alpine ski boots and binding heights are modified for this class from rules applied to able bodied competitor 's equipment . In the Biathlon , athletes with amputations can use a rifle support while shooting . 
 = = Technique = = 
 As this class includes skiers with paralysis , amputations and cerebral palsy , a variety of skiing techniques and training types are needed . Skiers in this classification who have paralysis as a result of hemiplegia , stroke or polio tend to initially favour a strong side of their body when they learn to ski , which sometimes results in <unk> . Ski @-@ bras and <unk> cords are used in training to correct this . If this is not corrected , skiers are likely to fall over when their skis cross in front of them . Skiers with below the knee amputations get on and off the ski lift using the same technique as able @-@ bodied skiers . 
 In this classification , skiers with cerebral palsy have difficulty walking in ski boots and sometimes require assistance when walking in them . When going up hill , they often have their weaker side on the uphill side . In learning to ski , a ski bra is often used to teach the proper technique . Skiers sometimes have difficulty with the snowplough technique . In teaching skiers with cerebral palsy , instructors are encouraged to delay the introduction ski poles as skiers may overgrip them . Use of a ski bra is also encourage as it helps the skier learn correct knee and hip placement . Some skiers with cerebral palsy have better balance while using skis than they would otherwise . This presents challenges for coaches who are working with the skier . Compared to other skiers in the class , the skier with cerebral palsy may tie more quickly . 
 One method of learning to ski for LW3 competitors with cerebral palsy is the American Teaching System . They first thing skiers learn is what their equipment is , and how to put it on and take it off . Next , skiers learn about positioning their body in a standing position on flat terrain . After this , the skier learns how to side step , and then how to fall down and get back up again . The skier then learns how to do a straight run , and then is taught how to get on and off the chair lift . This is followed by learning wedge turns and weight transfers , wedge turns , wide track parallel turns , how to use ski poles , and advanced parallel turns . 
 In the Biathlon , all Paralympic athletes shoot from a prone position . 
 = = Sport = = 
 A factoring system is used in the sport to allow different classes to compete against each other when there are too few individual competitors in one class in a competition . The factoring system works by having a number for each class based on their functional mobility or vision levels , where the results are calculated by multiplying the finish time by the factored number . The resulting number is the one used to determine the winner in events where the factor system is used . For the 2003 / 2004 para @-@ Nordic skiing season , the percentage for the classic technique was 87 % and percentage for free was 80 @-@ 91 % . The factoring for LW3 alpine skiing classification during the 2011 / 2012 skiing season was 0 @.@ <unk> for Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Giant Slalom , 0 @.@ <unk> for Super @-@ G and 0 @.@ <unk> for downhill . In para @-@ Nordic skiing , the percentage for the 2012 / 2013 ski season was 87 @-@ 94 % for classic and 80 @-@ 96 % for free . 
 In para @-@ Alpine @-@ skiing events , LW3 is grouped with standing classes who are seeded to start after visually impaired classes and before sitting classes in the slalom and giant slalom . In downhill , Super @-@ G and Super Combined , this same group competes after the visually impaired classes and sitting classes . For alpine events , a skier is required to have their ski poles or equivalent equipment planted in the snow in front of the starting position before the start of the race . In cross @-@ country and biathlon events , this classification is grouped with other standing classes . The IPC advises event organisers to run the men 's standing ski group after the blind men 's group and before the blind women 's group . Women 's standing classes are advised to go last . 
 = = Events = = 
 While LW3 was not grouped with others classes at an event in the 1980s , it was grouped with other classifications during the 1990s and 2000s . At the 1984 Winter Olympics Exhibition Competition , disciplines included on the programme were downhill and giant slalom . This classification was not grouped with others for medal events for men . At the 1992 Winter Paralympics , LW1 and LW3 were grouped together for men 's medal events in para @-@ Alpine . At the 1994 Winter Paralympics , LW1 and LW3 were grouped together for men 's medal events in para @-@ Alpine . At the 1996 Disabled Alpine World Championships , Lech , Austria , men 's LW1 , LW3 and LW5 were grouped together for medal events . At the 1998 Winter Paralympics , the women 's LW1 , LW3 , LW4 , LW5 and LW6 classes competed in one group , while LW1 , LW3 and LW5 were grouped for men 's medal events in para @-@ Alpine . At the 2002 Winter Paralympics in alpine @-@ skiing , LW3 , LW5 / 7 and LW9 were grouped for the men 's downhill , Super @-@ G , Slalom and Giant Slalom events , while women 's LW3 , LW4 , LW6 / 8 and LW9 were grouped for the Super @-@ G event and the women 's LW3 , LW4 , and LW9 classes were grouped for the slalom and giant slalom events . At the 2005 IPC Nordic Skiing World Championships , this class was grouped with other standing skiing classifications . In cross country , this class was eligible to compete in the men and women 's 5 km , 10 km and 20 km individual race . In the men and women 's biathlon , this classification was again grouped with standing classes in the 7 @.@ 4 km race with 2 shooting stages 12 @.@ 5 km race which had four shooting stages . At the 2009 World Championships , there were two men and two women from this class the standing downhill event . 
 = = Competitors = = 
 Skiers in this class include Australian Marty Mayberry , and Canadian LW3.1 skier Lauren <unk> . 
 = Zero ( Mega Man ) = 
 Zero ( ゼロ ) is a video game character present throughout Capcom 's Mega Man franchise . First appearing in the 1993 game Mega Man X for the Super NES , Zero is a Maverick Hunter , a mechanical soldier in charge of defeating Mavericks , robots who turned against humanity . He continues his job as the main character of the Mega Man Zero series . Zero has also played a supporting role in other game series such as the Mega Man ZX series and appeared in crossover video games as a guest character . 
 First developed by Keiji Inafune when he was attempting to create a new design for Mega Man for the X series , Zero was instead used as a secondary character . In the Zero series , which was developed by Inti Creates , Zero is the protagonist and had a change in his design , which was meant to create a more " human feel " to him . Zero has since played a minor role in the ZX series as Model Z. His inclusion in the Mega Man X series has generally received positive critical response from video games reviewers . 
 = = Conception and creation = = 
 Zero was created by designer Keiji Inafune when he was told to recreate Mega Man for a new series on the Super NES , Mega Man X. He wanted to design a Mega Man different from the original one . However , Inafune realized afterwards that the character he created was too different from Mega Man 's old appearance to be viewed positively by fans . Deciding to let another designer work on the character that eventually became Mega Man X while he developed Zero , Inafune created the character intending him to be " the ' other main character ' that would " steal all the good scenes " . He further described Zero as representing the idea that " nothing is absolute " , and circumstances can change anything . When asked if Zero had killed the cast of the original Mega Man titles , suspected due to their absence in the X series , he replied no , adding that given how he had designed the character , " Zero is not such a <unk> is not in his profile . " 
 The concept of Zero starring in his own series was proposed by Inafune . Inafune proposed that Zero star in his own series , and planned to go forward with the idea at the end of Mega Man X5 . However , he was unable to after Capcom announced another Mega Man title without his involvement . Designed by Toru Nakayama of Inti Creates , Zero was meant to have a more " human feel " rather than the complete " mechanical feel " of the X series . Nakayama wanted the public to recognize that this series was different from the X series . Since Capcom wanted Zero 's general structure to be the same , Inti @-@ Creates concentrated on how different they could make him , rather than how similar . Zero 's depiction in the series was intended to be morally ambiguous and depend on the perspective , appearing as a hero from one point of view and a terrorist from another . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Designed to be " harder and wilder " than the original Mega Man , Zero 's design ultimately resembled Mega Man X in several ways due to his initial character concept , Inafune 's insistence on drawing the character , and input from other project artists . In the X series , Zero has red and white armor with twin " horns " on his helmet . Zero also has his signature long blonde hair . His main weapon is the Z @-@ saber , an energy @-@ based sword that introduced melee combat to the Mega Man games . His secondary weapon is the Z @-@ buster , a cannon mounted at the end of his right arm , similar to Mega Man X 's primary weapon . A tertiary weapon that would orbit around Zero was also considered , but left uncompleted . Unlike the original Mega Man , who had a full head of hair under his helmet , Zero has a smooth secondary helmet , intended to imply the characters were older . In Mega Man X4 , Zero was going to receive his own enhanced armor in the same way X does , but the development team decided not to finish it . 
 In the Zero series , Zero still possesses his blonde hair and general structure , though it has much less of a " cartoon " feel and more of a " realistic " feel . Instead of having red and white armor , Zero has black upper arms and wears a red vest , <unk> , and boots . His helmet has horns , though they are more smoothly designed . The Z @-@ saber was also redesigned in Zero 3 , and has a more triangular shape compared to the original Z @-@ saber , which is similar to a katana and the Z @-@ buster was replaced with a handgun . Early concept art featured Zero with solid @-@ black , pupil @-@ less eyes , though this changed to a normal set of eyes as development progressed . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Mega Man video game series = = = 
 Zero made his debut appearance in Mega Man X in 1993 , and a cameo appearance in Mega Man 2 : The Power Fighters . Zero was revealed to have been originally created by Dr. Wily sometime during the Mega Man series . Zero works as a Maverick Hunter , a soldier in charge of defeating Mavericks , robots who turned against humanity . He plays the role as X 's comrade and best friend in the X series . The two , later accompanied by Axl , fight Sigma , Vile , and other enemies throughout the series . While in the first two titles he only assists X during gameplay , he becomes an optional character in X3 . In Mega Man X4 , Zero is one of two playable characters , along with X. In his scenario , Zero is haunted by nightmares of a shadowy figure ( implied to be Wily ) awakening him and giving him orders to destroy an unknown individual , and visions of ensuing carnage . Additionally , during his scenario , Sigma reminds him of the time that he led the Maverick Hunters , and the encounter between the two that led to a vicious battle that led to Sigma punching out the crystal on Zero 's helmet , leading to Sigma later becoming infected with the Maverick Virus . Depending on the story development , Zero can be fought as a boss character in Mega Man X5 . In Mega Man X6 , Zero is not initially present in the game since he went missing in the end of Mega Man X5 during a fight against Sigma , and he becomes an optional character depending on how the story develops throughout the game . In the spin @-@ off title Mega Man Xtreme , he is an assistant character but becomes playable in the sequel , Mega Man Xtreme 2 . He is also playable during the prologue and the last chapters from the role @-@ playing video game Mega Man X : Command Mission . 
 The Mega Man Zero series features Zero as the title character and protagonist . Set around 100 years after the X series , Zero helps a scientist named Ciel fight the human city of Neo Arcadia , during which he destroys Omega - his original body , Dr. Weil , and Copy X , leader of Neo Arcadia , twice . Zero makes an appearance in the ZX series as Model Z , who plays a minor supporting role in the plot in the first ZX game . In ZX Advent , Zero plays an even smaller role , only having a few lines throughout the game . Zero 's Mega Man Battle Network counterpart , <unk> makes an appearance in Mega Man Network Transmission as the antagonist of the first half of the game . He later aids Mega Man against the true villain , The " Professor " . 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 The Mega Man Zero version of Zero 's character appears as a sub @-@ boss in Playmore 's crossover fighting game SNK vs. Capcom : SVC Chaos and as a hidden character in Onimusha Blade Warriors . The Mega Man X version of Zero appears as a hidden character in Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars and as a playable character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds . In the latter titles , Zero was chosen to represent the " Mega Man " franchise over Mega Man himself , as director Ryota Niitsuma thought he had more variation in his moves . Zero also appears in Project X Zone and its sequel Project X Zone 2 as a playable character paired with X and as a collectable trophy and costume for the Mii Fighters in Super Smash Bros. for Wii U. 
 Zero 's appearances in the two manga series based on the Mega Man X series resemble his video games one . However , in the Mega Man Zero manga , Zero is depicted as a Reploid having two personalities depending on his usage of a helmet : without his helmet he is portrayed as cowardly whereas the other one resembles his video games counterpart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Zero 's character was met with positive critical response by publications for video games . Game Revolution called him " mysterious , androgynous " and compared him to Proto Man " with a ponytail " . <unk> <unk> from IGN named him one of his ten favorite sword @-@ wielding characters in the video games , describing him as an answer to the question of how Mega Man would fight if armed with a sword , and noted his fighting style as popular with gamers . GameZone writer Michael Knutson praised the inclusion of Zero in the Mega Man X series , citing his playability as popular amongst series fan as it expanded the gameplay . Jeremy Parish from 1UP.com stated that his appearance as a playable character with his own story in Mega Man X4 by itself made it the best game in the X series . GameSpot noted the contrast in his gameplay to that of Mega Man X in Mega Man X4 increased the difficulty of using him in the title . Additionally , Brett Elston from GamesRadar credited Zero as one of the reasons the X series became so popular and that his own popularity within gamers earned him his own video game series . 
 IGN repeated their positive sentiments about Zero in their list of characters they wished to see appear in a future Marvel vs. Capcom title , describing him as " arguably cooler than Mega Man " , regardless of version in comparison . PSM praised the character as well , stating " [ he ] might wear some funky shoes , but that doesn 't stop him from kicking some robot butt " . While reviewing Mega Man X : Command Mission , 1UP.com criticized that his English voice acting makes him " sound like a surfer " . 
 = The Boat Race 1875 = 
 The 32nd Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on the 20 March 1875 . The Cambridge crew contained four Blues to Oxford 's two , the latter went into the race without a win since the 1869 race . In a race umpired by Joseph William Chitty , Oxford won by ten lengths in a time of 22 minutes 2 seconds , taking the overall record in the event to 17 – 15 in their favour . One of the Cambridge crew broke his slide during the race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Oxford by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in the previous year 's race , while Oxford led overall with sixteen wins to Cambridge 's fifteen . 
 Cambridge were coached by John Goldie , the Cambridge boat club president and rower for the 1869 , 1870 and 1871 races , and Charles Stokes Read who had rowed for Cambridge in the previous three races . Oxford 's coaches were S. D. Darbishire who had rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1868 , 1869 and 1870 races , F. H. Hall who had coxed for three races between 1870 and 1872 , Robert Wells Risley who had rowed four times between the 1857 and 1860 races , Edmund Warre ( represented Oxford in 1857 and 1858 ) , Frank Willan ( four @-@ time winning rower between 1866 and 1869 ) and Walter Bradford Woodgate who had rowed in the 1862 and 1863 races . Joseph William Chitty was the umpire for the race . He had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in March and December ) and the 1852 race . The starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 12 @.@ 375 lb ( 75 @.@ 3 kg ) , 1 @.@ 625 pounds ( 0 @.@ 7 kg ) more than their opponents . Cambridge 's crew contained four former Blues , including Herbert Edward Rhodes who was making his third appearance in the race . Oxford saw two rowers return from the 1874 race , in H. J. Stayner and J. P. Way . According to Drinkwater , the Oxford University Boat Club towards the end of 1874 produced a " fine crew " , and of particular note was the inclusion of the former Eton Captain of the Boats Tom Cottingham Edwards @-@ Moss . In contrast , Cambridge 's crew , with just two returning from the previous year 's race , was completed with " material ... not of a very high order " . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford were considered clear pre @-@ race favourites to win their first Boat Race in five years ; conditions were inclement with a " nasty north @-@ west wind " but a " fair tide " . They lost the toss and Cambridge elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing Oxford the Surrey side of the river . The race commenced at 1 : 13 p.m. , and Cambridge made the better start , taking the lead from the outset with a higher stroke rate . Half a length ahead after a minute , the Light Blues nearly had a clear water advantage but tired in the strong headwind , and started to be caught by Craven Steps , around 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) along the course . About a mile into the race , one of the Cambridge crew broke a slide . 
 The crews were level at the Crab Tree pub and by Hammersmith Bridge , and with the advantage of the bend in the river , Oxford were clear and went on to win by ten lengths in a time of 22 minutes 2 seconds . It was their first victory since 1869 and took the overall record in the event to 17 – 15 in their favour . 
 = Rachel Carson = 
 Rachel Louise Carson ( May 27 , 1907 – April 14 , 1964 ) was an American marine biologist and conservationist whose book Silent Spring and other writings are credited with advancing the global environmental movement . 
 Carson began her career as an aquatic biologist in the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries , and became a full @-@ time nature writer in the 1950s . Her widely praised 1951 bestseller The Sea Around Us won her a U.S. National Book Award , recognition as a gifted writer , and financial security . Her next book , The Edge of the Sea , and the reissued version of her first book , Under the Sea Wind , were also bestsellers . This sea trilogy explores the whole of ocean life from the shores to the depths . 
 Late in the 1950s , Carson turned her attention to conservation , especially some environmental problems that she believed were caused by synthetic pesticides . The result was the book Silent Spring ( 1962 ) , which brought environmental concerns to an unprecedented share of the American people . Although Silent Spring was met with fierce opposition by chemical companies , it spurred a reversal in national pesticide policy , which led to a nationwide ban on DDT and other pesticides , and it inspired a grassroots environmental movement that led to the creation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . Carson was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Jimmy Carter . 
 = = Life and work = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Carson was born on May 27 , 1907 , on a small family farm near Springdale , Pennsylvania , just up the Allegheny River from Pittsburgh . She was the daughter of Maria Frazier ( McLean ) and Robert Warden Carson , an insurance salesman . An avid reader , she also spent a lot of time exploring around her family 's 65 @-@ acre ( 26 ha ) farm . She began writing stories ( often involving animals ) at age eight , and had her first story published at age ten . She especially enjoyed the St. Nicholas Magazine ( which carried her first published stories ) , the works of Beatrix Potter , and the novels of Gene Stratton Porter , and in her teen years , Herman Melville , Joseph Conrad and Robert Louis Stevenson . The natural world , particularly the ocean , was the common thread of her favorite literature . Carson attended Springdale 's small school through tenth grade , then completed high school in nearby Parnassus , Pennsylvania , graduating in 1925 at the top of her class of forty @-@ five students . 
 At the Pennsylvania College for Women ( today known as Chatham University ) , as in high school , Carson was somewhat of a loner . She originally studied English , but switched her major to biology in January 1928 , though she continued contributing to the school 's student newspaper and literary supplement . Though admitted to graduate standing at Johns Hopkins University in 1928 , she was forced to remain at the Pennsylvania College for Women for her senior year due to financial difficulties ; she graduated magna cum laude in 1929 . After a summer course at the Marine Biological Laboratory , she continued her studies in zoology and genetics at Johns Hopkins in the fall of 1929 . 
 After her first year of graduate school , Carson became a part @-@ time student , taking an assistantship in Raymond Pearl 's laboratory , where she worked with rats and Drosophila , to earn money for tuition . After false starts with pit vipers and squirrels , she completed a dissertation project on the embryonic development of the <unk> in fish . She earned a master 's degree in zoology in June 1932 . She had intended to continue for a doctorate , but in 1934 Carson was forced to leave Johns Hopkins to search for a full @-@ time teaching position to help support her family . In 1935 , her father died suddenly , leaving Carson to care for her aging mother and making the financial situation even more critical . At the urging of her undergraduate biology mentor Mary Scott Skinker , she settled for a temporary position with the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries , writing radio copy for a series of weekly educational broadcasts entitled Romance Under the Waters . The series of fifty @-@ two seven @-@ minute programs focused on aquatic life and was intended to generate public interest in fish biology and in the work of the bureau — a task the several writers before Carson had not managed . Carson also began submitting articles on marine life in the Chesapeake Bay , based on her research for the series , to local newspapers and magazines . 
 Carson 's supervisor , pleased with the success of the radio series , asked her to write the introduction to a public brochure about the fisheries bureau ; he also worked to secure her the first full @-@ time position that became available . Sitting for the civil service exam , she outscored all other applicants and , in 1936 , became only the second woman the Bureau of Fisheries hired for a full @-@ time professional position , as a junior aquatic biologist . 
 = = = Early career and publications = = = 
 At the U.S. Bureau of Fisheries , Carson 's main responsibilities were to analyze and report field data on fish populations , and to write brochures and other literature for the public . Using her research and consultations with marine biologists as starting points , she also wrote a steady stream of articles for The Baltimore Sun and other newspapers . However , her family responsibilities further increased in January 1937 when her older sister died , leaving Carson as the sole breadwinner for her mother and two nieces . 
 In July 1937 , the Atlantic Monthly accepted a revised version of an essay , The World of Waters , that she originally wrote for her first fisheries bureau brochure . Her supervisor had deemed it too good for that purpose . The essay , published as Undersea , was a vivid narrative of a journey along the ocean floor . It marked a major turning point in Carson 's writing career . Publishing house Simon & Schuster , impressed by Undersea , contacted Carson and suggested that she expand it into a book . Several years of writing resulted in Under the Sea Wind ( 1941 ) , which received excellent reviews but sold poorly . In the meantime , Carson 's article @-@ writing success continued — her features appeared in Sun Magazine , Nature , and Collier 's . 
 Carson attempted to leave the Bureau ( by then transformed into the Fish and Wildlife Service ) in 1945 , but few jobs for naturalists were available as most money for science was focused on technical fields in the wake of the Manhattan Project . In mid @-@ 1945 , Carson first encountered the subject of DDT , a revolutionary new pesticide ( lauded as the " insect bomb " after the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki ) that was only beginning to undergo tests for safety and ecological effects . DDT was but one of Carson 's many writing interests at the time , and editors found the subject unappealing ; she published nothing on DDT until 1962 . 
 Carson rose within the Fish and Wildlife Service , supervising a small writing staff by 1945 and becoming chief editor of publications in 1949 . Though her position provided increasing opportunities for fieldwork and freedom in choosing her writing projects , it also entailed increasingly tedious administrative responsibilities . By 1948 , Carson was working on material for a second book , and had made the conscious decision to begin a transition to writing full @-@ time . That year , she took on a literary agent , Marie Rodell ; they formed a close professional relationship that would last the rest of Carson 's career . 
 Oxford University Press expressed interest in Carson 's book proposal for a life history of the ocean , spurring her to complete the manuscript of what would become The Sea Around Us by early 1950 . Chapters appeared in Science Digest and the Yale Review — the latter chapter , The Birth of an Island , winning the American Association for the Advancement of Science 's George Westinghouse Science Writing Prize . Nine chapters were serialized in The New Yorker beginning June 1951 and the book was published July 2 , 1951 , by Oxford University Press . The Sea Around Us remained on the New York Times Best Seller List for 86 weeks , was abridged by Reader 's Digest , won the 1952 National Book Award for Nonfiction and the Burroughs Medal , and resulted in Carson 's being awarded two honorary doctorates . She also licensed a documentary film based on it . The Sea 's success led to the republication of Under the Sea Wind , which became a bestseller itself . With success came financial security , and Carson was able to give up her job in 1952 to concentrate on writing full @-@ time . 
 Carson was inundated with speaking engagements , fan mail and other correspondence regarding The Sea Around Us , along with work on the documentary script that she had secured the right to review . She was very unhappy with the final version of the script by writer , director and producer Irwin Allen ; she found it untrue to the atmosphere of the book and scientifically embarrassing , describing it as " a cross between a believe @-@ it @-@ or @-@ not and a breezy travelogue . " She discovered , however , that her right to review the script did not extend to any control over its content . Allen proceeded in spite of Carson 's objections to produce a very successful documentary . It won the 1953 Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature , but Carson was so embittered by the experience that she never again sold film rights to her work . 
 = = = Relationship with Dorothy Freeman = = = 
 Carson moved with her mother to Southport Island , Maine , in 1953 , and in July of that year met Dorothy Freeman ( 1898 – 1978 ) — the beginning of an extremely close relationship that would last the rest of Carson 's life . A summer resident of the island along with her husband , Freeman had written to Carson to welcome her . Freeman had read The Sea Around Us , a gift from her son , and was excited to have the prominent author as a neighbor . Carson 's biographer , Linda Lear , writes that " Carson sorely needed a devoted friend and kindred spirit who would listen to her without advising and accept her wholly , the writer as well as the woman . " She found this in Freeman . The two women had a number of common interests , nature chief among them , and began exchanging letters regularly while apart . They would share summers for the remainder of Carson 's life , and meet whenever else their schedules permitted . 
 In regards to the extent of their relationship , commentators have said that : " the expression of their love was limited almost wholly to letters and very occasional farewell kisses or holding of hands " . Freeman shared parts of Carson 's letters with her husband to help him understand the relationship , but much of their correspondence was carefully guarded . 
 Shortly before Carson 's death , she and Freeman destroyed hundreds of letters . The surviving correspondence was published in 1995 as Always , Rachel : The Letters of Rachel Carson and Dorothy Freeman , 1952 – 1964 : An Intimate Portrait of a Remarkable Friendship , edited by Freeman 's granddaughter . According to one reviewer , the pair " fit Carolyn Heilbrun 's characterization of a strong female friendship , where what matters is ' not whether friends are homosexual or heterosexual , lovers or not , but whether they share the wonderful energy of work in the public sphere ' . " 
 = = = The Edge of the Sea and transition to conservation work = = = 
 Early in 1953 , Carson began library and field research on the ecology and organisms of the Atlantic shore . In 1955 , she completed the third volume of her sea trilogy , The Edge of the Sea , which focuses on life in coastal ecosystems ( particularly along the Eastern Seaboard ) . It appeared in The New Yorker in two condensed installments shortly before its October 26 book release by Houghton Mifflin ( again a new publisher ) . By this time , Carson 's reputation for clear and poetical prose was well established ; The Edge of the Sea received highly favorable reviews , if not quite as enthusiastic as for The Sea Around Us . 
 Through 1955 and 1956 , Carson worked on a number of projects — including the script for an Omnibus episode , " Something About the Sky " — and wrote articles for popular magazines . Her plan for the next book was to address evolution , but the publication of Julian Huxley 's Evolution in Action — and her own difficulty in finding a clear and compelling approach to the topic — led her to abandon the project . Instead , her interests were turning to conservation . She considered an environment @-@ themed book project tentatively entitled Remembrance of the Earth and became involved with The Nature Conservancy and other conservation groups . She also made plans to buy and preserve from development an area in Maine she and Freeman called the " Lost Woods . " 
 Early in 1957 , family tragedy struck a third time when one of the nieces she had cared for in the 1940s died at the age of 31 , leaving a five @-@ year @-@ old orphan son , Roger Christie . Carson took on that responsibility , adopting the boy , alongside continuing to care for her aging mother ; this took a considerable toll on Carson . She moved to Silver Spring , Maryland , to care for Roger , and much of 1957 was spent putting their new living situation in order and focusing on specific environmental threats . 
 By late 1957 , Carson was closely following federal proposals for widespread pesticide spraying ; the USDA planned to eradicate fire ants , and other spraying programs involving chlorinated hydrocarbons and organophosphates were on the rise . For the rest of her life , Carson 's main professional focus would be the dangers of pesticide overuse . 
 = = = Silent Spring = = = 
 Silent Spring , Carson 's most well @-@ known book , was published by Houghton Mifflin on 27 September 1962 . The book described the harmful effects of pesticides on the environment , and is widely credited with helping launch the environmental movement . In 1994 , an edition of Silent Spring was published with an introduction written by Vice President Al Gore . In 2012 Silent Spring was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark by the American Chemical Society for its role in the development of the modern environmental movement . 
 = = = = Research and writing = = = = 
 Starting in the mid @-@ 1940s , Carson had become concerned about the use of synthetic pesticides , many of which had been developed through the military funding of science since World War II . It was the US federal government 's 1957 gypsy moth eradication program , however , that prompted Carson to devote her research , and her next book , to pesticides and environmental poisons . The gypsy moth program involved aerial spraying of DDT and other pesticides ( mixed with fuel oil ) , including the spraying of private land . Landowners on Long Island filed a suit to have the spraying stopped , and many in affected regions followed the case closely . Though the suit was lost , the Supreme Court granted petitioners the right to gain injunctions against potential environmental damage in the future ; this laid the basis for later successful environmental actions . 
 The Washington , D.C. chapter of the Audubon Society also actively opposed such spraying programs , and recruited Carson to help make public the government 's exact spraying practices and the related research . Carson began the four @-@ year project of what would become Silent Spring by gathering examples of environmental damage attributed to DDT . She also attempted to enlist others to join the cause : essayist E. B. White , and a number of journalists and scientists . By 1958 , Carson had arranged a book deal , with plans to co @-@ write with Newsweek science journalist Edwin Diamond . However , when The New Yorker commissioned a long and well @-@ paid article on the topic from Carson , she began considering writing more than simply the introduction and conclusion as planned ; soon it was a solo project . ( Diamond would later write one of the harshest critiques of Silent Spring ) . 
 As her research progressed , Carson found a sizable community of scientists who were documenting the physiological and environmental effects of pesticides . She also took advantage of her personal connections with many government scientists , who supplied her with confidential information . From reading the scientific literature and interviewing scientists , Carson found two scientific camps when it came to pesticides : those who dismissed the possible danger of pesticide spraying barring conclusive proof , and those who were open to the possibility of harm and willing to consider alternative methods such as biological pest control . 
 By 1959 , the USDA 's Agricultural Research Service responded to the criticism by Carson and others with a public service film , Fire Ants on Trial ; Carson characterized it as " flagrant propaganda " that ignored the dangers that spraying pesticides ( especially dieldrin and heptachlor ) posed to humans and wildlife . That spring , Carson wrote a letter , published in The Washington Post , that attributed the recent decline in bird populations — in her words , the " silencing of birds " — to pesticide overuse . That was also the year of the " Great Cranberry Scandal " : the 1957 , 1958 , and 1959 crops of U.S. cranberries were found to contain high levels of the herbicide <unk> ( which caused cancer in laboratory rats ) and the sale of all cranberry products was halted . Carson attended the ensuing FDA hearings on revising pesticide regulations ; she came away discouraged by the aggressive tactics of the chemical industry representatives , which included expert testimony that was firmly contradicted by the bulk of the scientific literature she had been studying . She also wondered about the possible " financial inducements behind certain pesticide programs . " 
 Research at the Library of Medicine of the National Institutes of Health brought Carson into contact with medical researchers investigating the gamut of cancer @-@ causing chemicals . Of particular significance was the work of National Cancer Institute researcher and environmental cancer section founding director Wilhelm <unk> , who classified many pesticides as carcinogens . Carson and her research assistant Jeanne Davis , with the help of NIH librarian Dorothy <unk> , found evidence to support the pesticide @-@ cancer connection ; to Carson the evidence for the toxicity of a wide array of synthetic pesticides was clear @-@ cut , though such conclusions were very controversial beyond the small community of scientists studying pesticide carcinogenesis . 
 By 1960 , Carson had more than enough research material , and the writing was progressing rapidly . In addition to the thorough literature search , she had investigated hundreds of individual incidents of pesticide exposure and the human sickness and ecological damage that resulted . However , in January , a duodenal ulcer followed by several infections kept her bedridden for weeks , greatly delaying the completion of Silent Spring . As she was nearing full recovery in March ( just as she was completing drafts of the two cancer chapters of her book ) , she discovered cysts in her left breast , one of which necessitated a mastectomy . Though her doctor described the procedure as precautionary and recommended no further treatment , by December Carson discovered that the tumor was in fact malignant and the cancer had metastasized . Her research was also delayed by revision work for a new edition of The Sea Around Us , and by a collaborative photo essay with Erich Hartmann . Most of the research and writing was done by the fall of 1960 , except for the discussion of recent research on biological controls and investigations of a handful of new pesticides . However , further health troubles slowed the final revisions in 1961 and early 1962 . 
 It was difficult finding a title for the book ; " Silent Spring " was initially suggested as a title for the chapter on birds . By August 1961 , Carson finally agreed to the suggestion of her literary agent Marie Rodell : Silent Spring would be a metaphorical title for the entire book — suggesting a bleak future for the whole natural world — rather than a literal chapter title about the absence of birdsong . With Carson 's approval , editor Paul Brooks at Houghton Mifflin arranged for illustrations by Louis and Lois Darling , who also designed the cover . The final writing was the first chapter , A Fable for Tomorrow , which Carson intended as a gentle introduction to what might otherwise be a <unk> serious topic . By mid @-@ 1962 , Brooks and Carson had largely finished the editing , and were laying the groundwork for promoting the book by sending the manuscript out to select individuals for final suggestions . 
 = = = = Content = = = = 
 As biographer Mark Hamilton Lytle writes , Carson " quite self @-@ consciously decided to write a book calling into question the paradigm of scientific progress that defined postwar American culture . " The overriding theme of Silent Spring is the powerful — and often negative — effect humans have on the natural world . 
 Carson 's main argument is that pesticides have detrimental effects on the environment ; they are more properly termed <unk> , she argues , because their effects are rarely limited to the target pests . DDT is a prime example , but other synthetic pesticides come under scrutiny as well — many of which are subject to bioaccumulation . Carson also accuses the chemical industry of intentionally spreading disinformation and public officials of accepting industry claims uncritically . Most of the book is devoted to pesticides ' effects on natural ecosystems , but four chapters also detail cases of human pesticide poisoning , cancer , and other illnesses attributed to pesticides . About DDT and cancer , the subject of so much subsequent debate , Carson says only a little : 
 In laboratory tests on animal subjects , DDT has produced suspicious liver tumors . Scientists of the Food and Drug Administration who reported the discovery of these tumors were uncertain how to classify them , but felt there was some " justification for considering them low grade hepatic cell carcinomas . " Dr. <unk> [ author of Occupational Tumors and Allied Diseases ] now gives DDT the definite rating of a " chemical carcinogen . " 
 Carson predicted increased consequences in the future , especially as targeted pests develop resistance to pesticides , while weakened ecosystems fall prey to unanticipated invasive species . The book closes with a call for a biotic approach to pest control as an alternative to chemical pesticides . 
 In regards to the pesticide DDT , Carson never actually called for an outright ban . Part of the argument she made in Silent Spring was that even if DDT and other insecticides had no environmental side effects , their indiscriminate overuse was counter @-@ productive because it would create insect resistance to the pesticide ( s ) , making the pesticides useless in eliminating the target insect populations : 
 No responsible person contends that insect @-@ borne disease should be ignored . The question that has now urgently presented itself is whether it is either wise or responsible to attack the problem by methods that are rapidly making it worse . The world has heard much of the triumphant war against disease through the control of insect vectors of infection , but it has heard little of the other side of the story — the defeats , the short @-@ lived triumphs that now strongly support the alarming view that the insect enemy has been made actually stronger by our efforts . Even worse , we may have destroyed our very means of fighting . 
 Carson further noted that " Malaria programmes are threatened by resistance among mosquitoes " and emphasized the advice given by the director of Holland 's Plant Protection Service : " Practical advice should be ' Spray as little as you possibly can ' rather than ' Spray to the limit of your capacity ' ... Pressure on the pest population should always be as slight as possible . " 
 = = = = Promotion and reception = = = = 
 Carson and the others involved with publication of Silent Spring expected fierce criticism . They were particularly concerned about the possibility of being sued for libel . Carson was also undergoing radiation therapy to combat her spreading cancer , and expected to have little energy to devote to defending her work and responding to critics . In preparation for the anticipated attacks , Carson and her agent attempted to amass as many prominent supporters as possible before the book 's release . 
 Most of the book 's scientific chapters were reviewed by scientists with relevant expertise , among whom Carson found strong support . Carson attended the White House Conference on Conservation in May 1962 ; Houghton Mifflin distributed proof copies of Silent Spring to many of the delegates , and promoted the upcoming New Yorker serialization . Among many others , Carson also sent a proof copy to Supreme Court Associate Justice William O. Douglas , a long @-@ time environmental advocate who had argued against the court 's rejection of the Long Island pesticide spraying case ( and who had provided Carson with some of the material included in her chapter on herbicides ) . 
 Though Silent Spring had generated a fairly high level of interest based on pre @-@ publication promotion , this became much more intense with the serialization in The New Yorker , which began in the June 16 , 1962 , issue . This brought the book to the attention of the chemical industry and its lobbyists , as well as a wide swath of the American populace . Around that time Carson also learned that Silent Spring had been selected as the Book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month for October ; as she put it , this would " carry it to farms and hamlets all over that country that don 't know what a bookstore looks like — much less The New Yorker . " Other publicity included a positive editorial in The New York Times and excerpts of the serialized version in Audubon magazine , with another round of publicity in July and August as chemical companies responded . The story of the birth defect @-@ causing drug thalidomide broke just before the book 's publication as well , inviting comparisons between Carson and Frances Oldham Kelsey , the Food and Drug Administration reviewer who had blocked the drug 's sale in the United States . 
 In the weeks leading up to the September 27 , 1962 , publication , there was strong opposition to Silent Spring from the chemical industry . DuPont ( a main manufacturer of DDT and 2 @,@ 4 @-@ D ) and <unk> Chemical Company ( exclusive manufacturer of chlordane and heptachlor ) were among the first to respond . DuPont compiled an extensive report on the book 's press coverage and estimated impact on public opinion . <unk> threatened legal action against Houghton Mifflin as well as The New Yorker and Audubon unless the planned Silent Spring features were canceled . Chemical industry representatives and lobbyists also lodged a range of non @-@ specific complaints , some anonymously . Chemical companies and associated organizations produced a number of their own brochures and articles promoting and defending pesticide use . However , Carson 's and the publishers ' lawyers were confident in the vetting process Silent Spring had undergone . The magazine and book publications proceeded as planned , as did the large Book @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Month printing ( which included a pamphlet endorsing the book by William O. Douglas ) . 
 American Cyanamid biochemist Robert White @-@ Stevens and former Cyanamid chemist Thomas Jukes were among the most aggressive critics , especially of Carson 's analysis of DDT . According to White @-@ Stevens , " If man were to follow the teachings of Miss Carson , we would return to the Dark Ages , and the insects and diseases and vermin would once again inherit the earth . " Others went further , attacking Carson 's scientific credentials ( because her training was in marine biology rather than biochemistry ) and her personal character . White @-@ Stevens labeled her " ... a fanatic defender of the cult of the balance of nature , " while former U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson — in a letter to former President Dwight D. Eisenhower — reportedly concluded that because she was unmarried despite being physically attractive , she was " probably a Communist . " 
 Many critics repeatedly asserted that she was calling for the elimination of all pesticides . Yet Carson had made it clear she was not advocating the banning or complete withdrawal of helpful pesticides , but was instead encouraging responsible and carefully managed use with an awareness of the chemicals ' impact on the entire ecosystem . In fact , she concludes her section on DDT in Silent Spring not by urging a total ban , but with advice for spraying as little as possible to limit the development of resistance . 
 The academic community — including prominent defenders such as H. J. Muller , Loren Eisley , Clarence Cottam , and Frank <unk> — by and large backed the book 's scientific claims ; public opinion soon turned Carson 's way as well . The chemical industry campaign backfired , as the controversy greatly increased public awareness of potential pesticide dangers , as well as Silent Spring book sales . Pesticide use became a major public issue , especially after the CBS Reports TV special " The Silent Spring of Rachel Carson " that aired April 3 , 1963 . The program included segments of Carson reading from Silent Spring and interviews with a number of other experts , mostly critics ( including White @-@ Stevens ) ; according to biographer Linda Lear , " in juxtaposition to the wild @-@ eyed , loud @-@ voiced Dr. Robert White @-@ Stevens in white lab coat , Carson appeared anything but the hysterical alarmist that her critics contended . " Reactions from the estimated audience of ten to fifteen million were overwhelmingly positive , and the program spurred a congressional review of pesticide dangers and the public release of a pesticide report by the President 's Science Advisory Committee . Within a year or so of publication , the attacks on the book and on Carson had largely lost momentum . 
 In one of her last public appearances , Carson testified before President John F. Kennedy 's Science Advisory Committee . The committee issued its report on May 15 , 1963 , largely backing Carson 's scientific claims . Following the report 's release , she also testified before a U.S. Senate subcommittee to make policy recommendations . Though Carson received hundreds of other speaking invitations , she was unable to accept the great majority of them . Her health was steadily declining as her cancer outpaced the radiation therapy , with only brief periods of remission . She spoke as much as she was physically able , however , including a notable appearance on The Today Show and speeches at several dinners held in her honor . In late 1963 , she received a flurry of awards and honors : the Audubon Medal ( from the National Audubon Society ) , the Cullum Geographical Medal ( from the American Geographical Society ) , and induction into the American Academy of Arts and Letters . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Weakened from breast cancer and her treatment regimen , Carson became ill with a respiratory virus in January 1964 . Her condition worsened , and in February , doctors found that she had severe anemia from her radiation treatments and in March they discovered that the cancer had reached her liver . She died of a heart attack on April 14 , 1964 , in her home in Silver Spring , Maryland . 
 Her body was cremated . Half of the ashes were buried in her mother 's grave at <unk> Memorial Cemetery in Rockville , Maryland . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Collected papers and posthumous publications = = = 
 Carson bequeathed her manuscripts and papers to Yale University , to take advantage of the new state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art <unk> facilities of the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library . Her longtime agent and literary executor Marie Rodell spent nearly two years organizing and cataloging Carson 's papers and correspondence , distributing all the letters to their senders so that only what each correspondent approved of would be submitted to the archive . 
 In 1965 , Rodell arranged for the publication of an essay Carson had intended to expand into a book : A Sense of Wonder . The essay , which was combined with photographs by Charles Pratt and others , exhorts parents to help their children experience the " ... lasting pleasures of contact with the natural world [ ... ] available to anyone who will place himself under the influence of earth , sea and sky and their amazing life . " 
 In addition to the letters in Always Rachel , in 1998 a volume of Carson 's previously unpublished work was published as Lost Woods : The Discovered Writing of Rachel Carson , edited by Linda Lear . All of Carson 's books remain in print . 
 = = = Grassroots environmentalism and the EPA = = = 
 Carson 's work had a powerful impact on the environmental movement . Silent Spring , in particular , was a rallying point for the fledgling social movement in the 1960s . According to environmental engineer and Carson scholar H. Patricia Hynes , " Silent Spring altered the balance of power in the world . No one since would be able to sell pollution as the necessary underside of progress so easily or uncritically . " Carson 's work , and the activism it inspired , are at least partly responsible for the deep ecology movement , and the overall strength of the grassroots environmental movement since the 1960s . It was also influential on the rise of ecofeminism and on many feminist scientists . 
 Carson 's most direct legacy in the environmental movement was the campaign to ban the use of DDT in the United States ( and related efforts to ban or limit its use throughout the world ) . Though environmental concerns about DDT had been considered by government agencies as early as Carson 's testimony before the President 's Science Advisory Committee , the 1967 formation of the Environmental Defense Fund was the first major milestone in the campaign against DDT . The organization brought lawsuits against the government to " establish a citizen 's right to a clean environment , " and the arguments employed against DDT largely mirrored Carson 's . By 1972 , the Environmental Defense Fund and other activist groups had succeeded in securing a phase @-@ out of DDT use in the United States ( except in emergency cases ) . 
 The creation of the Environmental Protection Agency by the Nixon Administration in 1970 addressed another concern that Carson had brought to light . Until then , the same agency ( the USDA ) was responsible both for regulating pesticides and promoting the concerns of the agriculture industry ; Carson saw this as a conflict of interest , since the agency was not responsible for effects on wildlife or other environmental concerns beyond farm policy . Fifteen years after its creation , one journalist described the EPA as " the extended shadow of Silent Spring . " Much of the agency 's early work , such as enforcing the 1972 Federal Insecticide , <unk> , and <unk> Act , was directly related to Carson 's work . 
 In the 1980s , the policies of the Reagan Administration emphasized economic growth , rolling back many of the environmental policies adopted in response to Carson and her work . 
 = = = Criticisms of environmentalism and DDT restrictions = = = 
 Carson and the environmental movement were , and continue to be , criticized by some who argue that restrictions placed on pesticides , specifically DDT , have caused tens of millions of needless deaths and hampered agriculture ( and , implicitly , that Carson bears responsibility for inciting such restrictions ) . These arguments have been dismissed as " outrageous " by former WHO scientist Socrates <unk> . May Berenbaum , University of Illinois entomologist , says , " to blame environmentalists who oppose DDT for more deaths than Hitler is worse than irresponsible . " Investigative journalist Adam <unk> and others characterize this notion as a " myth " promoted principally by Roger Bate of the pro @-@ DDT advocacy group Africa Fighting Malaria ( AFM ) . 
 In the 2000s , however , criticism of the real and alleged ban ( s ) of DDT her work prompted became much more intense . In 2009 , the libertarian think tank Competitive Enterprise Institute set up a website asserting " Millions of people around the world suffer the painful and often deadly effects of malaria because one person sounded a false alarm . That person is Rachel Carson . " A 2012 review article in Nature by Rob Dunn commemorating the 50th anniversary of Silent Spring prompted a response in a letter written by Anthony Trewavas and co @-@ signed by 10 others , including Christopher Leaver , Bruce Ames , Richard Tren and Peter Lachmann , who quote estimates of 60 to 80 million deaths " as a result of misguided fears based on poorly understood evidence . " 
 Biographer Hamilton Lytle believes these estimates unrealistic , even assuming that Carson can be " blamed " for worldwide DDT policies . John <unk> and Tim Lambert have written that " the most striking feature of the claim against Carson is the ease with which it can be refuted . " DDT was never banned for anti @-@ malarial use , ( its ban for agricultural use in the United States in 1972 did not apply outside the US or to anti @-@ malaria spraying ; the international treaty that banned most uses of DDT and other organochlorine pesticides — the 2001 Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants — included an exemption for DDT for the use of malaria control until affordable substitutes could be found . ) Mass outdoor spraying of DDT was abandoned in poor countries subject to malaria , such as Sri Lanka , in the 1970s and 1980s , not because of government prohibitions , but because the DDT had lost its ability to kill the mosquitoes ( because of insects ' very short breeding cycle and large number of offspring , the most resistant insects that survive and pass on their genetic traits to their offspring replace the pesticide @-@ slain insects relatively rapidly . Agricultural spraying of pesticides produces resistance to the pesticide in seven to ten years ) . 
 Consequently , some experts have argued that restrictions placed on the agricultural use of DDT have increased its effectiveness as a tool for battling malaria . According to pro @-@ DDT advocate Amir Attaran the result of the 2004 Stockholm Convention banning DDT 's use in agriculture " is arguably better than the status quo ... For the first time , there is now an insecticide which is restricted to vector control only , meaning that the selection of resistant mosquitoes will be slower than before . " 
 = = = Posthumous honors = = = 
 A variety of groups ranging from government institutions to environmental and conservation organizations to scholarly societies have celebrated Carson 's life and work since her death . Perhaps most significantly , on June 9 , 1980 , Carson was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom , the highest civilian honor in the United States A 17 ¢ Great Americans series postage stamp was issued in her honor the following year ; several other countries have since issued Carson postage as well . 
 Carson 's birthplace and childhood home in Springdale , Pennsylvania — now known as the Rachel Carson Homestead — became a National Register of Historic Places site , and the nonprofit Rachel Carson Homestead Association was created in 1975 to manage it . Her home in Colesville , Maryland where she wrote Silent Spring was named a National Historic Landmark in 1991 . Near Pittsburgh , a 35 @.@ 7 miles ( 57 km ) hiking trail , called the Rachel Carson Trail and maintained by the Rachel Carson Trails Conservancy , was dedicated to Carson in 1975 . A Pittsburgh bridge was also renamed in Carson 's honor as the Rachel Carson Bridge . The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection State Office Building in Harrisburg is named in her honor . Elementary schools in Gaithersburg , Montgomery County , Maryland , Sammamish , Washington and San Jose , California were named in her honor , as were middle schools in Beaverton , Oregon and Herndon , Virginia ( Rachel Carson Middle School ) , and a high school in Brooklyn , New York . 
 Two research vessels currently sail in the US bearing the name R / V Rachel Carson . One is on the west coast , owned by MBARI , and the other is on the east coast , operated by the University of Maryland . Another vessel of the name , now scrapped , was a former naval vessel obtained and converted by the US <unk> it operated on the Great Lakes . 
 In Woods Hole , Massachusetts , near the US Fisheries building and adjacent to the Marine Biological Laboratory and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , the Marine Biological Laboratory has erected a life @-@ sized bronze statue of Rachel , sitting on a bench , with a book . 
 The ceremonial auditorium on the third floor of U.S. EPA 's main headquarters , the Ariel Rios Building , is named after Rachel Carson . The Rachel Carson room is just a few feet away from the EPA administrator 's office and has been the site of numerous important announcements , including the Clean Air Interstate Rule , since the Agency moved to Ariel Rios in 2001 . 
 A number of conservation areas have been named for Carson as well . Between 1964 and 1990 , 650 acres ( 3 km2 ) near Brookeville in Montgomery County , Maryland were acquired and set aside as the Rachel Carson Conservation Park , administered by the Maryland @-@ National Capital Park and Planning Commission . In 1969 , the Coastal Maine National Wildlife Refuge became the Rachel Carson National Wildlife Refuge ; expansions will bring the size of the refuge to about 9 @,@ 125 acres ( 37 km2 ) . In 1985 , North Carolina renamed one of its estuarine reserves in honor of Carson , in Beaufort . 
 Carson is also a frequent namesake for prizes awarded by philanthropic , educational and scholarly institutions . The Rachel Carson Prize , founded in Stavanger , Norway in 1991 , is awarded to women who have made a contribution in the field of environmental protection . The American Society for Environmental History has awarded the Rachel Carson Prize for Best Dissertation since 1993 . Since 1998 , the Society for Social Studies of Science has awarded an annual Rachel Carson Book Prize for " a book length work of social or political relevance in the area of science and technology studies . " 
 Google created a Google Doodle for Carson 's 107th birthday on May 27 , 2014 . <unk> named Carson as the sixth best science writer of all time , under the category of Zoology and Naturalism . 
 = = = = Centennial events = = = = 
 2007 was the centennial of Carson 's birth . On Earth Day ( April 22 , 2007 ) , Courage for the Earth : Writers , Scientists , and Activists Celebrate the Life and Writing of Rachel Carson was released as " a centennial appreciation of Rachel Carson 's brave life and transformative writing . " It contained thirteen essays by environmental writers and scientists . Democratic Senator Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland had intended to submit a resolution celebrating Carson for her " legacy of scientific rigor coupled with poetic sensibility " on the 100th anniversary of her birth . The resolution was blocked by Republican Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma , who said that " The junk science and stigma surrounding DDT — the cheapest and most effective insecticide on the planet — have finally been jettisoned . " The Rachel Carson Homestead Association held a May 27 birthday party and sustainable feast at her birthplace and home in Springdale , Pennsylvania , and the first Rachel Carson Legacy Conference in Pittsburgh with E. O. Wilson as keynote speaker . Both Rachel 's Sustainable Feast and the conference continue as annual events . 
 Also in 2007 American author Ginger Wadsworth wrote a biography of Carson . 
 = = List of works = = 
 Under the Sea Wind , 1941 , Simon & Schuster , Penguin Group , 1996 , ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 " Fishes of the Middle West " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1943 . 
 " Fish and Shellfish of the Middle Atlantic Coast " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1945 . 
 " Chincoteague : A National Wildlife Refuge " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1947 . 
 " <unk> : A National Wildlife Refuge " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1947 . 
 " Parker River : A National Wildlife Refuge " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1947 . 
 " Bear River : A National Wildlife Refuge " ( PDF ) . United States Government Printing Office . 1950 . ( with <unk> T. Wilson ) 
 The Sea Around Us , Oxford University Press , 1951 ; Oxford University Press , 1991 , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 The Edge of the Sea , Houghton Mifflin 1955 ; Mariner Books , 1998 , ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Silent Spring , Houghton Mifflin , 1962 ; Mariner Books , 2002 , ISBN 0 @-@ 618 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Silent Spring initially appeared serialized in three parts in the June 16 , June 23 , and June 30 , 1962 issues of The New Yorker magazine 
 The Sense of Wonder , 1965 , HarperCollins , 1998 : ISBN 0 @-@ 06 @-@ <unk> @-@ X published posthumously 
 Always , Rachel : The Letters of Rachel Carson and Dorothy Freeman 1952 – 1964 An Intimate Portrait of a Remarkable Friendship , Beacon Press , 1995 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8070 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 edited by Martha Freeman ( granddaughter of Dorothy Freeman ) 
 Lost Woods : The Discovered Writing of Rachel Carson , Beacon Press , 1998 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8070 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Bedrock : Writers on the Wonders of Geology , edited by Lauret E. Savoy , Eldridge M. Moores , and Judith E. Moores , Trinity University Press , 2006 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 022 @-@ X 
 = Email Surveillance = 
 " Email Surveillance " is the ninth episode of the second season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's fifteenth episode overall . Written by Jennifer Celotta , and directed by Paul Feig , the episode first aired in the United States on November 22 , 2005 on NBC . The episode guest starred Ken Jeong and Omi Vaidya . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , the company tech support employee gives Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) the ability to read his employees ' emails , causing him to find out that Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) is throwing a party that Michael was not invited to . Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) begins to suspect that Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) might secretly be having a relationship . 
 Ken Jeong explained that , while all the scenes were scripted , the actors were allowed to improvise their lines during the improv shots . Omi Vaidya revealed that , during the party scenes , the cast were allowed to drink real beer and play video games on an Xbox 360 . " Email Surveillance " received largely positive reviews from television critics . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 3 @.@ 9 in the 18 – 49 demographic and was viewed by 8 @.@ 3 million viewers in its original broadcast . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dunder Mifflin 's tech support employee , Sadiq ( Omi Vaidya ) , arrives at the Scranton branch to set up a system that allows Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) to monitor his employees ' emails . When everyone in the office finds out , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) worries that Michael will discover the party he is throwing that night , to which Michael is not invited . Inevitably , Michael notices and tries to get Jim to admit that he 's having a party , while Jim acts nonchalantly as if nothing is happening . In order to keep Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) from exposing the party , Jim tells him that it 's a surprise party for Michael . 
 Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) notices some things that lead her to suspect that Dwight and Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) are dating . However , she discreetly abandons her suspicions when she asks Phyllis Lapin ( Phyllis Smith ) if she noticed any office romances and Phyllis guesses that Pam meant her and Jim . Jim and Pam bond when she sees Jim 's room for the first time and looks through his high school year book . 
 After ruining an improv class , Michael decides to crash Jim 's party , much to the staff 's dismay and Dwight 's naïve delight . Michael awkwardly tries his hand at karaoke but Jim then joins in , easing the tension considerably . The documentary crew catches Angela and Dwight making out in Jim 's backyard . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Email Surveillance " was written by Jennifer Celotta , making it her first writing contribution to the series . This episode was the fourth episode of the series directed by Paul Feig . Feig had previously directed episode " Office Olympics " , " Halloween " , and " Performance Review " . 
 When filming the scene with Michael in the improv class , Ken Jeong , who played Bill , said that " they ( the crew ) would shoot the scenes as scripted the first few takes , and then we would improvise after that . " For example " the scene where I ( Ken Jeong ) say ' Good job ' to Michael and he says ' Nice job , Bill ... not ' was improvised . " Jeong , who had previously taken part in an actual improv class , noted that " Anyone who 's ever taken an improv class appreciates that bit [ with Michael starting every session with a gun ] . " 
 The episode guest starred Omi Vaidya , who played the part of Sadiq , the IT assistant . Vaidya later explained that , originally , " a lot of people auditioned for that role , bigger Indian American actors " . However Vaidya , who had watched the British version and was familiar with the camera style , " took a scarf , created a turban out of it and walked to the audition room with it on " because he thought that " that was what was needed for the character and the show " . He later called his guest appearance " one of the best productions in the United States that I have been a part of . " Vaidya said that he enjoyed shooting the party scenes the most because they got to drink real beer and play video games on an Xbox 360 , which had not been released at the time . Vaidya said that " it was like being at a real party with everyone from The Office except that we had to shoot a few scenes while we were chatting and relaxing . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 After Oscar confronts Michael about reading the staff 's emails , Michael references Big Brother , from the novel Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four and does an impression of The Tin Man from the 1939 film The Wizard of Oz . Michael invites Dwight over to his house to watch the 2004 version of Battlestar Galactica , but he misidentifies the show as " Battleship Galaxy " . At his improv class , Michael , in an attempt to get the instructors attention , asks " Mr. Kot @-@ ter " , a reference to the 1975 series Welcome Back , Kotter . During Jim 's party , Phyllis sings a karaoke version of the 1987 hit " Here I Go Again " by hard rock band Whitesnake , and Kevin sings Cake 's 1996 cover of " I Will Survive " , originally by Gloria Gaynor . Finally , Michael and Jim share a duet of the 1983 single " Islands in the Stream " , originally sung by Kenny Rogers and Dolly Parton . At one point during the party , Kevin tells Ryan " Not so fast ... ' Fire Guy ' " . This is a reference to the earlier second season episode " The Fire " , in which Ryan accidentally started a fire in the office building . As a result , Dwight and Michael gave him the nickname " The Fire Guy " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Email Surveillance " originally aired on NBC in the United States on November 22 , 2005 . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 1 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 9 rating / 9 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode retained 76 percent of its lead @-@ in My Name is Earl audience , and was tied with an episode of the medical drama House as the number one television show in the 18 – 34 male demographic . An encore presentation of the episode , on June 20 , 2006 , received 2 @.@ 1 rating / 7 % share was viewed by over 5 million viewers , ranking it as the number one program in the 18 – 34 demographic . 
 " Email Surveillance " received generally positive reviews from television critics . TV Squad 's Michael Sciannamea said that " Email Surveillance " was " a solid episode " , and that even though " Michael 's vulnerabilities were again exposed " , in the end " you walk away from the episode feeling good that he did make it to Jim 's party . " M. Giant from Television Without Pity graded the episode with an " A- " . Dan Phillips from IGN named " Michael Crashes Jim 's Party " the fifth most awkward moment of the show , noting that , " Few things are more awkward than a party crasher , especially when the party crasher happens to be named Michael Scott . " 
 Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , and wrote positively of the way the show was able to write @-@ in the presence of the <unk> into the episode 's plot ; he compared this to the story arc in the ninth season involving Brian the boom mic operator , noting that the documentarians presence in " Email Surveillance " was much better executed than then the aforementioned Brian plot . He also called the episode 's conclusion , featuring Michael and Jim singing a duet , " emotionally satisfying " because it relies " on what these people mean to each other outside of the office " . 
 = Euonymeia = 
 Euonymeia ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> ) , also known by its medieval name Trachones ( Greek : <unk> ) , and by its modern colloquial Ano Kalamaki ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , Upper Kalamaki ) , is a historic settlement in Attica and currently a residential neighborhood within the municipality of Alimos on the southern suburbs of Athens , Greece . The area is an inland part of the south Athenian plain , situated between the foothills of Mount Hymettus and the southern coastal zone of Athens on the Saronic Gulf . The land is characterized by limestone hills and streams running from Hymettus toward the coast . Situated 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) south of the center of Athens , Euonymeia has been developed and incorporated into the urban sprawl of the Greek capital . 
 The area displays some of the earliest urban settlements in Europe , with archeological sites showing continuous development from the Neolithic and Bronze Age periods . Major archeological finds include Early Helladic fortifications , Mycenaean era workshops and necropolis , a classical era amphitheater , and <unk> and Byzantine temples . Some of the earliest and best preserved specimens of Athenian Geometric pottery have been attributed to the Trachones workshop and are featured in museum collections , including two <unk> on display at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City . 
 At its peak during the 5th and 4th centuries BCE , the area was the center of the Deme of Euonymos , one of the most populous communities of Ancient Athens . Euonymos had its own acropolis , theater , industrial installations , and religious festivals . Several <unk> played a major role in Athenian politics and civic life , most notably in the trial of Socrates and in the expeditions of the Peloponnesian War . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name Euonymeia is documented in the <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) , the gazetteer by 6th century CE scholar Stephanus of Byzantium , considered the earliest authoritative work on Mediterranean toponyms . Therein , Stephanus attributes the name to Euonymus of Greek Mythology – son of Gaia with either Uranus or Cephissus . The name itself derives from the Greek root @-@ words <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) " good , well " , and <unk> ( Greek : όνομα ) " name " . Alternative interpretations for the origin of the name are that it is a direct reference to the area being " well named " or " of good repute " , or that it comes from the spindle tree Euonymus europaeus . The medieval name Trachones derives from the word <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) meaning " rock " , derived from the ancient Greek adjective <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) meaning " coarse " . The modern colloquial name Ano Kalamaki ( upper Kalamaki ) arose in 1968 when Euonymeia was administratively linked with the coastal settlement of Kalamaki to the west , creating the contemporary Municipality of Alimos . 
 = = History = = 
 Systematic archeological excavation of the area has not been conducted , yet numerous construction projects during the intensive urban development of the later half of the twentieth century led to important circumstantial discoveries , which shed light on the historic timeline of the settlement . 
 = = = Prehistoric and Bronze Age = = = 
 The hills of Euonymeia , together with the adjacent coastal promontory of Agios Kosmas are the two most important sites of Neolithic and Aegean Bronze Age development in the area of Athens prior to ca . 3000 BCE . Ceramics and obsidian tools found on both sites were identified as originating from the island of Melos , indicating close ties of these settlements with the obsidian @-@ rich islands of the <unk> civilization . The commonality of findings in Agios Kosmas and Euonymeia suggests that the two settlements were functionally linked coastal and inland communities . 
 The earliest signs of prehistoric settlement in Euonymeia were recognized in the 1950s and ' 60s at the Kontopigado site . During expansion work on the Vouliagmenis Avenue , neolithic era masonry was identified around a small hill rising 6 metres ( 20 ft ) above the surrounding ground . In 2012 , prehistoric masonry , which has yet to be dated , was recognized on the summit of Pan 's Hill ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> Pani ) , the highest elevation point in Euonymeia . Several thousand obsidian tool specimens have been collected from both Kontopigado , and Pan 's Hill . Findings from this first settlement period come to an abrupt end around 2000 BCE , indicating a catastrophic event theorized to involve <unk> invaders . 
 Excavations at construction sites adjacent to the Kontopigado mound in the 1980s and ' 90s led to the discovery of an Early Helladic settlement ( third millennium BCE ) , and an overlying Mycenaean complex dated from Late Helladic IIIB to Late Helladic IIIC ( ca . 1300 BCE ) , marking the second period of intense development in Euonymeia . In 2006 , work on the Alimos Metro station 300 metres ( 980 ft ) South from the mound unearthed a large workshop complex from the same era with installations for ceramic production , including a kiln and potters wheel . This workshop included hydraulic installations with wells and water conduits used in the processing of flax into textiles for the production of table wares , and for sails and ropes used on Mycenaean era ships . Altogether the Mycenaean complex at Kontopigado , 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) south of the Mycenaean Palace on the Acropolis of Athens , is one of the largest of its kind found to date . This Bronze Age community and installations at Euonymeia are thought to have had close links to the central palatial authority in Athens , possibly supplying the sails and ropes for the 50 ships that Athens is said to have contributed to the Trojan war . 
 = = = Geometric = = = 
 During the Geometric period of the Hellenic Dark Ages ( 10th to 8th centuries BCE ) , the area continued to be inhabited , with notable pottery production from the Trachones workshop . Geometric era finds in Euonymeia concentrate 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) to the West of the <unk> site at Kontopigado , on a hill by the Trachones stream on the current Geroulanou Estate . While excavations have not yet been performed , the Geroulanou Estate is presumed to have been the site of the Acropolis of Euonymeia , based on surface finds of 8th - 7th century BCE fortifications . Geometric graves and pottery have been found around the estate providing evidence that unlike in Athens and neighboring communities , Euonymeia , together with <unk> further south , were peculiar in practicing cremation as the main burial rite during this period . Nonetheless , the 8th @-@ century ceremonial <unk> attributed to the Trachones workshop and used in burial tombs throughout Geometric Greece are considered some of the best examples of Athenian Geometric Pottery that have been discovered to date . In 1914 , the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City acquired two specimens , which are on display as part of its permanent collection of Greek and Roman Art . 
 = = = Classical : Deme of Euonymos = = = 
 The area was recognized as the site of the ancient Deme of Euonymos ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) in 1975 when construction work uncovered a 4th @-@ century BCE theater . An inscription to the god Dionysus identified it as the Euonymos Theater , previously known only from ancient texts as one of the Deme Theaters of Attica . The theater at Euonymos was constructed in the mid 5th century BCE ( making it one of the earliest known Deme theaters ) with <unk> Marble from quarries in nearby Mount Hymettus . It had an estimated capacity of 2000 – 3000 spectators and is unique among ancient theaters found in Greece owing to the rectangular shape of its orchestra . The theatre was destroyed during the Chremonidean War of the 260s BCE and never rebuilt . Two headless statues of Dionysus were found on the site of the theater , and together with the discovery in 2012 of Dionysian depictions on Red @-@ figure pottery from the area , and undated finds from the Kontopigado site of clay figures seemingly representing <unk> , the rabid female companions of Dionysus , suggest a possible early affiliation of Euonymeia with the Cult of Dionysus and Pan . 
 The town was on the Urban Way ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , the major ancient road linking Athens to the Temple of Poseidon at Sounion , and the all @-@ important silver mines at Laurium . Remains of the Urban Way have been unearthed in multiple sites along the modern Vouliagmenis Avenue , positioning this ancient thoroughfare adjacent to the most important installations in Euonymos . The old Mycenaean hydraulic installations 300 metres ( 980 ft ) Northeast of the theater show continued use through the classical era . In this period , water flowing through the installations from the Trachones stream and wells were used primarily for agriculture , <unk> , and cottage industries . The hill with Geometric @-@ era fortifications on the Geroulanou Estate 300 metres ( 980 ft ) Northwest of the theater is thought to have been the site of the Acropolis of Euonymos . Construction in the 1960s and work on the <unk> Metro station 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) South of the theater in 2003 uncovered a cemetery at the Hasani site with over 150 graves dating from the 7th to the 4th centuries BCE , and inscriptions identifying it as the cemetery of the Deme of Euonymos . Together , these findings conclusively position the center and extent of the classical Deme of Euonymos as a continuation of the early Euonymeia settlements . 
 The Deme of Euonymos was designated as one of the 139 Athenian <unk> by the Reform of Cleisthenes . Euonymos was a " city " deme ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> ) of the <unk> tribe , the first in the hierarchy of the Athenian democracy as descending from Erechtheus , the autochthonous founder of Athens . The Deme contributed 10 <unk> ( increased to 12 in 306 BCE ) to the 500 member @-@ strong Boule , and as such was one of Athens ' largest <unk> . Several <unk> were notable public officials in Ancient Athens , such as <unk> <unk> of <unk> , and high @-@ ranking military figures associated with the Peloponnesian Wars , including <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> of <unk> , and <unk> <unk> and <unk> , the latter also known as a main prosecutor in the trial of Socrates . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 Euonymeia declined in medieval times together with Athens after Christian reforms brought on the Decline of Greco @-@ Roman polytheism . At some point during this time the settlement 's name changed to the village of Trachones . Nonetheless , it retained urban settlement throughout the Early Christian and Byzantine eras as testified by the ruins of the <unk> Basilica of the Holy Apostles ( ca . 7th @-@ 9th centuries CE ) that can be found 200 metres ( 660 ft ) North of Euonymos Theater in the courtyard of the contemporary Church of the Life @-@ giving Spring of Trachones . 
 During the later Middle Ages , Athens was conquered by the fourth crusade , which established the 13th @-@ century crusader state of the Duchy of Athens . During this time , in defiance of the Roman Catholic allegiance to the Frankish lord of Athens Othon de la Roche , the Orthodox church of the " Presentation of Mary of Trachones " ( Greek : <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was constructed 300 metres ( 980 ft ) West of the Euonymos Theater . This church is currently in operation within the grounds of the Geroulanou Estate , making it one of the oldest continuously operational churches in Athens . 
 After the invasion of Greece by the Ottoman Turks , the area of Trachones was turned into a <unk> , and administered according to the Ottoman feudal system , with the local population becoming mandatory land peasants ( <unk> ) . The church of the Presentation of Mary appears to remain the center of the area 's civic life in the following centuries of Ottoman rule . 
 = = = 19th and 20th centuries = = = 
 Modern written use of the toponym Trachones appears right before the Greek Revolution in an 1820 tax record of villages in Attica , while its location , corresponding to the area of Euonymeia , is revealed in 19th century maps , including John Thomson 's 1814 map of Attica ( therein labeled as <unk> ) , and an 1881 map from the German Archeological Institute . During the preceding years , the Trachones Estate , corresponding to a large part of what is now South Athens , was sold to Mufti Hamza , an 18th @-@ century Muslim religious leader of Athens . Records show that the feudal estate had a small population of landless farmers , and that ownership passed on through the Mufti 's progeny . In 1912 , the settlement of Trachones was incorporated into the Municipality of Athens , while the land of the estate was sold in 1918 by the Greek State to the Geroulanou family for 680 @.@ 000 drachma . In 1952 , a large part of the estate was converted from farm to urban plots , including land for the creation of the <unk> Airport . This led to a rapid urbanization following the expanding urban sprawl of the Greek capital , and to the establishment of the current residential community . In 1968 the modern Municipality of Alimos was established , administratively linking the community of Trachones with the coastal community of Kalamaki 2 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) to the West , giving rise to the term Ano Kalamaki ( upper Kalamaki ) to refer to the area of Euonymeia . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The neighborhood is approximately bounded by the avenues of Vouliagmenis in the East , <unk> in the North and West , and <unk> in the South , and includes the " Alimos " Metro station . The area is rocky , a feature that gave it its medieval name , Trachones . The main physical features of Euonymeia are several small limestone hills , the largest of which is Pan 's Hill ( <unk> Pani ) , and the Trachones stream that runs from the Western slopes of <unk> , through Euonymeia , to the Saronic Gulf at Alimos beach . Mount Hymettus to the East is the dominant backdrop visible from most areas of the neighborhood . 
 = = Civic life = = 
 Euonymeia is largely a residential area , with small shops and businesses along <unk> and <unk> avenues . The central public space of the community stretches along the path of the Trachones stream , most of which now runs underground . This area features Karaiskakis square and park , which includes the " <unk> " outdoor public basketball court , and the municipal amphitheater , where the major community events take place . Adjacent to the square is a large school complex with two public elementary schools , and the 2nd Lyceum of Alimos public high school . Next to the school complex is the Municipal Indoor Gymnasium of Trachones with a capacity for 350 seated spectators , the home court of the three local Basketball teams Trachones - Dias Union , <unk> Alimos , A.O. Kalamaki , and the Trachones Volleyball team . Along the same axis next to the Geroulanou Estate is Trachones Field ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , a 457 @-@ seat track and field stadium that is the seat of the local soccer team , FC Trachones . 
 = K Foundation Burn a Million Quid = 
 K Foundation Burn a Million Quid was an action on 23 August 1994 in which the K Foundation ( an art duo consisting of Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty ) burned cash in the amount of one million pounds sterling in a disused boathouse on the <unk> Estate on the Scottish island of Jura . The money represented the bulk of the K Foundation 's funds , earned by Drummond and Cauty as The KLF , one of the United Kingdom 's most successful pop groups of the early 1990s . 
 The incineration was recorded on a Hi @-@ 8 video camera by K Foundation collaborator Gimpo . In August 1995 , the film — Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid — was toured around the UK , with Drummond and Cauty engaging each audience in debate about the burning and its meaning . In November 1995 , the duo pledged to dissolve the K Foundation and to refrain from public discussion of the burning for a period of 23 years , but Drummond spoke about the burning in 2000 and 2004 . At first he was unrepentant but in 2004 he admitted to the BBC that he regretted burning the money . 
 A book entitled K Foundation Burn A Million Quid , edited and compiled by collaborator Chris Brook — was published by Ellipsis Books in 1997 , compiling stills from the film , accounts of events and viewer reactions . The book also contains an image of the house brick that was manufactured from the fire 's ashes . 
 = = Background = = 
 As The KLF , Bill Drummond and Jimmy Cauty were the biggest @-@ selling singles act in the world for 1991 . They had also enjoyed considerable success with their album The White Room and a number one hit single – " <unk> ' the <unk> " – as The <unk> . In May 1992 , The KLF staged an incendiary performance at the BRIT Awards , and retired from the music industry shortly thereafter in typically enigmatic fashion . 
 By their own account , neither Drummond nor Cauty kept any of the money they made as The KLF ; it was all ploughed back into their extravagant productions . Cauty told an Australian Big Issue writer in 2003 that all the money they made as The KLF was spent , and that the royalties they accrued post @-@ retirement amounted to approximately one million pounds : 
 I think we made about £ 6m . We paid nearly half that in tax and spent the rest on production costs . When we stopped , the production costs stopped too , so over the next few months we amassed a surplus of cash still coming in from record sales ; this amounted to about £ <unk> After tax we were left with about £ 1m . This was the money that later became the K Foundation fund for the ' advancement of <unk> 
 Initially The KLF 's earnings were to be distributed by way of a fund for struggling artists managed by the K Foundation , Drummond and Cauty 's new post @-@ KLF art project , but , said Drummond , " We realised that struggling artists are meant to struggle , that 's the whole point . " Instead the duo decided to create art with the money . Nailed to the Wall was the first piece of art produced by the Foundation , and the major piece in their planned art exhibition , Money : A Major Body Of Cash . Consisting of one million pounds in cash nailed to a pine frame , the piece was presented to the press on 23 November 1993 during the buildup to the Foundation 's announcement of the " winner " of their " worst artist of the year award " , the K Foundation art award . 
 = = Decision and burning = = 
 During the first half of 1994 , the K Foundation attempted to interest galleries in staging Money : A Major Body of Cash , but even old friend Jayne Casey , director of the Liverpool Festival Trust , was unable to persuade a major gallery to participate . " ' The Tate , in Liverpool , wanted to be part of the 21st Century Festival I 'm involved with , ' says Casey . ' I suggested they put on the K Foundation exhibition ; at first they were encouraging , but they seemed nervous about the personalities involved . ' A curt fax from ... the gallery curator , informed Casey that the K Foundation 's exhibition of money had been done before and more interestingly " , leaving Drummond and Cauty obliged to pursue other options . The duo considered taking the exhibition across the former Soviet Union by train and on to the United States , but no insurer would touch the project . An exhibition at Kilmainham Jail in Dublin was then considered , but no sooner had a provisional August date been set for it than the duo changed their minds yet again . " Jimmy said : ' Why don 't we just burn it ? ' remembers Drummond . ' He said it in a light @-@ hearted way , I suppose , hoping I 'd say : ' No , we can 't do that , let 's do this ... ' But it seemed the most powerful thing to do . " Cauty : " We were just sitting in a cafe talking about what we were going to spend the money on and then we decided it would be better if we burned it . That was about six weeks before we did it . It was too long , it was a bit of a nightmare . " 
 The journey from deciding to burn the money to deciding how to burn the money to actually burning the money was a long one . Jim Reid , a freelance journalist and the only independent witness to the burning , reported the various schemes the K Foundation considered . The first was offering Nailed To The Wall to the Tate Gallery as the " 1995 K Foundation Bequest To The Nation . " The condition was that the gallery must agree to display the piece for at least 10 years . If they refused , the money would be burnt . A second idea was to hire Bankside Power Station , " the future site of the Tate Gallery extension and an imposing building downstream from the South Bank " , as a bonfire venue . In typical KLF ' guerrilla communication ' style , " posters were to appear on 15 August bearing the legend ' The 1995 K Foundation Bequest To The Nation ' , under which would have been an image of Nailed To The Wall on an easel and two flame @-@ throwers lying on the floor . On 24 August a new poster would go up , exactly the same as the first except that this time the work would be burnt . " 
 The K Foundation 's final solution for their one @-@ million @-@ pound " problem " was rather less showbiz , but dramatic nonetheless , the Foundation having decided that making a public spectacle of the event would lessen its impact . On 22 August , Reid , Drummond , Cauty and Gimpo touched down at Islay Airport in the Inner Hebrides and took a ferry to the island of Jura , previously the scene of a wicker man burning ceremony by The KLF . Early in the morning of 23 August 1994 , in an abandoned boathouse on Jura , Drummond and Cauty incinerated the money . The burning was witnessed by Reid , who subsequently wrote an article about the act for The Observer , and it was filmed on a Hi @-@ 8 video camera by collaborator Gimpo . As the burning began Reid said he felt guilt and shock . These feelings , he reported , quickly turned to boredom . 
 The money took well over an hour to burn as Drummond and Cauty fed £ 50 notes into the fire . According to Drummond , only about £ 900 @,@ 000 of the money was actually burnt , with the remainder flying straight up the chimney . Two days later , according to Reid , Jimmy Cauty destroyed all film and photographic evidence of the burning . Ten months later , Gimpo revealed to them that he had secretly kept a copy . 
 = = Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid film = = 
 Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid starts with a short description of the event , and then consists of Drummond and Cauty throwing £ 50 notes onto the fire . Burning the entire amount takes around 67 minutes . NME wrote : 
 At the start , Cauty is agitated and says he doesn 't think the money will burn because it is too wet . The camera shows 20 thick bundles of £ 50 notes , each bundle containing £ 50 @,@ 000 in new bank notes and sealed in cellophane . When the money ignites , Drummond starts to laugh as he and Cauty stand above a small fireplace throwing £ 50 notes on to the fire . Cauty constantly stokes the blaze with a large wooden plank and at one stage burns his hand on a flaming note . As the fire starts to dim , he scuttles around the floor sweeping stray notes into the flames . The cameraman shows a view from outside the building with charred £ 50 notes billowing out of the chimney . 
 In November 1995 , the BBC aired an edition of the Omnibus documentary series about The K Foundation entitled A Foundation Course in Art . Amongst the footage broadcast were scenes from Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid . Thomas Sutcliffe , reviewing the programme in The Independent , wrote : 
 The Omnibus film about this intriguing pair was in part a rear @-@ guard action in their continuing battle for recognition ( and a victory – for some people , after all , art is what appears on Omnibus ) . It was also a peculiarly modern fable about what constitutes an artist – will the artist 's say @-@ so do , or do you need the validation of the galleries ? " You can 't simply decide you 're going to become an artist , " said one gallery owner haughtily , which left you wondering how else the vocation might operate . A lottery system ? Secret @-@ ballot election ? 
 For my money ( meagre though it is ) , the video which recorded the laborious process of immolation was a decidedly intriguing work – rather more provoking than some contemporary work I 've seen . For established galleries , the medium used ( video , bank @-@ notes , fire ) is obviously an embarrassment , but if poverty of material is not to disqualify artworks ( bricks or lard , say ) why should the expense of material ? 
 = = = Screening tour = = = 
 The first public screening of Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid was on Jura on 23 August 1995 – exactly one year after the burning . " We feel we should face them and answer their questions " said one of the duo . Two weeks later an advert appeared in The Guardian ( pictured right ) , announcing a world tour of the film over the next 12 months at " relevant locations " . The second screening was at In The City music industry convention on 5 September in Manchester . After the film was shown , Drummond and Cauty held a question @-@ and @-@ answer session with the theme " Is It Rock 'n'Roll ? " . A week later , the pair travelled as guests of alternative radio station B92 to Belgrade , where the post @-@ screening discussion was titled " Is it a crime against humanity ? " An unauthorised screening at the BBC Television Centre was curtailed and Drummond and Cauty were escorted from the building . 
 On the weekend of 3 November 1995 , the film was screened at several locations in Glasgow , including at football matches involving Celtic and Rangers ; a planned screening at <unk> prison was cancelled after the Scottish Prison Service withdrew permission . Glasgow 's artistic community broadly seemed to welcome the screenings . A further public screening on Glasgow Green on 5 November was announced by various newspapers , but there is no record of the showing having ever occurred . The K Foundation disappeared from Glasgow ; they later issued a statement that on 5 November 1995 they had signed a " contract " at Cape Wrath in northern Scotland agreeing to wind up the K Foundation and not to speak about the money burning for a period of 23 years . 
 Despite the K Foundation 's reported moratorium , further national screenings of the film organised by Chris Brook took place as planned . At each screening , Drummond and Cauty announced they would not answer questions after the film ; instead , they would ask questions of the audience . These screenings were held in Bradford , Hull , Liverpool , Cheltenham Ladies College , Eton College , Bristol , Aberystwyth , Glastonbury Tor and Brick Lane , London . 
 The Brick Lane screening – on 8 December 1995 – had been previewed in NME , and was chaotically busy . It was originally planned for a car park , but freezing conditions and snow forced a rethink and the screening was moved indoors , to the basement of the nearby Seven Stars pub . Hundreds of people crammed in to watch the screening , which was eventually abandoned partway through due to the cramped conditions . The NME preview had claimed that after the screening the film would be cut up and individual frames sold off to the public . Gimpo , the owner of the film , had no intention of doing so , but after the screening was nearly overwhelmed by a mob of people wanting to take home a piece of the film . 
 Gimpo has continued to show the film at events such as literary festivals and underground film evenings over the years since the initial tour . On 23 August 2007 , after a screening in Berlin , Germany , the DVD briefly disappeared . A few hours later , the film was released on several BitTorrent trackers . 
 = = Burning as a theme = = 
 Ritualistic burnings had already been a recurring aspect of Drummond and Cauty 's work . In 1987 , the duo disposed of copies of their copyright @-@ breaching debut album — The Justified Ancients of Mu Mu 's 1987 ( What the Fuck Is Going On ? ) — by burning them in a Swedish field . This event was pictured on the back sleeve of their second album , Who Killed The JAMs ? , and celebrated in the song " Burn the Bastards " . During the 1991 summer solstice , they burnt a 60 feet ( 18 m ) wicker man . This was chronicled in The KLF movie The Rites of Mu . 
 As the K Foundation , Drummond and Cauty threatened to burn the K Foundation art award prize money ( Gimpo was fumbling with matches and lighter fluid when , at the last moment , Rachel Whiteread accepted the prize ) . In the seventh K Foundation press advert they asked " What would you do with a million pounds ? Burn it ? " 
 = = Reaction and analysis = = 
 Jim Reid 's piece appeared in The Observer on 25 September 1994 . This is " one of the most peculiar stories of the year " , he cautioned readers . " Peculiar because pretty much everyone who comes across this magazine is going to have trouble believing a word of it . Peculiar because every last dot and comma of what is to come is the truth . " " It took about two hours for that cash to go up in flames " , he added . " I looked at it closely , it was real . It came from a bona fide security firm and was not swapped at any time on our journey . More importantly , perhaps , after working with the K Foundation I know they are capable of this . " 
 The Daily Express ran the story on 1 October 1994 . They reported that charred £ 50 notes were being found by islanders , who did not doubt the burning had really taken place . Drummond and Cauty had been seen eating in a hotel bar on Jura before leaving with two suitcases , the newspaper reported . 
 The Times followed with essentially the same story on 4 October 1994 , adding that the burning " [ had ] left many on the island bewildered , incredulous and angry " . £ 1500 had been handed in by a local fisherman to Islay police : " Sergeant Lachlan Maclean checked the money with both banks on Islay and with Customs and Excise , who pronounced it genuine . ' I telephoned Mr Drummond in London and told him the money had been found . I asked him if it was his . He said he would get in touch with his partner , Mr Cauty . So far he has not telephoned back ' " . 
 The media returned to the story in earnest in October and November 1995 , previewing and then reviewing Foundation Course In Art , and reporting on the K Foundation 's tour screening Watch the K Foundation Burn a Million Quid . 
 An October 1995 feature quoted Kevin Hull , the BBC documentary maker responsible for the Omnibus item , saying he had found " the boys rather depressed , and almost in a state of shock " . " Every day I wake up and I think ' Oh God , I 've burnt a million quid and everyone thinks it 's wrong ' " , Cauty told him . 
 A piece in The Times on 5 November 1995 , coinciding with the Glasgow screenings , reported that the K Foundation had no solid reason for burning the money or view of what , if anything , the act represented , but concluded " The K Foundation may not have changed or challenged much but they have certainly provoked thousands to question and analyse the power of money and the responsibilities of those who possess it . And what could be more artistic than that ? " In the same issue , the newspaper 's K Foundation art award witness , Robert Sandall , wrote that the Foundation 's award , million @-@ pound artwork and the burning were all " entertaining , and satirically quite sharp " , but " the art world has chosen not to think [ of it as art ] .... The general view remains that the K Foundation 's preoccupation with money , though undoubtedly sincere , simply isn 't very original . Although they didn 't blow their entire life 's savings along the way , other artists , notably Yves Klein and Chris Burden , have been here before . " 
 The Guardian 's TV reviewer was sceptical . " Snag is , the K men have always dealt in myth and sown a trail of confusion , so nobody quite believes they really burned the money . And if they did , they must be nuts . Confucius says : Aston Martin dealer will not accept suitcase full of ash as down payment . " 
 = = = Later reaction = = = 
 In the following years , the burning would be mentioned regularly in the press , with Drummond and Cauty often relegated to a cultural status of " the men who burnt a million quid " . 
 A February 2000 article in The Observer newspaper again insisted that the duo really had burnt one million pounds . " It wasn 't a stunt . They really did it . If you want to rile Bill Drummond , you call him a hoaxer . ' I knew it was real , ' a long @-@ time friend and associate of his group The KLF tells me , ' because afterwards , Jimmy and Bill looked so harrowed and haunted . And to be honest , they 've never really been the same since ' " . 
 A 2004 listener poll by BBC Radio 6 Music saw The KLF / K Foundation placed second after The Who in a list of " rock excesses " . 
 Drummond 's former protegé Julian Cope was unimpressed , claiming that Drummond still owed him money . " He burned a million pounds which was not all his , and some of it was mine . People should pay off their creditors before they pull intellectual dry @-@ wank stunts like that . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 17 September 1997 , a new film , This Brick , was premiered . The film consisted of one three @-@ minute shot of a brick made from the ashes of the money burnt at Jura . It was shown at the Barbican Centre prior to Drummond and Cauty 's performance as 2K . 
 On 27 September 1997 , K Foundation Burn A Million Quid ( ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 @-@ 9 , ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 37 @-@ 7 paperback ) was published . The book , by Chris Brook and Gimpo , contains stills from the film and transcriptions of various Q & A sessions from the tour . It also includes a timeline of K Foundation activity and sundry essays including one from Alan Moore . Publisher Ellipsis promoted the book with an advert modelled on those of the K Foundation – " Why did Ellipsis publish K Foundation Burn A Million Quid ? " they asked . 
 Initially , Drummond was unrepentant , telling The Observer in 2000 that he couldn 't imagine ever feeling regret unless his child was ill and only " an expensive clinic " could cure him . By 2004 , however , he had admitted to the BBC the difficulty of justifying his decision . " It 's a hard one to explain to your kids and it doesn 't get any easier . I wish I could explain why I did it so people would understand . " 
 = Top Thrill Dragster = 
 Top Thrill Dragster is a steel accelerator roller coaster built by Intamin at Cedar Point in Sandusky , Ohio , United States . It was the sixteenth roller coaster built at the park since the Blue Streak in 1964 . When built in 2003 , it was the first full circuit roller coaster to exceed 400 feet ( 120 m ) in height , and was the tallest roller coaster in the world , before being surpassed by Kingda Ka at Six Flags Great Adventure in May 2005 . Top Thrill Dragster , along with Kingda Ka , are the only strata coasters in existence . It was the second hydraulically launched roller coaster built by Intamin , following <unk> at Knott 's Berry Farm . The tagline for Top Thrill Dragster is " Race for the Sky " . 
 = = History = = 
 Planning for Top Thrill Dragster started around 2000 when Millennium Force opened . Footers started being poured during the winter of 2001 / 2002 then were covered up during the 2002 operating season . To construct the roller coaster , the park had to use a 480 feet ( 150 m ) crane , only one of four in the United States . Vertical construction by Martin & Vleminckx started in fall 2002 , months before the announcement . By October 2002 , the roller coaster had reached 200 feet ( 61 m ) . The ride was announced on January 9 , 2003 and the structure , built by Intamin 's subcontractor Stakotra , was finished shortly after . It is tied with Millennium Force for being the two largest investments in Cedar Point history . The announcement revealed the park 's goal to build " the tallest and fastest roller coaster on earth " , reaching 420 feet ( 130 m ) and accelerating up to 120 miles per hour ( 193 km / h ) in 3 @.@ 8 seconds . On March 10 , 2003 , Cedar Fair Entertainment Company filed a trademark for the name Top Thrill Dragster . 
 Top Thrill Dragster 's media day was held on May 1 , 2003 then it officially opened to the public on May 4 . It became the " tallest " and " fastest " roller coaster in the world overtaking both world records from Steel Dragon 2000 at Nagashima Spa Land that was just built three years earlier . It lost the title of being the world 's tallest and fastest roller coaster when Kingda Ka at Six Flags Great Adventure opened in May 2005 . Intamin designed both Kingda Ka and Top Thrill Dragster , and the two share a similar design and layout that differs primarily by the theme and the additional hill featured on Kingda Ka . 
 The ride had constant downtime in its first couple seasons . Several problems such as the ride 's hydraulic system and launch cable caused the ride to experience downtime . Top Thrill Dragster was also closed in 2003 for the annual event , <unk> . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 After leaving the station , the train enters the launch area . To the left of the launch area is a " Christmas tree " light , similar to those employed at the starting line of a drag strip . A brief message is played to the riders to : " keep arms down , head back , and hold on . " Once the train is prepared to launch , a motor revving sound effect is played and its magnetic braking fins are lowered from the launch track . It then launches , accelerating to a speed of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) in 3 @.@ 8 seconds . Shortly after reaching its maximum velocity , the train begins its ascent up a 90 @-@ degree incline , twisting 90 degrees clockwise before climbing over the 420 @-@ foot ( 130 m ) top hat . Upon descending , the track twists 270 degrees before leveling out , allowing the train to be stopped by the magnetic brakes . 
 = = = Theme / trains = = = 
 The roller coaster is based on the Top Fuel Drag Racing motor sport . A real Top Fuel dragster weighs approximately one ton , while each train on the coaster weighs 15 tons . Its dragster themed trains once had decorative spoilers and engines , but these were removed soon after opening , allowing an extra row of seats to be added to each one . Also , when the ride opened , it had only four cars on each train , including the decals . By the middle of the 2003 season , the fifth cars were added to all trains , making them the five cars long that they are now . The fifth cars were added on shortly before the decals were removed . The ride 's theme song , " Ready to Go " by Republica , is played while in the station . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Occasionally , a train is launched with not enough speed to clear the crest . This typically happens in cool , wet , or breezy weather , or when the wind is working against it . In these conditions , the launch often does not provide it with enough speed to climb over the hill , which causes it to stop short of the top , and roll back down the hill in reverse , hence the term " rollback " . The launch track is equipped with retractable magnetic braking fins which are raised after the train is launched in order to slow one that did not crest the hill . 
 On very rare occasions a combination of the weight distribution of the train , the force of the launch , and the wind can stall a train on the top of the tower . When this happens , a mechanic takes the elevator to the top and pushes the train down the hill . This has only happened three times with passengers on board , June 24 , 2005 , October 25 , 2008 , and May 25 , 2009 . 
 = = World records = = 
 When Top Thrill Dragster debuted , it set four new records : 
 World 's tallest complete circuit roller coaster 
 World 's tallest roller coaster 
 World 's tallest roller coaster drop 
 World 's fastest roller coaster 
 It was the fourth roller coaster to break the 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) speed barrier . It was preceded by Tower of Terror II at Dreamworld , Superman : Escape from Krypton at Six Flags Magic Mountain and Dodonpa at Fuji @-@ Q Highland . The previous record holder for overall height was Superman : Escape from Krypton at Six Flags Magic Mountain , standing at 415 feet ( 126 m ) . Its record was broken in 2005 when Kingda Ka opened at Six Flags Great Adventure , standing 456 feet ( 139 m ) tall . The previous record holder for speed was Dodonpa , at 107 miles per hour ( 172 km / h ) . This record was broken by Top Thrill Dragster , which reaches speeds up to 120 miles per hour ( 190 km / h ) , which was later broken by Kingda Ka which reached a top speed of 128 miles per hour ( 206 km / h ) . In November 2010 , Formula Rossa at Ferrari World broke the record for fastest roller coaster , with a top speed of 149 @.@ 1 miles per hour ( 240 @.@ 0 km / h ) . 
 As of 2015 , Top Thrill Dragster has the second tallest lift , the third fastest speed , and the second @-@ highest drop among steel roller coasters in the world . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Top Thrill Dragster is negatively affected by unfavourable weather conditions as both a high altitude and high velocity ride . " Rain , high winds , and / or lightning " may result in the closing of the ride depending on the severity . It will close in high winds and any kind of precipitation . 
 There is no minimum age requirement , but passengers must meet the miniumum height requirement of 52 inches and a maximum of 78 inches to ride . Some persons over a certain weight / waist size will not be permitted to ride if the seat and lapbar harness cannot accommodate them . Passengers on Dragster may not bring any loose articles onto the train and will be required to wear shirts and footwear . Headphones must be removed before boarding . 
 Passengers are advised that they must not ride Dragster if they have " a history of recent surgery , heart trouble / high blood pressure , neck trouble , back trouble , or any other condition that may be aggravated by riding , or who are pregnant " . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On July 14 , 2004 , four people were struck by flying debris while riding the coaster . Reports indicated that a metal cable frayed during launch , shearing off shards of metal that struck the riders . The injuries were mainly arm abrasions , with one passenger experiencing cuts to the face . They were treated at the park 's first aid station , and two later sought further medical attention . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Records = = 
 = 1983 Pacific typhoon season = 
 The 1983 Pacific typhoon season has no official bounds , but most tropical cyclones tend to form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean between May and November . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean . Tropical storms formed in the entire west Pacific basin were assigned a name by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . Tropical depressions that enter or form in the Philippine area of responsibility are assigned a name by the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration or PAGASA . This can often result in the same storm having two names . 
 The season had a late start , as the first system did not form until late June for the first time since 1973 . The last tropical cyclone dissipated in mid @-@ December . A total of 26 tropical depressions formed this year in the Western Pacific , of which 23 became tropical storms . Of the 26 tropical cyclones , one formed in June , three formed in July , six formed in August , three formed in September , seven formed in October , five formed in November , and two formed in December . Twelve storms reached typhoon intensity , of which four reached super typhoon strength . Fifteen of the tropical cyclones made landfall , with six moving through the Philippines , six striking China , six moving into Vietnam , and three moving in Japan . Vera , Wayne , Kim , and Lex led to over half of the fatalities from tropical cyclones this season . Forrest became the fastest @-@ developing tropical cyclone on record for the western Pacific ocean , with a pressure drop of 92 hectopascals ( 2 @.@ 7 inHg ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The season had a late start , as the first system did not form until late June for the first time since 1973 . The last tropical cyclone dissipated in mid @-@ December . A total of 26 tropical depressions formed this year in the Western Pacific , of which 23 became tropical storms . Of the 26 tropical cyclones , one formed in June , three formed in July , six formed in August , three formed in September , seven formed in October , five formed in November , and two formed in December . Ten storms reached typhoon intensity , of which four reached super typhoon strength . Fifteen of the tropical cyclones made landfall , with six moving through the Philippines , six striking China , six moving into Vietnam , and three moving in Japan . Tropical cyclones accounted for 24 percent of the annual rainfall in Hong Kong this season . 
 Wayne formed east of the Philippines , becoming the first super typhoon of the season before striking mainland China on July 25 . Abby was a long @-@ lived system , forming near Guam and remaining an intense typhoon for a number of days before recurving into Japan as a weakening tropical storm on August 17 . Ellen was a strong typhoon which tracked from the International Dateline westward near the northern Philippines and mainland China by September 9 . Forrest formed well east of the Philippines in late September , becoming the fastest @-@ developing tropical cyclone on record for the western Pacific ocean , with a pressure drop of 92 hectopascals ( 2 @.@ 7 inHg ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . Marge was an intense typhoon which recurved well off the coast of Asia during the first week of November . Orchid was a long @-@ lived and erratic tropical cyclone which moved slowly just east of the Philippines during late November , absorbing Percy along the way . Vera , Wayne , Kim , and Lex led to over half of the fatalities from tropical cyclones this season . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sarah = = = 
 When Tropical Storm Sarah formed in the South China Sea on June 24 , it became the latest start of a western Pacific season since 1973 . The initial tropical disturbance formed south of Guam on June 16 . By June 19 , a low level circulation formed as the system moved westward . As a tropical disturbance , the low crossed the Philippines with light winds . The system finally organized into a tropical depression and then a tropical storm on June 25 . Sarah moved west @-@ northwestward across the South China Sea , striking Vietnam before dissipating on June 26 . Damage across the Philippines totaled 2 @.@ 77 billion Philippine Pesos ( 1983 pesos ) , or US $ 249 @.@ 3 million ( 1983 dollars ) . 
 = = = Typhoon Tip ( Auring ) = = = 
 A tropical disturbance first noted east of the Philippines , the system moved through the archipelago as a tropical depression before strengthening briefly to a typhoon in the South China Sea . A combination of northeasterly vertical wind shear and proximity to land weakened the cyclone to a tropical storm before its landfall on Hai @-@ nan and struck Chan Chiang , China as a tropical depression . Winds peaked at 34 knots ( 63 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn in Hong Kong . 
 = = = Typhoon Vera ( Bebeng ) = = = 
 The monsoon trough spawned a tropical depression on July 12 , east of the Philippines . It headed westward , strengthening to a tropical storm that night and a typhoon on the 13th . Vera made landfall on the 14th as an 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) typhoon in the Philippines , weakened over the islands , and restrengthened over the South China Sea to a 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) typhoon . Damage totaled US $ 9 million in the Philippines . In Hong Kong , winds peaked at 60 knots ( 110 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn . Vera struck Hainan Island on the 17th , crossed the Gulf of Tonkin , and dissipated over Vietnam on the 18th . Vera brought torrential flooding , resulting in the deaths of 106 people . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Wayne ( Katring ) = = = 
 Becoming a tropical depression east of the Philippines , Wayne strengthened rapidly to become a tropical storm on July 22 , a typhoon on July 23 , and a super typhoon around midday on July 24 before moving south of Taiwan into mainland China on July 25 and dissipating . In the Philippines , 20 perished due to flash flooding . Wayne was the fifth most intense tropical cyclone to impact Fujian between 1960 and 2005 . Heavy rainfall led to severe flooding in Fujian and Guangdong . The total death toll reached 105 . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Abby ( <unk> ) = = = 
 First noted southeast of Guam on July 31 , this system slowly matured into the season 's second super typhoon as it moved west @-@ northwest over the following nine days . Intensification was most rapid as it was slowly recurving northward on August 7 and August 8 . After peaking early on August 9 , Abby slowly weakened as it interacted with the main belt of the Westerlies . It managed to remain a major typhoon , with winds at or above 100 knots ( 190 km / h ) , for a week . Abby finally weakened back into a tropical storm on August 17 just before its landfall at Hamamatsu , Japan . By late that night , Abby completed the transition to an extratropical cyclone after moving through central Japan . Two perished from Abby in Japan . Its deluge led to numerous landslides and the destruction of 19 bridges . Commercial traffic by land , sea , and air was also paralyzed by the cyclone . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Carmen ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Originating in the monsoon trough in the South China Sea in early August , a low level circulation was first spotted about 370 km east of Vietnam on August 8 . Slow development ensued , and the system became a tropical depression during the night of August 12 . Tracking slowly north @-@ northeast , Carmen began to accelerate to the east @-@ northeast towards the Luzon Strait , steered by Abby . This acceleration was likely a redevelopment of the low pressure area downshear . The system became a tropical storm early morning of August 14 as it continued to close the distance to Abby . By late morning on August 15 , absorption into Abby was complete . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ben = = = 
 An area of strong thunderstorms formed east of Abby , developing a low level center on August 12 on the western side of the thunderstorm activity , due to westerly vertical wind shear from nearby Abby . It developed into a tropical storm that night and moved northwest due to Abby 's influence on the steering across the western Pacific at that time . Turning to the west , Ben moved along the southern coast of Honshū and made landfall west of Hamamatsu . Due to land interaction and increasing upper level westerly wind shear , Ben became an exposed low level circulation on August 14 in the Sea of Japan , eventually dissipating late on August 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Dom ( <unk> ) = = = 
 On August 17 , a tropical disturbance was noted west of Guam . Slow development ensued , and the system became a tropical storm late on August 19 . As a deep cyclone near Japan linked up with the monsoon trough , the cyclone turned sharply northeast on August 20 . <unk> sheared by strong northeasterly flow aloft initially , once Dom recurved its convection was left completely behind , weakening the system to a tropical depression on August 21 . Thunderstorms began to redevelop near the center , and by midday on August 23 Dom was a tropical storm once more . At this point Dom was moving erratically as the trough near Japan moved off to the east , and by August 24 Dom turned back to the north @-@ northwest . By August 25 strong winds aloft weakened Dom once more , and the cyclone dissipated as a tropical cyclone on August 26 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression 09W = = = 
 This system formed well north of the normal climatological position to the west of Dom , as the monsoon trough was similarly displaced . It was first noted on August 25 , but showed no further development . Thunderstorms were located about 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of the center , but since the central pressure was under 1000 mb , it was considered a tropical depression while an exposed low level swirl . The system did develop some central convection , and moved northward into South Korea , bringing showers to the region , and dissipated late on August 27 . 
 = = = Typhoon Ellen ( Herming ) = = = 
 It was first noted as a tropical disturbance east of the International Dateline on August 26 , and became a tropical storm soon after crossing in the dateline on the morning of August 29 . A strong high pressure ridge offshore Japan led to no further development over the next 5 days , and the cyclone began to track south of west . Dropping down to a weak tropical depression late on September 1 , conditions aloft finally improved and the cyclone strengthened into a typhoon on September 3 as it tracked west @-@ northwest . Approaching Luzon late on September 5 , Ellen intensified rapidly into a strong typhoon before the terrain began to weaken the cyclone . Its final landfall was at Macau on the morning of September 9 as a minor typhoon . 
 Hong Kong experienced extensive damage , with six killed and 277 injured . Winds gusted to 134 knots ( 248 km / h ) at Stanley . Twenty @-@ two ships ran aground in the harbor . Rainfall totaled 231 @.@ 8 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 13 in ) at Hong Kong 's Royal Observatory . The second tornado ever recorded in Hong Kong , and the first during a typhoon passage , occurred during Ellen . Ellen was Hong Kong 's worst typhoon since Typhoon Hope of 1979 . By late on the 9th , Ellen was rapidly dissipating in mainland China . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = = Super Typhoon Forrest ( Ising ) = = = 
 Super Typhoon Forrest developed in the Western Pacific Ocean in September over the open ocean . It was the fastest @-@ developing tropical cyclone on record , with a pressure drop of 100 mbar in a 24 ‑ hour period . A tornado struck Inza Island , destroying 26 homes and injuring 26 people , as the cyclone passed by Okinawa . Forrest struck Japan as a tropical storm on the 28th . Kadena Air Force base reported winds gusting to 74 knots ( 137 km / h ) and rainfall totaling 300 millimetres ( 12 in ) during Forrest 's passage . Up to 483 millimetres ( 19 @.@ 0 in ) of rainfall fell across Japan , damaging 46 @,@ 000 homes . Overall , the storm caused 21 casualties and moderate damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = = Typhoon Georgia ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A large area of thunderstorm activity formed west of the Philippines . Rapidly organizing on September 28 , Georgia became a tropical storm by the next morning . Moving westward , it tracked across Hainan Island to the south of China . Wind gusts reached 60 knots ( 110 km / h ) both at Tate 's Cairn and Kowloon Tsai Hill in Hong Kong . Ultimately the storm made its final landfall in Vietnam before dissipating while entering Laos . Georgia killed 26 , damaged 7000 buildings , and led to a loss of 247 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of rice . The 13 to 14 inches ( 330 to 360 mm ) of rainfall it brought to Vietnam relieved drought conditions . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 This system was recognized by the Hong Kong Royal Observatory and PAGASA . A tropical depression formed in the South China Sea near <unk> Dao on October 2 , and moved northwest , dissipating near Hanoi a couple days later . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Herbert = = = 
 The initial disturbance was first spotted 250 miles ( 402 km ) east of Mindanao . Moving westward for the next few days without development , the system moved into the South China Sea . The system became a tropical storm on October 7 to due significantly increased low @-@ level southwesterlies spinning up its circulation . The cyclone then moved west @-@ northwest , striking Nha Trang , Vietnam . The convective pattern was slow to fade as it drifted westward across Indochina over the next few days . Forty perished during this tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ida ( <unk> ) = = = 
 An inverted trough appeared near Saipan on October 6 , which appears to be linked with pre @-@ existing convection within an upper @-@ level cyclone , which appeared as early as October 3 . By late on the 6th , a closed circulation formed . Continuing to develop , the system became a tropical depression on the morning of October 8 as it moved northwest . Becoming a typhoon on October 10 as it was recurving into the main belt of the Westerlies , the cyclone passed only 150 km southeast of Honshū . Since it was a small cyclone , no damage occurred within Japan . By late on October 11 , Ida evolved into an extratropical cyclone which moved eastward through the northern Pacific . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Pepang = = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Joe ( Rosing ) = = = 
 One of three consecutive tropical cyclones to form in the South China Sea , the initial disturbance was first noted well south of Guam on October 6 . The system moved westward , and developed a closed wind circulation by midday on October 9 . A new center formed to the south , which complicated the system 's development . Remaining poorly organized in the Philippine Sea due to northerly vertical wind shear , the tropical depression crossed central Luzon . Now in the South China Sea , the system became better organized and developed into a tropical storm and typhoon as it moved northwest . Soon after becoming a typhoon , Joe moved into southern China about 190 kilometres ( 120 mi ) west of Hong Kong and quickly dissipated inland . Wind gusts reached 78 knots ( 144 km / h ) at Tai O , while rainfall amounts of 183 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 7 @.@ 24 in ) fell at Tate 's Cairn . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Kim = = = 
 Tropical Storm Kim , which formed in the South China Sea on October 14 , hit southeastern Vietnam late on October 16 . It weakened over land , but retained its circulation , and redeveloped into a tropical depression on October 19 in the northeastern Bay of Bengal in the North Indian Ocean . Kim continued northwestward , and dissipated on October 20 over Myanmar . Even though Tropical Storm Kim was a weak storm , its heavy rains caused serious flash flooding and mudslides in Vietnam and Thailand . In Thailand , already deluged by an earlier tropical storm , there was moderate flooding in Bangkok . Elsewhere , over 300 boats and 3 @,@ 000 homes and buildings were destroyed and the storm severely damaged much of the rice harvest . Kim caused 200 fatalities and extensive crop damage from heavy rainfall . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Lex ( Sisang ) = = = 
 First noted near the Marshall Islands on October 14 , the tropical disturbance moved westward for the next couple of days without and further development . An upper level ridge built over the system on October 16 while near Truk , which encouraged slow development . The system developed a weak surface circulation which progressed across the central Philippines . Once it entered the South China Sea , development increased and it became a tropical depression , then tropical storm , on October 22 . <unk> a cyclonic loop , Lex continued to intensify and was a typhoon by October 25 . 
 Moving close to Hainan Island , Lex weakened to a tropical storm while entering the Gulf of Tonkin . Winds gusted to 48 knots ( 89 km / h ) at Waglan Island . The cyclone made landfall near Dong Hoi , Vietnam on October 26 as a moderate tropical storm , and then rapidly weakened after moving inland . At least 200 fishermen were killed , with 81 of the total from an oil drilling ship which sank during the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = = Super Typhoon Marge ( Uring ) = = = 
 This system began as a tropical disturbance with a weak circulation near 7N <unk> . Becoming the fourth super typhoon of the season , Marge <unk> west @-@ northwest east of the Philippines before recurving east of Japan . During recurvature , its forward motion reached 54 knots ( 100 km / h ) , becoming one of the fastest known tropical cyclones on record . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Norris = = = 
