 This system was spawned just ahead of a frontal boundary extending from the extratropical cyclone formerly known as Marge . A midget tropical storm , Norris quickly evolved on November 8 and recurved ahead of the frontal boundary well east of Asia , primarily threatening shipping in the western Pacific . Within three days of formation , Norris had been absorbed by the advancing cold front . 
 = = = Typhoon Orchid ( Warling ) = = = 
 A tropical disturbance organized into a tropical depression on November 14 over the open West Pacific . It tracked southwestward then westward , slowly organizing into a tropical storm on the 17th . Orchid 's motion became erratic , and it drifted northward , always remaining within 850 nautical miles ( 1 @,@ 570 km ) of Typhoon Percy , a slow @-@ moving typhoon in the South China Sea . Orchid reached her peak of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) winds on the 23rd , before vertical shear caused it to weaken . The storm turned southward , where it dissipated on the 27th . A total of 167 fatalities occurred when the Philippine vessel MV Dona Cassandra capsized due to high waves off the coast of Mindanao . A total of 219 people survived the shipwreck , including 98 that were rescued . In addition , 89 persons were injured , 18 at sea . At the time of the shipwreck , the boat had 387 passengers and 36 crew members . Onshore the Philippines , three people were killed and thousands were displaced . 
 = = = Typhoon Percy ( <unk> ) = = = 
 Located not too distant to the southwest of Orchid , Percy thrived in a divergent region created by Orchid 's outflow pattern beginning on November 17 . Rapid development occurred on the morning of November 19 while in the South China Sea , and the system meandered due to the weakness in steering created by Orchid to its northeast . The cyclone managed 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) of movement through November 23 . Briefly becoming a typhoon , eventually Percy became entrained in Orchid 's inflow band and began to be sheared by Orchid 's opposing outflow pattern . Other than moving through the Philippines while in the initial tropical depression phase , Percy affected no other land masses . 
 = = = November Tropical Depression = = = 
 This system was only recognized by the Hong Kong Royal Observatory . A tropical depression formed and moved westward through the Caroline Islands between November 21 and 24 before dissipating . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ruth ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This system began along the near equatorial trough southeast of Guam on November 15 . Moving slowly westward , there was little additional development until November 19 . Thunderstorm activity significantly increased in coverage along a 1 @,@ 670 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 040 mi ) east @-@ west axis , with a center forming near 5N <unk> . The system moved slowly northwest until November 23 . Orchid acted to limit its development by robbing inflow from this disturbance . On the 23rd it became a tropical depression before executing an anticyclonic loop . Upper level conditions became hostile soon afterwards , and the depression weakened . Into November 27 the system moved erratically and went through cycles of convective development and shearing . When Orchid weakened into a tropical depression , Ruth began to develop rapidly and became a tropical storm early on November 28 . A frontal zone on its northwest side led to an intense gale in that quadrant , which led to the upgrade . The cyclone nearly became a typhoon later that day before vertical wind shear returned , introduced by a fresh cold outbreak from Asia . The cyclone degenerated to an exposed low @-@ level swirl on November 30 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sperry ( Barang ) = = = 
 The initial disturbance formed along the near equatorial trough after Ruth dissipated . On November 30 a surface circulation formed 740 kilometres ( 460 mi ) south of Guam . By December 1 , the system appeared to be forming into a tropical cyclone but its thunderstorm activity shifted over 900 kilometres ( 560 mi ) to the northwest of the center . Taking a day to recover , the system attempted to reorganize and became a tropical storm early on December 3 . Southerly vertical wind shear limited its development for much of its life cycle . Turning eastward , it reached its maximum intensity late on the 3rd before shearing apart on December 4 . Early on December 5 , the system degenerated into a weak area of low pressure . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Thelma ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This system formed east of the Caroline Islands on December 11 near 4N <unk> . Over the next couple days , an upper cyclone to its north shifted westward , which helped lead to increased outflow and a low @-@ level circulation . It moved rapidly westward for the next 60 hours as a poorly defined low despite increasing convective organization . By late morning on December 16 , it became a tropical storm . The system tracked along a smooth parabola east of the Philippines becoming a moderately strong tropical storm . Intense vertical wind shear struck the cyclone as it moved northeast at a clip up to 27 knots ( 50 km / h ) , and the system rapidly weakened . 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = Storm names = = 
 During the season 23 named tropical cyclones developed in the Western Pacific and were named by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , when it was determined that they had become tropical storms . These names were contributed to a revised list from 1979 . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration uses its own naming scheme for tropical cyclones in their area of responsibility . PAGASA assigns names to tropical depressions that form within their area of responsibility and any tropical cyclone that might move into their area of responsibility . Should the list of names for a given year prove to be insufficient , names are taken from an auxiliary list , the first 6 of which are published each year before the season starts . Names not retired from this list will be used again in the 1987 season . This is the same list used for the 1979 season . PAGASA uses its own naming scheme that starts in the Filipino alphabet , with names of Filipino female names ending with " ng " ( A , B , K , D , etc . ) . Names that were not assigned / going to use are marked in gray . 
 = Michael Tippett = 
 Sir Michael Kemp Tippett OM CH CBE ( 2 January 1905 – 8 January 1998 ) was an English composer who rose to prominence during and immediately after the Second World War . In his lifetime he was sometimes ranked with his contemporary Benjamin Britten as one of the leading British composers of the 20th century . Among his best @-@ known works are the oratorio A Child of Our Time , the orchestral Fantasia Concertante on a Theme of Corelli , and the opera The Midsummer Marriage . 
 Tippett 's talent developed slowly . He withdrew or destroyed his earliest compositions , and was 30 before any of his works were published . Until the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1950s his music was broadly lyrical in character , before changing to a more astringent and experimental style . New influences , including those of jazz and blues after his first visit to America in 1965 , became increasingly evident in his compositions . While Tippett 's stature with the public continued to grow , not all critics approved of these changes in style , some believing that the quality of his work suffered as a consequence . From around 1976 Tippett 's late works began to reflect the works of his youth through a return to lyricism . Although he was much honoured in his lifetime , critical judgement on Tippett 's legacy has been uneven , the greatest praise being generally reserved for his earlier works . His centenary in 2005 was a muted affair ; apart from the few best @-@ known works , his music has been performed infrequently in the 21st century . 
 Having briefly embraced communism in the 1930s , Tippett avoided identifying with any political party . A pacifist after 1940 , he was imprisoned in 1943 for refusing to carry out war @-@ related duties required by his military exemption . His initial difficulties in accepting his homosexuality led him in 1939 to Jungian psychoanalysis ; the Jungian dichotomy of " shadow " and " light " remained a recurring factor in his music . He was a strong advocate of music education , and was active for much of his life as a radio broadcaster and writer on music . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Family background = = = 
 The Tippett family originated in Cornwall . Michael Tippett 's grandfather , George Tippett , left the county in 1854 to make his fortune in London through property speculation and other business schemes . A flamboyant character , he had a strong tenor voice that was a popular feature at Christian revivalist meetings . In later life his business enterprises faltered , leading to debts , prosecution for fraud , and a term of imprisonment . His son Henry , born in 1858 , was Michael 's father . A lawyer by training , he was successful in business and was independently wealthy by the time of his marriage in April 1903 . Unusually for his background and upbringing , Henry Tippett was a progressive liberal and a religious sceptic . 
 Henry Tippett 's bride was Isabel Kemp , from a large upper @-@ middle class family based in Kent . Among her mother 's cousins was Charlotte Despard , a well @-@ known campaigner for women 's rights , suffragism , and Irish home rule . Despard was a powerful influence on the young Isabel , who was herself briefly imprisoned after participating in an illegal suffragette protest in Trafalgar Square . Although neither she nor Henry was musical , she had inherited an artistic talent from her mother , who had exhibited at the Royal Academy . After their marriage the couple settled outside London in Eastcote where two sons were born , the second , Michael , on 2 January 1905 . 
 = = = Childhood and schooling = = = 
 Shortly after Michael 's birth , the family moved to <unk> in Suffolk . Michael 's education began in 1909 , with a nursery governess and various private tutors who followed a curriculum that included piano lessons — his first formal contact with music . There was a piano in the house , on which he " took to improvising crazily ... which I called ' composing ' , though I had only the vaguest notion of what that meant " . In September 1914 Michael became a boarder at Brookfield Preparatory School in Swanage , Dorset . He spent four years there , at one point earning notoriety by writing an essay that challenged the existence of God . In 1918 he won a scholarship to Fettes College , a boarding school in Edinburgh , where he studied the piano , sang in the choir , and began to learn to play the pipe organ . The school was not a happy place ; sadistic bullying of the younger pupils was commonplace . When Michael revealed to his parents in March 1920 that he had formed a homosexual relationship with another boy , they removed him . He transferred to Stamford School in Lincolnshire , where a decade previously Malcolm Sargent had been a pupil . 
 Around this time Henry Tippett decided to live in France , and the house in <unk> was sold . The 15 @-@ year @-@ old Michael and his brother Peter remained at school in England , travelling to France for their holidays . Michael found Stamford much more congenial than Fettes , and developed both academically and musically . He found an inspiring piano teacher in Frances Tinkler , who introduced him to the music of Bach , Beethoven , Schubert and Chopin . Sargent had maintained his connection with the school , and was present when Tippett and another boy played a C minor Concerto for Two <unk> by Bach on pianos with a local string orchestra . Tippett sang in the chorus when Sargent directed a local performance of Robert Planquette 's operetta Les Cloches de Corneville . Despite his parents ' wish that he follow an orthodox path by proceeding to Cambridge University , Tippett had firmly decided on a career as a composer , a prospect that alarmed them and was discouraged by his headmaster and by Sargent . 
 By mid @-@ 1922 Tippett had developed a rebellious streak . His overt atheism particularly troubled the school , and he was required to leave . He remained in Stamford in private lodgings , while continuing lessons with Tinkler and with the organist of the local St Mary 's Church . He also began studying Charles Villiers Stanford 's book Musical Composition which , he later wrote , " became the basis of all my compositional efforts for decades to come " . In 1923 Henry Tippett was persuaded that some form of musical career , perhaps as a concert pianist , was possible , and agreed to support his son in a course of study at the Royal College of Music ( RCM ) . After an interview with the college principal , Sir Hugh Allen , Tippett was accepted despite his lack of formal entry qualifications . 
 = = = Royal College of Music = = = 
 Tippett began at the RCM in the summer term of 1923 , when he was 18 years old . At the time , his biographer Meirion Bowen records , " his aspirations were Olympian , though his knowledge rudimentary " . Life in London widened his musical awareness , especially the Proms at the Queen 's Hall , opera at Covent Garden ( where he saw Dame Nellie Melba 's farewell performance in La bohème ) and the Diaghilev Ballet . He heard Chaliapin sing , and attended concerts conducted by , among others , Stravinsky and Ravel — the last @-@ named " a tiny man who stood bolt upright and conducted with what to me looked like a pencil " . Tippett overcame his initial ignorance of early music by attending Palestrina masses at Westminster Cathedral , following the music with the help of a borrowed score . 
 At the RCM , Tippett 's first composition tutor was Charles Wood , who used the models of Bach , Mozart and Beethoven to instil a solid understanding of musical forms and syntax . When Wood died in 1926 , Tippett chose to study with C.H. Kitson , whose pedantic approach and lack of sympathy with Tippett 's compositional aims strained the relationship between teacher and pupil . Tippett studied conducting with Sargent and Adrian Boult , finding the latter a particularly empathetic mentor — he let Tippett stand with him on the rostrum during rehearsals and follow the music from the conductor 's score . By this means Tippett became familiar with the music of composers then new to him , such as Delius and Debussy , and learned much about the sounds of orchestral instruments . 
 In 1924 Tippett became the conductor of an amateur choir in the Surrey village of Oxted . Although he saw this initially as a means of advancing his knowledge of English madrigals , his association with the choir lasted many years . Under his direction it combined with a local theatrical group , the Oxted and Limpsfield Players , to give performances of Vaughan Williams 's opera The Shepherds of the Delectable Mountains and of Tippett 's own adaptation of an 18th @-@ century ballad opera , The Village Opera . He passed his Bachelor of Music ( <unk> ) exams , at his second attempt , in December 1928 . Rather than continuing to study for a doctorate , Tippett decided to leave the academic environment . The RCM years had brought him intense and lasting friendships with members of both sexes , in particular with Francesca Allinson and David Ayerst . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 = = = = False start = = = = 
 On leaving the RCM , Tippett settled in Oxted to continue his work with the choir and theatrical group and to compose . To support himself he taught French at Hazelwood , a small preparatory school in Limpsfield , which provided him with a salary of £ 80 a year and a cottage . Also teaching at the school was Christopher Fry , the future poet and playwright who later collaborated with Tippett on several of the composer 's early works . 
 In February 1930 Tippett provided the incidental music for a performance by his theatrical group of James Elroy Flecker 's Don Juan , and in October he directed them in his own adaptation of Stanford 's opera The Travelling Companion . His compositional output was such that on 5 April 1930 he gave a concert in Oxted consisting entirely of his own works — a Concerto in D for flutes , oboe , horns and strings ; settings for tenor of poems by Charlotte Mew ; Psalm in C for chorus and orchestra , with a text by Christopher Fry ; piano variations on the song " Jockey to the Fair " ; and a string quartet . Professional soloists and orchestral players were engaged , and the concert was conducted by David Moule @-@ Evans , a friend from the RCM . Despite encouraging comments from The Times and the Daily Telegraph , Tippett was deeply dissatisfied with the works , and decided that he needed further tuition . He withdrew the music , and in September 1930 re @-@ enrolled at the RCM for a special course of study in counterpoint with R. O. Morris , an expert on 16th @-@ century music . This second RCM period , during which he learned to write fugues in the style of Bach and received additional tuition in orchestration from Gordon Jacob , was central to Tippett 's eventual discovery of what he termed his " individual voice " . 
 On 15 November 1931 Tippett conducted his Oxted choir in a performance of Handel 's Messiah , using choral and orchestral forces close to Handel 's original intentions . Such performances were rare at that time , and the event attracted considerable interest . 
 = = = = Friendships , politics and music = = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1932 Tippett moved to a cottage in neighbouring Limpsfield , provided by friends as a haven in which he could concentrate on composition . His friendships with Ayerst and Allinson had opened up new cultural and political vistas . Through Ayerst he met W. H. Auden , who in due course introduced him to T. S. Eliot . Although no deep friendship developed with either poet , Tippett came to consider Eliot as his " spiritual father " . Ayerst also introduced him to a young artist , Wilfred Franks . By this time Tippett was coming to terms with his homosexuality , while not always at ease with it . Franks provided him with what he described as " the deepest , most shattering experience of falling in love " . This intense relationship ran alongside a political awakening . Tippett 's natural sympathies had always been <unk> , and became more consciously so from his inclusion in Allinson 's circle of left @-@ wing activists . As a result , he gave up his teaching position at Hazelwood to become the conductor of the South London Orchestra , a project financed by the London County Council and made up of unemployed musicians . Its first public concert was held on 5 March 1933 at Morley College , later to become Tippett 's professional base . 
 In the summers of 1933 and 1934 Tippett took charge of musical activities at miners ' work camps near Boosbeck in the north of England . These camps were run by a munificent local landowner , Major Pennyman , to give unemployed miners a sense of purpose and independence . In 1933 Tippett arranged the staging of a shortened version of John Gay 's The Beggar 's Opera , with locals playing the main parts , and the following year he provided the music for a new folk opera , Robin Hood , with words by Ayerst , himself and Ruth Pennyman . Both works proved hugely popular with their audiences , and although most of the music has disappeared , some of Robin Hood was revived by Tippett for use in his Birthday Suite for Prince Charles of 1948 . In October 1934 Tippett and the South London Orchestra performed at a centenary celebration of the Tolpuddle Martyrs , as part of a grand Pageant of Labour at the Crystal Palace . 
 Tippett was not formally a member of any political party or group until 1935 , when he joined the British Communist Party at the urging of his cousin , Phyllis Kemp . This membership was brief ; the influence of Trotsky 's History of the Russian Revolution had led him to embrace Trotskyism , while the party maintained a strict Stalinist line . Tippett resigned after a few months when he saw no chance of converting his local party to his Trotskyist views . According to his obituarist J.J. Plant , Tippett then joined the Bolshevik @-@ Leninist Group within the Labour Party , where he continued to advocate Trotskyism until at least 1938 . Although Tippett 's radical instincts always remained strong , he was aware that excessive political activism would distract him from his overriding objective of becoming recognised as a composer . A significant step towards professional recognition came in December 1935 , when his String Quartet No. 1 was performed by the <unk> Quartet at the Mercury Theatre in Notting Hill , London . This work , which he dedicated to Franks , is the first in the recognised canon of Tippett 's music . 
 = = = Towards maturity = = = 
 = = = = Personal crisis = = = = 
 Before the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , Tippett released two further works : the Piano Sonata No. 1 , first performed by Phyllis Sellick at the Queen Mary Hall , London , on 11 November 1938 , and the Concerto for Double String Orchestra , which was not performed until 1940 . In a climate of increasing political and military tension , Tippett 's compositional efforts were overwhelmed by an emotional crisis . When his relationship with Franks ended acrimoniously in August 1938 he was thrown into doubt and confusion about both his homosexuality and his worth as an artist . He was saved from despair when , at Ayerst 's suggestion , he undertook a course of Jungian analysis with the psychotherapist John Layard . Through an extended course of therapy , Layard provided Tippett with the means to analyse and interpret his dreams . Tippett 's biographer Ian Kemp describes this experience as " the major turning point in [ his ] life " , both emotionally and artistically . His particular discovery from dream analysis was " the Jungian ' shadow ' and ' light ' in the single , individual psyche ... the need for the individual to accept his divided nature and profit from its conflicting demands " . This brought him to terms with his homosexuality , and he was able to pursue his creativity without being distracted by personal relationships . While still unsure of his sexuality , Tippett had considered marriage with Francesca Allinson , who had expressed the wish that they should have children together . After his psychotherapy he enjoyed several committed — and sometimes overlapping — same @-@ sex relationships . Among the most enduring , and most tempestuous , was that with the artist Karl Hawker , whom he first met in 1941 . 
 = = = = A Child of Our Time = = = = 
 While his therapy proceeded , Tippett was searching for a theme for a major work — an opera or an oratorio — that could reflect both the contemporary turmoil in the world and his own recent catharsis . Having briefly considered the theme of the Dublin Easter Rising of 1916 , he based his work on a more immediate event : the murder in Paris of a German diplomat by a 17 @-@ year @-@ old Jewish refugee , Herschel Grynszpan . This murder triggered Kristallnacht ( Crystal Night ) , a coordinated attack on Jews and their property throughout Nazi Germany on 9 – 10 November 1938 . Tippett hoped that Eliot would provide a libretto for the oratorio , and the poet showed interest . However , when Tippett presented him with a more detailed scenario , Eliot advised him to write his own text , suggesting that the poetic quality of the words might otherwise dominate the music . Tippett called the oratorio A Child of Our Time , taking the title from Ein Kind unserer Zeit , a contemporary protest novel by the Austro @-@ Hungarian writer Ödön von Horváth . Within a three @-@ part structure based on Handel 's Messiah , Tippett took the novel step of using North American spirituals in place of the traditional chorales that punctuate oratorio texts . According to Kenneth Gloag 's commentary , the spirituals provide " moments of focus and repose ... giving shape to both the musical and literary dimensions of the work " . Tippett began composing the oratorio in September 1939 , on the conclusion of his dream therapy and immediately after the outbreak of war . 
 = = = = Morley , war , imprisonment = = = = 
 With the South London Orchestra temporarily disbanded because of the war , Tippett returned to teaching at Hazelwood . In October 1940 he accepted the post of Director of Music at Morley College , just after its buildings were almost completely destroyed by a bomb . Tippett 's challenge was to rebuild the musical life of the college , using temporary premises and whatever resources he could muster . He revived the Morley College Choir and orchestra , and arranged innovative concert programmes that typically mixed early music ( Orlando Gibbons , Monteverdi , Dowland ) , with contemporary works by Stravinsky , Hindemith and Bartók . He continued the college 's established association with the music of Purcell ; a performance in November 1941 of Purcell 's Ode to St. Cecilia , with improvised instruments and rearrangements of voice parts , attracted considerable attention . The music staff at Morley was augmented by the recruitment of refugee musicians from Europe , including Walter Bergmann , Mátyás Seiber , and Walter Goehr who took charge of the college orchestra . 
 A Child of Our Time was finished in 1941 and put aside with no immediate prospects of performance . Tippett 's Fantasia on a Theme of Handel for piano and orchestra was performed at the Wigmore Hall in March 1942 , with Sellick again the soloist , and the same venue saw the première of the composer 's String Quartet No. 2 a year later . The first recording of Tippett 's music , the Piano Sonata No. 1 played by Sellick , was issued in August 1941 . The recording was well received by the critics , Wilfrid Mellers predicting a leading role for the composer in the future of English music . In 1942 , Schott Music began to publish Tippett 's works , establishing an association that continued until the end of the composer 's life . 
 The question of Tippett 's liability for war service remained unresolved until mid @-@ 1943 . In November 1940 he had formalised his pacifism by joining the Peace Pledge Union and applying for registration as a conscientious objector . His case was heard by a tribunal in February 1942 , when he was assigned to non @-@ combatant duties . Tippett rejected such work as an unacceptable compromise with his principles and in June 1943 , after several further hearings and statements on his behalf from distinguished musical figures , he was sentenced to three months ' imprisonment in HM Prison Wormwood Scrubs . He served two months , and although thereafter he was technically liable to further charges for failing to comply with the terms set by his tribunal , the authorities left him alone . 
 = = = Recognition and controversy = = = 
 On his release , Tippett returned to his duties at Morley , where he boosted the college 's Purcell tradition by persuading Alfred Deller , the countertenor , to sing several Purcell odes at a concert on 21 October 1944 — the first modern use of a countertenor in Purcell 's music . Tippett formed a fruitful musical friendship with Benjamin Britten and Peter Pears , for whom he wrote the cantata Boyhood 's End for tenor and piano . Encouraged by Britten , Tippett made arrangements for the first performance of A Child of Our Time , at London 's Adelphi Theatre on 19 March 1944 . Goehr conducted the London Philharmonic Orchestra , and Morley 's choral forces were augmented by the London Regional Civil Defence Choir . Pears sang the tenor solo part , and other soloists were borrowed from Sadler 's Wells Opera . The work was well received by critics and the public , and eventually became one of the most frequently performed large @-@ scale choral works of the post @-@ Second World War period , in Britain and overseas . Tippett 's immediate reward was a commission from the BBC for a motet , The Weeping Babe , which became his first broadcast work when it was aired on 24 December 1944 . He also began to give regular radio talks on music . 
 In 1946 Tippett organised at Morley the first British performance of Monteverdi 's Vespers , adding his own organ Preludio for the occasion . Tippett 's compositions in the immediate postwar years included his First Symphony , performed under Sargent in November 1945 , and the String Quartet No. 3 , premiered in October 1946 by the Zorian Quartet . His main creative energies were increasingly devoted to his first major opera , The Midsummer Marriage . During the six years from 1946 he composed almost no other music , apart from the Birthday Suite for Prince Charles ( 1948 ) . 
 The musical and philosophical ideas behind the opera had begun in Tippett 's mind several years earlier . The story , which he wrote himself , charts the fortunes of two contrasting couples in a manner which has brought comparisons with Mozart 's The Magic Flute . The strain of composition , combined with his continuing responsibilities at Morley and his BBC work , affected Tippett 's health and slowed progress . Following the death in 1949 of Morley 's principal , Eva <unk> , Tippett 's personal commitment to the college waned . His now @-@ regular BBC fees had made him less dependent on his Morley salary , and he resigned his college post in 1951 . His farewell took the form of three concerts which he conducted at the new Royal Festival Hall , in which the programmes included A Child of Our Time , the British première of Carl Orff 's Carmina Burana , and Thomas Tallis 's rarely performed 40 @-@ part motet <unk> in <unk> . 
 In 1951 Tippett moved from Limpsfield to a large , dilapidated house , <unk> Manor in Wadhurst , Sussex . As The Midsummer Marriage neared completion he wrote a song cycle for tenor and piano , The Heart 's Assurance . This work , a long @-@ delayed tribute to Francesca Allinson ( who had committed suicide in 1945 ) , was performed by Britten and Pears at the Wigmore Hall on 7 May 1951 . The Midsummer Marriage was finished in 1952 , after which Tippett arranged some of the music as a concert suite , the Ritual Dances , performed in Basel , Switzerland , in April 1953 . The opera itself was staged at Covent Garden on 27 January 1955 . The lavish production , with costumes and stage designs by Barbara Hepworth and choreography by John Cranko , perplexed the opera @-@ going public and divided critical opinion . According to Bowen , most " were simply unprepared for a work that departed so far from the methods of Puccini and Verdi " . Tippett 's libretto was variously described as " one of the worst in the 350 @-@ year history of opera " and " a complex network of verbal symbolism " , and the music as " intoxicating beauty " with " passages of superbly conceived orchestral writing " . A year after the première , the critic <unk> Dickinson concluded that " in spite of notable gaps in continuity and distracting infelicities of language , [ there is ] strong evidence that the composer has found the right music for his ends " . 
 Much of the music Tippett composed following the opera 's completion reflected its lyrical style . Among these works was the Fantasia Concertante on a Theme of Corelli ( 1953 ) for string orchestra , written to commemorate the 300th anniversary of the composer Arcangelo Corelli 's birth . The Fantasia would eventually become one of Tippett 's most popular works , though The Times 's critic lamented the " excessive complexity of the contrapuntal writing ... there was so much going on that the perplexed ear knew not where to turn or fasten itself " . Such comments helped to foster a view that Tippett was a " difficult " composer , or even that his music was amateurish and poorly prepared . These perceptions were strengthened by controversies around several of his works in the late 1950s . The Piano Concerto ( 1955 ) was declared unplayable by its scheduled soloist , Julius <unk> , who had to be replaced before the première by Louis <unk> . The Dennis Brain Wind Ensemble , for whom Tippett had written the Sonata for Four Horns ( 1955 ) , complained that the work was in too high a key and required it to be transposed down . When the Second Symphony was premièred by the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Boult , in a live broadcast from the Royal Festival Hall on 5 February 1958 , the work broke down after a few minutes and had to be restarted by the apologetic conductor : " Entirely my mistake , ladies and gentlemen " . The BBC 's Controller of Music defended the orchestra in The Times , writing that it " is equal to all reasonable demands " , a wording that implied the fault was the composer 's . 
 = = = International acclaim = = = 
 = = = = King Priam and after = = = = 
 In 1960 Tippett moved to a house in the Wiltshire village of Corsham , where he lived with his long @-@ term partner Karl Hawker . By then Tippett had begun work on his second major opera , King Priam . He chose for his theme the tragedy of Priam , mythological king of the Trojans , as recorded in Homer 's Iliad , and again he prepared his own libretto . As with The Midsummer Marriage , Tippett 's preoccupation with the opera meant that his compositional output was limited for several years to a few minor works , including a Magnificat and Nunc <unk> written in 1961 for the 450th anniversary of the foundation of St John 's College , Cambridge . King Priam was premièred in Coventry by the Covent Garden Opera on 29 May 1962 as part of a festival celebrating the consecration of the new Coventry Cathedral . The production was by Sam Wanamaker and the lighting by Sean Kenny . John Pritchard was the conductor . The music for the new work displayed a marked stylistic departure from what Tippett had written hitherto , heralding what a later commentator , Iain Stannard , refers to as a " great divide " between the works before and after King Priam . Although some commentators questioned the wisdom of so radical a departure from his established voice , the opera was a considerable success with critics and the public . Lewis later called it " one of the most powerful operatic experiences in the modern theatre " . This reception , combined with the fresh acclaim for The Midsummer Marriage following a well @-@ received BBC broadcast in 1963 , did much to rescue Tippett 's reputation and establish him as a leading figure among British composers . 
 As earlier with The Midsummer Marriage , the compositions that followed King Priam retained the musical idiom of the opera , notably the Piano Sonata No. 2 ( 1962 ) and the Concerto for Orchestra ( 1963 ) , the latter written for the Edinburgh Festival and dedicated to Britten for his 50th birthday . Tippett 's main work in the mid @-@ 1960s was the cantata The Vision of Saint Augustine , commissioned by the BBC , which Bowen marks as a peak of Tippett 's compositional career : " Not since The Midsummer Marriage had he unleashed such a torrent of musical invention " . His status as a national figure was now being increasingly recognised . He had been appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 1959 ; in 1961 he was made an honorary Fellow of the Royal College of Music ( <unk> ) , and in 1964 he received from Cambridge University the first of many honorary doctorates . In 1966 he was awarded a knighthood . 
 = = = = Wider horizons = = = = 
 In 1965 Tippett made the first of several visits to the United States , to serve as composer in residence at the Aspen Music Festival in Colorado . Tippett 's American experiences had a significant effect on the music he composed in the late 1960s and early 1970s , with jazz and blues elements particularly evident in his third opera , The Knot Garden ( 1966 – 69 ) , and in the Symphony No. 3 ( 1970 – 72 ) . At home in 1969 , Tippett worked with the conductor Colin Davis to rescue the Bath International Music Festival from a financial crisis , and became the festival 's artistic director for the following five seasons . In 1970 , following the collapse of his relationship with Hawker , he left Corsham and moved to a secluded house on the Marlborough Downs . Among the works he wrote in this period were In Memoriam <unk> ( 1971 ) , a chamber piece commissioned by Tempo magazine as a memorial to Stravinsky , who had died on 6 April 1971 , and the Piano Sonata No. 3 ( 1973 ) . 
 In February 1974 Tippett attended a " Michael Tippett Festival " , arranged in his honour by Tufts University , near Boston , Massachusetts . He was also present at a performance of The Knot Garden at Northwestern University at Evanston , Illinois — the first Tippett opera to be performed in the US . Two years later he was again in the country , engaged on a lecture tour that included the Doty Lectures in Fine Art at the University of Texas . Between these American journeys , Tippett travelled to Lusaka for the first African performance of A Child of Our Time , at which the Zambian president , Kenneth Kaunda , was present . 
 In 1976 Tippett was awarded the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society . The following few years saw journeys to Java and Bali — where he was much attracted by the sounds of gamelan ensembles — and to Australia , where he conducted a performance of his Fourth Symphony in Adelaide . In 1979 , with funds available from the sale of some of his original manuscripts to the British Library , Tippett inaugurated the Michael Tippett Musical Foundation , which provided financial support to young musicians and music education initiatives . 
 Tippett maintained his pacifist beliefs , while becoming generally less public in expressing them , and from 1959 served as president of the Peace Pledge Union . In 1977 he made a rare political statement when , opening a <unk> exhibition at St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields , he attacked President Carter 's plans to develop a neutron bomb . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 In his seventies , Tippett continued to compose and travel , although now handicapped by health problems . His eyesight was deteriorating as a result of macular dystrophy , and he relied increasingly on his musical amanuensis and near namesake Michael Tillett , and on Meirion Bowen , who became Tippett 's assistant and closest companion in the remaining years of the composer 's life . The main works of the late 1970s were a new opera , The Ice Break , the Symphony No. 4 , the String Quartet No. 4 and the Triple Concerto for violin , viola and cello . The Ice Break was a reflection of Tippett 's American experiences , with a contemporary storyline incorporating race riots and drug @-@ taking . His libretto has been criticised for its awkward attempts at American street vernacular , and the opera has not found a place in the general repertory . Mellers finds that its fusion of " art music , rock ritual and performance art fail to gel " . The Triple Concerto includes a finale inspired by the gamelan music that Tippett absorbed during his visit to Java . 
 In 1979 Tippett was made a Companion of Honour ( CH ) . The main composition that occupied him in the early 1980s was his oratorio The Mask of Time , loosely based on Jacob Bronowski 's 1973 TV series The Ascent of Man . In Tippett 's words , this is an attempt to deal " with those fundamental matters that bear upon man , his relationship with Time , his place in the world as we know it and in the mysterious universe at large " . The oratorio was commissioned by the Boston Symphony Orchestra for its centenary , and was one of several of Tippett 's late compositions that were premièred in America . 
 In 1983 Tippett became president of the London College of Music and was appointed a Member of the Order of Merit ( OM ) . By the time of his 80th birthday in 1985 he was blind in his right eye , and his output had slowed . Nevertheless , in his final active years he wrote his last opera , New Year . This futuristic fable involving flying saucers , time travel and urban violence was indifferently received on its première in Houston , Texas , on 17 October 1989 . Donal Henahan in The New York Times wrote that " Unlike Wagner , Tippett does not provide music of enough quality to allow one to overlook textual absurdities and commonplaces . " The opera was introduced to Britain in the Glyndebourne Festival of 1990 . 
 In spite of his deteriorating health , Tippett toured Australia in 1989 – 90 , and also visited Senegal . His last major works , written between 1988 and 1993 , were : Byzantium , for soprano and orchestra ; the String Quartet No. 5 ; and The Rose Lake , a " song without words for orchestra " inspired by a visit to Lake <unk> in Senegal during his 1990 trip . He intended The Rose Lake to be his farewell , but in 1996 he broke his retirement to write " Caliban 's Song " as a contribution to the Purcell tercentenary . In 1997 he moved from Wiltshire to London to be closer to his friends and carers ; in November of that year he made his last overseas trip , to Stockholm for a festival of his music . After suffering a stroke he was taken home , where he died on 8 January 1998 , six days after his 93rd birthday . He was cremated on 15 January , at Hanworth crematorium , after a secular service . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = General character = = = 
 Bowen has described Tippett as " a composer of our time " , one who engaged with the social , political and cultural issues of his day . Arnold Whittall sees the music as embodying Tippett 's philosophy of " ultimately optimistic humanism " . Rather than ignoring the barbarism of the 20th century , says Kemp , Tippett chose through his works to seek " to preserve or remake those values that have been perverted , while at the same time never losing sight of the contemporary reality " . The key early work in this respect is A Child of Our Time , of which Clarke writes : " [ t ] he words of the oratorio 's closing ensemble , ' I would know my shadow and my light , So shall I at last be whole ' , have become canonical in commentary on Tippett ... this [ Jungian ] statement crystallizes an ethic , and aesthetic , central to his world @-@ view , and one which underlies all his text @-@ based works " . <unk> critics such as the musicologist Derrick Puffett have argued that Tippett 's craft as a composer was insufficient for him to deal adequately with the task that he had set himself of " <unk> [ ing ] his personal and private agonies into ... something universal and impersonal " . Michael Kennedy has referred to Tippett 's " open ‐ eyed , even naive outlook on the world " , while accepting the technical sophistication of his music . Others have acknowledged his creative ingenuity and his willingness to adopt whatever means or techniques were necessary to fit his intentions . 
 Tippett 's music is marked by the expansive nature of his melodic line — the Daily Telegraph 's Ivan Hewett refers to his " astonishingly long @-@ breathed melodies " . According to Jones , a further element of the " individual voice " that emerged in 1935 was Tippett 's handling of rhythm and counterpoint , demonstrated in the First String Quartet — Tippett 's first use of the additive rhythm and cross @-@ rhythm polyphony which became part of his musical signature . This approach to metre and rhythm is derived in part from Bartók and Stravinsky but also from the English madrigalists . Sympathy with the past , observed by Colin Mason in an early appraisal of the composer 's work , was at the root of the neoclassicism that is a feature of Tippett 's music , at least until the Second Symphony ( 1957 ) . 
 In terms of tonality , Tippett shifted his ground in the course of his career . His earlier works , up to The Midsummer Marriage , are key @-@ centred , but thereafter he moved through bitonality into what the composer Charles Fussell has summarised as " the freely @-@ organized harmonic worlds " of the Third Symphony and The Ice Break . Although Tippett flirted with the " twelve @-@ tone " technique — he introduced a twelve @-@ tone theme into the " storm " prelude that begins The Knot Garden — Bowen records that he generally rejected serialism , as incompatible with his musical aims . 
 = = = Compositional process = = = 
 Tippett described himself as the receiver of inspiration rather than its originator , the creative spark coming from a particular personal experience , which might take one of many forms but was most often associated with listening to music . The process of composing was lengthy and laborious , the actual writing down of the music being preceded by several stages of gestation ; as Tippett put it , " the concepts come first , and then a lot of work and imaginative processes until eventually , when you 're ready , finally ready , you look for the actual notes " . Tippett elaborated : " I compose by first developing an overall sense of the length of the work , then of how it will divide itself into sections or movements , then of the kind of texture or instruments or voices that will be performing it . I prefer not to consider the actual notes of the composition until this process ... has gone as far as possible " . Sometimes the time required to see a project through from conception to completion was very lengthy — seven years , Tippett says , in the case of the Third Symphony . In the earlier , contemplative stages he might be simultaneously engaged on other works , but once these stages were complete he would dedicate entirely himself to the completion of the work in hand . Tippett preferred to compose in full score ; once the writing began , progress was often not fluent , as evidenced by Tippett 's first pencil draft manuscripts which show multiple rubbings @-@ out and reworkings . In this , the musicologist Thomas <unk> says , his methods resembled those of Beethoven , with the difference that " whereas Beethoven 's struggle is considered a virtue of his work , and almost universally admired , Tippett 's was the source and subject of a debate about his competency as a composer " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The style that emerged from Tippett 's long compositional apprenticeship was the product of many diverse influences . Beethoven and Handel were initial models ( Handel above Bach , who in Tippett 's view lacked drama ) , supplemented by 16th- and 17th @-@ century masters of counterpoint and madrigal — Thomas Weelkes , Monteverdi and Dowland . Purcell became significant later , and Tippett came to lament his ignorance of Purcell during his RCM years : " It seems to me incomprehensible now that his work was not even recommended in composition lessons as a basic study for the setting of English " . 
 Tippett recognised the importance to his compositional development of several 19th- and 20th @-@ century composers : Berlioz for his clear melodic lines , Debussy for his inventive sound , Bartók for his colourful dissonance , Hindemith for his skills at counterpoint , and Sibelius for his originality in musical forms . He revered Stravinsky , sharing the Russian composer 's deep interest in older music . Tippett had heard early ragtime as a small child before the First World War ; he noted in his later writings that , in the early years of the 20th century , ragtime and jazz " attracted many serious composers thinking to find ... a means to refresh serious music by the primitive " . His interest in these forms led to his fascination with blues , articulated in several of his later works . Among his contemporary composers , Tippett admired Britten and shared his desire to end the perception of English music as provincial . He also had a high regard for Alan Bush , with whom he joined forces to produce the 1934 Pageant of Labour . " I can remember the excitement I felt when he outlined to me his plan for a major string quartet " . 
 Although influences of folk music from all parts of the British Isles are evident in Tippett 's early works , he was wary of the English folksong revival of the early 20th century , believing that much of the music presented as " English " by Cecil Sharp and his followers originated elsewhere . Notwithstanding his doubts , Tippett took some inspiration from these sources . The composer David Matthews writes of passages in Tippett 's music which " evoke the ' sweet especial rural scene ' as vividly as Elgar or Vaughan Williams ... perhaps redolent of the Suffolk landscape with its gently undulating horizons , wide skies and soft lights . " 
 = = = Works = = = 
 After the withdrawn works written in the 1920s and early 1930s , analysts generally divide Tippett 's mature compositional career into three main phases , with fairly fluid boundaries and some internal subdivision in each main period . The first phase extends from the completion of the String Quartet No. 1 in 1935 to the end of the 1950s , a period in which Tippett drew on the past for his main inspiration . The 1960s marked the beginning of a new phase in which Tippett 's style became more experimental , reflecting both the social and cultural changes of that era and the broadening of his own experiences . The mid @-@ 1970s produced a further stylistic change , less marked and sudden than that of the early 1960s , after which what Clarke calls the " extremes " of the experimental phase were gradually replaced by a return to the lyricism characteristic of the first period , a trend that was particularly manifested in the final works . 
 = = = = Withdrawn compositions = = = = 
 Tippett 's earliest compositions cover several genres . Kemp writes that the works indicate Tippett 's deep commitment to the learning of his craft , his early ability to manipulate traditional forms , and a general willingness to experiment . Clarke observes that in these youthful efforts , characteristics which would mark his mature work were already discernible . Some of the early work is of high quality — the Symphony in B flat of 1933 was , in Kemp 's view , comparable to William Walton 's contemporaneous First Symphony . Tippett pondered for years whether to include this work in his formal canon before deciding that its debt to Sibelius was too great . Nevertheless , it foreshadows techniques that feature in the String Quartet No. 1 and in the Corelli Fantasia . 
 Other accomplished early works include the two string quartets , composed between 1928 and 1930 , in which Tippett sought to combine the styles of Beethoven and Haydn respectively with folk @-@ song , as Beethoven had in his <unk> quartets of 1806 . Tippett explains the withdrawal of these and the other early works : " I realised very clearly that they were not totally consonant with myself . I didn 't think they had the stamp of artistic durability . So I took the whole lot along to R.O. Morris who agreed that they didn 't show enough technical mastery . " 
 = = = = First period : 1935 to late 1950s = = = = 
 Kemp identifies the String Quartet No. 1 ( 1935 ) as marking Tippett 's discovery of his individual voice . According to the composer Alan Ridout , the work stamped its character on Tippett 's first period , and together with the second and third quartets of 1942 and 1946 it typifies his style up to The Midsummer Marriage . In the two works that immediately followed the first quartet , Bowen finds the Piano Sonata No. 1 ( 1938 ) full of the young composer 's inventiveness , while Matthews writes of the Concerto for Double String Orchestra ( 1939 ) : " [ I ] t is the rhythmic freedom of the music , its joyful liberation from orthodox notions of stress and phrase length , that contributes so much to its vitality " . Both of these works show influence of folk music , and the finale of the Piano Sonata is marked by innovative jazz syncopations . According to <unk> , the Double Concerto marks the proper beginning of Tippett 's maturity as an orchestral composer . 
 In A Child of Our Time Tippett was , in Kemp 's view , wholly successful in integrating the language of the spirituals with his own musical style . Tippett had obtained recordings of American singing groups , especially the Hall Johnson Choir , which provided him with a model for determining the relationships between solo voices and chorus in the spirituals . Thus , Kemp believes , the fourth spiritual " O by and by " sounds almost as if it had been composed by Tippett . The composer 's instructions in the score specify that " the spirituals should not be thought of as congregational hymns , but as integral parts of the Oratorio ; nor should they be sentimentalised but sung with a strong underlying beat and slightly ' swung ' " . 
 In Tippett 's Symphony No. 1 ( 1945 ) , his only large @-@ scale work between A Child of Our Time and The Midsummer Marriage , his " gift for launching a confident flow of sharply characterized , contrapuntally combined ideas " is acknowledged by Whittall . The same critic found the symphony 's quality uneven , and the orchestral writing weaker than in the Double Concerto . Whittall offers nearly unqualified praise for The Midsummer Marriage , a view largely echoed by Mellers , who saw the perceived " difficulty " of the music as " an aspect of its truth " . He considered the opera one of the best musical @-@ theatrical works of its era . 
 Three major works of the 1950s round off Tippett 's first period : the Corelli Fantasia ( 1953 ) , in which Clarke sees , in the alla pastorale section , the composer 's instrumental writing at its best ; the mildly controversial Piano Concerto ( 1955 ) which Whittall regards as one of the composer 's most intriguing works — an attempt to " make the piano sing " ; and the Symphony No. 2 ( 1957 ) which Tippett acknowledges as a turning @-@ point in his music . Until this point , says Matthews , Tippett 's style had remained broadly tonal . The Second Symphony was his first essay in polytonality , paving the way to the dissonance and chromaticism of subsequent works . Milner , too , recognises the pivotal position of this symphony in Tippett 's development which , he says , both sums up the style of the late 1950s and presages the changes to come . 
 = = = = Second period : King Priam to 1976 = = = = 
 In his analysis of King Priam , Bowen argues that the change in Tippett 's musical style arose initially from the nature of the opera , a tragedy radically different in tone from the warm optimism of The Midsummer Marriage . Clarke sees the change as something more fundamental , the increases in dissonance and atonality in Priam being representative of a trend that continued and reached a climax of astringency a few years later in Tippett 's third opera , The Knot Garden . Tippett 's new modernistic language , writes Clarke , was rooted in his desire to represent a wider range of human experiences , characteristic of a changing world : " War , violence , sex , homoeroticism , and social and interpersonal alienation [ would now feature ] much more overtly in [ his ] dramatic works or works with text " . Critics acknowledged Priam as a considerable achievement , but received the new musical style cautiously . While Gloag thought the change was not an absolute departure from Tippett 's earlier style , Milner viewed King Priam as a complete break with Tippett 's previous work , pointing out the lack of counterpoint , the considerably increased dissonances , and the move towards atonality : " very little of the music is in a definite key " . 
 Many of the minor works that Tippett wrote in the wake of King Priam reflect the musical style of the opera , in some cases quoting directly from it . In the first purely instrumental post @-@ Priam work , the Piano Sonata No. 2 ( 1962 ) , Milner thought the new style worked better in the theatre than in the concert or recital hall , although he found the music in the Concerto for Orchestra ( 1963 ) had matured into a form that fully justified the earlier experiments . The critic Tim <unk> refers to Tippett 's " new , hard , sparse instrumental style " evident in The Vision of Saint Augustine ( 1965 ) , written for baritone soloist , chorus and orchestra , a work which Bowen considers one of the peaks of Tippett 's career . 
 During the late 1960s Tippett worked on a series of compositions that reflected the influence of his American experiences after 1965 : The Shires Suite ( 1970 ) , The Knot Garden ( 1970 ) and the Symphony No. 3 ( 1972 ) . In The Knot Garden Mellers discerns Tippett 's " wonderfully acute " ear only intermittently , otherwise : " thirty years on , the piece still sounds and looks knotty indeed , exhausting alike to participants and audience " . The Third Symphony is overtly linked by Tippett to Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony through a vocal finale of four blues songs , introduced by a direct quotation from Beethoven 's finale . Tippett 's intention , explained by the music critic Calum MacDonald , was to explore the contemporary relevance of the grand , universal sentiments in Schiller 's Ode to Joy , as set by Beethoven . Tippett 's conclusion is that while the need to rejoice remains , the twentieth century has put paid to the Romantic ideals of universality and certainty . 
 After completing his Piano Sonata No. 3 ( 1973 ) , " a formidable piece of abstract composition " according to Bowen , Tippett returned to the modern vernacular in his fourth opera The Ice Break ( 1976 ) . Describing the music in an introduction to the published libretto , Tippett identifies " two archetypal sounds : one relating to the frightening but exhilarating sound of the ice breaking on the great northern rivers in the spring ; the other related to the exciting or terrifying sound of the slogan @-@ shouting crowds , which can lift you on your shoulders in triumph , or stamp you to death " . Although the work was generally regarded as a critical and public failure , aspects of its music have been recognised as among Tippett 's best . The critic John Warrack writes that , after the violence of the opening acts , the third act 's music has a lyrical warmth comparable to that of The Midsummer Marriage " . William Mann in The Times was equally enthusiastic , finding the music compelling and worthy of many a rehearing . 
 = = = = Third period : 1977 to 1995 = = = = 
 In the late 1970s Tippett produced three single @-@ movement instrumental works : the Symphony No. 4 ( 1977 ) , the String Quartet No. 4 ( 1978 ) , and the Triple Concerto for violin , viola and cello ( 1979 ) . The symphony , written in the manner of the tone poem or symphonic fantasia exemplified by Sibelius , represents what Tippett describes as a birth @-@ to @-@ death cycle , beginning and ending with the sounds of breathing . This effect was initially provided by a wind machine , although other means have been tried , with mixed results — according to Bowen " the sounds emitted can turn out to be redolent of a space @-@ fiction film or a bordello " . The Fourth String Quartet , Tippett explains , is an exercise in " finding a sound " that he first encountered in the incidental music to a television programme on Rembrandt . In the Triple Concerto , which is thematically related to the Fourth Quartet and quotes from it , the three solo instruments perform individually rather than as a formal grouping . The work acknowledges Tippett 's past with quotations from The Midsummer Marriage . 
 Tippett described the longest and most ambitious of his late works , the oratorio The Mask of Time ( 1982 ) , as " a pageant of sorts with an ultimately lofty message " . Mellers called the work " a mind @-@ boggling cosmic history of the universe " . Paul Driver , who had been a critic of Tippett 's new style , wrote that the Mask revealed " the authentic early Tippett " , with a return to the lyricism of The Midsummer Marriage and multiple acknowledgements of his early compositions . 
 Tippett had intended The Ice Break to be his final opera , but in 1985 he began work on New Year . Bowen saw this work as a summary of ideas and images that had attracted Tippett throughout his working life . Donal Henahan was dismissive of the music : " ... the score generally <unk> along in the numbing , not @-@ quite @-@ atonal but <unk> style familiar from other Tippett works . " In Byzantium ( 1990 ) , Tippett set the five stanzas of W. B. Yeats 's poem , with added orchestral interludes . By this time he was professing little interest in his own work beyond its creation ; performance and reception had become irrelevant to him . In 1996 he told an interviewer : " I 'm outside the music I 've made , I have no interest in it " . After the String Quartet No. 5 ( 1991 ) , which connects thematically with earlier works , Tippett closed his main output with The Rose Lake ( 1993 ) , described in Tippett 's Daily Telegraph obituary as " of luminous beauty ... a worthy ending to a remarkable career . " 
 = = Reputation and legacy = = 
 In a joint study of Tippett and Britten published in 1982 , Whittall designated the pair as " the two best British composers of that ... generation born between 1900 and the outbreak of the First World War , and among the best of all composers born in the first two decades of the twentieth century " . After Britten 's death in 1976 , Tippett became widely regarded as the doyen of British music , but critical opinion of his later works was not always positive . After the first performance of the Triple Concerto in 1980 , Driver wrote that " not since The Knot Garden has [ he ] produced anything worthy of his early masterpieces " . In 1982 , in his comparative study of Britten and Tippett , Whittall asserted that " it would be difficult to claim that any of the works [ Tippett ] has begun in his seventies are the equal of earlier compositions " . Although both Driver and Whittall later modified their opinions , such comments represented a general view among critics that Tippett 's creative powers had begun to decline after the triumph of King Priam . This perception was strongly expressed by Derek Puffett , who argued that the decline followed Tippett 's abandonment of myth — seen as the key to the success of The Midsummer Marriage and King Priam — and stemmed from his increasingly futile efforts to <unk> his private agonies and express them musically . Despite his admiration for the early works , Puffett consigned Tippett " to the ranks of those noble but tragic composers who have lived beyond their time " . The critic Norman Lebrecht , writing in 2005 , dismissed almost all Tippett 's output , labelling him " a composer to forget " . With the forthcoming centenary celebrations in mind , Lebrecht wrote : " I cannot begin to assess the damage to British music that will ensue from the coming year 's purblind promotion of a composer who failed so insistently to observe the rules of his craft " . Against these criticisms Kemp maintained that while the style had become less immediately accessible , Tippett 's later works showed no loss of creative power . The critic Peter Wright , writing in 1999 , challenged the " decline " theory with the view that the later compositions are " harder to come to terms with ... because of the more challenging nature of their musical language " , a theme he developed in a detailed study of the Fifth String Quartet . 
 After Tippett 's death the more popular pieces from his first period continued to be played , but there was little public enthusiasm for the later works . After the relatively muted 2005 centenary celebrations , performances and recordings tailed off . In October 2012 Hewett wrote in the Daily Telegraph of a " calamitous fall " in Tippett 's reputation since his death . Geraint Lewis acknowledges that " no consensus yet exists in respect of the works composed from the 1960s onwards " , while forecasting that Tippett will in due course be recognised as one of the most original and powerful musical voices of twentieth @-@ century Britain " . 
 Many of Tippett 's articles and broadcast talks were issued in collections between 1959 and 1995 . In 1991 he published an episodic autobiography , Those Twentieth Century Blues , notable for its frank discussions of personal issues and relationships . Collectively , Tippett 's writings define his aesthetic standpoint , which Clarke summarises thus : " Tippett holds that art 's role in post @-@ Enlightenment culture is to offer a corrective to society 's spiritually injurious domination by mass technology . Art , he suggests , can articulate areas of human experience , unapproachable through scientific rationality , by presenting ' images ' of the inner world of the psyche . " 
 Although Tippett did not found a compositional school , composers who have acknowledged his influence include David Matthews and William Mathias . More generally , his musical and educational influence continues through the Michael Tippett Foundation . He is also commemorated in the Michael Tippett Centre , a concert venue within the Newton Park campus of Bath Spa University . In Lambeth , home of Morley College , is the Michael Tippett School , an educational facility for young people aged 11 – 19 with complex learning disabilities . Within the school 's campus is the Tippett Music Centre , which offers music education for children of all ages and levels of ability . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Three collections of Tippett 's articles and broadcast talks have been published : 
 Moving into Aquarius ( 1959 ) . London , Routledge and Kegan Paul . OCLC <unk> 
 Music of the Angels : essays and sketchbooks of Michael Tippett ( 1980 ) . London , Eulenburg Books . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 60 @-@ 5 
 Tippett on Music ( 1995 ) . Oxford , Clarendon Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 = Porter ( MBTA station ) = 
 Porter is an MBTA transfer station serving the rapid transit Red Line and the commuter rail Fitchburg Line , located at Porter Square in Cambridge , Massachusetts . Positioned at the intersection of Massachusetts and Somerville Avenues , the station provides rapid transit access to northern Cambridge and the western portions of Somerville . Porter is 14 minutes from Park Street on the Red Line , and about 10 minutes from North Station on commuter rail trains . Several local MBTA Bus routes also stop at the station . 
 A series of commuter rail depots have been located at Porter Square under various names since the 1840s . The modern station with both subway and commuter rail levels was designed by Cambridge Seven Associates and opened on December 8 , 1984 . At 105 feet ( 32 m ) below ground , the subway section is the deepest station on the MBTA system . The station originally had six artworks installed as part of the Arts on the Line program ; five remain , including Gift of the Wind and Glove Cycle . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 There has been a railroad station at Porter Square since the Fitchburg Railroad began operations in the early 1840s . The first station , built in 1843 – 45 , was called Porter 's Station . Later stations at the site were known as North Cambridge , then later simply as Cambridge . In 1869 , the original station was moved to the North Avenue ( now Massachusetts Avenue ) bridge over the tracks . 
 = = = B & M era = = = 
 A new station was built in 1897 , slightly to the southeast , behind the Lovell Block . In 1927 , the Fitchburg Cutoff became freight @-@ only between the Alewife area and Somerville Junction . Passenger trains from the Lexington Branch and the Central Massachusetts Railroad were diverted to the Fitchburg mainline and began to stop at Cambridge station . In 1937 , the Boston and Maine Railroad built a two @-@ story brick depot by the bridge , with the ticket office at street level and the waiting room and platforms below . 
 = = = MBTA era = = = 
 By the time the newly formed Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority began subsidizing northside commuter rail operations in the late 1960s , both the Lexington Branch and the Central Mass Branch had been reduced to single rush hour round trips on poorly maintained track . The South Sudbury run on the Central Mass was terminated on November 26 , 1971 . The Bedford round trip on the Lexington Branch ended after a major snowstorm on January 10 , 1977 , leaving the Fitchburg Line ( with multiple daily round trips ) as the only rail service at Cambridge station . 
 = = = Adding the Red Line = = = 
 In the late 1970s , Cambridge station was renamed to Porter when it became certain that the Red Line Northwest Extension would include a stop there . ( " Cambridge " , while sufficient for a commuter @-@ rail station , would have been confusing for a rapid @-@ transit station , because the Red Line has multiple stations — six in total — in the City of Cambridge . ) The Red Line platforms were built in a deep @-@ bore tunnel , while the commuter platform was rebuilt with an accessible mini @-@ high platform . During construction , commuter trains were accessed via a still @-@ extant staircase from Somerville Avenue . 
 A new glass and concrete <unk> was built around 1982 , and the complete new transfer station opened on December 8 , 1984 along with the renovated Harvard station and the new Davis station . The new station , designed by Cambridge Seven Associates , won awards from the American Institute of Architects and the American Consulting Engineering Council of New England . 
 Because of its Red Line connection , Porter Square can serve as a temporary inbound terminus for the Fitchburg Line service when commuter rail service is disrupted between Porter and Boston 's North Station . It served this role during the 2004 Democratic National Convention , when North Station was closed for a week for security purposes , and during Green Line Extension construction in 2015 . 
 = = Station layout = = 
 The subway station at Porter is , at 105 feet below ground level , the deepest in the MBTA system . Porter 's unusual depth is due to the MBTA 's decision to build the station in bedrock rather than soft clay , saving time and money in the construction process . Passengers reach Red Line platforms via a series of escalators , stairs totalling 199 steps , or a set of elevators . The longest single span of the escalators is 143 feet , the longest in the MBTA system . In 2005 , a man was killed when his sweatshirt tangled in the bottom of the escalator . 
 The subway tracks and platforms are enclosed in a single cylindrical concrete shell , similar to most underground stations of the Washington Metro . The two platforms are at different levels , with portions of the inbound platform projecting over the outbound platform . Both tracks are on the outer side of their platforms . On the MBTA subway network , only State , North Station , and Harvard have similar split platforms . ( Several downtown transfer stations have multiple platform levels , but these are the only four with multiple @-@ level platforms for a single line . ) 
 Porter has five levels : the street @-@ level entrances , the below @-@ grade commuter platforms , the fare mezzanine , and two subway platform levels underground . 
 Porter has a refreshment vendor outside the fare gates on the mezzanine level , and , unlike most MBTA stations , public restrooms . 
 = = Arts on the Line = = 
 As a part of the Red Line Northwest Extension , Porter was included as one of the stations involved in the Arts on the Line program , devised to bring art into the MBTA 's subway stations in the late 1970s and early 1980s . It was the first program of its kind in the United States and became the model for similar drives for art across the country . 
 Six works , five of which remain , were placed at Porter : 
 Gift of the Wind by Susumu <unk> , a 46 @-@ foot tall kinetic sculpture with three large red " wings " that rotate the structure in response to the wind 
 Ondas by Carlos Dorrien , a 24 @-@ foot tall piece of undulating granite affixed to the station wall both inside the station and outside 
 Glove Cycle by Mags Harries , a large number of bronze gloves of varying types and sizes scattered inside the station , including alongside one of the escalators 
 Untitled by William Reimann , six granite bollards with various ethnic designs carved into them 
 Porter Square Megaliths by David Phillips , four boulders with large " slices " removed and replaced with bronze casts of the missing pieces 
 The Lights at the End of the Tunnel by William Wainwright , a large reflective mobile in the station 's mezzanine . It was removed in 1986 after a lead weight fell off . 
 = = Accessibility = = 
 Porter is fully handicapped accessible ; elevators lead from street level to the mezzanine with its accessible bathroom , to the commuter rail platform , and to both Red Line platform levels . Although most of the commuter platform is low , there is a " mini @-@ high platform " - a one car @-@ length high section - that allows level boarding . 
 As a result of a 2006 settlement of a lawsuit filed by the Boston Center for Independent Living and a group of individuals , the MBTA installed additional elevators at Porter and four other busy MBTA subway stations . The elevator to the Red Line was out of service for 15 months beginning in March 2011 for car replacement and the installation of a second , redundant , elevator . An accessible shuttle bus ran between Porter and Davis . 
 The elevator to the commuter rail platform was also temporarily out of service for maintenance during the same period ; a shuttle bus ran between Harvard , Porter and Waltham . The Red Line elevator was returned to service on June 22 , 2012 , and the commuter rail elevator returned to service on July 30 , 2012 . 
 = = Bus connections = = 
 Porter serves several MBTA Bus local routes via shelters on Massachusetts Avenue and Somerville Avenue : 
 77 Arlington Heights - Harvard Station via Massachusetts Avenue 
 83 Rindge Ave . - Central Square , Cambridge via Porter Square Station 
 96 Medford Square - Harvard Station via George Street & Davis Square Station 
 The 77 and 96 run on Massachusetts Avenue , while the 83 turns from Somerville Avenue to Massachusetts Avenue at Porter Square . Additionally , the 87 Arlington Center or Clarendon Hill - Lechmere Station via Somerville Avenue bus stops on Elm Street at the Porter Square Shopping Center , one block northeast of Porter station . 
 The 77A short turn of the 77 operates as a trolleybus on a limited number of runs , as trolleybuses on other routes are brought to and from the North Cambridge <unk> . 
 = Frédéric Chopin = 
 Frédéric François Chopin ( / <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> fʁɑ ̃ swa <unk> ̃ ] ; 1 March 1810 – 17 October 1849 ) , born Fryderyk Franciszek Chopin , was a Polish composer and virtuoso pianist of the Romantic era who wrote primarily for the solo piano . He gained and has maintained renown worldwide as a leading musician of his era , whose " poetic genius was based on a professional technique that was without equal in his generation . " Chopin was born in what was then the Duchy of Warsaw and grew up in Warsaw , which in 1815 became part of Congress Poland . A child prodigy , he completed his musical education and composed his earlier works in Warsaw before leaving Poland at the age of 20 , less than a month before the outbreak of the November 1830 Uprising . 
 At 21 he settled in Paris . Thereafter , during the last 18 years of his life , he gave only some 30 public performances , preferring the more intimate atmosphere of the salon . He supported himself by selling his compositions and teaching piano , for which he was in high demand . Chopin formed a friendship with Franz Liszt and was admired by many of his musical contemporaries , including Robert Schumann . In 1835 he obtained French citizenship . After a failed engagement to Maria Wodzińska , from 1837 to 1847 he maintained an often troubled relationship with the French writer George Sand . A brief and unhappy visit to Majorca with Sand in 1838 – 39 was one of his most productive periods of composition . In his last years , he was financially supported by his admirer Jane Stirling , who also arranged for him to visit Scotland in 1848 . Through most of his life , Chopin suffered from poor health . He died in Paris in 1849 , at the age of 39 , probably of tuberculosis . 
 All of Chopin 's compositions include the piano . Most are for solo piano , though he also wrote two piano concertos , a few chamber pieces , and some songs to Polish lyrics . His keyboard style is highly individual and often technically demanding ; his own performances were noted for their nuance and sensitivity . Chopin invented the concept of instrumental ballade . His major piano works also include mazurkas , waltzes , nocturnes , polonaises , études , impromptus , <unk> , preludes and sonatas , some published only after his death . Influences on his compositional style include Polish folk music , the classical tradition of J. S. Bach , Mozart and Schubert , the music of all of whom he admired , as well as the Paris salons where he was a frequent guest . His innovations in style , musical form , and harmony , and his association of music with nationalism , were influential throughout and after the late Romantic period . 
 Chopin 's music , his status as one of music 's earliest superstars , his association ( if only indirect ) with political insurrection , his love life and his early death have made him a leading symbol of the Romantic era in the public consciousness . His works remain popular , and he has been the subject of numerous films and biographies of varying degrees of historical accuracy . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Fryderyk Chopin was born in <unk> Wola , 46 kilometres ( 29 miles ) west of Warsaw , in what was then the Duchy of Warsaw , a Polish state established by Napoleon . The parish baptismal record gives his birthday as 22 February 1810 , and cites his given names in the Latin form <unk> Franciscus ( in Polish , he was Fryderyk Franciszek ) . However , the composer and his family used the birthdate 1 March , which is now generally accepted as the correct date . 
 Fryderyk 's father , Nicolas Chopin , was a Frenchman from Lorraine who had emigrated to Poland in 1787 at the age of sixteen . Nicolas tutored children of the Polish aristocracy , and in 1806 married Justyna <unk> , a poor relative of the <unk> , one of the families for whom he worked . Fryderyk was baptized on Easter Sunday , 23 April 1810 , in the same church where his parents had married , in <unk> . His eighteen @-@ year @-@ old godfather , for whom he was named , was Fryderyk Skarbek , a pupil of Nicolas Chopin . Fryderyk was the couple 's second child and only son ; he had an elder sister , Ludwika ( 1807 – 55 ) , and two younger sisters , Izabela ( 1811 – 81 ) and Emilia ( 1812 – 27 ) . Nicolas was devoted to his adopted homeland , and insisted on the use of the Polish language in the household . 
 In October 1810 , six months after Fryderyk 's birth , the family moved to Warsaw , where his father acquired a post teaching French at the Warsaw Lyceum , then housed in the Saxon Palace . Fryderyk lived with his family in the Palace grounds . The father played the flute and violin ; the mother played the piano and gave lessons to boys in the boarding house that the <unk> kept . Chopin was of slight build , and even in early childhood was prone to illnesses . 
 Fryderyk may have had some piano instruction from his mother , but his first professional music tutor , from 1816 to 1821 , was the Czech pianist Wojciech Żywny . His elder sister Ludwika also took lessons from Żywny , and occasionally played duets with her brother . It quickly became apparent that he was a child prodigy . By the age of seven Fryderyk had begun giving public concerts , and in 1817 he composed two polonaises , in G minor and B @-@ flat major . His next work , a polonaise in A @-@ flat major of 1821 , dedicated to Żywny , is his earliest surviving musical manuscript . 
 In 1817 the Saxon Palace was requisitioned by Warsaw 's Russian governor for military use , and the Warsaw Lyceum was reestablished in the Kazimierz Palace ( today the rectorate of Warsaw University ) . Fryderyk and his family moved to a building , which still survives , adjacent to the Kazimierz Palace . During this period , Fryderyk was sometimes invited to the Belweder Palace as playmate to the son of the ruler of Russian Poland , Grand Duke Constantine ; he played the piano for the Duke and composed a march for him . Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz , in his dramatic eclogue , " <unk> <unk> " ( " Our Discourses " , 1818 ) , attested to " little Chopin 's " popularity . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 From September 1823 to 1826 , Chopin attended the Warsaw Lyceum , where he received organ lessons from the Czech musician Wilhelm <unk> during his first year . In the autumn of 1826 he began a three @-@ year course under the Silesian composer Józef <unk> at the Warsaw Conservatory , studying music theory , figured bass and composition . Throughout this period he continued to compose and to give recitals in concerts and salons in Warsaw . He was engaged by the inventors of a mechanical organ , the " <unk> " , and on this instrument in May 1825 he performed his own improvisation and part of a concerto by Moscheles . The success of this concert led to an invitation to give a similar recital on the instrument before Tsar Alexander I , who was visiting Warsaw ; the Tsar presented him with a diamond ring . At a subsequent <unk> concert on 10 June 1825 , Chopin performed his Rondo Op. 1 . This was the first of his works to be commercially published and earned him his first mention in the foreign press , when the Leipzig Allgemeine <unk> Zeitung praised his " wealth of musical ideas " . 
 During 1824 – 28 Chopin spent his vacations away from Warsaw , at a number of locales . In 1824 and 1825 , at Szafarnia , he was a guest of Dominik <unk> , the father of a schoolmate . Here for the first time he encountered Polish rural folk music . His letters home from Szafarnia ( to which he gave the title " The Szafarnia Courier " ) , written in a very modern and lively Polish , amused his family with their spoofing of the Warsaw newspapers and demonstrated the youngster 's literary gift . 
 In 1827 , soon after the death of Chopin 's youngest sister Emilia , the family moved from the Warsaw University building , adjacent to the Kazimierz Palace , to lodgings just across the street from the university , in the south annex of the Krasiński Palace on Krakowskie Przedmieście , where Chopin lived until he left Warsaw in 1830 . Here his parents continued running their boarding house for male students ; the Chopin Family Parlour ( <unk> <unk> ) became a museum in the 20th century . In 1829 the artist <unk> <unk> executed a set of portraits of Chopin family members , including the first known portrait of the composer . 
 Four boarders at his parents ' apartments became Chopin 's intimates : <unk> Woyciechowski , Jan Nepomucen <unk> , Jan <unk> and Julian Fontana ; the latter two would become part of his Paris milieu . He was friendly with members of Warsaw 's young artistic and intellectual world , including Fontana , Józef Bohdan Zaleski and Stefan <unk> . He was also attracted to the singing student Konstancja <unk> . In letters to Woyciechowski , he indicated which of his works , and even which of their passages , were influenced by his fascination with her ; his letter of 15 May 1830 revealed that the slow movement ( Larghetto ) of his Piano Concerto No. 1 ( in E minor ) was secretly dedicated to her – " It should be like dreaming in beautiful springtime – by moonlight . " His final Conservatory report ( July 1829 ) read : " Chopin F. , third @-@ year student , exceptional talent , musical genius . " 
 = = = Travel and domestic success = = = 
 In September 1828 Chopin , while still a student , visited Berlin with a family friend , zoologist Feliks <unk> , enjoying operas directed by Gaspare Spontini and attending concerts by Carl Friedrich Zelter , Felix Mendelssohn and other celebrities . On an 1829 return trip to Berlin , he was a guest of Prince Antoni Radziwiłł , governor of the Grand Duchy of Posen — himself an accomplished composer and aspiring cellist . For the prince and his pianist daughter Wanda , he composed his Introduction and Polonaise brillante in C major for cello and piano , Op. 3 . 
 Back in Warsaw that year , Chopin heard Niccolò Paganini play the violin , and composed a set of variations , Souvenir de Paganini . It may have been this experience which encouraged him to commence writing his first Études , ( 1829 – 32 ) , exploring the capacities of his own instrument . On 11 August , three weeks after completing his studies at the Warsaw Conservatory , he made his debut in Vienna . He gave two piano concerts and received many favourable reviews — in addition to some commenting ( in Chopin 's own words ) that he was " too delicate for those accustomed to the piano @-@ bashing of local artists " . In one of these concerts , he premiered his Variations on Là ci <unk> la mano , Op. 2 ( variations on an aria from Mozart 's opera Don Giovanni ) for piano and orchestra . He returned to Warsaw in September 1829 , where he premiered his Piano Concerto No. 2 in F minor , Op. 21 on 17 March 1830 . 
 Chopin 's successes as a composer and performer opened the door to western Europe for him , and on 2 November 1830 , he set out , in the words of Zdzisław Jachimecki , " into the wide world , with no very clearly defined aim , forever . " With Woyciechowski , he headed for Austria , intending to go on to Italy . Later that month , in Warsaw , the November 1830 Uprising broke out , and Woyciechowski returned to Poland to enlist . Chopin , now alone in Vienna , was nostalgic for his homeland , and wrote to a friend , " I curse the moment of my departure . " When in September 1831 he learned , while travelling from Vienna to Paris , that the uprising had been crushed , he expressed his anguish in the pages of his private journal : " Oh God ! ... You are there , and yet you do not take vengeance ! " Jachimecki ascribes to these events the composer 's maturing " into an inspired national bard who intuited the past , present and future of his native Poland . " 
 = = = Paris = = = 
 Chopin arrived in Paris in late September 1831 ; he would never return to Poland , thus becoming one of many expatriates of the Polish Great Emigration . In France he used the French versions of his given names , and after receiving French citizenship in 1835 , he travelled on a French passport . However , Chopin remained close to his fellow Poles in exile as friends and confidants and he never felt fully comfortable speaking French . Chopin 's biographer Adam Zamoyski writes that he never considered himself to be French , despite his father 's French origins , and always saw himself as a Pole . 
 In Paris , Chopin encountered artists and other distinguished figures , and found many opportunities to exercise his talents and achieve celebrity . During his years in Paris he was to become acquainted with , among many others , Hector Berlioz , Franz Liszt , Ferdinand Hiller , Heinrich Heine , Eugène Delacroix , and Alfred de Vigny . Chopin was also acquainted with the poet Adam Mickiewicz , principal of the Polish Literary Society , some of whose verses he set as songs . 
 Two Polish friends in Paris were also to play important roles in Chopin 's life there . His fellow student at the Warsaw Conservatory , Julian Fontana , had originally tried unsuccessfully to establish himself in England ; Albert Grzymała , who in Paris became a wealthy financier and society figure , often acted as Chopin 's adviser and " gradually began to fill the role of elder brother in [ his ] life . " Fontana was to become , in the words of Michałowski and Samson , Chopin 's " general factotum and copyist " . 
 At the end of 1831 , Chopin received the first major endorsement from an outstanding contemporary when Robert Schumann , reviewing the Op. 2 Variations in the Allgemeine musikalische Zeitung ( his first published article on music ) , declared : " Hats off , gentlemen ! A genius . " On 26 February 1832 Chopin gave a debut Paris concert at the Salle Pleyel which drew universal admiration . The critic François @-@ Joseph Fétis wrote in the Revue et gazette musicale : " Here is a young man who ... taking no model , has found , if not a complete renewal of piano music , ... an abundance of original ideas of a kind to be found nowhere else ... " After this concert , Chopin realized that his essentially intimate keyboard technique was not optimal for large concert spaces . Later that year he was introduced to the wealthy Rothschild banking family , whose patronage also opened doors for him to other private salons ( social gatherings of the aristocracy and artistic and literary elite ) . By the end of 1832 Chopin had established himself among the Parisian musical elite , and had earned the respect of his peers such as Hiller , Liszt , and Berlioz . He no longer depended financially upon his father , and in the winter of 1832 he began earning a handsome income from publishing his works and teaching piano to affluent students from all over Europe . This freed him from the strains of public concert @-@ giving , which he disliked . 
 Chopin seldom performed publicly in Paris . In later years he generally gave a single annual concert at the Salle Pleyel , a venue that seated three hundred . He played more frequently at salons , but preferred playing at his own Paris apartment for small groups of friends . The musicologist Arthur Hedley has observed that " As a pianist Chopin was unique in acquiring a reputation of the highest order on the basis of a minimum of public appearances — few more than thirty in the course of his lifetime . " The list of musicians who took part in some of his concerts provides an indication of the richness of Parisian artistic life during this period . Examples include a concert on 23 March 1833 , in which Chopin , Liszt and Hiller performed ( on pianos ) a concerto by J.S. Bach for three keyboards ; and , on 3 March 1838 , a concert in which Chopin , his pupil Adolphe Gutmann , Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan , and Alkan 's teacher Joseph Zimmermann performed Alkan 's arrangement , for eight hands , of two movements from Beethoven 's 7th symphony . Chopin was also involved in the composition of Liszt 's <unk> ; he wrote the sixth ( and final ) variation on Bellini 's theme . Chopin 's music soon found success with publishers , and in 1833 he contracted with Maurice Schlesinger , who arranged for it to be published not only in France but , through his family connections , also in Germany and England . 
 In the spring of 1834 , Chopin attended the Lower Rhenish Music Festival in Aix @-@ la @-@ Chapelle with Hiller , and it was there that Chopin met Felix Mendelssohn . After the festival , the three visited Düsseldorf , where Mendelssohn had been appointed musical director . They spent what Mendelssohn described as " a very agreeable day " , playing and discussing music at his piano , and met Friedrich Wilhelm <unk> , director of the Academy of Art , and some of his eminent pupils such as Lessing , Bendemann , Hildebrandt and Sohn . In 1835 Chopin went to Carlsbad , where he spent time with his parents ; it was the last time he would see them . On his way back to Paris , he met old friends from Warsaw , the <unk> . He had made the acquaintance of their daughter Maria in Poland five years earlier , when she was eleven . This meeting prompted him to stay for two weeks in Dresden , when he had previously intended to return to Paris via Leipzig . The sixteen @-@ year @-@ old girl 's portrait of the composer is considered , along with Delacroix 's , as among Chopin 's best likenesses . In October he finally reached Leipzig , where he met Schumann , Clara <unk> and Felix Mendelssohn , who organised for him a performance of his own oratorio St. Paul , and who considered him " a perfect musician " . In July 1836 Chopin travelled to Marienbad and Dresden to be with the <unk> family , and in September he proposed to Maria , whose mother Countess Wodzińska approved in principle . Chopin went on to Leipzig , where he presented Schumann with his G minor Ballade . At the end of 1836 he sent Maria an album in which his sister Ludwika had inscribed seven of his songs , and his 1835 Nocturne in C @-@ sharp minor , Op. 27 , No. 1 . The anodyne thanks he received from Maria proved to be the last letter he was to have from her . 
 = = = Franz Liszt = = = 
 Although it is not known exactly when Chopin first met Liszt after arriving in Paris , on 12 December 1831 he mentioned in a letter to his friend Woyciechowski that " I have met Rossini , Cherubini , <unk> , etc . — also Kalkbrenner . You would not believe how curious I was about Herz , Liszt , Hiller , etc . " Liszt was in attendance at Chopin 's Parisian debut on 26 February 1832 at the Salle Pleyel , which led him to remark : " The most vigorous applause seemed not to suffice to our enthusiasm in the presence of this talented musician , who revealed a new phase of poetic sentiment combined with such happy innovation in the form of his art . " 
 The two became friends , and for many years lived in close proximity in Paris , Chopin at 38 Rue de la <unk> @-@ d <unk> , and Liszt at the Hôtel de France on the Rue Lafitte , a few blocks away . They performed together on seven occasions between 1833 and 1841 . The first , on 2 April 1833 , was at a benefit concert organized by Hector Berlioz for his bankrupt Shakespearean actress wife Harriet Smithson , during which they played George Onslow 's Sonata in F minor for piano duet . Later joint appearances included a benefit concert for the Benevolent Association of Polish Ladies in Paris . Their last appearance together in public was for a charity concert conducted for the Beethoven Memorial in Bonn , held at the Salle Pleyel and the Paris Conservatory on 25 and 26 April 1841 . 
 Although the two displayed great respect and admiration for each other , their friendship was uneasy and had some qualities of a love @-@ hate relationship . Harold C. Schonberg believes that Chopin displayed a " tinge of jealousy and spite " towards Liszt 's virtuosity on the piano , and others have also argued that he had become enchanted with Liszt 's theatricality , showmanship and success . Liszt was the dedicatee of Chopin 's Op. 10 Études , and his performance of them prompted the composer to write to Hiller , " I should like to rob him of the way he plays my studies . " However , Chopin expressed annoyance in 1843 when Liszt performed one of his nocturnes with the addition of numerous intricate embellishments , at which Chopin remarked that he should play the music as written or not play it at all , forcing an apology . Most biographers of Chopin state that after this the two had little to do with each other , although in his letters dated as late as 1848 he still referred to him as " my friend Liszt " . Some commentators point to events in the two men 's romantic lives which led to a rift between them ; there are claims that Liszt had displayed jealousy of his mistress Marie d 'Agoult 's obsession with Chopin , while others believe that Chopin had become concerned about Liszt 's growing relationship with George Sand . 
 = = = George Sand = = = 
 In 1836 , at a party hosted by Marie d 'Agoult , Chopin met the French author George Sand ( born [ <unk> ] Aurore [ Lucile ] Dupin ) . Short ( under five feet , or 152 cm ) , dark , big @-@ eyed and a cigar smoker , she initially repelled Chopin , who remarked , " What an unattractive person la Sand is . Is she really a woman ? " However , by early 1837 Maria Wodzińska 's mother had made it clear to Chopin in correspondence that a marriage with her daughter was unlikely to proceed . It is thought that she was influenced by his poor health and possibly also by rumours about his associations with women such as d 'Agoult and Sand . Chopin finally placed the letters from Maria and her mother in a package on which he wrote , in Polish , " My tragedy " . Sand , in a letter to Grzymała of June 1838 , admitted strong feelings for the composer and debated whether to abandon a current affair in order to begin a relationship with Chopin ; she asked Grzymała to assess Chopin 's relationship with Maria Wodzińska , without realising that the affair , at least from Maria 's side , was over . 
 In June 1837 Chopin visited London incognito in the company of the piano manufacturer Camille Pleyel where he played at a musical soirée at the house of English piano maker James Broadwood . On his return to Paris , his association with Sand began in earnest , and by the end of June 1838 they had become lovers . Sand , who was six years older than the composer , and who had had a series of lovers , wrote at this time : " I must say I was confused and amazed at the effect this little creature had on me ... I have still not recovered from my astonishment , and if I were a proud person I should be feeling humiliated at having been carried away ... " The two spent a miserable winter on Majorca ( 8 November 1838 to 13 February 1839 ) , where , together with Sand 's two children , they had journeyed in the hope of improving the health of Chopin and that of Sand 's 15 @-@ year @-@ old son Maurice , and also to escape the threats of Sand 's former lover Félicien <unk> . After discovering that the couple were not married , the deeply traditional Catholic people of Majorca became inhospitable , making accommodation difficult to find . This compelled the group to take lodgings in a former Carthusian monastery in <unk> , which gave little shelter from the cold winter weather . 
 On 3 December , Chopin complained about his bad health and the incompetence of the doctors in Majorca : " Three doctors have visited me ... The first said I was dead ; the second said I was dying ; and the third said I was about to die . " He also had problems having his Pleyel piano sent to him . It finally arrived from Paris in December . Chopin wrote to Pleyel in January 1839 : " I am sending you my Preludes [ ( Op. 28 ) ] . I finished them on your little piano , which arrived in the best possible condition in spite of the sea , the bad weather and the Palma customs . " Chopin was also able to undertake work on his Ballade No. 2 , Op. 38 ; two <unk> , Op. 40 ; and the Scherzo No. 3 , Op. 39 . 
 Although this period had been productive , the bad weather had such a detrimental effect on Chopin 's health that Sand determined to leave the island . To avoid further customs duties , Sand sold the piano to a local French couple , the <unk> . The group traveled first to Barcelona , then to Marseilles , where they stayed for a few months while Chopin convalesced . In May 1839 they headed for the summer to Sand 's estate at Nohant , where they spent most summers until 1846 . In autumn they returned to Paris , where Chopin 's apartment at 5 rue <unk> was close to Sand 's rented accommodation at the rue <unk> . He frequently visited Sand in the evenings , but both retained some independence . In 1842 he and Sand moved to the Square d 'Orléans , living in adjacent buildings . 
 At the funeral of the tenor Adolphe Nourrit in Paris in 1839 , Chopin made a rare appearance at the organ , playing a transcription of Franz Schubert 's lied Die <unk> . On 26 July 1840 Chopin and Sand were present at the dress rehearsal of Berlioz 's Grande symphonie funèbre et triomphale , composed to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the July Revolution . Chopin was reportedly unimpressed with the composition . 
 During the summers at Nohant , particularly in the years 1839 – 43 , Chopin found quiet , productive days during which he composed many works , including his Polonaise in A @-@ flat major , Op. 53 . Among the visitors to Nohant were Delacroix and the mezzo @-@ soprano Pauline Viardot , whom Chopin had advised on piano technique and composition . Delacroix gives an account of staying at Nohant in a letter of 7 June 1842 : 
 The hosts could not be more pleasant in entertaining me . When we are not all together at dinner , lunch , playing billiards , or walking , each of us stays in his room , reading or lounging around on a couch . Sometimes , through the window which opens on the garden , a gust of music wafts up from Chopin at work . All this mingles with the songs of nightingales and the fragrance of roses . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 From 1842 onwards , Chopin showed signs of serious illness . After a solo recital in Paris on 21 February 1842 , he wrote to Grzymała : " I have to lie in bed all day long , my mouth and tonsils are aching so much . " He was forced by illness to decline a written invitation from Alkan to participate in a repeat performance of the Beethoven Seventh Symphony arrangement at Erard 's on 1 March 1843 . Late in 1844 , Charles Hallé visited Chopin and found him " hardly able to move , bent like a half @-@ opened penknife and evidently in great pain " , although his spirits returned when he started to play the piano for his visitor . Chopin 's health continued to deteriorate , particularly from this time onwards . Modern research suggests that apart from any other illnesses , he may also have suffered from temporal lobe epilepsy . 
 Chopin 's relations with Sand were soured in 1846 by problems involving her daughter Solange and Solange 's fiancé , the young fortune @-@ hunting sculptor Auguste Clésinger . The composer frequently took Solange 's side in quarrels with her mother ; he also faced jealousy from Sand 's son Maurice . Chopin was utterly indifferent to Sand 's radical political pursuits , while Sand looked on his society friends with disdain . As the composer 's illness progressed , Sand had become less of a lover and more of a nurse to Chopin , whom she called her " third child " . In letters to third parties , she vented her impatience , referring to him as a " child , " a " little angel " , a " sufferer " and a " beloved little corpse . " In 1847 Sand published her novel Lucrezia Floriani , whose main characters — a rich actress and a prince in weak health — could be interpreted as Sand and Chopin ; the story was uncomplimentary to Chopin , who could not have missed the allusions as he helped Sand correct the printer 's galleys . In 1847 he did not visit Nohant , and he quietly ended their ten @-@ year relationship following an angry correspondence which , in Sand 's words , made " a strange conclusion to nine years of exclusive friendship . " The two would never meet again . 
 Chopin 's output as a composer throughout this period declined in quantity year by year . Whereas in 1841 he had written a dozen works , only six were written in 1842 and six shorter pieces in 1843 . In 1844 he wrote only the Op. 58 sonata . 1845 saw the completion of three mazurkas ( Op. 59 ) . Although these works were more refined than many of his earlier compositions , Zamoyski concludes that " his powers of concentration were failing and his inspiration was beset by anguish , both emotional and intellectual . " 
 = = = Tour of England and Scotland = = = 
 Chopin 's public popularity as a virtuoso began to wane , as did the number of his pupils , and this , together with the political strife and instability of the time , caused him to struggle financially . In February 1848 , with the cellist Auguste Franchomme , he gave his last Paris concert , which included three movements of the Cello Sonata Op. 65 . 
 In April , during the Revolution of 1848 in Paris , he left for London , where he performed at several concerts and at numerous receptions in great houses . This tour was suggested to him by his Scottish pupil Jane Stirling and her elder sister . Stirling also made all the logistical arrangements and provided much of the necessary funding . 
 In London Chopin took lodgings at Dover Street , where the firm of Broadwood provided him with a grand piano . At his first engagement , on 15 May at Stafford House , the audience included Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . The Prince , who was himself a talented musician , moved close to the keyboard to view Chopin 's technique . Broadwood also arranged concerts for him ; among those attending were Thackeray and the singer Jenny Lind . Chopin was also sought after for piano lessons , for which he charged the high fee of one guinea ( £ 1 @.@ 05 in present British currency ) per hour , and for private recitals for which the fee was 20 guineas . At a concert on 7 July he shared the platform with Viardot , who sang arrangements of some of his mazurkas to Spanish texts . On 28 August , he played at a concert in Manchester 's Concert Hall , sharing the stage with Marietta Alboni and Lorenzo Salvi . 
 In late summer he was invited by Jane Stirling to visit Scotland , where he stayed at Calder House near Edinburgh and at Johnstone Castle in Renfrewshire , both owned by members of Stirling 's family . She clearly had a notion of going beyond mere friendship , and Chopin was obliged to make it clear to her that this could not be so . He wrote at this time to Grzymała " My Scottish ladies are kind , but such bores " , and responding to a rumour about his involvement , answered that he was " closer to the grave than the nuptial bed . " He gave a public concert in Glasgow on 27 September , and another in Edinburgh , at the Hopetoun Rooms on Queen Street ( now Erskine House ) on 4 October . In late October 1848 , while staying at 10 Warriston Crescent in Edinburgh with the Polish physician Adam <unk> , he wrote out his last will and testament — " a kind of disposition to be made of my stuff in the future , if I should drop dead somewhere " , he wrote to Grzymała . 
 Chopin made his last public appearance on a concert platform at London 's Guildhall on 16 November 1848 , when , in a final patriotic gesture , he played for the benefit of Polish refugees . By this time he was very seriously ill , weighing under 99 pounds ( i.e. less than 45 kg ) , and his doctors were aware that his sickness was at a terminal stage . 
 At the end of November , Chopin returned to Paris . He passed the winter in unremitting illness , but gave occasional lessons and was visited by friends , including Delacroix and Franchomme . Occasionally he played , or accompanied the singing of Delfina Potocka , for his friends . During the summer of 1849 , his friends found him an apartment in Chaillot , out of the centre of the city , for which the rent was secretly subsidised by an admirer , Princess <unk> . Here in June 1849 he was visited by Jenny Lind . 
 = = = Death and funeral = = = 
 With his health further deteriorating , Chopin desired to have a family member with him . In June 1849 his sister Ludwika came to Paris with her husband and daughter , and in September , supported by a loan from Jane Stirling , he took an apartment at Place Vendôme 12 . After 15 October , when his condition took a marked turn for the worse , only a handful of his closest friends remained with him , although Viardot remarked sardonically that " all the grand Parisian ladies considered it de rigueur to faint in his room . " 
 Some of his friends provided music at his request ; among them , Potocka sang and Franchomme played the cello . Chopin requested that his body be opened after death ( for fear of being buried alive ) and his heart returned to Warsaw where it rests at the Church of the Holy Cross . He also bequeathed his unfinished notes on a piano tuition method , Projet de méthode , to Alkan for completion . On 17 October , after midnight , the physician leaned over him and asked whether he was suffering greatly . " No longer " , he replied . He died a few minutes before two o 'clock in the morning . Those present at the deathbed appear to have included his sister Ludwika , Princess <unk> Czartoryska , Sand 's daughter Solange , and his close friend Thomas Albrecht . Later that morning , Solange 's husband Clésinger made Chopin 's death mask and a cast of his left hand . 
 Chopin 's disease and the cause of his death have since been a matter of discussion . His death certificate gave the cause as tuberculosis , and his physician , Jean Cruveilhier , was then the leading French authority on this disease . Other possibilities have been advanced including cystic fibrosis , cirrhosis and alpha 1 @-@ antitrypsin deficiency . However , the attribution of tuberculosis as principal cause of death has not been disproved . Permission for DNA testing , which could put the matter to rest , has been denied by the Polish government . 
 The funeral , held at the Church of the Madeleine in Paris , was delayed almost two weeks , until 30 October . Entrance was restricted to ticket holders as many people were expected to attend . Over 3 @,@ 000 people arrived without invitations , from as far as London , Berlin and Vienna , and were excluded . 
 Mozart 's Requiem was sung at the funeral ; the soloists were the soprano Jeanne @-@ Anais Castellan , the mezzo @-@ soprano Pauline Viardot , the tenor Alexis Dupont , and the bass Luigi <unk> ; Chopin 's Preludes No. 4 in E minor and No. 6 in B minor were also played . The organist at the funeral was Louis Lefébure @-@ Wély . The funeral procession to Père Lachaise Cemetery , which included Chopin 's sister Ludwika , was led by the aged Prince Adam Czartoryski . The pallbearers included Delacroix , Franchomme , and Camille Pleyel . At the graveside , the Funeral March from Chopin 's Piano Sonata No. 2 was played , in Reber 's instrumentation . 
 Chopin 's tombstone , featuring the muse of music , Euterpe , weeping over a broken lyre , was designed and sculpted by Clésinger . The expenses of the funeral and monument , amounting to 5 @,@ 000 francs , were covered by Jane Stirling , who also paid for the return of the composer 's sister Ludwika to Warsaw . Ludwika took Chopin 's heart in an urn , preserved in alcohol , back to Poland in 1850 . She also took a collection of two hundred letters from Sand to Chopin ; after 1851 these were returned to Sand , who seems to have destroyed them . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Over 230 works of Chopin survive ; some compositions from early childhood have been lost . All his known works involve the piano , and only a few range beyond solo piano music , as either piano concertos , songs or chamber music . 
 Chopin was educated in the tradition of Beethoven , Haydn , Mozart and Clementi ; he used Clementi 's piano method with his own students . He was also influenced by Hummel 's development of virtuoso , yet Mozartian , piano technique . He cited Bach and Mozart as the two most important composers in shaping his musical outlook . Chopin 's early works are in the style of the " brilliant " keyboard pieces of his era as exemplified by the works of Ignaz Moscheles , Friedrich Kalkbrenner , and others . Less direct in the earlier period are the influences of Polish folk music and of Italian opera . Much of what became his typical style of ornamentation ( for example , his <unk> ) is taken from singing . His melodic lines were increasingly reminiscent of the modes and features of the music of his native country , such as drones . 
 Chopin took the new salon genre of the nocturne , invented by the Irish composer John Field , to a deeper level of sophistication . He was the first to write ballades and <unk> as individual concert pieces . He essentially established a new genre with his own set of free @-@ standing preludes ( Op. 28 , published 1839 ) . He exploited the poetic potential of the concept of the concert étude , already being developed in the 1820s and 1830s by Liszt , Clementi and Moscheles , in his two sets of studies ( Op. 10 published in 1833 , Op. 25 in 1837 ) . 
 Chopin also endowed popular dance forms with a greater range of melody and expression . Chopin 's mazurkas , while originating in the traditional Polish dance ( the <unk> ) , differed from the traditional variety in that they were written for the concert hall rather than the dance hall ; " it was Chopin who put the mazurka on the European musical map . " The series of seven polonaises published in his lifetime ( another nine were published posthumously ) , beginning with the Op. 26 pair ( published 1836 ) , set a new standard for music in the form . His waltzes were also written specifically for the salon recital rather than the ballroom and are frequently at rather faster tempos than their dance @-@ floor equivalents . 
 = = = Titles , opus numbers and editions = = = 
 Some of Chopin 's well @-@ known pieces have acquired descriptive titles , such as the Revolutionary Étude ( Op. 10 , No. 12 ) , and the Minute Waltz ( Op. 64 , No. 1 ) . However , with the exception of his Funeral March , the composer never named an instrumental work beyond genre and number , leaving all potential <unk> associations to the listener ; the names by which many of his pieces are known were invented by others . There is no evidence to suggest that the Revolutionary Étude was written with the failed Polish uprising against Russia in mind ; it merely appeared at that time . The Funeral March , the third movement of his Sonata No. 2 ( Op. 35 ) , the one case where he did give a title , was written before the rest of the sonata , but no specific event or death is known to have inspired it . 
 The last opus number that Chopin himself used was 65 , allocated to the Cello Sonata in G minor . He expressed a deathbed wish that all his unpublished manuscripts be destroyed . At the request of the composer 's mother and sisters , however , his musical executor Julian Fontana selected 23 unpublished piano pieces and grouped them into eight further opus numbers ( Opp . 66 – 73 ) , published in 1855 . In 1857 , 17 Polish songs that Chopin wrote at various stages of his life were collected and published as Op. 74 , though their order within the opus did not reflect the order of composition . 
 Works published since 1857 have received alternative catalogue designations instead of opus numbers . The present standard musicological reference for Chopin 's works is the <unk> Catalogue ( usually represented by the initials ' KK ' ) , named for its compiler , the Polish musicologist Krystyna <unk> . 
 Chopin 's original publishers included Maurice Schlesinger and Camille Pleyel . His works soon began to appear in popular 19th @-@ century piano anthologies . The first collected edition was by Breitkopf & Härtel ( 1878 – 1902 ) . Among modern scholarly editions of Chopin 's works are the version under the name of Paderewski published between 1937 and 1966 and the more recent Polish " National Edition " , edited by Jan <unk> , both of which contain detailed explanations and discussions regarding choices and sources . 
 = = = Form and harmony = = = 
 Improvisation stands at the centre of Chopin 's creative processes . However , this does not imply impulsive rambling : Nicholas Temperley writes that " improvisation is designed for an audience , and its starting @-@ point is that audience 's expectations , which include the current conventions of musical form . " The works for piano and orchestra , including the two concertos , are held by Temperley to be " merely vehicles for brilliant piano playing ... formally <unk> and extremely conservative " . After the piano concertos ( which are both early , dating from 1830 ) , Chopin made no attempts at large @-@ scale multi @-@ movement forms , save for his late sonatas for piano and for cello ; " instead he achieved near @-@ perfection in pieces of simple general design but subtle and complex cell @-@ structure . " Rosen suggests that an important aspect of Chopin 's individuality is his flexible handling of the four @-@ bar phrase as a structural unit . 
 J. Barrie Jones suggests that " amongst the works that Chopin intended for concert use , the four ballades and four <unk> stand supreme " , and adds that " the Barcarolle Op. 60 stands apart as an example of Chopin 's rich harmonic palette coupled with an Italianate warmth of melody . " Temperley opines that these works , which contain " immense variety of mood , thematic material and structural detail " , are based on an extended " departure and return " form ; " the more the middle section is extended , and the further it departs in key , mood and theme , from the opening idea , the more important and dramatic is the reprise when it at last comes . " 
 Chopin 's mazurkas and waltzes are all in straightforward ternary or episodic form , sometimes with a coda . The mazurkas often show more folk features than many of his other works , sometimes including modal scales and harmonies and the use of drone basses . However , some also show unusual sophistication , for example Op. 63 No. 3 , which includes a canon at one beat 's distance , a great rarity in music . 
 Chopin 's polonaises show a marked advance on those of his Polish predecessors in the form ( who included his teachers <unk> and <unk> ) . As with the traditional polonaise , Chopin 's works are in triple time and typically display a martial rhythm in their melodies , accompaniments and cadences . Unlike most of their precursors , they also require a formidable playing technique . 
 The 21 nocturnes are more structured , and of greater emotional depth , than those of Field ( whom Chopin met in 1833 ) . Many of the Chopin nocturnes have middle sections marked by agitated expression ( and often making very difficult demands on the performer ) which heightens their dramatic character . 
 Chopin 's études are largely in straightforward ternary form . He used them to teach his own technique of piano playing — for instance playing double thirds ( Op. 25 , No. 6 ) , playing in octaves ( Op. 25 , No. 10 ) , and playing repeated notes ( Op. 10 , No. 7 ) . 
 The preludes , many of which are very brief ( some consisting of simple statements and developments of a single theme or figure ) , were described by Schumann as " the beginnings of studies " . Inspired by J.S. Bach 's The Well @-@ Tempered Clavier , Chopin 's preludes move up the circle of fifths ( rather than Bach 's chromatic scale sequence ) to create a prelude in each major and minor tonality . The preludes were perhaps not intended to be played as a group , and may even have been used by him and later pianists as generic preludes to others of his pieces , or even to music by other composers , as Kenneth Hamilton suggests : he has noted a recording by Ferruccio Busoni of 1922 , in which the Prelude Op. 28 No. 7 is followed by the Étude Op. 10 No. 5 . 
 The two mature piano sonatas ( No. 2 , Op. 35 , written in 1839 and No. 3 , Op. 58 , written in 1844 ) are in four movements . In Op. 35 , Chopin was able to combine within a formal large musical structure many elements of his virtuosic piano technique — " a kind of dialogue between the public pianism of the brilliant style and the German sonata principle " . The last movement , a brief ( 75 @-@ bar ) perpetuum mobile in which the hands play in unmodified octave unison throughout , was found shocking and unmusical by contemporaries , including Schumann . The Op. 58 sonata is closer to the German tradition , including many passages of complex counterpoint , " worthy of Brahms " according to the music historians <unk> Michałowski and Jim Samson . 
 Chopin 's harmonic innovations may have arisen partly from his keyboard improvisation technique . Temperley says that in his works " novel harmonic effects frequently result from the combination of ordinary appoggiaturas or passing notes with melodic figures of accompaniment " , and cadences are delayed by the use of chords outside the home key ( <unk> sixths and diminished sevenths ) , or by sudden shifts to remote keys . Chord progressions sometimes anticipate the shifting tonality of later composers such as Claude Debussy , as does Chopin 's use of modal harmony . 
 = = = Technique and performance style = = = 
 In 1841 , Léon Escudier wrote of a recital given by Chopin that year , " One may say that Chopin is the creator of a school of piano and a school of composition . In truth , nothing equals the lightness , the sweetness with which the composer preludes on the piano ; moreover nothing may be compared to his works full of originality , distinction and grace . " Chopin refused to conform to a standard method of playing and believed that there was no set technique for playing well . His style was based extensively on his use of very independent finger technique . In his Projet de méthode he wrote : " Everything is a matter of knowing good fingering ... we need no less to use the rest of the hand , the wrist , the forearm and the upper arm . " He further stated : " One needs only to study a certain position of the hand in relation to the keys to obtain with ease the most beautiful quality of sound , to know how to play short notes and long notes , and [ to attain ] unlimited dexterity . " The consequences of this approach to technique in Chopin 's music include the frequent use of the entire range of the keyboard , passages in double octaves and other chord groupings , swiftly repeated notes , the use of grace notes , and the use of contrasting rhythms ( four against three , for example ) between the hands . 
 Jonathan Bellman writes that modern concert performance style — set in the " conservatory " tradition of late 19th- and 20th @-@ century music schools , and suitable for large auditoria or recordings — militates against what is known of Chopin 's more intimate performance technique . The composer himself said to a pupil that " concerts are never real music , you have to give up the idea of hearing in them all the most beautiful things of art . " Contemporary accounts indicate that in performance , Chopin avoided rigid procedures sometimes incorrectly attributed to him , such as " always crescendo to a high note " , but that he was concerned with expressive phrasing , rhythmic consistency and sensitive colouring . Berlioz wrote in 1853 that Chopin " has created a kind of chromatic embroidery ... whose effect is so strange and piquant as to be impossible to describe ... virtually nobody but Chopin himself can play this music and give it this unusual turn " . Hiller wrote that " What in the hands of others was elegant embellishment , in his hands became a colourful wreath of flowers . " 
 Chopin 's music is frequently played with rubato , " the practice in performance of disregarding strict time , ' robbing ' some note @-@ values for expressive effect " . There are differing opinions as to how much , and what type , of rubato is appropriate for his works . Charles Rosen comments that " most of the written @-@ out indications of rubato in Chopin are to be found in his mazurkas ... It is probable that Chopin used the older form of rubato so important to Mozart ... [ where ] the melody note in the right hand is delayed until after the note in the bass ... An allied form of this rubato is the arpeggiation of the chords thereby delaying the melody note ; according to Chopin 's pupil , Karol <unk> , Chopin was firmly opposed to this practice . " 
 Friederike Müller , a pupil of Chopin , wrote : " [ His ] playing was always noble and beautiful ; his tones sang , whether in full forte or softest piano . He took infinite pains to teach his pupils this legato , cantabile style of playing . His most severe criticism was ' He — or she — does not know how to join two notes together . ' He also demanded the strictest adherence to rhythm . He hated all lingering and dragging , misplaced <unk> , as well as exaggerated <unk> ... and it is precisely in this respect that people make such terrible errors in playing his works . " 
 = = = Polish heritage = = = 
 With his mazurkas and polonaises , Chopin has been credited with introducing to music a new sense of nationalism . Schumann , in his 1836 review of the piano concertos , highlighted the composer 's strong feelings for his native Poland , writing that " Now that the Poles are in deep mourning [ after the failure of the November 1830 rising ] , their appeal to us artists is even stronger ... If the mighty autocrat in the north [ i.e. Nicholas I of Russia ] could know that in Chopin 's works , in the simple strains of his mazurkas , there lurks a dangerous enemy , he would place a ban on his music . Chopin 's works are cannon buried in flowers ! " The biography of Chopin published in 1863 under the name of Franz Liszt ( but probably written by Carolyne zu Sayn @-@ Wittgenstein ) claims that Chopin " must be ranked first among the first musicians ... <unk> in themselves the poetic sense of an entire nation . " 
 Some modern commentators have argued against exaggerating Chopin 's primacy as a " nationalist " or " patriotic " composer . George Golos refers to earlier " nationalist " composers in Central Europe , including Poland 's Michał <unk> <unk> and Franciszek <unk> , who utilised polonaise and mazurka forms . Barbara <unk> suggests that Chopin 's experience of Polish music came more from " urbanised " Warsaw versions than from folk music , and that attempts ( by Jachimecki and others ) to demonstrate genuine folk music in his works are without basis . Richard Taruskin <unk> Schumann 's attitude toward Chopin 's works as patronizing and comments that Chopin " felt his Polish patriotism deeply and sincerely " but consciously modelled his works on the tradition of Bach , Beethoven , Schubert and Field . 
 A reconciliation of these views is suggested by William Atwood : " Undoubtedly [ Chopin 's ] use of traditional musical forms like the polonaise and mazurka roused nationalistic sentiments and a sense of cohesiveness amongst those Poles scattered across Europe and the New World ... While some sought solace in [ them ] , others found them a source of strength in their continuing struggle for freedom . Although Chopin 's music undoubtedly came to him intuitively rather than through any conscious patriotic design , it served all the same to symbolize the will of the Polish people ... " 
 = = = Reception and influence = = = 
 Jones comments that " Chopin 's unique position as a composer , despite the fact that virtually everything he wrote was for the piano , has rarely been questioned . " He also notes that Chopin was fortunate to arrive in Paris in 1831 — " the artistic environment , the publishers who were willing to print his music , the wealthy and aristocratic who paid what Chopin asked for their lessons " — and these factors , as well as his musical genius , also fuelled his contemporary and later reputation . While his illness and his love @-@ affairs conform to some of the stereotypes of romanticism , the rarity of his public recitals ( as opposed to performances at fashionable Paris soirées ) led Arthur Hutchings to suggest that " his lack of Byronic flamboyance [ and ] his aristocratic reclusiveness make him exceptional " among his romantic contemporaries , such as Liszt and Henri Herz . 
 Chopin 's qualities as a pianist and composer were recognized by many of his fellow musicians . Schumann named a piece for him in his suite Carnaval , and Chopin later dedicated his Ballade No. 2 in F major to Schumann . Elements of Chopin 's music can be traced in many of Liszt 's later works . Liszt later transcribed for piano six of Chopin 's Polish songs . A less fraught friendship was with Alkan , with whom he discussed elements of folk music , and who was deeply affected by Chopin 's death . 
 Two of Chopin 's long @-@ standing pupils , Karol <unk> ( 1821 – 1897 ) and Georges Mathias , were themselves piano teachers and passed on details of his playing to their own students , some of whom ( such as Raoul <unk> ) were to make recordings of his music . Other pianists and composers influenced by Chopin 's style include Louis Moreau Gottschalk , Édouard Wolff ( 1816 – 1880 ) and Pierre Zimmermann . Debussy dedicated his own 1915 piano Études to the memory of Chopin ; he frequently played Chopin 's music during his studies at the Paris Conservatoire , and undertook the editing of Chopin 's piano music for the publisher Jacques Durand . 
 Polish composers of the following generation included virtuosi such as Moritz Moszkowski , but , in the opinion of J. Barrie Jones , his " one worthy successor " among his compatriots was Karol Szymanowski ( 1882 – 1937 ) . Edvard Grieg , Antonín Dvořák , Isaac Albéniz , Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky and Sergei Rachmaninoff , among others , are regarded by critics as having been influenced by Chopin 's use of national modes and idioms . Alexander Scriabin was devoted to the music of Chopin , and his early published works include nineteen mazurkas , as well as numerous études and preludes ; his teacher Nikolai Zverev drilled him in Chopin 's works to improve his virtuosity as a performer . In the 20th century , composers who paid homage to ( or in some cases parodied ) the music of Chopin included George Crumb , Bohuslav Martinů , Darius Milhaud , Igor Stravinsky and Heitor Villa @-@ Lobos . 
 Chopin 's music was used in the 1909 ballet <unk> , choreographed by Michel Fokine and orchestrated by Alexander Glazunov . Sergei Diaghilev commissioned additional orchestrations — from Stravinsky , Anatoly Lyadov , Sergei Taneyev and Nikolai Tcherepnin — for later productions , which used the title Les Sylphides . 
 Chopin 's music remains very popular and is regularly performed , recorded and broadcast worldwide . The world 's oldest monographic music competition , the International Chopin Piano Competition , founded in 1927 , is held every five years in Warsaw . The Fryderyk Chopin Institute of Poland lists on its website over eighty societies world @-@ wide devoted to the composer and his music . The Institute site also lists nearly 1 @,@ 500 performances of Chopin works on YouTube as of January 2014 . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 The British Library notes that " Chopin 's works have been recorded by all the great pianists of the recording era . " The earliest recording was an 1895 performance by Paul Pabst of the Nocturne in E major Op. 62 No. 2 . The British Library site makes available a number of historic recordings , including some by Alfred Cortot , Ignaz Friedman , Vladimir Horowitz , Benno Moiseiwitsch , Ignacy Jan Paderewski , Arthur Rubinstein , Xaver Scharwenka and many others . A select discography of recordings of Chopin works by pianists representing the various pedagogic traditions stemming from Chopin is given by Methuen @-@ Campbell in his work tracing the lineage and character of those traditions . 
 Numerous recordings of Chopin 's works are available . On the occasion of the composer 's bicentenary , the critics of The New York Times recommended performances by the following contemporary pianists ( among many others ) : Martha <unk> , Vladimir Ashkenazy , Emanuel Ax , Evgeny Kissin , Murray Perahia , Maurizio Pollini and Krystian <unk> . The Warsaw Chopin Society organizes the Grand prix du <unk> de F. Chopin for notable Chopin recordings , held every five years . 
 = = In literature , stage , film and television = = 
 Chopin has figured extensively in Polish literature , both in serious critical studies of his life and music and in fictional treatments . The earliest manifestation was probably an 1830 sonnet on Chopin by Leon Ulrich . French writers on Chopin ( apart from Sand ) have included Marcel Proust and André Gide ; and he has also featured in works of Gottfried Benn and Boris Pasternak . There are numerous biographies of Chopin in English ( see bibliography for some of these ) . 
 Possibly the first venture into fictional treatments of Chopin 's life was a fanciful operatic version of some of its events . Chopin was written by Giacomo <unk> and produced in Milan in 1901 . All the music is derived from that of Chopin . 
 Chopin 's life and his relations with George Sand have been fictionalized in numerous films . The 1945 biographical film A Song to Remember earned Cornel Wilde an Academy Award nomination as Best Actor for his portrayal of the composer . Other film treatments have included : La valse de l <unk> ( France , 1928 ) by Henry Roussel , with Pierre <unk> as Chopin ; Impromptu ( 1991 ) , starring Hugh Grant as Chopin ; La note bleue ( 1991 ) ; and Chopin : Desire for Love ( 2002 ) . 
 Chopin 's life was covered in a BBC TV documentary Chopin – The Women Behind The Music ( 2010 ) , and in a 2010 documentary realised by Angelo <unk> and Roberto <unk> for Italian television . 
 = X @-@ Cops ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " X @-@ Cops " is the twelfth episode of the seventh season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . Directed by Michael Watkins and written by Vince Gilligan , the installment serves as a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story — a stand @-@ alone plot unconnected to the overarching mythology of The X @-@ Files . Originally aired in the United States by the Fox network on February 20 , 2000 , " X @-@ Cops " received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 and was seen by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers . The episode earned positive reviews from critics , largely due to its unique presentation , as well as its use of humor . Since its airing , the episode has been named among the best episodes of The X @-@ Files by several reviewers . 
 The X @-@ Files centers on Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal ; the skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , Mulder and Scully are interviewed for the Fox reality television program Cops during an X @-@ Files investigation . Mulder , hunting what he believes to be a werewolf , discovers that the monster terrorizing people instead feeds on fear . While Mulder embraces the publicity of Cops , Scully is more uncomfortable about appearing on national television . 
 " X @-@ Cops " serves as a fictional crossover with Cops and is one of only two X @-@ Files episodes to be shot in real time , in which events are presented at the same rate that the audience experiences them . Gilligan , who was inspired to write the script because he enjoyed Cops , pitched the idea several times to series creator Chris Carter and the series writing staff , receiving a mixed reception ; when the crew felt that the show was nearing its end with the conclusion of the seventh season , Gilligan was given the green light because it was seen as an experiment . In the tradition of the real @-@ life Cops program , the entire episode was shot on videotape and featured several members of the crew of Cops . The episode has been thematically analyzed for its use of postmodernism and its presentation as reality television . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with the standard opening credit sequence of the reality television program Cops and its theme song " Bad Boys " . Keith Wetzel ( Judson Mills ) , a deputy with the Los Angeles County Sheriff 's Department , is accompanied by a Cops film crew at Willow Park , California , a fictional high @-@ crime district of Los Angeles . Wetzel visits the home of Mrs. <unk> ( Perla Walter ) , who has reported a monster in the neighborhood . Wetzel , expecting to find a dog , follows the creature around a corner but runs back screaming for the crew to flee . They return to Wetzel 's police car , but before they can escape , it is overturned by an unseen entity . 
 When backup arrives on the scene , an injured Wetzel claims that he encountered gang members . The police soon discover and surround Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , believing them to be criminals , before they realize that the pair are FBI agents . Mulder and Scully claim that they are investigating an alleged werewolf that killed a man in the area during the last full moon . According to Mulder , the entity that they are tracking only comes out at night . Scully is irritated by the constant presence of the Cops crew , but Mulder is enthused at the prospect of paranormal proof being presented to a national television audience . The agents and the police interview Mrs. Guerrero , who describes the monster to Ricky ( Solomon <unk> ) , a sketch artist . To Mulder 's surprise , Mrs. Guerrero describes not a werewolf , but the horror movie villain Freddy Krueger . Ricky expresses a fear of being alone in the dangerous neighborhood , and is found a short time later with serious slashes in his chest . Mulder and Scully find a pink fingernail at the scene . The group also meets Steve and Edy ( J. W. Smith and Curtis C. ) , a couple who witnessed the incident but did not see Ricky 's attacker , saying that it appeared he was being attacked by nothing . Scully shows the couple the fingernail , which they identify as belonging to Chantara Gomez ( Maria <unk> ) , a prostitute . 
 When the agents track down Chantara , whose face is pixelated , she claims that her pimp attacked Ricky and fears that he will kill her . She pleads with the agents for protection . Mulder and Scully have Wetzel guard Chantara while they assist the police in the raid of a crack house . However , the two are drawn back outside when Wetzel encounters the entity , wildly shooting at it . Inside a police car , the agents find Chantara with her neck broken . When Mulder questions Wetzel , he admits that he thought he saw the " wasp man " , a monster his older brother told him about when he was a kid . Mulder formulates a theory that the entity changes its form to correspond with its victims ' worst fears . Wetzel , Ricky , and Chantara all expressed fear shortly before their run @-@ ins with the entity ; it was visible to them , but not to others . The agents think that Steve and Edy may be the entity 's next target because they were in the vicinity of Ricky 's attack . They head to their house , only to find the couple in the middle of an argument . After Edy expresses fear of a separation from Steve , the couple reconciles . Based on this situation , Mulder proposes that the entity ignored Steve and Edy because they did not exhibit mortal fear . 
 Mulder believes that the entity travels from victim to victim like a contagion . At his request , Scully performs an autopsy on Chantara 's body at the morgue . During the procedure , a conversation between Scully and the coroner 's assistant ( Tara <unk> ) causes the latter to panic about a Hantavirus outbreak . The entity suddenly kills her with the disease . When Mulder discusses the death with Scully , he realizes that Wetzel is in danger of being revisited by the entity . The agents and police return to the crack house , where the entity has trapped an injured Wetzel in an upstairs room . The agents are unable to enter the room until dawn comes , when the entity disappears and spares Wetzel 's life . After the incident is over , Scully expresses her sympathies to Mulder that being filmed by a national television crew did not provide the public exposure to paranormal phenomena that he had hoped . However , Mulder remains hopeful , noting that it all comes down to how the production crew edits the footage together . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Vince Gilligan , who wrote the episode , was inspired by Cops , which he describes as a " great slice of Americana . " Gilligan first pitched the idea to the X @-@ Files writing staff and to series creator Chris Carter during the show 's fourth season . Carter was concerned that the concept was too " goofy " . Fellow writer and producer Frank Spotnitz concurred ; however , he was more uncomfortable with Gilligan 's idea of using videotape instead of film to shoot the episode . The show 's production crew liked to use film to create " effective scares " , and Spotnitz worried that shooting exclusively on videotape would be too challenging as the series would be unable to cut and edit the final product . However , during the show 's seventh season , Carter relented . Many critics and fans believed , erroneously , that the seventh season of The X @-@ Files would be the show 's last . Similarly , Carter felt that the show had nearly run its course . Seeing the potential in Gilligan 's idea , he decided to green @-@ light the episode . Gilligan noted that " the longer we 've been on the air , the more chances we 've taken . We try to keep the show fresh ... I think [ Carter ] appreciates that " . " X @-@ Cops " was not Gilligan 's first attempt at writing a cross @-@ over . Almost three years before , he had been working on a script that would involve a story being presented by Robert Stack of Unsolved Mysteries , with unknown actors playing Mulder and Scully . This script was later aborted , and re @-@ written as the fifth season episode " Bad Blood " . 
 Gilligan reasoned that , because Mulder and Scully would appear on a nationally syndicated television series , the episode 's main monster could not be shown , only " hinted at " . Gilligan and the writing staff applied methods previously used in the 1999 psychological horror film The Blair Witch Project to show as little of the monster as possible while still making the episode scary . Michael Watkins , who directed the episode , had a good rapport with the Los Angeles police department . As such , he secured real Sheriff 's deputies as extras . Casting director Rick Milikan later explained that the group needed " actors who could pull off the believability in just normal off @-@ the @-@ cuff conversation of cops on the job . " During the crack house scene , real SWAT team members were hired to break down the doors . Actor Judson Mills later explained that , because there were few cameramen and owing to the manner in which the episode was filmed , " people just behaved as if we were [ real ] cops . I had other cops waving and giving their signals or heads @-@ up the way they do amongst themselves . It was quite funny " . 
 = = = Filming and post @-@ production = = = 
 " X @-@ Cops " was filmed in Venice and Long Beach , California . When members of The X @-@ Files staff asked Cops producer John Langley about a potential cross @-@ over , the crew of Cops liked the idea and offered their complete cooperation . Gilligan was even invited to the shooting of an episode . Inspired by Cops , Watkins ' directing style was unique for this episode . Watkins filmed some of the scenes himself , in addition to the shots caught by the usual camera operators of The X @-@ Files . However , he also brought in Bertram van Munster , a cameraman for Cops , to shoot scenes to give the finished product an authentic feel . In an attempt at realism , other staff members from Cops participated in the production : Daniel Emmet and John Michael Vaughn , two Cops crew members , were featured during the episode 's climax . During rehearsals , Watkins kept the cameras away from the set , so that when filming commenced , the cameramen 's unfamiliarity would create the " unscripted " reality feel of a documentary . In addition , a Cops editor was brought in to insert the blur over the faces of bystanders . 
 The episode was one of two X @-@ Files episodes to take place in real time — wherein events are presented at the same rate that the audience experiences them — the other being the sixth season episode " Triangle " . Due to the nature of the shooting schedule , the episode was relatively cheap to film and production moved at a quick pace . Initially , the actors struggled with the new cinéma vérité style of the episode , and several takes were needed for scenes during the first few days , but these problems receded as filming progressed . On one night , three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half pages of script were shot in only two hours ; the normal rate for The X @-@ Files was three to four pages a day . Both Watkins and Mills likened the filming of the episode to live theater . The former noted , " In a sense we were doing theater : we were doing an act , or half of a whole act in one take . " Anderson called the performance " fun " to shoot , and highlighted " Scully getting pissed off at the camera crew " as her favorite part to play . She further noted that " it was interesting to make the adjustment to playing something more real than you might play for television . " 
 Although filmed to create the illusion that events occurred in real time , the episode employed several camera tricks and effects . For the opening shot , a " surreptitious cut " helped to replace actor Judson Mills with a stunt person when the cop car is overturned by the monster . Usually , an episode of the series required 800 to 1 @,@ 200 film cuts , but " X @-@ Cops " only required 45 . During post @-@ production , a minor argument broke out between Vince Gilligan and the network . Originally , Gilligan did not want the X @-@ Files logo to appear at any time during the episode . He stressed that he wanted " X @-@ Cops " to feel like an " episode of Cops that happened to involve Mulder and Scully . " The network , fearing that people would not understand that " X @-@ Cops " was actually an episode of The X @-@ Files , vetoed this idea . A compromise was reached wherein the episode would open with the Cops theme song , but the normal X @-@ Files credits would scroll after an opening scene . In addition , the commercial bumpers would feature red and blue lights flashing across The X @-@ Files logo while dialogue is heard in the background , in a similar fashion to the Cops logo . The episode also features a disclaimer at the beginning informing viewers that the episode is a special installment of The X @-@ Files to prevent watchers from thinking that the show " has been preempted this week by Cops " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Several critics , such as M. Keith Booker , have argued that " X @-@ Cops " is an example of The X @-@ Files delving into the postmodern school of thought . Postmodernism has been described as a " style and concept in the arts [ that ] is characterized by the self @-@ conscious use of earlier styles and conventions [ and the ] mixing of different artistic styles and media " . According to Booker , the episode helps to " identify the series as postmodern [ due to its ] cumulative summary of modern American culture " , or , in this case , the show 's merging with another popular television series . The episode also serves as an example of the series ' " self @-@ consciousness in terms of its status as a ( fictional ) television " show . M. Keith Booker , in the book Strange TV , notes that " <unk> [ sion ] to films and works of literature " present in " X @-@ Cops " suggests " its role as a kind of cumulative summary of modern American culture " . 
 According to Jeremy Butler in the book Television Style , the episode , along with many other found footage @-@ type movies and shows , helps to suggest that what is being promoted as " live TV " , is actually a series of events that have already unfolded in the past . Furthermore , while the episode is written and performed in a self @-@ reflexive and humorous tone , the real @-@ time aspects of " X @-@ Cops " " heighten [ s ] s the sense of realism within the episode " , and makes the result come across as hyper @-@ realistic . This sense of realism is further heightened by the near lack of music in the episode ; aside from the title theme , Mark Snow 's soundtrack is not to be heard . 
 Sarah Stegall proposed that the episode works on two separate layers . On the top @-@ most superficial layer , it functions as an outright parody , mimicking both the stylings of The X @-@ Files as well as Cops . However , on the other layer , she notes that " it 's a serious look at validation . " Throughout the episode , Mulder is attempting to capture the monster on camera and expose it to a national audience . However , all of the witnesses to monster function as unreliable narrators : a Hispanic woman with " a history of medications " , a homosexual " Drama Queen " , a prostitute , a " terrified morgue attendant , and Deputy Wetzel . Stegall argues that all of these characters are from " the wrong side of the tracks " and would not be accepted , let alone believed , by " a placid , middle @-@ class society " . In the end , the only reliable witness is the camera , but Stegall points out that " the camera , suspiciously , never quite manages to find [ the monster ] . " Furthermore , she reasons that Mulder 's biggest fear is not finding the monster . To back this idea up , she points out that Mulder not only fails to find what he is looking for , but he also fails before a live audience . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " X @-@ Cops " was first broadcast in the United States on the Fox network on February 20 , 2000 . Watched by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers , according to the Nielsen ratings system , it was the second @-@ highest rated episode of the season , after " The Sixth Extinction " . It received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 7 , with a 14 share among viewers , meaning that 9 @.@ 7 percent of all households in the United States , and 14 percent of people watching television at that time , tuned into the episode . It originally aired in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on June 4 , 2000 , receiving 850 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the channel 's third @-@ most watched program for that week . On May 13 , 2003 , " X @-@ Cops " was released on DVD as part of the complete seventh @-@ season box set . 
 Initial critical reaction to the episode was generally positive , although a few reviewers felt that the episode was a gimmick . Eric Mink of the Daily News described it as " nifty " and " exceptionally clever . " While noting that " The X @-@ Files hasn 't exactly smoked this season " , Kinney Littlefield from The Orange County Register called " X @-@ Cops " a stand @-@ out episode from the seventh season . Stegall praised the episode and likened the episode 's monster to the Boggart from the Harry Potter series . Stegall wrote of Vince Gilligan : " top honors must go to Vince Gilligan , whose work on The X @-@ Files is consistently the sharpest and most consistent . " Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review . He called the entry " one of the most entertaining episodes of the season " and " 60 minutes of pure fun " . Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that " some might view it as a stunt , but having Mulder and Scully be part of a spot @-@ on Cops ! parody ( complete with full " Bad Boys , bad boys " intro ) is just brilliant stuff " . Not all reviews were positive . Kenneth Silber from Space.com gave the episode a negative review and wrote , " ' X @-@ Cops ' is a wearisome episode . Watching the agents and police repeatedly run through the darkened streets of Los Angeles after an unseen — and uninteresting — foe evokes merely a sense of futility . The use of the format of the Fox TV show Cops provides some transient novelty but little drama or humor . " 
 Contemporary reviews have praised the episode as one of the show 's best installments . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two wrote that the episode was " funny , it 's clever , and it 's actually quite frightening " . Shearman and Pearson also wrote positively of the faux documentary style , likening it to The Blair Witch Project . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " and called it " witty , inventive , and intermittently spooky " . He argued that the episode was a late @-@ series " gimmick episode " and compared it the last few seasons of House ; although he reasoned that House relied on gimmicks to prop itself up , " X @-@ Cops " is " the work of a creative team which may be running out of ideas , but still has enough gas in the tank to get us where we need to go . " Furthermore , Handlen felt that the show used the Cops format to the best of its ability , and that many of the scenes were humorous , startling , or a combination of both . 
 Since its airing , " X @-@ Cops " has appeared on several best @-@ of lists . Montreal 's The Gazette named it the eighth best X @-@ Files episode , writing that it " pushed the show to new post @-@ modern heights . " Rob Bricken from Topless Robot named it the fifth funniest X @-@ Files episode , and Starpulse described it as the funniest X @-@ Files episode , writing that when the series " did comedy , it was probably the funniest drama ever on television " . UGO named the episode 's main antagonist as one of the greatest " Top 11 X @-@ Files Monsters , " noting that the creature is a " perfect [ Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week ] if only because the monster in question is a living , breathing metaphor , a never @-@ seen specter that shifts to fit the fears of the person witnessing it . " <unk> Bahar from SFX named the episode one of the " Best Sci @-@ Fi TV <unk> " and wrote , " Whether you see this as a brilliantly post @-@ modern merging of fact and fiction or shameless cross @-@ promotion of two of the Fox Network 's biggest TV shows , there 's lots of nods to the real Cops show in this episode " . Bahar praised the scene featuring the terrified lady telling Mulder that Freddy Krueger attacked her — calling the scene the " best in @-@ joke " — and applauded the two series ' cohesion . 
 = Katipo = 
 The katipo ( Latrodectus katipo ) is an endangered species of spider native to New Zealand . It is one of many species in the genus Latrodectus , such as the Australian redback ( L. hasseltii ) , and the North American black widows . The species is venomous to humans , capable of delivering a comparatively dangerous bite . The name katipo ( plural : katipo ) is from the Māori <unk> , meaning " night @-@ stinger " . It is a small to medium @-@ sized spider , with the female having a round black or brown pea @-@ sized body . Red katipo females , found in the South Island and the lower half of the North Island , are always black , and their abdomen has a distinctive red stripe bordered in white . In black katipo females , found in the upper half of the North Island , this stripe is absent , pale , yellow , or replaced with cream @-@ coloured blotches . These two forms were previously thought to be separate species . The male is much smaller than the female and quite different in appearance : white with black stripes and red diamond @-@ shaped markings . Katipo are only found living in sand dunes close to the seashore . They are found throughout most of coastal New Zealand except the far south and west . Katipo feed mainly on ground dwelling insects , caught in an irregular tangled web spun amongst dune plants or other debris , 
 After mating in August or September , the female katipo produces five or six egg sacs in November or December . The spiderlings hatch during January and February and disperse into surrounding plants . Due to habitat loss and colonisation of their natural habitat by other exotic spiders , the katipo is threatened with extinction . 
 A katipo bite produces the toxic syndrome latrodectism ; symptoms include extreme pain and , potentially , hypertension , seizure , or coma . Bites are rare , an antivenom is available , and no deaths have been reported since 1901 . The katipo is particularly notable in New Zealand as the nation is almost entirely devoid of dangerous native wildlife ; this unique status means the spider is well known , despite being rarely seen . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Although the ' <unk> ' was reported to the Linnean Society as early as 1855 , the spider was formally described as Latrodectus katipo by L. Powell in 1870 . Spiders of the genus Latrodectus have a worldwide distribution and include all of the commonly known widow spiders : the North American black widow spider ( Latrodectus mactans ) , the brown widow ( Latrodectus <unk> ) , and the European black widow ( Latrodectus tredecimguttatus ) . The katipo 's closest relative is the Australian redback spider ( Latrodectus hasseltii ) Latrodectus katipo and L. <unk> ( black katipo ) were previously thought to be two separate species , but research has shown that they are a single species , L. katipo , with colour variation that is clinal over latitude and correlated with mean annual temperature . The katipo is so closely related to the redback that it was at one stage thought to be a subspecies , with the proposed name Latrodectus hasseltii katipo . Further research has shown that the katipo is distinct from the redback , having slight structural differences and striking differences in habitat preference , and it remains its own species . The katipo 's family Theridiidae has a large number of species both in New Zealand and worldwide and are commonly known as tangle @-@ web spiders , cobweb spiders or comb @-@ footed spiders . 
 The common name , katipo , is Māori for " night stinger " , derived from the words <unk> ( to sting ) and <unk> ( the night ) . This name was apparently given to the spider due to the Māori belief that the spiders bite at night . Other common names include red katipo , black katipo and New Zealand 's redback . 
 = = Description = = 
 The katipo is a small to medium @-@ sized spider . The mature female has a body size of about 8 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) with a leg span of up to 32 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) . The red katipo female , found in the South Island and the lower North Island , has a large black globular abdomen , about the size of a garden pea , with slender legs and a white @-@ bordered orange or red stripe on its back that runs from the uppermost surface of the abdomen back to the spinnerets . The dark velvet @-@ black abdomen is described as satin or silky in appearance , rather than being shiny . The underside of the abdomen is black and has a red patch or partial red hourglass @-@ shaped marking . It has mainly black legs with the extremities changing to brown . The black katipo female , found in the upper North Island , does not have a red stripe on the top of her body , and the abdominal colouration is usually lighter , but is otherwise very similar in appearance to the red katipo . The hourglass pattern on the underside of the abdomen may also be less distinct , losing the middle section , and may even be absent . Variations also exist whose abdomen , cephalothorax , or entire body is brown , sometimes with a dull red or yellow stripe , or cream @-@ coloured spots on its upper side . These different forms were at one point thought to be different species , but a 2008 study demonstrated they were different morphs of the same species . 
 Adult males and juveniles are quite different in appearance to the female . They are smaller in size , being about one sixth the size of an adult female . Juveniles have a brown carapace , with a predominantly white abdomen which has a series of red @-@ orange diamonds running along the dorsal region bordered on either side by irregular black lines . Males retain this coloration into adulthood . Due to its much smaller size , Urquhart ( 1886 ) believed the male to be a separate species and named it Theridion <unk> . This was not rectified until 1933 when it was correctly identified as the male Latrodectus katipo . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 The katipo is restricted to a highly specialised habitat and is only found near the seashore living among sand dunes . They generally reside on the landward side of dunes closest to the coast where they are most sheltered from storms and sand movement . They can sometimes be associated with dunes several kilometres from the sea when these dunes extend inland for long distances . 
 Webs are typically established in low @-@ growing dune plants and other vegetation such as the native <unk> ( <unk> spiralis ) or the introduced marram grass ( Ammophila arenaria ) . They may also build their webs under driftwood , stones , or other debris such as empty tin cans or bottles . Webs are almost always constructed over open sand and near the ground so as to catch crawling insects for food . Spiders inhabiting dune grasses construct their webs in open spaces between the grass tufts , while spiders inhabiting areas of shrubbery do so on the underside of a plant overhanging open sand . It has been found that these patches of open sand are necessary for katipo to build their webs as plants that envelop sand dunes in dense cover , such as exotic plants like <unk> or buffalo grass , create an environment unsuitable for web construction . The katipo therefore prefers to spin its web amongst pingao plants as this plants growth pattern leaves patches of sand between each plant . The wind can then blow insects and other prey through these gaps and into the web . Marram grass has been extensively planted in New Zealand to help stabilise sand dunes and has largely replaced pingao in many areas . Because marram grass grows in a very tight formation only leaving small gaps between tuffs , this makes it difficult for the katipo to construct a suitable web for capturing prey . 
 Like other <unk> spiders , the web is a disorganised , irregular tangle of fine textured silk . It is hammock @-@ shaped and is made up of opaque yellowish @-@ white silk . The web consists of a broad base with many supporting threads above and below , including a number of sticky guy lines anchored to debris in the sand . A cone @-@ shaped retreat is built in the lower part of the web , although the katipo can normally be found near the main body of the web . The plants it builds its web in provide support and shelter for the nest . 
 = = Range = = 
 The katipo is endemic to New Zealand . In the North Island it is found along the West Coast from Wellington to North Cape . On the east coast of the North Island it occurs irregularly , however , it is abundant on Great Barrier Island . In the South Island it is found in coastal regions south to Dunedin on the east coast and south to Greymouth on the west coast . This southern limit is due to the katipo needing temperatures higher than about 17 ° C ( 63 ° F ) to be maintained during the development of their eggs – in the southern areas of New Zealand it is typically colder than this . 
 The red katipo is found south of approximately 39 ° 15 ′ S ( the western tip of Taranaki on the west coast , and just north of <unk> Beach in Hawke 's Bay on the east coast ) . The black katipo is found north of approximately 38 ° S ( <unk> Harbour , just north of <unk> on the west coast , and <unk> Bay and just south of the Bay of Plenty on the east coast ) . Both forms are found in the area in @-@ between these latitudes . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The katipo typically catches wandering ground invertebrates such as beetles ( e.g. <unk> <unk> ) or amphipods ( e.g. <unk> <unk> ) , but it may occasionally catch moths , flies , and other spiders . Katipo can catch insects much larger than themselves . These larger insects often become entangled in the web and in the ensuing struggle , the web 's ground anchor line breaks . Due to the silk 's elasticity , this causes the prey to become suspended a few centimetres off the ground . The katipo then moves to the prey , turns so that the spinnerets are facing the insect and spins silk over it . Like most <unk> , the tarsi of the hind legs have a row of strong curved bristles which are arranged as a comb . The katipo uses these to scoop sticky silk from her spinnerets and throws it over the insect with a series of rapid movements . After the insect is firmly immobilised , she bites it several times , usually at the joints , before spinning more silk to strengthen the web , and then administering a last long bite which ultimately kills the insect . The spider then moves the prey up into the web until it is ready to eat . If food is readily available then it is common to see five or six insects hanging in the web waiting to be ingested . The male 's hunting behaviour is similar to the female 's , although may not be as vigorous due to its smaller size . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The male wanders as an adult and in August or September goes looking for the females ' webs to mate . The male will enter the female 's web and vibrate the silk as he approaches her . The female is usually aggressive at first and will chase the male from the web . The Courtship process consists of the male bobbing , plucking and tweaking the web along with periods of cautious approach and being chased by the female . Eventually , when she becomes docile and allows him to approach , the male will then approach the female as she hangs quietly upside down in the web . The male moves onto her ventral abdomen , tapping her rapidly until she moves to align his abdomen above hers . He then inserts his palps one at a time , leaving the female between each insertion . Copulation occurs over 10 to 30 minutes . After mating , the male retreats to groom , which is performed by running his palps and legs through his fangs and wiping them over his body . The male is not eaten by the female unlike some other widow spiders . 
 The females lay their eggs in November or December . The eggs are round , about the size of a mustard seed , and are a transparent , <unk> red . They are held together in a cream @-@ coloured , round , ball shaped egg sac which is about 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) in diameter . The female constructs five or six egg sacs over the next three to four weeks . Each egg sac contains about 70 to 90 fertilised eggs . The egg sacs are hung in the centre of the spiders web and the female spins more silk over them . Over time the exterior of the egg sac may become covered with sand . After six weeks of incubation , during January and February , the spiderlings hatch . The young spiders then disperse from the web . At present , little is known about the dispersal mechanism that the spiderlings use to move away from the nest . In one study , observing spiders over 24 hours , 28 % used a ballooning method , which is where the young spiders use heat currents to carry themselves away from the nest suspended by a single web strand . While the majority , 61 % , used a bridging method where the <unk> uses its silk to move to nearby plants , and 11 % still remained in the nest . The young spiderlings reach full maturity the following spring . 
 The close relationship between the katipo and redback is shown when mating , The male redback is able to successfully mate with a female katipo producing hybrid offspring . However , the male katipo can not mate with the female redback as the male katipo is heavier than the male redback and when it approaches the web it triggers a predatory response in the female leading to the katipo being eaten before mating occurs . There is evidence of interbreeding between katipo and redbacks in the wild . 
 = = Predators = = 
 The katipo has only one known direct predator : a small , undescribed native wasp from the family Ichneumonidae has been observed feeding on katipo eggs . 
 = = Population decline = = 
 The katipo is an endangered species and has recently become threatened with extinction . It is estimated that there are only a few thousand katipo left in about 50 areas in the North Island and eight in the South Island , making it rarer than some species of kiwi . A number of reasons have contributed to its decline ; the major factors appear to be loss of habitat and declining quality of the remaining habitat . Human interference with their natural habitat has been occurring for over a century following European settlement . Coastal dune modification resulting from agriculture , forestry , or urban development along with recreational activities like the use of beach buggies , off road vehicles , beach horse riding and driftwood collection have destroyed or changed areas where katipo lives . The introduction of many invasive exotic plants has also contributed to the decline of suitable habitat . 
 Foreign spiders have colonised areas where suitable habitat remains . The major coloniser is the South African spider Steatoda capensis . It was first reported in the 1990s and may have displaced the katipo along the west coast of the North Island from Wellington to Wanganui . Although both the katipo and S. capensis have been found sharing the same dune systems or even co @-@ existing under the same piece of driftwood suggesting that the two species can co @-@ exist in similar habitats . It is possible that the displacement of the katipo by S. capensis is due to its ability to recolonise areas from which the katipo had been displaced after storms or other dune modifications . Furthermore , S. capensis breeds year @-@ round , produces more offspring and lives in a greater range of habitats which leads to greater pressure on the katipo . S. capensis also belongs to the family Theridiidae and shares many of the katipo 's features . It is of similar size , shape , general coloration , it lacks the red stripe on its back , but may have some red , orange or yellow on its abdomen , as well as the general location where <unk> are found . Due to these similarities it is commonly known in New Zealand as the ‘ false katipo ’ . 
 In 2010 the katipo was one of a dozen species of previously @-@ unprotected invertebrate given full protection under the 1953 Wildlife Act , noted as " iconic , vulnerable to harm , and in serious decline " . Under the Act , killing an absolutely @-@ protected species such as a katipo is punishable by a fine or even imprisonment . 
 = = Toxicology = = 
 The katipo has medically significant venom in humans , although bites are rare . The incidence of bites is low as it is a shy , non @-@ aggressive spider . Their narrow range , diminishing population , and human awareness of where they live means interaction between humans and the spider is minimal . The katipo will only bite as a last resort ; if molested , the spider will usually fold up into a ball and drop to the ground or retreat to the nearest cover . If the threat continues , the spider may throw out silk against the interference . When restrained in any way or held against skin , such as if tangled up in clothing , the spider will then bite defensively . However , if the female is with an egg sac it will remain close by it and sometimes move offensively to bite any threat . 
 Bites from Katipo spiders produce a syndrome known as latrodectism . The venoms of all Latrodectus spiders are thought to contain similar components with the neurotoxin α @-@ latrotoxin the main agent responsible . Most bites are caused by female spiders ; the male katipo was considered too small to cause systemic envenoming in humans . However , bites from male redback spiders have been reported suggesting male Latrodectus spiders can cause envenoming in humans . Although bites by male spiders are much rarer than those by females , perhaps due to their smaller jaws rather than lacking venom of similar potency to females or being unable to administer an effective bite . Māori legends recall many deaths , the last of which appears to have been a Māori girl who – according to the missionary Thomas Chapman – died in approximately 1849 . While there were reports of severe katipo bites in 19th or early 20th century records , no other fatalities from spider bites have since been reported in New Zealand . The most recent fatality seems to have been in 1901 , as reported in the Evening Post on 25 September of that year : " <unk> , This Day . Mr. George <unk> , aged 47 , son of Mr. George <unk> of <unk> , was bitten by a katipo spider on . September 16 . His arm swelled , and he suffered great pain till Saturday last , when he died . He leaves a widow and several children . " The most recent reported katipo bites ( as of 2016 ) were to a Canadian tourist in 2010 and a kayaker in 2012 . 
 = = = Symptoms = = = 
 The clinical features of latrodectism are similar for all species of Latrodectus spiders and is generally characterised by extreme pain . Initially , the bite may be painful , but sometimes only feels like a pin prick or mild burning sensation . Within an hour victims generally develop more severe local pain with local sweating and sometimes piloerection ( goosebumps ) . Pain , swelling and redness spread proximally from the site . Less commonly , systemic envenoming is heralded by swollen or tender regional lymph nodes ; associated features include malaise , nausea , vomiting , abdominal or chest pain , generalised sweating , headache , fever , hypertension and tremor . Rare complications include seizure , coma , pulmonary edema , respiratory failure or localised skin infection . The duration of effects can range from a few hours to days , with severe pain persisting for over 24 hours after being bitten in some cases . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Treatment is based on the severity of the bite ; the majority of cases do not require medical care and patients with localised pain , swelling and redness usually only require local application of ice and routine analgesics . Hospital assessment is recommended if simple analgesia does not resolve local pain or clinical features of systemic envenoming occur . In more severe bites , Redback antivenom can be given . Redback antivenom can also cross @-@ neutralise katipo venom , and it is used to treat envenoming from Latrodectus katipo in New Zealand . It is available from most major New Zealand hospitals . Antivenom will usually relieve symptoms of systemic envenoming and is indicated in anyone suffering symptoms consistent with Latrodectus envenoming . Unlike some other antivenoms , it is not limited to patients with signs of severe , systemic envenoming . Particular indications for using antivenom are local then generalised pain , sweating or hypertension . However , good evidence to support the effectiveness of widow spider antivenoms is lacking and studies have cast some doubt on antivenoms efficacy in latrodectism . Pain relief agents , such as parenteral opiates , or benzodiazepines may be required as adjunct agents . 
 = Operation Storm = 
 Operation Storm ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> ) was the last major battle of the Croatian War of Independence and a major factor in the outcome of the Bosnian War . It was a decisive victory for the Croatian Army ( HV ) , which attacked across a 630 @-@ kilometre ( 390 mi ) front against the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) , and a strategic victory for the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) . The HV was supported by the Croatian special police advancing from the Velebit Mountain , and the ARBiH located in the Bihać pocket , in the Army of the Republic of Serb Krajina 's ( ARSK ) rear . The battle , launched to restore Croatian control of 10 @,@ 400 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 000 square miles ) of territory , representing 18 @.@ 4 % of the territory it claimed , and Bosnian control of Western Bosnia , was the largest European land battle since the Second World War . Operation Storm commenced at dawn on 4 August 1995 and was declared complete on the evening of 7 August , despite significant mopping @-@ up operations against pockets of resistance lasting until 14 August . 
 Operation Storm was a strategic victory in the Bosnian War , effectively ending the siege of Bihać and placing the HV , Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) and the ARBiH in a position to change the military balance of power in Bosnia and Herzegovina through the subsequent Operation Mistral 2 . The operation built on HV and HVO advances made during Operation Summer ' 95 , when strategic positions allowing the rapid capture of the RSK capital Knin were gained , and on the continued arming and training of the HV since the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence , when the RSK was created during the Serb Log revolution and Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) intervention . The operation itself followed an unsuccessful United Nations ( UN ) peacekeeping mission and diplomatic efforts to settle the conflict . 
 The HV 's ( and ARBiH 's strategic ) success was a result of a series of improvements to the armies themselves , and crucial breakthroughs made in the ARSK positions that were subsequently exploited by the HV and the ARBiH . The attack was not immediately successful at all points , but seizing key positions led to the collapse of the ARSK command structure and overall defensive capability . The HV capture of Bosansko Grahovo just before Operation Storm , and the special police 's advance to Gračac , made it nearly impossible to defend Knin . In Lika , two guard brigades quickly cut the ARSK @-@ held area ( which lacked tactical depth and mobile reserve forces ) , isolating pockets of resistance , positioning a mobile force for a decisive northward thrust into the Karlovac Corps area of responsibility ( AOR ) , and pushing ARSK towards Banovina . The defeat of the ARSK at Glina and Petrinja , after a tough defence , defeated the ARSK Banija Corps as well , as its reserve was pinned down by the ARBiH . The RSK relied on the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav militaries as its strategic reserve , but they did not intervene in the battle . 
 The HV and the special police suffered 174 – 211 killed or missing , while the ARSK had 560 soldiers killed . Four UN peacekeepers were also killed . The HV captured 4 @,@ 000 prisoners of war . The number of Serb civilian deaths is disputed — Croatia claims that 214 were killed , while Serbian sources cite 1 @,@ 192 civilians killed or missing . During and after the offensive , 150 @,@ 000 – 200 @,@ 000 Serbs — or nearly the entire Serb population of the area formerly held by the ARSK — fled and a variety of crimes were committed against the remaining civilians there . The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) later tried three Croatian generals charged with war crimes and partaking in a joint criminal enterprise designed to force the Serb population out of Croatia , although all three were ultimately acquitted and the tribunal refuted charges of a criminal enterprise . In 2010 , Serbia sued Croatia before the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) , claiming that the offensive was an example of genocide . In 2015 , the court ruled that it was not genocidal , though it affirmed that the Serb population fled as a direct result of the offensive and that serious crimes against civilians had been committed by Croatian forces . As of November 2012 , the Croatian judiciary has convicted 2 @,@ 380 persons for various crimes committed during Operation Storm . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , following the electoral defeat of the government of the Socialist Republic of Croatia , ethnic tensions between Croats and Serbs worsened . Serbian President Slobodan Milošević used Franjo Tuđman 's actions to his advantage , portraying the Croatian leader and his Croatian Democratic Union ( HDZ ) as a reincarnation of the Ustaše , a fascist movement that had ruled Croatia during World War II . 
 In August 1990 , an insurgency known as the Log Revolution took place in Croatia centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , as well as in parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , and settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations . The areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) and , after declaring its intention to integrate with Serbia , the Government of Croatia declared the RSK a rebellion . The conflict escalated by March 1991 , resulting in the Croatian War of Independence . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated . A three @-@ month moratorium on Croatia 's and the RSK 's declarations followed , after which the decision came into effect on 8 October . The RSK then initiated a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Croat civilians and most non @-@ Serbs were expelled by early 1993 . By November 1993 , less than 400 ethnic Croats remained in the United Nations @-@ protected area known as Sector South , while a further 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 remained in Sector North . 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported the RSK and the Croatian Police was unable to cope with the situation , the Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 . The ZNG was renamed the Croatian Army ( HV ) in November . The establishment of the military of Croatia was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September . The final months of 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , culminating in the Battle of the Barracks , the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . 
 In January 1992 , an agreement to implement the Vance plan designed to stop the fighting was made by representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the UN . Ending the series of unsuccessful ceasefires , the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed to Croatia to supervise and maintain the agreement . A stalemate developed as the conflict evolved into static trench warfare , and the JNA soon retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina , where a new conflict was anticipated . Serbia continued to support the RSK , but a series of HV advances restored small areas to Croatian control as the siege of Dubrovnik ended , and Operation Maslenica resulted in minor tactical gains . In response to the HV successes , the Army of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( ARSK ) intermittently attacked a number of Croat towns and villages with artillery and missiles . 
 As the JNA disengaged in Croatia , its personnel prepared to set up a new Bosnian Serb army , as Bosnian Serbs declared the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of a 29 February – 1 March 1992 referendum on the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The referendum was later cited as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs set up barricades in the capital , Sarajevo , and elsewhere on 1 March , and the next day the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , the Bosnian Serb army started shelling Bosanski Brod , and on 4 April , Sarajevo was attacked . By the end of the year , the Bosnian Serb army — renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) after the Republika Srpska state was proclaimed — controlled about 70 % of Bosnia and Herzegovina . That proportion would not change significantly over the next two years . Even though the war originally pitted Bosnian Serbs against non @-@ Serbs in the country , it evolved into a three @-@ sided conflict by the end of the year , as the Croat – Bosniak War started . The RSK was supported to a limited extent by the Republika Srpska , which launched occasional air raids from Banja Luka and bombarded several cities in Croatia . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In November 1994 , the Siege of Bihać , a battle of the Bosnian War , entered a critical stage as the VRS and the ARSK came close to capturing the town of Bihać from the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) . It was a strategic area and , since June 1993 , Bihać had been one of six United Nations Safe Areas established in Bosnia and Herzegovina . The US administration felt that its capture by Serb forces would intensify the war and lead to a humanitarian disaster greater than any other in the conflict to that point . Amongst the United States , France and the United Kingdom , division existed regarding how to protect the area . The US called for airstrikes against the VRS , but the French and the British opposed them citing safety concerns and a desire to maintain the neutrality of French and British troops deployed as a part of the UNPROFOR in Bosnia and Herzegovina . In turn , the US was unwilling to commit ground troops . On the other hand , the Europeans recognized that the US was free to propose military confrontation with the Serbs while relying on the European powers to block any such move , since French President François Mitterrand discouraged any military intervention , greatly aiding the Serb war effort . The French stance reversed after Jacques Chirac was elected president of France in May 1995 , pressuring the British to adopt a more aggressive approach as well . Denying Bihać to the Serbs was also strategically important to Croatia , and General Janko Bobetko , the Chief of the Croatian General Staff , considered the potential fall of Bihać to represent an end to Croatia 's war effort . 
 In March 1994 , the Washington Agreement was signed , ending the Croat – Bosniak War , and providing Croatia with US military advisors from Military Professional Resources Incorporated ( MPRI ) . The US involvement reflected a new military strategy endorsed by Bill Clinton in February 1993 . Because the UN arms embargo was still in place , MPRI was hired ostensibly to prepare the HV for participation in the NATO Partnership for Peace programme . MPRI trained HV officers and personnel for 14 weeks from January to April 1995 . It has also been speculated in several sources , including an article in The New York Times by Leslie Wayne and in various Serbian media reports , that MPRI may also have provided doctrinal advice , scenario planning and US government satellite intelligence to Croatia , although MPRI , American and Croatian officials have denied such claims . In November 1994 , the United States unilaterally ended the arms embargo against Bosnia and Herzegovina , in effect allowing the HV to supply itself as arms shipments flowed through Croatia . 
 The Washington Agreement also resulted in a series of meetings between Croatian and US government and military officials in Zagreb and Washington , D.C. On 29 November 1994 , the Croatian representatives proposed to attack Serb @-@ held territory from Livno in Bosnia and Herzegovina , in order to draw away part of the force besieging Bihać and to prevent the town 's capture by the Serbs . As the US officials gave no response to the proposal , the Croatian General Staff ordered Operation Winter ' 94 the same day , to be carried out by the HV and the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) — the main military force of the Bosnian Croats . In addition to contributing to the defence of Bihać , the attack shifted the HV 's and HVO 's line of contact closer to the RSK 's supply routes . 
 In 1994 , the United States , Russia , the European Union ( EU ) and the UN sought to replace the Vance plan , which brought in the UNPROFOR . They formulated the Z @-@ 4 Plan giving Serb @-@ majority areas in Croatia substantial autonomy . After numerous and frequently uncoordinated changes to the proposed plan , including leaking of its draft elements to the press in October , the Z @-@ 4 Plan was presented on 30 January 1995 . Neither Croatia nor the RSK liked the plan . Croatia was concerned that the RSK might accept it , but Tuđman realised that Milošević , who would ultimately make the decision for the RSK , would not accept the plan for fear that it would set a precedent for a political settlement in Kosovo — allowing Croatia to accept the plan with little possibility for it to be implemented . The RSK refused to receive , let alone accept , the plan . 
 In December 1994 , Croatia and the RSK made an economic agreement to restore road and rail links , water and gas supplies , and use of a part of the Adria oil pipeline . Even though some of the agreement was never implemented , a section of the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway passing through RSK territory near Okučani and the pipeline were both opened . Following a deadly incident that occurred in late April 1995 on the recently opened motorway , Croatia reclaimed all of the RSK 's territory in western Slavonia during Operation Flash , taking full control of the territory by 4 May , three days after the battle began . In response , the ARSK attacked Zagreb using M @-@ 87 Orkan missiles with cluster munitions . Subsequently , Milošević sent a senior Yugoslav Army officer to command the ARSK , along with arms , field officers and thousands of Serbs born in the RSK area who had been forcibly conscripted by the ARSK . 
 On 17 July , the ARSK and the VRS started a fresh effort to capture Bihać by expanding on gains made during Operation Spider . The move provided the HV with a chance to extend their territorial gains from Operation Winter ' 94 by advancing from the Livno valley . On 22 July , Tuđman and Bosnian President Alija Izetbegović signed the Split Agreement for mutual defence , permitting the large @-@ scale deployment of the HV in Bosnia and Herzegovina . The HV and HVO responded quickly through Operation Summer ' 95 ( Croatian : Ljeto ' 95 ) , capturing Bosansko Grahovo and Glamoč on 28 – 29 July . The attack drew some ARSK units away from Bihać , but not as many as expected . However , it put the HV in an excellent position , as it isolated Knin from the Republika Srpska , as well as Yugoslavia . 
 In late July and early August , there were two more attempts at resurrecting the Z @-@ 4 Plan and the 1994 economic agreement . Talks proposed on 28 July were ignored by the RSK , and last @-@ ditch talks were held in Geneva on 3 August . These quickly broke down as Croatia and the RSK rejected a compromise proposed by Thorvald Stoltenberg , a Special Representative of the UN Secretary @-@ General , essentially calling for further negotiations at a later date . In addition , the RSK dismissed a set of Croatian demands , including to disarm , and failed to endorse the Z @-@ 4 Plan once again . The talks were used by Croatia to prepare diplomatic ground for the imminent Operation Storm , whose planning was completed during the Brijuni Islands meeting between Tuđman and military commanders on 31 July . The HV started large @-@ scale mobilization in late July , soon after General Zvonimir Červenko became its new Chief of General Staff on 15 July . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The HV operational plan was set out in four separate parts , designated Storm @-@ 1 through 4 , which were allocated to various corps based upon their individual areas of responsibility ( AORs ) . Each plan was scheduled to take between four and five days . The forces that the HV allocated to attack the RSK were organised into five army corps : Split , Gospić , Karlovac , Zagreb and Bjelovar Corps . A sixth zone was assigned to the Croatian special police inside the Split Corps AOR , near the boundary with the Gospić Corps . The HV Split Corps , located in the far south of the theatre of operations and commanded by Lieutenant General Ante Gotovina , was assigned the Storm @-@ 4 plan , which was the primary component of Operation Storm . The Split Corps issued orders for the battle using the name Kozjak @-@ 95 instead , which was not an unusual practice . The 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Split Corps was opposed by the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ strong ARSK 7th North Dalmatia Corps , headquartered in Knin and commanded by Major General Slobodan Kovačević . The 3 @,@ 100 @-@ strong special police , deployed to the Velebit Mountain on the left flank of the Split Corps , were directly subordinated to the HV General Staff commanded by the Lieutenant General Mladen Markač . 
 The 25 @,@ 000 @-@ strong HV Gospić Corps was assigned the Storm @-@ 3 component of the operation , to the left of the special police zone . It was commanded by Brigadier Mirko Norac , and opposed by the ARSK 15th Lika Corps , headquartered in Korenica and commanded by Major General Stevan <unk> . The Lika Corps , consisting of about 6 @,@ 000 troops , was sandwiched between the HV Gospić Corps and the ARBiH in the Bihać pocket in ARSK rear , forming a wide but a very shallow area . The ARBiH 5th Corps deployed about 2 @,@ 000 troops in the zone . The Gospić Corps , assigned a 150 @-@ kilometre ( 93 mi ) section of the front , was tasked with cutting the RSK in half and linking up with the ARBiH , while the ARBiH was tasked with pinning down ARSK forces that were in contact with the Bihać pocket . 
 The HV Karlovac Corps , commanded by Major General Miljenko <unk> , on the left flank of the Gospić Corps , covered the area extending from Ogulin to Karlovac , including Kordun , and executed the Storm @-@ 2 plan . The corps was composed of 15 @,@ 000 troops and was tasked with pinning down the ARSK forces in the area to protect the flanks of the Zagreb and Gospić Corps . It had a forward command post in Ogulin and was opposed by the ARSK 21st Kordun Corps headquartered at Petrova Gora , consisting of 4 @,@ 000 troops in the AOR ( one of its brigades was facing the Zagreb Corps ) . Initially , the 21st Kordun Corps was commanded by Colonel Veljko Bosanac , but he was replaced by Colonel Čedo Bulat during the evening of 5 August . In addition , the bulk of the ARSK Special Units Corps was present in the area , commanded by Major General Milorad <unk> . ARSK Special Units Corps was 5 @,@ 000 @-@ strong , largely facing the Bihać pocket at the onset of Operation Storm . The ARSK armour and artillery in the AOR outnumbered that of the HV . 
 The HV Zagreb Corps , assigned the Storm @-@ 1 plan , initially commanded by Major General Ivan <unk> , on the left flank of the Karlovac Corps , was deployed on three main axes of attack — towards Glina , Petrinja and Hrvatska Kostajnica . It was opposed by the ARSK 39th Banija Corps , headquartered in Glina and commanded by Major General Slobodan <unk> . The Zagreb Corps was tasked with bypassing Petrinja to neutralize ARSK artillery and missiles potentially targeting Croatian cities , making a secondary thrust from Sunja towards Hrvatska Kostajnica . Their secondary mission was compromised when a battalion of the special police and the 81st Guards Battalion planned to spearhead the advance were deployed elsewhere forcing modifications to the plan . The Zagreb Corps was composed of 30 @,@ 000 troops , while the ARSK had 9 @,@ 000 facing them and about 1 @,@ 000 ARBiH troops in the Bihać pocket to their rear . At the start of Operation Storm , about 3 @,@ 500 ARSK troops were in contact with the ARBiH . HV Bjelovar Corps , on the left flank of the Zagreb Corps , covering the area along the Una River , had a forward command post in Novska . The corps was commanded by Major General Luka Džanko . Opposite the Bjelovar Corps was a part of the ARSK Banija Corps . The Bjelovar Corps was included in the attack on 2 August and were therefore not issued a separate operations plan . 
 The ARSK divided its forces in the area in two , subordinating the North Dalmatia and Lika Corps to the ARSK General Staff , and grouping the rest into the Kordun Operational Group commanded by Lieutenant Colonel General Mile Novaković . <unk> , the division corresponded to the North and South sectors of the UN protected areas . 
 Estimates of the total number of troops deployed by the belligerents vary considerably . Croatian forces have been estimated from under 100 @,@ 000 to 150 @,@ 000 , but most sources put the figure at about 130 @,@ 000 troops . ARSK troop strength in the Sectors North and South was estimated by the HV prior to Operation Storm at approximately 43 @,@ 000 . More detailed HV estimates of the manpower by individual ARSK corps indicated 34 @,@ 000 soldiers , while Serb sources quote 27 @,@ 000 troops . The discrepancy is usually reflected in literature as an estimate of about 30 @,@ 000 ARSK troops . The ARBiH deployed approximately 3 @,@ 000 troops against the ARSK positions near Bihać . In late 1994 , the Fikret Abdić @-@ led Autonomous Province of Western Bosnia ( APWB ) — a sliver of land northwest of Bihać between its ally RSK and the pocket — commanded 4 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 soldiers who were deployed south of Velika Kladuša against the ARBiH force . 
 = = Operation timeline = = 
 = = = 4 August 1995 = = = 
 Operation Storm started at 5 a.m. on 4 August 1995 when coordinated attacks were executed by reconnaissance and sabotage detachments in concert with Croatian Air Force ( CAF ) air strikes aimed at disrupting ARSK command , control , and communications . UN peacekeepers , known as United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation ( UNCRO ) , were notified three hours in advance of the attack when Tuđman 's chief of staff , Hrvoje Šarinić , telephoned UNCRO commander , French Army General Bernard Janvier . In addition , each HV corps notified the UNCRO sector in its path of the attack , requesting written confirmations of receipt of the information . The UNCRO relayed the information to the RSK , confirming the warnings RSK received from the Yugoslav Army General Staff the previous day . 
 = = = = Sector South = = = = 
 In the Split Corps AOR , at 5 a.m. the 7th Guards Brigade advanced south from Bosansko Grahovo towards the high ground ahead of Knin after a period of artillery preparation . Moving against the ARSK 3rd Battlegroup , consisting of elements of the North Dalmatian Corps and RSK police , the 7th Guards achieved its objectives for the day and allowed the 4th Guards Brigade to attack . The HV Sinj Operational Group ( OG ) , on the left flank of the two brigades , joined the attack and the 126th Home Guard Regiment captured <unk> , gaining control of the area overlooking the Sinj – Knin road . The 144th Brigade and the 6th Home Guard Regiment also pushed ARSK forces back . The Šibenik OG units faced the ARSK 75th Motorized Brigade and a part of the 2nd Infantry Brigade of the ARSK North Dalmatian Corps . There , the 142nd and the 15th Home Guard Regiments made minor progress in the area between Krka and Drniš , while the 113th Infantry Brigade made a slightly greater advance on their left flank , to <unk> Velika . In the Zadar OG area , the 134th Home Guard Regiment ( without its 2nd Battalion ) failed to advance , while the 7th Home Guard Regiment and the 112th HV Brigade gained little ground against the ARSK 92nd Motorized and 3rd Infantry Brigades at Benkovac . On the Velebit , the 2nd Battalion of the 9th Guards Brigade , reinforced with a company from the 7th Home Guard Regiment , and the 2nd Battalion of the 134th Home Guard Regiment met stiff resistance but advanced sufficiently to secure use of the Obrovac – Sveti Rok road . At 4 : 45 p.m. , a decision to evacuate the population in the Northern Dalmatia and Lika areas was made by RSK President Milan Martić . According to RSK Major General <unk> <unk> , Martić ordered the evacuation hoping to coax Milošević and the international community to help the RSK . Nonetheless , the evacuation was extended the whole sectors North and South , except Kordun region . In the evening the ARSK General Staff moved from Knin to Srb , about 35 kilometres ( 22 miles ) to the northwest . 
 At 5 a.m. , Croatian special police advanced to the Mali Alan pass on the Velebit , encountering strong resistance from the ARSK Lika Corps ' 4th Light Brigade and elements of the 9th Motorized Brigade . The pass was captured at 1 p.m. , and Sveti Rok village was captured at about 5 p.m. The special police advanced further beyond Mali Alan , meeting more resistance at 9 p.m. and then bivouacking until 5 a.m. The ARSK 9th Motorized Brigade withdrew to Udbina after being forced out of its positions on the Velebit . In the morning , the special police captured Lovinac , Gračac and Medak . 
 In the Gospić Corps AOR , the 138th Home Guard Regiment and the 1st Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade began an eastward attack in the Mala Kapela area in the morning , meeting heavy resistance from the ARSK 70th Infantry Brigade . The rest of the 1st Guards joined in around midnight . The 133rd Home Guard Regiment attacked east of Otočac , towards Vrhovine , attempting to encircle the ARSK 50th Infantry Brigade and elements of the ARSK 103rd Infantry Brigade in a pincer movement . Even though the regiment advanced , it failed to achieve its objective for the day . On the regiment 's right flank , the HV 128th Brigade advanced together with the 3rd Battalion of the 8th Home Guard Regiment and cut through the Vrhovine – Korenica road . The rest of the 9th Guards Brigade , the bulk of the HV 118th Home Guard Regiment and the 111th Infantry Brigade advanced east from Gospić and Lički Osik , coming up against very strong resistance from the ARSK 18th Infantry Brigade . As a result of these setbacks , the Gospić Corps ended the day short of the objectives it had been given . 
 = = = = Sector North = = = = 
 In the Ogulin area of the HV Karlovac Corps AOR , the 99th Brigade , reinforced by the 143rd Home Guard Regiment 's Saborsko Company , moved towards Plaški at 5 a.m. , but the force was stopped and turned back in disarray by 6 p.m. The 143rd Home Guard Regiment advanced from <unk> towards Plaški , encountering minefields and strong ARSK resistance . Its elements connected with the 14th Home Guard Regiment , advancing through Barilović towards Slunj . Near the city of Karlovac , the 137th Home Guard Regiment deployed four reconnaissance groups around midnight of 3 – 4 August , followed by artillery preparation and crossing of the Korana River at 5 a.m. The advance was fiercely resisted by the ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade , but the bridgehead was stable by the end of the day . The 110th Home Guard Regiment , reinforced by a company of the 137th Home Guard Regiment , advanced east to the road leading south from Karlovac to Vojnić and Slunj , where it met heavy resistance and suffered more casualties to landmines , demoralizing the unit and preventing its further advance . In addition , the attached company of the 137th Home Guard Regiment and the 104th Brigade failed to secure the regiment 's flanks . The 104th Brigade tried to cross the Kupa River at 5 a.m. , but failed and fell back to its starting position by 8 a.m. , at which time it was shifted to the bridgehead established by the 110th Home Guard Regiment . A company of the 99th Brigade was attached to the 143rd Home Guard Regiment for operations the next day , and a 250 @-@ strong battlegroup was removed from the brigade and subordinated to the Karlovac Corps directly . 
 In the Zagreb Corps area , the HV moved across the Kupa River at two points towards Glina — in and near <unk> , using the 20th Home Guard Regiment and the 153rd Brigade . Both crossings established bridgeheads , although the bulk of the units were forced to retreat as the ARSK counter @-@ attacked — only a battalion of the 153rd Brigade and elements of the 20th Home Guard Regiment held their ground . The crossings prompted the ARSK General Staff to order the 2nd Armoured Brigade of the Special Units Corps to move from Slunj to the bridgeheads , as the HV advance threatened a vital road in Glina . The HV 2nd Guards Brigade and the 12th Home Guard Regiment were tasked with the quick capture of Petrinja from the ARSK 31st Motorized Brigade in a pincer movement . The original plan , involving thrusts six to seven kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 to 4 @.@ 3 miles ) south of Petrinja , was amended by <unk> to a direct assault on the city . On the right flank , the regiment was soon stopped by minefields and forced to retreat , while the bulk of the 2nd Guards Brigade advanced until it wavered following the loss of a company commander and five soldiers . The rest of the 2nd Guards Brigade — reinforced by the 2nd Battalion , elements of the 12th Home Guard Regiment , the 5th Antitank Artillery Battalion and the 31st Engineers Battalion — formed Tactical Group 2 ( TG2 ) operating on the left flank of the attack . TG2 advanced from <unk> , a short distance from Petrinja , but was stopped after the 2nd Battalion 's commander and six soldiers were killed . The ARSK 31st Motorized Brigade also panicked but managed to stabilize its defences as it received reinforcements . The HV 57th Brigade advanced south of Petrinja , intent on reaching the Petrinja – Hrvatska Kostajnica road , but ran into a minefield where the brigade commander was killed , while the 101st Brigade to its rear suffered heavy artillery fire and casualties . In the Sunja area , the 17th Home Guard Regiment and a company of the 151st Brigade unsuccessfully attacked the ARSK 26th Infantry Brigade . Later that day , a separate attack by the rest of the 151st Brigade also failed . The HV 103rd Brigade advanced to the Sunja – Sisak railroad , but had to retreat under heavy fire . The Zagreb Corps failed to meet any objective of the first day . This was attributed to inadequate manpower and as a result the corps requested the mobilization of the 102nd Brigade and the 1st and 21st Home Guard Regiments . The 2nd Guards Brigade was reinforced by the 1st Battalion of the 149th Brigade previously held in reserve in Ivanić Grad . 
 In the Bjelovar Corps AOR , two battalions of the 125th Home Guard Regiment crossed the Sava River near Jasenovac , secured a bridgehead for trailing HV units and advanced towards Hrvatska Dubica . The two battalions were followed by an additional company of the same regiment , a battalion of the 52nd Home Guard Regiment , the 265th Reconnaissance Company and finally the 24th Home Guard Regiment battlegroup . A reconnaissance platoon of the 52nd Home Guard Regiment crossed the Sava River into the Republika Srpska , established a bridgehead for two infantry companies and subsequently demolished the Bosanska Dubica – Gradiška road before returning to Croatian soil . The Bjelovar Corps units reached the outskirts of Hrvatska Dubica before nightfall . That night , the town of Hrvatska Dubica was abandoned by the ARSK troops and the civilian population . They fled south across the Sava River into Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 = = = 5 August 1995 = = = 
 = = = = Sector South = = = = 
 The HV did not advance towards Knin during the night of 4 / 5 August when the ARSK General Staff ordered a battalion of the 75th Motorized Brigade to stage themselves north of Knin . The ARSK North Dalmatian Corps became increasingly uncoordinated as the HV 4th Guards Brigade advanced south towards Knin , protecting the right flank of the 7th Guards Brigade . The latter met little resistance and entered the town at about 11 a.m. Lieutenant General Ivan Čermak was appointed commander of the newly established HV Knin Corps . Sinj OG completed its objectives , capturing Kozjak and Vrlika , and meeting little resistance as the ARSK 1st Light Brigade disintegrated , retreating to Knin and later to Lika . By 8 p.m. , Šibenik OG units advanced to <unk> ( 113th Brigade ) , <unk> ( 15th Home Guard Regiment ) , and captured Drniš ( 142nd Home Guard Regiment ) , while the ARSK 75th Motorized Brigade retreated towards Srb and Bosanski Petrovac together with the 3rd Infantry and the 92nd Motorized Brigades , leaving the Zadar OG units with little opposition . The 7th Home Guard Regiment captured Benkovac , while the 112th Brigade entered <unk> and elements of the 9th Guards Brigade reached Obrovac . 
 The 138th Home Guard Regiment and the 1st Guards Brigade advanced to Lička Jasenica , the latter pressing their attack further towards Saborsko , with the 2nd Battalion of the HV 119th Brigade reaching the area in the evening . The HV reinforced the 133rd Home Guard Regiment with a battalion of the 150th Brigade enabling the regiment to achieve its objectives of the previous day , partially encircling the ARSK force in Vrhovine . The 154th Home Guard Regiment was mobilized and deployed to the Ličko <unk> area . The 9th Guards Brigade ( without its 2nd Battalion ) advanced towards Udbina Air Base , where ARSK forces started to evacuate . The 111th Brigade and the 118th Home Guard Regiment also made small advances , linking up behind ARSK lines . 
 = = = = Sector North = = = = 
 The 143rd Home Guard Regiment advanced towards Plaški , capturing it that evening , while the 14th Home Guard Regiment captured <unk> , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 miles ) northwest of Slunj . At 0 : 30 a.m. , the ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade and a company of the 19th Infantry Brigade counter @-@ attacked at the Korana bridgehead , causing the bulk of the 137th Home Guard Regiment to panic and flee across the river . A single platoon of the regiment remained but the ARSK troops did not exploit the opportunity to destroy the bridgehead . In the morning , the regiment reoccupied the bridgehead , reinforced by a 350 @-@ strong battlegroup drawn from the 104th Brigade ( including a tank platoon and multiple rocket launchers ) , and a company of the 148th Brigade from the Karlovac Corps operational reserve . The regiment and the battlegroup managed to extend the bridgehead towards the Karlovac – Slunj road . The 110th Home Guard Regiment attacked again south of Karlovac , but was repelled by prepared ARSK defences . That night , the Karlovac Corps decided to move elements of the 110th Home Guard Regiment and the 104th Brigade to the Korana bridgehead , while the ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade retreated to the right bank of Korana in an area extending about 30 kilometres ( 19 miles ) north from Slunj . 
 The Zagreb Corps made little or no progress on day two of the battle . Part of the 2nd Guards Brigade was ordered to drive towards Glina with the 20th Home Guards Regiment making a modest advance , while the 153rd Brigade abandoned its bridgehead . In the area of Petrinja , the HV advanced gradually only to be pushed back in some areas by an ARSK counter @-@ attack . The results were reversed at significant cost by a renewed push by the 2nd Guards Brigade . The Zagreb Corps commander was replaced by Lieutenant General Petar Stipetić on orders from President Tuđman . The HV reassigned the 102nd Brigade to drive to Glina , and the 57th Brigade was reinforced with the 2nd Battalion of the 149th Brigade . The 145th Brigade was moved from Popovača to the Sunja area , where the 17th Home Guard Regiment and the 151st Brigade made minor advances into the ARSK @-@ held area . 
 In the Bjelovar Corps AOR , Hrvatska Dubica was captured by the 52nd and the 24th Home Guard Regiments advancing from the east and the 125th Home Guard Regiment approaching from the north . The 125th Home Guard Regiment garrisoned the town , while the 52nd Home Guard Regiment moved northwest towards expected Zagreb Corps positions , but the Zagreb Corps ' delays prevented any link @-@ up . The 24th Home Guard Regiment advanced about four kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 miles ) towards Hrvatska Kostajnica when it was stopped by ARSK troops . In response , the Corps called in a battalion and a reconnaissance platoon of the 121st Home Guard Regiment from Nova Gradiška to aid the push to the town . The ARBiH 505th and 511th Mountain Brigades advanced north to Dvor and engaged the ARSK 33rd Infantry Brigade — the only reserve unit of the Banija Corps . 
 = = = 6 August 1995 = = = 
 On 6 August , the HV conducted mopping @-@ up operations in the areas around Obrovac , Benkovac , Drniš and Vrlika , as President Tuđman visited Knin . After securing their objectives on or near Velebit , the special police was deployed on foot behind ARSK lines to hinder movement of ARSK troops there , capturing strategic intersections in the villages of <unk> at 7 a.m. and Otrić at 11 a.m. 
 At midnight , elements of the ARBiH 501st and 502nd Mountain Brigades advanced west from Bihać against a skeleton force of the ARSK Lika Corps that had been left behind since the beginning of the battle . The 501st moved about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) into Croatian territory , to Ličko Petrovo Selo and Plitvice Lakes by 8 a.m. The 502nd captured an ARSK radar and communications facility on <unk> Mountain , and proceeded towards Korenica where it was stopped by the ARSK units . The HV 1st Guards Brigade reached Rakovica and linked up with the Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina 5th Corps in the area of Drežnik Grad by 11 a.m. It was supported by the 119th Brigade and a battalion of the 154th Home Guard Regiment deployed in the <unk> <unk> and Ličko Petrovo Selo areas . In the afternoon , a link @-@ up ceremony was held for the media in <unk> <unk> . The 138th Home Guard Regiment completely encircled Vrhovine , which was captured by the end of the day by the 8th and the 133rd Home Guard Regiments , reinforced with a battalion of the 150th Brigade . The HV 128th Brigade entered Korenica while the 9th Guards Brigade continued towards Udbina . 
 The 143rd Home Guard Regiment advanced to <unk> where it connected with the 1st Guards Brigade . From there the regiment continued towards Slunj , accompanied by elements of the 1st Guards Brigade and the 14th Home Guard Regiment , capturing the town at 3 p.m. The advance of the 14th Home Guard Regiment was supported by the 148th Brigade guarding its flanks . The ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade retreated from Slunj , together with the civilian population , moving north towards Topusko . An attack by the 137th Home Guard Regiment , and the elements of various units reinforcing it , extended the bridgehead and connected it with the 14th Home Guard Regiment in <unk> , 18 kilometres ( 11 miles ) north of Slunj . The rest of the 149th Brigade ( without the 1st Battalion ) was reassigned from the Zagreb Corps to the Karlovac Corps to reinforce the 137th Home Guard Regiment . At 11 a.m. , an agreement was reached between the ARSK and civilian authorities in Glina and Vrginmost , securing the evacuation of civilians from the area . The ARBiH 502nd Mountain Brigade also moved north , flanking the APWB capital of Velika Kladuša from the west , and capturing the town by the end of the day . 
 The TG2 advanced to Petrinja at about 7 a.m. after a heavy artillery preparation . The 12th Home Guard Regiment entered the city from the west and was subsequently assigned to garrison Petrinja and its surrounding area . After the loss of Petrinja to the HV , the bulk of the ARSK Banija Corps started to retreat towards Dvor . The HV 57th Brigade advanced against light resistance and took control of the Petrinja – Hrvatska Kostajnica road . During the night of 6 / 7 August , the 20th Home Guard Regiment , supported by Croatian police and elements of the 153rd Brigade , captured Glina despite strong resistance . The 153rd Brigade then took positions that allowed the advance to continue towards the village of Maja in coordination with the 2nd Guards Brigade , which drove south from Petrinja towards Zrinska gora conducting mop @-@ up operations . The 140th Home Guard Regiment flanked the 2nd Guards Brigade on the northern slope of Zrinska Gora , while the 57th Brigade captured <unk> . The 103rd and the 151st Brigades , and the 17th Home Guard Regiment , advanced towards Hrvatska Kostajnica , with the addition of a battalion of the HV 145th Brigade which would arrive that afternoon . Around noon , the 151st Brigade connected with the Bjelovar Corps units on the Sunja – Hrvatska Dubica road . They were assigned to secure roads in the area afterwards . 
 By capturing Glina , the HV trapped the bulk of the ARSK Kordun Corps and about 35 @,@ 000 evacuating civilians in the area of Topusko , prompting its commander to request UNCRO protection . The 1st Guards Brigade , approaching Topusko from Vojnić , received orders to engage the ARSK Kordun Corps , but the orders were cancelled at midnight by the chief of the HV General Staff . Instead , the Zagreb Corps was instructed to prepare a brigade @-@ strength unit to escort unarmed persons and ARSK officers and non @-@ commissioned officers with side arms to Dvor and allow them to cross into Bosnia and Herzegovina . Based on information obtained from UN troops , it was believed that the ARSK forces in Banovina were about to surrender . 
 A battalion of the 121st Home Guard Regiment entered Hrvatska Kostajnica , while the 24th Home Guard Regiment battlegroup secured the national border behind them . The 52nd Home Guard Regiment connected with the Zagreb Corps and then turned south to the town , reaching it that evening . The capture of Hrvatska Kostajnica marked the fulfilment of all of the Bjelovar Corps ' objectives . 
 = = = 7 August 1995 = = = 
 The 1st Croatian Guards Brigade ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski zdrug - HGZ ) arrived in the Knin area to connect with elements of the 4th , 7th and 9th Guards Brigades , tasked with a northward advance the next day . The Split Corps command moved to Knin as well . The Croatian special police proceeded to Gornji Lapac and Donji Lapac arriving by 2 p.m. and completing the boundary between the Gospić and Split Corps AORs . The Croatian special police also made contact with the 4th Guards Brigade in Otrić and the Gospić Corps units in Udbina by 3 p.m. By 7 p.m. , a battalion of the special police reached the border near Kulen Vakuf , securing the area . 
 In the morning , the 9th Guards Brigade ( without its 2nd Battalion ) captured Udbina , where it connected with the 154th Home Guard Regiment , approaching from the opposite side of the Krbava Polje ( Croatian : Polje or karst field ) . By the end of the day , Operation Storm objectives assigned to the Gospić Corps were completed . 
 A forward command post of the HV General Staff was moved from Ogulin to Slunj , and it assumed direct command of the 1st Guards Brigade , the 14th Home Guard Regiment and the 99th Brigade . The 14th Home Guard Regiment secured the Slunj area and deployed to the left bank of Korana to connect with the advancing Karlovac special police . Elements of the regiment and the 99th Brigade secured the national border in the area . The 1st Guards Brigade advanced towards Kordun , as the Karlovac Corps reoriented its main axis of attack . The 110th Home Guard Regiment and elements of the 104th Brigade reached a largely deserted Vojnić in early afternoon , followed by the 1st Guards Brigade , the 143rd Home Guard Brigade and the 137th Home Guard Regiment . Other HV units joined them by evening . 
 The 2nd Guards Brigade advanced from Maja towards Dvor , but was stopped approximately 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) short by ARSK units protecting the withdrawal of the ARSK and civilians towards the town . Elements of the brigade performed mopping @-@ up operations in the area . The ARSK 33rd Infantry Brigade held the road bridge in Dvor that connected the ARSK and the Republika Srpska across the Una River . The brigade was overwhelmed by the ARBiH 5th Corps , and it retreated south of Una , as the ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade and the civilians from Kordun were reaching Dvor . Elements of the 17th Home Guard Regiment and the HV 145th and 151st Brigades reached Dvor via Hrvatska Kostajnica and came into contact with the ARSK 13th Infantry Brigade and elements of the ARSK 24th Infantry and 2nd Armoured Brigades , who had retreated from Glina . As the expected surrender of the ARSK Kordun Corps did not materialize , the HV was ordered to reengage . Despite major pockets of resistance , Croatia 's defence minister , Gojko Šušak , declared major operations over at 6 p.m. , 84 hours after the battle had started . 
 = = = 8 – 14 August 1995 = = = 
 On 8 August , the 4th and the 7th Guards Brigades , the 2nd Battalion of the 9th Guards Brigade and the 1st HGZ advanced north to Lička <unk> and the border of Bosnia and Herzegovina , eliminating the last major pocket of ARSK resistance in Donji Lapac and the Srb area by 8 p.m. and achieving all of Split Corps ' objectives for Operation Storm . After the capture of Vojnić , the bulk of the Karlovac Corps units were tasked with mopping up operations in their AOR . Elements of the 2nd Guards Brigade reached the Croatian border southwest of Dvor , where fighting for full control of the town was in progress , and connected with the ARBiH 5th Corps . 
 As Tuđman ordered the cessation of military operations that afternoon , the ARSK Kordun Corps accepted surrender . Negotiations of the terms of surrender were held the same day at 1 : 20 p.m. at the Ukrainian UNCRO troops command post in Glina , and the surrender document was signed at 2 p.m. in Topusko . Croatia was represented by Lieutenant General Stipetić , while the RSK was represented by Bulat , commander of the ARSK Kordun Corps , and Interior Minister <unk> <unk> . The terms of surrender specified the handover of weapons , except officers ' side arms , on the following day , and the evacuation of persons from Topusko via Glina , Sisak , and the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway to Serbia , protected by the Croatian military and civilian police . 
 On 9 August , the special police surrendered their positions to the HV , after covering more than 150 kilometres ( 93 miles ) on foot in four days . The 1st Guards Brigade , followed by other HV units , entered Vrginmost . The 110th and the 143rd Home Guard Regiments conducted mopping up operations around Vrginmost and <unk> . The 137th Home Guard Regiment conducted mopping up operations in the Vojnić area and the 14th Home Guard Regiment did the same in the Slunj , Cetingrad , and Rakovica areas . The HV secured Dvor late in the evening , shortly after the civilians finished evacuating . Numerous HV Home Guard units were later tasked with further mopping up operations . 
 On 10 August , the HV 57th Brigade reached the Croatian border south of <unk> , while elements of the 2nd Guards Brigade reached Dvor and the 12th Home Guard Regiment captured <unk> , just to the south of Dvor , on the Croatian border . The Zagreb Corps reported that the entire national border in its AOR was secured and all its Operation Storm objectives had been achieved . Mopping up operations in Banovina lasted until 14 August , and special police units joined the operations on the Zrinska Gora and Petrova Gora mountains . 
 = = Air force operations = = 
 On 4 August 1995 , the CAF had at its disposal 17 MiG @-@ 21s , five attack and nine transport helicopters , three transport airplanes and two reconnaissance aircraft . On that first day of the operation , thirteen MiG @-@ 21s were used to destroy or disable six targets in the Gospić and Zagreb Corps AORs , at the cost of one severely and three slightly damaged jets . The same day , three Mi @-@ 8s were used for medical evacuation . US Navy EA @-@ 6Bs and F / A @-@ 18s on patrol as part of Operation Deny Flight fired on ARSK surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) sites at Udbina and Knin as SAM radars locked onto the jets . A few sources claim that they were deployed as a deterrent as the UN troops came under HV fire , and a subsequent UN Security Council report only notes that the deployment was a result of the deterioration of the military situation and resulting low security of the peacekeepers in the area . Also on 4 August , the RSK 105th Air Force Brigade based at Udbina , deployed helicopters against the Croatian special police on Velebit Mountain and against targets in the Gospić area virtually to no effect . 
 On 5 August , the RSK air force began evacuating to <unk> Airbase near Banja Luka , completing the move that day . At the same time the CAF deployed 11 MiG @-@ 21s to strike a communications facility and a storage site , as well as five other military positions throughout the RSK . That day , the CAF also deployed a Mi @-@ 24 to attack ARSK armour units near Sisak and five Mi @-@ 8s to transport casualties , and move troops and cargo . Five CAF MiG @-@ 21s sustained light damage in the process . The next day , jets struck an ARSK command post , a bridge and at least four other targets near Karlovac and Glina . A Mi @-@ 24 was deployed to the Slunj area to attack ARSK tanks , while three Mi @-@ 8s transported wounded personnel and supplies . An additional pair of MiG @-@ 21s was deployed to patrol the airspace over Ivanić Grad and intercept two Bosnian Serb fighter jets , but they failed to do so due to fog in the area and their low level of flight . The VRS aircraft subsequently managed to strike the <unk> chemical plant in Kutina . 
 On 7 August , two VRS air force jets attacked a village in the Nova Gradiška area , just north of the Sava River — the international border in the area . The CAF bombed an ARSK command post , a storage facility and several tanks near Bosanski Petrovac . CAF jets also struck a column of Serb refugees near <unk> <unk> , killing nine people , including four children . On 8 August , the CAF performed its last combat sorties in the operation , striking tanks and armoured vehicles between Bosanski Novi and Prijedor , and two of its MiG @-@ 21s were damaged . The same day , UN military observers deployed at Croatian airfields claimed that the CAF attacked military targets and civilians in the Dvor area , where refugee columns were mixed with ARSK transporting heavy weapons and large quantities of ammunition . Overall , the CAF performed 67 close air support , three attack helicopter , seven reconnaissance , four combat air patrol and 111 transport helicopter sorties during Operation Storm . 
 = = Other coordinated operations = = 
 In order to protect areas of Croatia away from Sectors North and South , the HV conducted defensive operations while the HVO started a limited offensive north of Glamoč and Kupres to pin down part of the VRS forces , exploit the situation and gain positions for further advance . On 5 August , the HVO 2nd and 3rd Guards Brigades attacked VRS positions north of Tomislavgrad , achieving small advances to secure more favourable positions for future attacks towards Šipovo and Jajce , while tying down part of the VRS 2nd Krajina Corps . As a consequence of the overall battlefield situation , the VRS was limited to a few counter @-@ attacks around Bihać and Grahovo as it was short of reserves . The most significant counter @-@ attack was launched by the VRS 2nd Krajina Corps on the night of 11 / 12 August . It broke through the 141st Brigade , consisting of the HV 's reserve infantry , reaching the outskirts of Bosansko Grahovo , only to be beaten back by the HV , using one battalion drawn from the 4th Guards and the 7th Guards Brigade each , supported by the 6th and the 126th Home Guard Regiments . 
 = = = Operation Phoenix = = = 
 In eastern Slavonia , the HV Osijek Corps was tasked with preventing ARSK or Yugoslav Army forces from advancing west in the region , and counter @-@ attacking into the ARSK @-@ held area around Vukovar . The Osijek Corps mission was codenamed Operation Phoenix ( Croatian : Operacija Fenix ) . The Corps commanded the 3rd Guards and 5th Guards Brigades , as well as six other HV brigades and seven Home Guard regiments . Additional reinforcements were provided in a form of specialized corps @-@ level units otherwise directly subordinated to the HV General Staff , including a part of the Mi @-@ 24 gunship squadron . Even though artillery rounds and small arms fire were traded between the HV and the ARSK 11th Slavonia @-@ Baranja Corps in the region , no major attack occurred . The most significant coordinated ARSK effort occurred on 5 August , when the exchange was compounded by three RSK air raids and an infantry and tank assault targeting Nuštar , northeast of Vinkovci . Operation Storm led the Yugoslav Army to mobilize and deploy considerable artillery , tanks and infantry to the border area near eastern Slavonia , but it took no part in the battle . 
 = = = Operation Maestral = = = 
 In the south of Croatia , the HV deployed to protect the Dubrovnik area against the VRS Herzegovina Corps and the Yugoslav Army situated in and around Trebinje and the Bay of Kotor . The plan , codenamed Operation Maestral , entailed deployment of the 114th , 115th and 163rd Brigades , the 116th and 156th Home Guard Regiments , the 1st Home Guard Battalion ( Dubrovnik ) , the 16th Artillery Battalion , the 39th Engineers Battalion and a mobile coastal artillery battery . The area was reinforced on 8 August with the 144th Brigade as the unit completed its objectives in Operation Storm and moved to Dubrovnik . The CAF committed two MiG @-@ 21s and two Mi @-@ 24s based in Split to Operation Maestral . The Croatian Navy supported the operation deploying the Korčula , Brač and Hvar Marine Detachments , as well as missile boats , minesweepers , anti @-@ submarine warfare ships and coastal artillery . In the period , the VRS attacked the Dubrovnik area intermittently using artillery only . 
 = = Assessment of the battle = = 
 Operation Storm became the largest European land battle since the Second World War , encompassing a 630 @-@ kilometre ( 390 mi ) frontline . It was a decisive victory for Croatia , restoring its control over 10 @,@ 400 square kilometres ( 4 @,@ 000 square miles ) of territory , representing 18 @.@ 4 % of the country . Losses sustained by the HV and the special police are most often cited as 174 killed and 1 @,@ 430 wounded , but a government report prepared weeks after the battle specified 211 killed or missing , 1 @,@ 100 wounded and three captured troops . By 21 August , Croatian authorities recovered and buried 560 ARSK troops killed in the battle . The HV captured 4 @,@ 000 prisoners of war , 54 armoured and 497 other vehicles , six aircraft , hundreds of artillery pieces and over 4 @,@ 000 infantry weapons . Four UN peacekeepers were killed — three as a result of HV actions and one as a result of ARSK activities — and 16 injured . The HV destroyed 98 UN observation posts . 
 The HV 's success was a result of a series of improvements to the HV itself and crucial breakthroughs made in the ARSK positions that were subsequently exploited by the HV and the ARBiH . The attack was not immediately successful everywhere , but the seizing of key positions led to the collapse of the ARSK command structure and overall defensive capability . The HV 's capture of Bosansko Grahovo just before Operation Storm and the special police 's advance to Gračac made Knin nearly impossible to defend . In Lika , two Guards brigades rapidly cut the ARSK @-@ held area lacking tactical depth or mobile reserve forces , isolating pockets of resistance and placing the 1st Guards Brigade in a position that allowed it to move north into the Karlovac Corps AOR , pushing ARSK forces towards Banovina . The defeat of the ARSK at Glina and Petrinja , after heavy fighting , also defeated the ARSK Banija Corps , as its reserve became immobilized by the ARBiH . The ARSK force was capable of containing or substantially holding assaults by regular HV brigades and the Home Guard , but attacks by the Guards brigades and the special police proved to be decisive . Colonel Andrew Leslie , commanding the UNCRO in the Knin area , assessed Operation Storm as a textbook operation that would have " scored an A @-@ plus " by NATO standards . 
 Even if the ARBiH had not provided aid , the HV would almost certainly have defeated the Banija Corps on its own , albeit at greater cost . The lack of reserves was the ARSK 's key weakness that was exploited by the HV and the ARBiH since the ARSK 's static defence could not cope with fast @-@ paced attacks . The ARSK military was unable to check outflanking manoeuvres and their Special Units Corps failed as a mobile reserve , holding back the HV 's 1st Guards Brigade south of Slunj for less than a single day . The ARSK traditionally counted on the VRS and the Yugoslav military as its strategic reserve , but the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina immobilized the VRS reserves and Yugoslavia did not intervene militarily as Milošević did not order it to do so . Even if he had wished to intervene , the speed of the battle would have allowed a very limited time for Yugoslavia to deploy appropriate reinforcements to support the ARSK . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The defeat of the RSK led the Bosnian Serbs to realise that a settlement in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be negotiated as soon as possible , and reversed the tide of the war against the Serbs , giving US diplomacy a strong boost . The success of Operation Storm also represented a strategic victory in the Bosnian War as it lifted the siege of Bihać , and allowed the Croatian and Bosnian leadership to plan a full @-@ scale military intervention in the VRS @-@ held Banja Luka area — one aimed at creating a new balance of power in Bosnia and Herzegovina , a buffer zone along the Croatian border , and contributing to the resolution of the war . The intervention materialized as Operation Mistral 2 in September 1995 . Combined with a NATO air campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina , it led to the start of peace talks that would result in the Dayton Agreement a few months later . The development also led to the restoration of the remaining Serb @-@ held areas in eastern Slavonia and Baranja to Croatian control through the Erdut Agreement , ending the Croatian War of Independence in November . 
 The ease with which the HV achieved victory surprised many observers as Western intelligence services predicted a Croatian defeat . International reactions to Operation Storm quickly evolved from emotive arguments , supportive of either side in the battle , to those calmly assessing the situation on the ground . UN officials and most international media criticised Croatia . Carl Bildt , an EU negotiator working for the former Yugoslavia , publicly condemned Croatia , while UN Special Representative Stoltenberg urged the UN Secretary General Personal Representative Yasushi Akashi to request NATO strikes against the HV . German Foreign Minister Klaus Kinkel expressed regret but added that " ... the years of Serb aggression ... have sorely tried Croatia 's patience " . The US response was mixed . While Secretary of Defense William Perry reflected favourably on the military development , the US ambassador to Croatia , Peter Galbraith , declared his disapproval . On 10 August , the UN Security Council issued Resolution 1009 demanding that Croatia halt military operations , condemning the targeting of UN peacekeepers , and calling for the resumption of talks — but not calling for a HV withdrawal . By 18 August , US diplomats on Robert Frasure 's team tasked to mediate in the Bosnian War believed Operation Storm lent their diplomatic mission a chance to succeed , reflecting the opinion of US President Bill Clinton that the Serbs would not negotiate seriously unless they sustained major military defeats . 
 In Serbia , Milošević condemned the Croatian attack , but the Milošević @-@ influenced press also denounced the leadership of the RSK as being incompetent , while the most extreme politicians , including Vojislav Šešelj , demanded retaliation against Croatia . Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadžić begged for the Yugoslav Army to help while accusing Milošević of treason . 
 In Croatia , HV units returning to their bases were given heroes ' welcomes in numerous cities , and a commemorative medal was created to be issued to HV troops who took part in the operation . On 26 August , Croatia organised the Freedom Train — a railroad tour taking Tuđman and the bulk of Croatia 's government officials , public personalities , journalists and the diplomatic corps in Croatia from Zagreb to Karlovac , Gospić , Knin and Split . Tuđman gave a speech at each of the stops . In Knin , he declared : " [ The Serbs ] didn 't even have time to collect their dirty [ money ] and their dirty underwear . On this day , we can say that Croatia stopped bearing its historical cross . This is not just the liberation of land , but the creation of a foundation for a free and independent Croatia for centuries to come . " During the final rally in Split , which drew a crowd of 300 @,@ 000 , Tuđman vowed to liberate Vukovar as well . 
 Croats and Serbs hold opposing views of the operation . In Croatia , 5 August — the day that the HV captured Knin — was chosen as Victory and Homeland Thanksgiving Day and the Day of Croatian Defenders , the Croatian public holiday when Operation Storm is officially celebrated . In Serbia and the Republika Srpska , the day is marked by mourning for the Serbs killed and those who fled during or after the operation . 
 = = Refugee crisis = = 
 The evacuation and following mass @-@ exodus of the Serbs from the RSK led to a significant humanitarian crisis . In August 1995 , the UN estimated that only 3 @,@ 500 Serbs remained in Kordun and Banovina ( former Sector North ) and 2 @,@ 000 remained in Lika and Northern Dalmatia ( former Sector South ) , while more than 150 @,@ 000 had fled to Yugoslavia , and between 10 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 had arrived in the Banja Luka area . The number of Serb refugees was reported to be as many as 200 @,@ 000 by the international media and international organizations . Also , 21 @,@ 000 Bosniak refugees from the former APWB fled to Croatia . After Operation Storm , the Republika Srpska ordered the expulsion of all Croats and Bosniaks from the Banja Luka area , and 22 @,@ 000 refugees fled to Croatia by the end of August . EU envoy Bildt accused Croatia of the most efficient ethnic cleansing carried out in the Yugoslav Wars . His view is supported by several Western analysts , such as historians Marie @-@ Janine <unk> , Gerard Toal and Carl T. Dahlman , <unk> biographer Adam <unk> , and Professor Paul Mojzes , but rejected by US ambassador Galbraith . 
 While approximately 35 @,@ 000 Serb refugees , trapped with the surrendered ARSK Kordun Corps , were evacuated to Yugoslavia via Sisak and the Zagreb – Belgrade motorway , the bulk of the refugees followed a route through the Republika Srpska , arriving there via Dvor in Banovina or via Srb in Lika — two corridors to Serb @-@ held territory in Bosnia and Herzegovina left as the HV advanced . The two points of retreat were created as a consequence of the delay of a northward advance of the HV Split Corps after the capture of Knin , and the decision not to use the entire HV 2nd Guards Brigade to spearhead the southward advance from Petrinja . The retreating ARSK , transporting large quantities of weaponry , ammunition , artillery and tanks , often intermingled with evacuating or fleeing civilians , had few roads to use . The escaping columns were reportedly intermittently attacked by CAF jets , and the HV , trading fire with the ARSK located close to the civilian columns . The refugees were also targeted by ARBiH troops , as well as by VRS jets , and sometimes were run over by the ARSK Special Units Corps ' retreating tanks . On 9 August , a refugee convoy evacuating from the former Sector North under the terms of the ARSK Kordun Corps ' surrender agreement was attacked by Croatian civilians in Sisak . The attack caused one civilian death , many injuries and damage to a large number of vehicles . Croatian police intervened in the incident after UN civilian police monitors pressured them to do so . The next day , US ambassador Galbraith joined the column to protect them , and the Croatian police presence along the planned route increased . The refugees moving through the Republika Srpska were extorted at checkpoints and forced to pay extra for fuel and other services by the local strongmen , much to the disgrace of the local Bosnian Serb population . 
 Aiming to reduce evidence of political failure , Yugoslav authorities sought to disperse the refugees in various parts of Serbia and prevent their concentration in the capital , Belgrade . The government encouraged the refugees to settle in predominantly Hungarian areas of Vojvodina , and in Kosovo , which was largely populated by Albanians , leading to increased instability in those regions . Even though 20 @,@ 000 were planned to be settled in Kosovo , only 4 @,@ 000 moved to the region . After 12 August , the Serbian authorities started to deport some of the refugees who were of military age , declaring them illegal immigrants . They were turned over to the VRS or the ARSK in eastern Croatia for conscription . Some of the conscripts were publicly humiliated and beaten for abandoning the RSK . In some areas , ethnic Croats of Vojvodina were evicted from their homes by the refugees themselves to claim new accommodations . Similarly , the refugees moving through Banja Luka forced Croats and Bosniaks out of their homes . 
 = = = Return of the refugees = = = 
 At the beginning of the Croatian War of Independence , in 1991 – 1992 , a non @-@ Serb population of more than 220 @,@ 000 was forcibly removed from Serb @-@ held territories in Croatia , as the RSK was established . In the wake of Operation Storm , a part of those refugees , as well as Croat refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina , settled in a substantial number of housing units in the area formerly held by the ARSK , presenting an obstacle to the return of Serb refugees . As of September 2010 , out of 300 @,@ 000 – 350 @,@ 000 Serbs who fled from Croatia during the entire war , 132 @,@ 707 are registered as having returned , but only 60 – 65 % of those are believed to reside permanently in the country . However , only 20 @,@ 000 – 25 @,@ 000 more are interested in returning to Croatia . As of 2010 , approximately 60 @,@ 000 Serb refugees from Croatia remained in Serbia . 
 The return of refugees has been hampered by several obstacles . These include property ownership and accommodation , as Croat refugees settled in vacated homes , and Croatian war @-@ time legislation that stripped the refugees once living in government @-@ owned housing of their tenancy rights . The legislation was abolished following the war , and alternative accommodation is offered to returnees . 6 @,@ 538 housing units were allocated by November 2010 . Another obstacle is the difficulty for refugees to obtain residency status or Croatian citizenship . Applicable legislation has been relaxed since , and by November 2010 , Croatia allowed the validation of identity documents issued by the RSK . Even though Croatia declared a general amnesty , refugees fear legal prosecution , as the amnesty does not pertain to war crimes . The final obstacle to the return of refugees is the lack of vocational opportunities due to the poor economic situation in Croatia . 
 = = War crimes = = 
 The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) , set up in 1993 based on the UN Security Council Resolution 827 , indicted Gotovina , Čermak and Markač for war crimes , specifically for their roles in Operation Storm , citing their participation in a joint criminal enterprise ( JCE ) aimed at the permanent removal of Serbs from the ARSK @-@ held part of Croatia . The ICTY charges specified that other participants in the JCE were Tuđman , Šušak , and Bobetko and Červenko , however all except Bobetko were dead before the first relevant ICTY indictment was issued in 2001 . Bobetko was indicted by the ICTY , but died a year later , before he could be extradited for trial at the ICTY . The trial of Gotovina et al began in 2008 , leading to the convictions of Gotovina and Markač and the acquittal of Čermak three years later . Gotovina and Markač were acquitted on appeal in November 2012 , in a ruling that refuted the charges of the two generals as well as Croatia 's political leaders of the 1990s , as the ICTY concluded that Operation Storm was not aimed at ethnic persecution . 
 In February 2015 , during the Croatia – Serbia genocide case , the International Court of Justice ( ICJ ) dismissed the Serbian lawsuit claim that Operation Storm constituted genocide , ruling that Croatia did not have the specific intent to exterminate the country 's Serb minority , though it reaffirmed that serious crimes against Serb civilians had taken place . The judgment stated that it is not disputed that a substantial part of the Serb population fled that region as a direct consequence of the military actions . The Croatian authorities were aware that the operation would provoke a mass exodus ; they even to some extent predicated their military planning on such an exodus , which they considered not only probable , but desirable . They left accessible escape routes for civilians . Fleeing civilians and people remaining in United Nations protected areas were subject to various forms of harassment , including military assaults and acts by Croatian civilians . On 8 August , a refugee column was shelled . 
 The number of civilian casualties in Operation Storm is disputed . The State Attorney 's Office of the Republic of Croatia claims that 214 civilians were killed — 156 in 24 instances of war crimes and another 47 as victims of murder — during the battle and in its immediate aftermath . The Croatian Helsinki Committee disputes the claim and reports that 677 civilians were killed during the same period , however their report was rejected by the ICTY , when submitted as evidence , due to unsourced statements and double entries contained in the report . Serbian sources quote 1 @,@ 192 civilians dead or missing . ICTY prosecutors set the number of civilian deaths at 324 . 
 Although it was very difficult to determine the number of properties destroyed during and after Operation Storm since a large number of houses sustained some degree of damage since the beginning of the war , Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) estimated that more than 5 @,@ 000 houses were destroyed in the area during and after the battle . Out of the 122 Serbian Orthodox churches in the area , one was destroyed and 17 were damaged , but most of the damage to the churches occurred prior to the Serb retreat . HRW also reported that the vast majority of the abuses were committed by Croatian forces . These abuses , which continued on a large scale even months after Operation Storm , included summary executions of elderly and infirm Serbs who remained behind and the wholesale burning and destruction of Serbian villages and property . In the months following the August offensive , at least 150 Serb civilians were summarily executed and another 110 persons forcibly disappeared . One example of such crimes was the <unk> massacre , where nine elderly Serb villagers were killed by the HV . 
 As of November 2012 , Croatian authorities have received 6 @,@ 390 reports of crimes committed in the area during or after Operation Storm and have convicted 2 @,@ 380 persons for looting , arson , murders , war crimes and other illegal acts . As of the same date , 24 more trials of war crimes related to Operation Storm were in progress . In 2012 , Serbian authorities were investigating five cases of war crimes committed during Operation Storm . The military operation also allowed Croatian authorities access to areas where , as of March 2012 , a total of 144 mass and 1 @,@ 200 individual graves have been discovered , in which a total of 3 @,@ 809 Croatian civilians and military personnel were buried . 
 = Lanny McDonald = 
 Lanny King McDonald ( born February 16 , 1953 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player for the Toronto Maple Leafs , Colorado Rockies and Calgary Flames of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He played over 1 @,@ 100 games during a 16 @-@ year career in which he scored 500 goals and over 1 @,@ 000 points . His total of 66 goals in 1982 – 83 remains the Flames ' franchise record for a single season . 
 McDonald was selected by the Maple Leafs as the fourth overall pick in the 1973 NHL Amateur Draft and established himself as an offensive forward with three consecutive 40 @-@ goal seasons in Toronto in the mid @-@ 1970s . His trade to the Rockies in 1979 resulted in Toronto fans protesting the deal in front of Maple Leaf Gardens . He played parts of three seasons in Denver , before he was sent to Calgary in 1981 where he spent the remainder of his career . He co @-@ captained the Flames to a Stanley Cup championship in his final season of 1988 – 89 . 
 He is among the most popular players in Flames history and his personality and bushy red moustache made him an iconic figure within the sport . McDonald won the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy for dedication and sportsmanship in 1983 and in 1988 was named the inaugural winner of the King Clancy Memorial Trophy for his leadership and humanitarian presence , in particular through his long association with the Special Olympics . Internationally , he represented Team Canada as a player on two occasions and in a management role three times . He was a member of the inaugural Canada Cup championship team in 1976 and was director of player personnel of Canada 's 2004 World Championship winning team . McDonald was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1992 and the Alberta Sports Hall of Fame in 1993 . The Flames retired his uniform number 9 in 1990 . In 2015 he was named chairman of the board of the Hockey Hall of Fame , after serving nine years on the Hall 's selection committee . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McDonald was born February 16 , 1953 , in Hanna , Alberta . He is the youngest of four children after brother Lynn and sisters Donna and Dixie . His father , Lorne , tended the family farm near the hamlet of <unk> , 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) outside Hanna . The young Lanny viewed his father as his hero , often following Lorne around helping with whatever chores he could . McDonald credits his father for teaching him the value of honesty and hard work . His mother , Phyllis , was a full @-@ time teacher who was frequently involved with community events . 
 Learning to skate at the age of five , McDonald immediately developed a passion for hockey . He served as a stick boy , helping manage equipment , for his father 's community team and grew up listening to radio broadcasts of Hockey Night in Canada . McDonald shared his father 's passion for the Toronto Maple Leafs ; he was given his middle name , King , after Maple Leafs ' star King Clancy . He began playing organized hockey at the age of six and , despite both having full @-@ time commitments , his parents drove him and Lynn to Hanna for their practices and games . McDonald recalled that half of his time in youth hockey was spent in Hanna , and the other half in the car . He completed high school while playing in Lethbridge , choosing to remain with his junior A team in 1970 – 71 rather than join the Medicine Hat Tigers of the Western Canada Hockey League ( WCHL ) so that he could complete his diploma . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 McDonald began his junior career in 1969 with the Lethbridge Sugar Kings of the tier II Alberta Junior Hockey League ( AJHL ) . He appeared in 34 games for the Sugar Kings as a 16 @-@ year @-@ old , scoring two goals . The following season , 1970 – 71 , he emerged as a leading scorer , recording 37 goals and 82 points in 45 games . He was voted the league 's most valuable player and named to the Second All @-@ Star team . Additionally , McDonald appeared in six WCHL games with the Calgary Centennials . 
 The Medicine Hat Tigers acquired McDonald 's playing rights in a trade during the 1970 – 71 WCHL season . He joined the team the following year , finishing eighth in league scoring with 114 points , including 50 goals . He improved to 62 goals and 139 points in 1972 – 73 to finish third overall in league scoring and was named to the WCHL All @-@ Star Team at forward . McDonald added 37 points in the playoffs as the Tigers won the league championship . 
 In McDonald 's draft year of 1973 , the National Hockey League ( NHL ) was in competition with the rival World Hockey Association ( WHA ) for talent . McDonald was considered a top junior prospect and was recruited by both leagues . The Vancouver Canucks had the third overall selection in the NHL draft and were interested in drafting him , but opted against it when McDonald made it clear he would likely go to the WHA rather than play with Vancouver . Instead , he went to the Toronto Maple Leafs with the fourth overall pick . In the WHA draft , he was selected 10th overall by the Cleveland Crusaders . McDonald chose to play in the NHL , signing a contract with the Maple Leafs that was considered to be among the richest in the league . The deal , worth between $ 175 @,@ 000 and $ 200 @,@ 000 per season , came as a result of the competition between the two leagues and McDonald found that some of the older players in Toronto resented him as a result . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 McDonald made his NHL debut with the Leafs on October 10 , 1973 , against the Buffalo Sabres . He assisted on two goals in the game , but also suffered a concussion and required several stitches after landing on his head as a result of a check by Rick Martin . Following the custom of most NHL players at the time , he played the game without wearing a helmet . It was the only time in his career he did so , as he felt that his injury contributed to his early struggles in the NHL . McDonald scored his first NHL goal on October 17 against Michel <unk> of the Montreal Canadiens , but finished the season with only 14 goals and 30 points in 1973 – 74 . His continued inability to score early in the 1974 – 75 season nearly resulted in a trade . Atlanta Flames general manager Cliff Fletcher sought to take advantage of the Maple Leafs ' early disappointment in McDonald and agreed in principle to a trade for the young forward in exchange for Curt Bennett . However , McDonald scored three goals in his following two games causing Toronto to back out of the deal . McDonald recorded a modest improvement over his rookie campaign : 17 goals and 44 points . 
 The patience the Maple Leafs had shown McDonald in his first two seasons was rewarded in 1975 – 76 when he rediscovered his offensive touch , scoring 37 goals and adding 56 assists . Following the season , he earned an invite to the Canadian national team 's summer camp in advance of the 1976 Canada Cup . McDonald was named to the roster , and appeared in five of Team Canada 's seven games . He recorded two assists in the tournament , one of which came on Darryl Sittler 's overtime goal that clinched the inaugural Canada Cup championship . 
 A 43 @-@ goal season in 1976 – 77 earned McDonald several accolades . He was named to the Wales Conference team at the 1977 All @-@ Star Game where he scored two goals in a 4 – 3 victory over the Campbell Conference . He was also named a Second Team All @-@ Star at right wing following the season . It was the first of three consecutive 40 @-@ goal seasons for McDonald , and he finished in the top ten in NHL scoring in both 1977 – 78 and 1978 – 79 . He appeared in his second All @-@ Star Game in 1978 and played for the NHL All @-@ Stars in the 1979 Challenge Cup against the Soviet national team . 
 The highlight of McDonald 's career in Toronto came in the 1978 Stanley Cup playoffs against the New York Islanders . The Maple Leafs were viewed as underdogs in the series against an Islanders team that was considered to be among the best in the league . Toronto overcame a 2 – 0 series deficit to force a seventh and deciding game . Playing despite breaking both his wrist and nose during the series , McDonald scored the overtime winning goal that eliminated the Islanders and allowed the Maple Leafs to advance to the league semi @-@ finals for the first time in 11 years . Toronto was then eliminated by Montreal , who swept the series with four consecutive victories . 
 = = = Colorado Rockies = = = 
 Punch Imlach was named Toronto general manager prior to the 1979 – 80 season and immediately clashed with team captain Darryl Sittler . Imlach wanted to move Sittler to another team , but the player refused to waive his no trade clause . Imlach responded by trading teammates friendly to Sittler instead . On December 28 , 1979 , Imlach dealt McDonald to the Colorado Rockies , along with Joel Quenneville , in exchange for Wilf Paiement and Pat Hickey . The deal came as a surprise even to Toronto 's head coach . 
 McDonald was devastated by the trade , particularly because he and his wife were expecting their second child and had just purchased a new house . In his 1987 autobiography , he argued that Imlach made the trade out of spite . McDonald had also come into conflict with Imlach while serving as the team 's representative of the National Hockey League Players Association ( NHLPA ) when the general manager refused to honour an increase in the per diem paid to each player . The trade outraged fans in Toronto , where McDonald was among the team 's most popular players . While fans picketed outside Maple Leaf Gardens in protest , McDonald told the media that he felt fortunate to have been traded away from the unsettled situation the Leafs were in and blamed Imlach for the team 's failures on the ice . Sittler resigned as the team 's captain following the trade . 
 Arriving in Colorado , McDonald found himself at the centre of another power struggle . Sympathetic to the fact that his wife was less than two weeks away from giving birth , head coach Don Cherry gave McDonald permission to leave the team on off @-@ days to return to his wife in Toronto . But he did so without gaining the approval of general manager Ray Miron , who disagreed frequently with Cherry and fired him following the season . On the ice , McDonald scored 35 goals with the Rockies and finished with a total of 40 between the two teams . 
 Rumours circulated following the season that Maple Leafs owner Harold Ballard had told the media that he was attempting to reacquire McDonald . The Rockies disputed that any such negotiations had taken place and Ballard quickly apologized for the news story after Colorado threatened to file tampering charges against the Maple Leafs ' owner . McDonald served as the Rockies ' captain , and scored 35 goals and 81 points in 1980 – 81 , his only full season with the team . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Stating that his team needed to add character and leadership , Cliff Fletcher finally completed a trade for McDonald seven years after his first attempt . McDonald was acquired by the Calgary Flames , along with a draft pick , in exchange for Bob MacMillan and Don Lever on November 25 , 1981 . The deal occurred one day after the last place Rockies lost to the Flames by a 9 – 2 score . Once the team 's plane landed in Winnipeg , McDonald was informed of the trade and told to return to Calgary . Angered at first , he viewed the deal as an insult , that the worst team in the NHL had rejected him . 
 McDonald also felt the pressure of having to replace two popular ex @-@ Flames in MacMillan and Lever while also working to overcome a separated shoulder he suffered earlier in the year with the Rockies . He made his debut with the Flames the following night , a 7 – 1 victory over the Los Angeles Kings , after which McDonald remarked that it was the most fun he had playing the game in a long time . He was given a loud ovation by the fans who immediately embraced him as a local hero , even though it took him seven games before he scored his first goal as a member of the Flames . He scored 34 goals in Calgary , and combined with the 6 scored in Colorado , finished with his fifth 40 @-@ goal campaign in six years . 
 The 1982 – 83 season was dominated by McDonald 's battle with Wayne Gretzky of the Edmonton Oilers for the league lead in goals . Amidst the best offensive season of his career , McDonald scored a hat trick against Pittsburgh to give him 47 goals at the mid @-@ season break for the 1983 All @-@ Star Game , a total that tied his career high . He was named to the starting lineup for the All @-@ Star Game and was the league 's leading goal scorer at that point , two ahead of Gretzky . McDonald finished with 66 goals , five short of Gretzky 's 71 . At that time , only Gretzky , Mike Bossy and Phil Esposito had ever scored more goals in one NHL season . McDonald was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team for the second time in his career and was voted the winner of the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy , given to the player who " best exemplifies the qualities of perseverance , sportsmanship and dedication to hockey " . His 66 goals remains a Flames ' single season record . 
 Following the trade of Phil Russell in the summer of 1983 , McDonald and Doug Risebrough were named co @-@ captains for the 1983 – 84 season . They were joined by Jim Peplinski the following season . McDonald missed 15 games due to injuries which reduced his scoring to 33 goals and 66 points , but he played in his fourth All @-@ Star Game . He scored the first Flames goal in the Olympic Saddledome , on the building 's opening night of October 15 , 1983 . 
 McDonald became the 21st player in NHL history to score 400 career goals , reaching the mark in a 7 – 4 loss in Los Angeles on December 21 , 1983 . He was initially credited with scoring the milestone goal in his previous game , against the Winnipeg Jets , but after reviewing a replay of the goal himself , McDonald asked the league to credit it to teammate Eddy Beers who had deflected his shot . His injury problems worsened in 1984 – 85 as he missed the start of the season with pulled muscles and was limited to just 43 games . 
 As the 1985 – 86 season approached , McDonald endured questions about whether he was reaching the point where age and injuries meant he could no longer be an effective NHL player . Hoping to prove himself , he set a goal of playing all 80 games for the Flames . He succeeded , and scored 28 goals and 71 points in the process , despite dislocating his thumb in the pre @-@ season and suffering minor knee and hip injuries during the course of the year . He later said it was a matter of pride to him not to miss a game . In the playoffs , McDonald was witness to one of the most infamous mistakes in NHL history . With the score tied at two in the seventh game of the Smythe Division final against Edmonton , McDonald chased Oilers ' rookie Steve Smith around the Edmonton net . Smith attempted to pass the puck forward , but inadvertently hit the back of goaltender Grant Fuhr 's skate , deflecting the puck into his own net . 
 It turned out to be the winning goal for Calgary who eliminated Edmonton to clinch the Smythe Division championship . The victory over their provincial rivals also touched off a celebration amongst the fans , of which over 20 @,@ 000 greeted the team with wild cheering when their plane landed at Calgary International Airport . A series win over the St. Louis Blues led McDonald and the Flames into their first Stanley Cup Final , against Montreal . The series ended in disappointment : He watched from the bench as his teammates unsuccessfully attempted to tie the deciding game in the final minute and the Canadiens defeated the Flames in five games to win the Stanley Cup . 
 Two separate knee injuries limited McDonald in 1986 – 87 . His total of 14 goals in 58 games was his fewest since his rookie season . He reached a milestone in the Flames ' final game of the season , appearing in the 1,000th game of his career . Following a 10 @-@ goal campaign in 60 games in 1987 – 88 , McDonald reached two additional major milestones in the 1988 – 89 season . On March 7 , 1989 , he scored the 1,000th point of his career with a wraparound goal from behind the net against Bob Essensa in a 9 – 5 victory against the Winnipeg Jets . Two weeks later , on March 21 , he scored the 500th goal of his career on a nearly identical wraparound against Mark Fitzpatrick of the New York Islanders . It was the final regular season goal of McDonald 's career . 
 At 36 years old and approaching the end of his career , the 1989 Stanley Cup Playoffs was potentially his last chance at winning the Stanley Cup . The Flames defeated the Vancouver Canucks , Los Angeles Kings and Chicago Blackhawks to set up a Stanley Cup Final rematch of the 1986 Final with the Montreal Canadiens . McDonald was left out of the Flames ' lineup for the third , fourth and fifth games , but with Calgary leading the series three wins to two , head coach Terry Crisp felt that if the Flames were to win the championship , McDonald deserved to be in the game . Crisp 's decision paid dividends , as midway through the sixth game , McDonald stepped onto the ice after serving a penalty to join Håkan Loob and Joe Nieuwendyk in a three @-@ on @-@ one rush toward the Montreal goal . Loob passed the puck up to Nieuwendyk , who saw a streaking McDonald coming up the right side of the ice . McDonald received the pass then shot the puck over Montreal goaltender Patrick Roy 's glove to give the Flames a 2 – 1 lead . Doug Gilmour added two goals , and Calgary won the game 4 – 2 to earn the franchise 's first Stanley Cup championship . League president John Ziegler presented the trophy to McDonald , co @-@ captain Jim Peplinski and alternate Tim Hunter . Wearing the captain 's " C " for the game , McDonald was the first member of the Flames to carry the trophy as the team paraded it around the Forum in celebration . 
 = = Management career = = 
 McDonald announced his retirement as a player on August 28 , 1989 , stating in a press conference that he made the determination before the 1988 – 89 season began that it would be his last . He also revealed that he had received an offer from another , unnamed , team to play in 1989 – 90 but felt that it was the right time to end his career . The Flames made McDonald their Vice President in Charge of Corporate and Community Affairs . He chose the corporate position partly due to a fascination with the business world , and partly to remain close to his family as a role in hockey operations would have necessitated more travel . His interest in business grew following his trade to Calgary as he was featured in numerous commercials and signed endorsements throughout southern Alberta . He had also previously served as a vice president of the NHLPA in the early 1980s . McDonald changed roles in 1992 as he was named the team 's Vice President of Marketing . After serving four years in that position , McDonald became the Vice President of Corporate Development in 1996 . 
 McDonald was part of a committee tasked with hiring a new management team in June 2000 . The media speculated that after several years in a corporate position , he hoped to land a role as a vice president within hockey operations . He received no such role , and two months after the hiring of Craig Button as executive vice president and general manager of the Flames , McDonald announced he was leaving the organization . McDonald denied claims from team sources that he was upset at not gaining a new role when Button was hired . He stated that after " nineteen great years here in one organization " , it was the right time to retire . He retained a small role in the organization , serving as a board member of the Saddledome Foundation . 
 Ken King , newly hired president of the Flames , lured McDonald back into the organization a year later by naming him an executive assistant to hockey operations . McDonald held the position until 2003 . He also served in hockey operations roles with Hockey Canada . McDonald was the general manager of Team Canada for the 2001 and 2002 World Championships . He returned in 2004 in a role as director of player personnel of Canada 's gold medal @-@ winning squad . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 McDonald was known primarily as an offensive player with a hard shot . His wrist shot was considered to be effective , and his scoring exploits in junior hockey earned him the nickname " Machine @-@ Gun Lanny " . Red Kelly , McDonald 's coach in his first NHL seasons , recalled that he was impressed with his young player 's skill handling the puck and defended McDonald against critics who wanted him moved out of Toronto due to his early struggles . In his NHL career , McDonald led his team in goal scoring six times : 1976 – 77 , 1977 – 78 and 1978 – 79 with Toronto , 1980 – 81 with Colorado , and 1981 – 82 and 1982 – 83 in Calgary . He was also a physical player , willing to play a hard @-@ hitting style in the corners . 
 As age and injuries took their toll , McDonald 's role with the Flames changed . His playing time decreased in his later years as he was no longer counted on to be the team 's primary offensive threat . Often left out of the lineup in his final season , McDonald was expected to provide a boost to the team when he drew into the lineup . He was counted on to provide a veteran presence and to act as a mentor for the team 's younger players . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Flames arrived in Calgary after relocating from Atlanta for the 1980 – 81 season . The organization entered a transitional phase , as many players used to the warm weather and relaxed atmosphere of Atlanta were unable or unwilling to adapt to the higher expectations fans in Calgary placed on them . David Poile , then Flames assistant general manager , stated that the team had an identity crisis as a result . It was in this atmosphere that General Manager Cliff Fletcher made the trade for McDonald on November 25 , 1981 , claiming that McDonald added two characteristics the Flames lacked : character and leadership . 
 McDonald 's arrival in Calgary was considered a turning point for the organization , one where his personality , demeanor and on @-@ ice play came to define the Flames in the 1980s . Poile argued that it signaled the true beginning of the team in its new market : " The trade for Lanny McDonald was the start of the Calgary Flames franchise . It gave us that Calgary identity , that Western Canadian flavor . " Columnist and co @-@ author of McDonald 's autobiography , Steve Simmons , agreed . He added that the personal and professional disappointments McDonald endured in Toronto and Colorado resulted in his gaining a greater appreciation of both the game and himself . McDonald was extremely popular with his teammates and the fans wherever he played , as well as with the media – he was named Colorado 's athlete of the year in 1980 by the state 's sportswriters . 
 Renowned for his leadership ability , McDonald cultivated the respect of the team 's younger players . He came into the NHL at a time when the battle with the rival WHA for talent led to rookies signing for far more money than the previous generation of players commanded . Consequently , McDonald faced the resentment of several of Toronto 's veteran players and resolved to show greater respect to those that followed him . His efforts left a lasting impression on his peers ; among them was Tiger Williams who called McDonald " a great ambassador " for the NHL . 
 The Flames made McDonald the first player in franchise history to have his jersey retired when they raised his number 9 to the rafters of the Olympic Saddledome in a ceremony on March 17 , 1990 . As part of its 1992 class , he was also the first former Flame to gain induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame . One year later he was inducted into the Alberta Sports Hall of Fame . McDonald 's image endured well into retirement ; in 2008 , he was the only athlete named in a list of Alberta 's ten greatest citizens compiled by the Calgary Herald . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McDonald met his wife <unk> while playing junior hockey for the Medicine Hat Tigers . They were married in 1975 , and have four children : daughters Andra and Leah , and sons Barrett and Graham . The family settled in Calgary after McDonald 's trade to the Flames . They also maintain a summer home in Montana , where the family has invested in restaurants and a craft brewery in the community of Lakeside . Co @-@ owned by Andra , the brewery considers McDonald its inspiration , and produces " Old ' <unk> Porter " in his honour . 
 His giant , walrus @-@ style moustache is McDonald 's most defining physical characteristic and helped him become an iconic figure in the sport . He developed it in 1974 , spending the summer seeing what kind of beard he could grow . Knowing that the Maple Leafs did not allow players to maintain beards at the time , he settled on what he described as a " normal moustache " once he returned to Toronto . Some time later , he was inspired by baseball player Sparky Lyle 's moustache and chose to grow one in a similar style . It became a symbol for the Flames as some fans took to wearing fake red moustaches during playoff runs . Razor manufacturers offered endorsements if he would shave it , which he refused . 
 Among his charitable and humanitarian efforts , McDonald is best known for his participation with the Special Olympics . He first became involved with the organization in 1974 when the Maple Leafs asked him to represent the team at the Special Olympics Summer Games . The event began a decades long association for McDonald . He was the honorary coach of the 1986 Special Olympics Summer Games in Calgary , and served as a head coach for the Canadian Special Olympics floor hockey team . In 1988 , McDonald 's contributions to the Special Olympics as a coach and co @-@ chairman of the organization 's fundraising efforts , as well as his work with the Alberta Children 's Miracle Network Hospitals , were recognized by the NHL as he was named the inaugural recipient of the King Clancy Memorial Trophy . The award is given to the hockey player who best exemplifies leadership on the ice with humanitarian contributions off of it . McDonald was previously honoured by the Flames as the first winner of the Ralph T. Scurfield Humanitarian Award in 1987 , which he won again in 1989 . 
 McDonald 's autobiography , Lanny , co @-@ written by Steve Simmons , was published in 1987 . A Canadian best @-@ seller , it was an unexpected success for publisher McGraw @-@ Hill . The book sold 10 @,@ 000 copies in its first couple months of publication , for which the publisher made a donation of $ 10 @,@ 000 to the Special Olympics . In 2008 , McDonald was given an honorary doctorate from the University of Calgary . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International play = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = HMS Royal Sovereign ( 05 ) = 
 HMS Royal Sovereign ( pennant number 05 ) was a Revenge @-@ class ( also known as Royal Sovereign and R @-@ class ) battleship of the Royal Navy displacing 28 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 27 @,@ 560 long tons ; 30 @,@ 860 short tons ) and armed with eight 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) guns in four twin turrets . She was laid down in January 1914 and launched in April 1915 ; she was completed in May 1916 , but was not ready for service in time to participate in the Battle of Jutland at the end of the month . She served with the Grand Fleet for the remainder of the war , but did not see action . In the early 1930s , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet and based in Malta . 
 Unlike the Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships , Royal Sovereign and her sisters were not modernised during the interwar period . Only minor alterations to her anti @-@ aircraft battery were effected before the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 . Assigned to the Home Fleet , she was tasked with convoy protection until May 1940 , when she returned to the Mediterranean Fleet . She was present during the Battle of Calabria in July 1940 , but her slow speed prevented her from engaging the Italian battleships . By March 1942 , she was assigned to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean , but after the Indian Ocean raid by Admiral Nagumo 's Kido Butai , she was withdrawn to eastern Africa to escort convoys . In January 1944 , she returned to Britain , and in May the Royal Navy transferred the ship to the Soviet Navy , where she was renamed Arkhangelsk . She then escorted Arctic convoys into Kola until the end of the war . The Soviets returned the ship in 1949 , after which she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Description = = 
 Royal Sovereign had a length overall of 620 feet 7 inches ( 189 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 88 feet 6 inches ( 27 @.@ 0 m ) and a deep draught of 33 feet 7 inches ( 10 @.@ 2 m ) . She had a designed displacement of 27 @,@ 790 long tons ( 28 @,@ 240 t ) and displaced 31 @,@ 130 long tons ( 31 @,@ 630 t ) at deep load . She was powered by four Parsons steam turbines using steam from eighteen oil @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The turbines were rated at 40 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 29 @,@ 828 kW ) and a top speed of 23 knots ( 42 @.@ 6 km / h ; 26 @.@ 5 mph ) . She had a range of 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 964 km ; 8 @,@ 055 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 18 @.@ 5 km / h ; 11 @.@ 5 mph ) . Her crew numbered 1 @,@ 240 officers and enlisted men in 1921 . Royal Sovereign cost £ 2 @,@ 570 @,@ 504 upon completion . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The ship was equipped with eight breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) Mk I guns in four twin gun turrets , in two superfiring pairs fore and aft of the superstructure , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . Twelve of the fourteen BL 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Mk XII guns were mounted in casemates along the broadside of the vessel amidships ; the remaining pair were mounted on the shelter deck and were protected by gun shields . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of two quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 20 cwt Mk I guns . 
 In August – September 1924 , the 3 @-@ inch guns were replaced by a pair of QF 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk V guns , During the ship 's 1927 – 28 refit , the shelter deck 6 @-@ inch guns were removed and another pair of 4 @-@ inch AA guns were added . These were replaced by eight QF 4 @-@ inch Mk XVI guns in twin turrets during Royal Sovereign 's 1937 – 38 refit . A pair of eight @-@ barrel 2 @-@ pounder " pom @-@ poms " were added in 1932 abreast the funnel , and two four @-@ barrel " pom @-@ poms " were added in early 1942 atop ' B ' and ' X ' turrets . Ten 20 mm Oerlikon guns were also added in 1941 . Another six were added in 1943 . Royal Sovereign was initially equipped with four submerged 21 in ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes on her broadside , though the after pair were removed in 1932 . The forward pair were also removed in 1937 – 38 , during the ship 's last prewar refit . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 Royal Sovereign was completed with two fire @-@ control directors fitted with 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) rangefinders . One was mounted above the conning tower , protected by an armoured hood , and the other was in the spotting top above the tripod foremast . Each turret was also fitted with a 15 @-@ foot rangefinder . The main armament could be controlled by ' X ' turret as well . The secondary armament was primarily controlled by directors mounted on each side of the compass platform on the foremast once they were fitted in March 1917 . A 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) rangefinder replaced the smaller one originally fitted in ' X ' turret in 1919 . Similarly , another large rangefinder was fitted in ' B ' turret during the ship 's 1921 – 22 refit . A simple high @-@ angle rangefinder was added above the bridge during that same refit . 
 About 1931 , a High @-@ Angle Control System ( HACS ) Mk I director replaced the high @-@ angle rangefinder on the spotting top . During the 1932 refit two positions for 2 @-@ pounder " pom @-@ pom " anti @-@ aircraft directors were added on new platforms abreast and below the fire @-@ control director in the spotting top . In the 1937 – 38 refit a HACS Mark III director replaced the Mk I in the spotting top and another was added to the torpedo @-@ control tower aft . By 1942 , a Type 279 air warning radar , a Type 273 surface @-@ search radar , a Type 284 gunnery radar and two Type 285 anti @-@ aircraft gunnery radars were installed . By September 1943 , the Type 284 radar had been replaced by an improved Type <unk> and two Type 282 radars had been fitted for the " pom @-@ poms " . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Royal Sovereign 's waterline belt consisted of face @-@ hardened Krupp cemented armour ( KC ) that was 13 inches ( 330 mm ) thick between ' A ' and ' Y ' barbettes and thinned to 4 to 6 inches ( 102 to 152 mm ) towards the ship 's ends , but did not reach either the bow or the stern . Above this was a strake of armour 6 inches thick that extended between ' A ' and ' X ' barbettes . Transverse bulkheads 4 to 6 inches thick ran at an angle from the ends of the thickest part of the waterline belt to ' A ' and ' Y ' barbettes . 
 The gun turrets were protected by 11 to 13 inches ( 279 to 330 mm ) of KC armour , except for the turret roofs which were 4 @.@ 75 – 5 inches ( 121 – 127 mm ) thick . The barbettes ranged in thickness from 6 – 10 inches ( 152 – 254 mm ) above the upper deck , but were only 4 to 6 inches thick below it . The Revenge @-@ class ships had multiple armoured decks that ranged from 1 to 4 inches ( 25 to 102 mm ) in thickness . The main conning tower had 13 inches of armour on the sides with a 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) roof . The torpedo control tower in the rear superstructure had 6 inches of armour protecting it . After the Battle of Jutland , 1 inch of high @-@ tensile steel was added to the main deck over the magazines and additional anti @-@ flash equipment was added in the magazines . In 1918 the gun shields for the upper deck 6 @-@ inch guns were replaced by armoured casemates . 
 To protect against underwater explosions , the ship was fitted with longitudinal torpedo bulkheads 1 to 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) inches thick that ran from the forward to the rear magazines . During her 1921 refit , Royal Sovereign was fitted with an anti @-@ torpedo bulge that ran the length of the ship between the fore and aft barbettes . It was divided into a water @-@ tight empty lower compartment and an upper compartment filled with water @-@ tight " crushing tubes " intended to absorb and distribute the force of an explosion . The space between the tubes was filled with wood and cement . 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The ship was fitted with flying @-@ off platforms mounted on the roofs of ' B ' and ' X ' turrets in 1918 , from which fighters and reconnaissance aircraft could launch . In 1932 the platforms were removed from the turrets and a trainable catapult was installed on her quarterdeck , along with a crane to recover a seaplane . The catapult and crane were removed by March 1937 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 Royal Sovereign was laid down on 15 January 1914 at the Portsmouth Dockyard . The ship was launched on 29 April 1915 and commissioned in May 1916 . She was still working up during the Battle of Jutland and the end of the month , and so she was not present during the engagement . On 30 May 1916 , three weeks after her commissioning , Royal Sovereign was present in Scapa Flow when the fleet commander , Admiral John Jellicoe ordered the fleet to sea . Jellicoe purposely left Royal Sovereign in port due to the inexperience of her crew ; as a result , she missed the Battle of Jutland the following day . In the months after the engagement , Royal Sovereign was quickly made ready for service with the fleet to further increase the numerical superiority of the Grand Fleet over the German High Seas Fleet . 
 The Grand Fleet sortied on 18 August 1916 to ambush the High Seas Fleet while it advanced into the southern North Sea , but a series of miscommunications and mistakes prevented Jellicoe from reaching the German fleet before it returned to port . Two light cruisers were sunk by German U @-@ boats during the operation , prompting Jellicoe to decide to not risk the major units of the fleet south of 55 ° 30 ' North due to the prevalence of German submarines and mines . The Admiralty concurred and stipulated that the Grand Fleet would not sortie unless the German fleet was attempting an invasion of Britain or there was a strong possibility it could be forced into an engagement under suitable conditions . 
 In April 1918 , the High Seas Fleet again sortied , to attack British convoys to Norway . They enforced strict wireless silence during the operation , which prevented Room 40 cryptanalysts from warning the new commander of the Grand Fleet , Admiral David Beatty . The British only learned of the operation after an accident aboard the battlecruiser SMS Moltke forced her to break radio silence to inform the German commander of her condition . Beatty then ordered the Grand Fleet to sea to intercept the Germans , but he was not able to reach the High Seas Fleet before it turned back for Germany . This was the last time Royal Sovereign and the rest of the Grand Fleet would go to sea for the remainder of the war . On 21 November 1918 , following the Armistice , the entire Grand Fleet left port to escort the surrendered German fleet into internment at Scapa Flow . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war period = = = 
 The Royal Marines detachment assigned to Royal Sovereign left the ship on 21 June 1919 to conduct exercises . The ship meanwhile went into drydock at Invergordon in September . Post @-@ war demobilisation in 1919 saw some 500 men leave the ship while she was in dock . Upon returning to service in late 1919 , the ship was assigned to the 1st Battle Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet . Conflicts between Greece and the crumbling Ottoman Empire prompted the Royal Navy to deploy a force to the eastern Mediterranean . In April 1920 , Royal Sovereign and her sister ship Resolution steamed to the region via Malta . While in the Ottoman capital Constantinople , Royal Sovereign and the other British warships took on White émigré fleeing the Communist Red Army . Among those refugees aboard Royal Sovereign was a princess of the Galitzine family . 
 The 1922 Washington Naval Treaty cut the battleship strength of the Royal Navy from forty ships to fifteen . The remaining active battleships were divided between the Atlantic and Mediterranean Fleets and conducted joint operations annually . Royal Sovereign remained with the <unk> Fleet through 1926 . On 4 October 1927 , the ship was placed in reserve to effect a major refit . Four new rangefinders and eight searchlights were installed . On 15 May 1929 , the refit was finished , and the ship was assigned to the 1st Battle Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet . The squadron consisted of Royal Sovereign , her sisters Resolution and Revenge , and Queen Elizabeth , and based in Malta . By the 1930s , the five ships of the Queen Elizabeth class were rotated through extensive modernisation . Royal Sovereign and her sisters , however , were smaller and slower than the Queen Elizabeth class , and so they were not extensively modernised in the inter @-@ war period . The only changes made were augmentations to their anti @-@ aircraft batteries . 
 Fleet exercises in 1934 were carried out in the Bay of Biscay , followed by a fleet regatta in Navarino Bay off Greece . In 1935 , the ship returned to Britain for the Jubilee Fleet Review for King George V. In August 1935 , Royal Sovereign was transferred to the 2nd Battle Squadron of the Atlantic Fleet , where she served as the flagship of Rear Admiral Charles Ramsey . The ship served as a training vessel until 2 June 1937 , when she was again placed in reserve for a major overhaul . This lasted until 18 February 1938 , after which she returned to the 2nd Battle Squadron . In 1939 , King George VI made a state visit to Canada ; Royal Sovereign and the rest of the fleet escorted his ship halfway across the Atlantic and met it on the return leg of the voyage . 
 In early 1939 , the Admiralty considered plans to send Royal Sovereign and her four sisters to Asia to counter Japanese expansionism . They reasoned that the then established " Singapore strategy " , which called for a fleet to be formed in Britain to be dispatched to confront a Japanese attack was inherently risky due to the long delay . They argued that a dedicated battle fleet would allow for faster reaction . The plan was abandoned , however , because the new King George V @-@ class battleship ( 1939 ) s would not begin to enter service until 1941 . In the last weeks of August 1939 , the Royal Navy began to concentrate in wartime bases as tensions with Germany rose . Royal Sovereign steamed to Invergordon , where she joined her sisters Resolution and Royal Oak , Rodney , and the battlecruiser Repulse . By 31 August , the force joined Nelson , the flagship of Admiral Charles Forbes , the commander of the Home Fleet . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 On 31 August , the day before the German invasion of Poland , Royal Sovereign was assigned to a screening force in the Greenland @-@ Iceland @-@ United Kingdom gap to patrol for German merchant ships that might be attempting to reach Germany . At the outset of war in September 1939 , Royal Sovereign was assigned to the 2nd Battle Squadron of the Home Fleet . She was assigned to the North Atlantic Escort Force , which was based in Halifax , Nova Scotia , and was tasked with protecting convoys to Britain . Upon returning to Plymouth , she underwent a short refit . In May 1940 , she moved to the Mediterranean Fleet . There she was based in Alexandria with the battleships Warspite , Malaya , and Valiant , under the command of Admiral Andrew Cunningham . On 25 – 27 June , she and her sister ship HMS Ramillies escorted two convoys from Alexandria to Malta . On 28 June , aerial reconnaissance located Italian destroyers off Zakynthos ; Admiral John Tovey took the 7th Cruiser Squadron . Royal Sovereign was left behind due to her slow speed . Cunningham split his fleet into three groups ; Royal Sovereign and Malaya were the core of Group C. She was present at the Battle of Calabria on 18 July , but her slow speed prevented her from engaging the Italian battleships . Warspite bore the brunt of the action , as Royal Sovereign and Malaya lagged behind . 
 In mid @-@ August 1940 , while steaming in the Red Sea , Royal Sovereign was unsuccessfully attacked by the Italian submarine Galileo Ferraris . Later that month , she returned to Atlantic convoy duties . These lasted until August 1941 , when periodic maintenance was effected in Norfolk , Virginia . The Admiralty decided in May 1941 to deploy a powerful fleet to be based in Singapore to counter any Japanese attempt to invade Western colonies in Southeast Asia . Royal Sovereign and her sisters Revenge , Ramillies , and Resolution were assigned to the force . The unit was to have been assembled in Singapore by March 1942 , though Royal Sovereign reached the theatre earlier . At the beginning of March 1942 , Royal Sovereign , the heavy cruiser Cornwall , and several smaller vessels escorted the convoy <unk> of twelve troopships transporting 10 @,@ 090 soldiers . The convoy departed Colombo on 1 March , bound for Australia . The convoy reached Fremantle without incident on 15 March . 
 By the end of March 1942 , the Eastern Fleet had been formed , under the command of Admiral James Somerville . The fleet was centred on a pair of fleet aircraft carriers , the elderly carrier Hermes , and five battleships , four of which were Royal Sovereign and her sisters ; the fifth was Warspite . The fleet also included seven cruisers and sixteen destroyers . Despite the numerical strength of the Eastern Fleet , many of its units , including the four Revenge @-@ class battleships , were no longer front @-@ line warships . Vice Admiral Chūichi Nagumo 's powerful Kido Butai , composed of six carriers and four fast battleships , was significantly stronger than Somerville 's Eastern Fleet . As a result , only the modernised Warspite could operate with the two fleet carriers ; Royal Sovereign , her three sisters , and Hermes were kept away from combat to escort convoys in the Indian Ocean . 
 In late March , the code @-@ breakers at the Far East Combined Bureau , a branch of Bletchley Park , informed Somerville that the Japanese were planning a raid into the Indian Ocean to attack Colombo and Trincomalee and destroy his fleet . He therefore divided his fleet into two groups : Force A , which consisted of the two fleet carriers , Warspite and four cruisers , and Force B , centred on Royal Sovereign and her sisters and the carrier Hermes . He intended to ambush Nagumo 's fleet in a night action , the only method by which he thought he could achieve a victory . After three days of searching for the Japanese fleet without success , Somerville returned to Addu Atoll to refuel . While refuelling his ships , Somerville received a report that the Japanese fleet was approaching Colombo , which they attacked the following day , on 5 April , followed by attacks on Trincomalee on 9 April . 
 Following the raid in April 1942 , Somerville withdrew Royal Sovereign and her three sisters to Mombasa , where they could secure the shipping routes in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf . Royal Sovereign and her sisters departed from Addu Atoll early on the morning on 9 April , bound for Mombasa . Here they remained stationed until September 1943 , with the exception of another long period in the dockyard in Philadelphia in late 1942 . While Royal Sovereign was moored in Philadelphia , the American light cruiser USS Boise , a badly @-@ damaged veteran of the Battle of Cape Esperance , shared a pier with her . During the refit , the ship 's deck armour was increased by 2 inches ( 51 mm ) and four of her 6 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) guns were removed . Royal Sovereign was sent back to the United States for a major overhaul in Philadelphia , from March to September 1943 . She then returned to the Indian Ocean to resume her patrol duties . In January 1944 , she left the Indian Ocean , bound for Britain . 
 = = = = Service with the Soviet Navy = = = = 
 After returning to Britain , Royal Sovereign was sent to the naval base in Scapa Flow . On 30 May 1944 she was transferred on loan to the Soviet Navy as Arkhangelsk in lieu of war reparations from Italy . The ship left Britain on 17 August 1944 as part of the escort for Convoy JW 59 , which contained thirty @-@ three merchant vessels . Six days later , while still en route , the convoy was attacked by the U @-@ boat U @-@ 711 . The submarine 's captain , Hans @-@ Günther Lange , incorrectly reported hits on Arkhangelsk and a destroyer , though his torpedoes had exploded prematurely . Under the impression that they had crippled the battleship , the Germans launched several submarine attacks on the ship while she was moored in Kola . Anti @-@ torpedo nets ensured that the attacks failed , however . The Germans then planned to use six Biber midget submarines to attack the ship , but mechanical difficulties eventually forced the cancellation of the plan . Regardless , Arkhangelsk had already departed Kola to patrol the White Sea by the time the <unk> would have arrived . A Soviet crew commissioned the ship on 29 August 1944 at Polyarny . Arkhangelsk was the largest ship in the Soviet fleet during the war . While in Soviet service , she was the flagship of Admiral <unk> <unk> and was tasked with meeting Allied convoys in the Arctic Ocean and escorting them into Kola . 
 Arkhangelsk ran aground in the White Sea in late 1947 ; the extent of damage , if any , is unknown . The Soviet Navy returned the ship to the Royal Navy on 4 February 1949 after the former Italian battleship Giulio Cesare was transferred to the Soviet Black Sea Fleet . The Soviet Navy had initially sought to avoid sending the ship back , claiming that she was not sufficiently seaworthy to make the voyage back to Britain . After an inspection by a Royal Navy officer , however , the Soviet Navy agreed to return the vessel in January 1949 . Upon returning to the Rosyth naval base , Royal Navy personnel thoroughly inspected the ship and found much of her equipment to be unserviceable . It appeared to the inspectors that the main battery turrets had not been rotated while the ship was in Soviet service , and were jammed on the centreline . As a result of her poor condition , she was sold for scrap . The ship arrived at Inverkeithing , Scotland on 18 May to be broken up . The elevation mechanisms from her main battery gun turrets were later reused in the 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) Mark I radio telescope at Jodrell Bank , Cheshire built in 1955 – 1957 . 
 = The Boat Race 1924 = 
 The 76th Boat Race took place on 5 April 1924 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Oxford were reigning champions having won the previous year 's race and their crew was significantly heavier than their opponents for this year 's race . Umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 18 minutes 41 seconds , the fastest time since 1911 . The victory took the overall record in the event to 40 – 35 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1923 race by three @-@ quarters of a length , and led overall with 40 victories to Cambridge 's 34 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) and E. D. Horsfall ( who had rowed in the three races prior to the First World War ) . Cambridge 's coaches were Francis Escombe , P. Haig @-@ Thomas ( four @-@ time Blue who had rowed between 1902 and 1905 ) and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . For the sixteenth year the umpire was Old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 Cambridge had few former Blues to call upon and despite measles striking at least one of the crew down , their rowing style was described by author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater as " harmoniously together " . Conversely , Oxford 's crew was experienced yet a " lack of uniformity " in early training evolved into a crew with " a turn of such extraordinary speed that being was as much as four to one on Oxford " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 5 @.@ 5 lb ( 78 @.@ 5 kg ) , 5 @.@ 875 pounds ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw a single rower return with Boat Race experience in their number six T. D. A. Collet . Conversely , Oxford 's crew included six individuals who had represented the Dark Blues in the event , including bow P. C. Mallam who was making his fourth consecutive appearance . Oxford 's American stroke W. P. Mellen was the only non @-@ British participant registered in the event , having been educated at the Middlesex School in Concord , Massachusetts . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Umpire Pitman started the race in bright sunshine and a light breeze at 2 : 23 p.m. Oxford took a brief lead , out @-@ rating their opponents significantly in the first minute , but by the time the crews passed the Mile Post , the Light Blues were nearly a quarter of a length ahead . As both boats passed under Hammersmith Bridge , Cambridge had extended their lead and were clear of Oxford , despite rowing two strokes per minute slower . 
 Even though the Dark Blues made a spurt , Cambridge pulled away and were three lengths ahead by Chiswick Steps . According to author and former Oxford rower George Drinkwater , " from here they had it all their own way to the finish " . Cambridge passed the finishing post four and a half lengths ahead , in a time of 18 minutes 41 seconds , the fastest winning time since the 1911 race and the second fastest time in the history of the event . It was their fourth win in five years and took the overall record in the event to 40 – 35 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Blackledge River Railroad Bridge = 
 The Blackledge River Railroad Bridge is a Warren truss bridge that was built on the site of a c . 1870 railroad bridge . The original bridge was completed and opened by August 3 , 1877 . Likely built by the Colchester Railway Company , the bridge was part of the 3 @.@ 59 miles ( 5 @.@ 78 km ) of track from Colchester , Connecticut , to <unk> ( now known as <unk> , Connecticut ) . The line was leased to the Boston & New York Air Line Railroad and reported improvement in 1879 and a new 110 @-@ foot long ( 34 m ) iron bridge by 1881 . The line was leased to the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad in 1882 . After dominating the region , the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad petitioned for changes to the Air Line and the approval came on July 7 , 1911 . 
 The historic Blackledge River Railroad Bridge was constructed c . 1912 as an improved version of the previous bridge . The new 108 @-@ foot long ( 33 m ) bridge integrated the previous abutments into the design and was elevated a further 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above the Blackledge River . The railroad bridge was abandoned in the 1960s and sold to the Connecticut Department of Transportation . The bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places on July 31 , 1986 . The bridge is now located in Airline State Park . By 2007 , a wooden pedestrian bridge was built atop the railroad bridge and crosses over the Blackledge River . 
 = = Previous bridges = = 
 According to the National Register of Historic Places nomination , the first bridge was constructed in the early 1870s by the New York and Boston Air Line Railroad . The details on this bridge are largely unknown , but contradictory evidence exists placing the construction of the bridge between 1876 and 1877 . According to Marshall , the Air Line Railroad was completed in 1873 and the Colchester branch was completed in 1877 . 
 Organized in 1876 , the Colchester line was completed by the Colchester Railway Company . The line operated 3 @.@ 59 miles of track from Colchester , Connecticut , to <unk> ( now known as <unk> , Connecticut ) and it opened on August 3 , 1877 . The line was leased on April 3 , 1878 to the Boston & New York Air Line Railroad company for 999 years . In January 1879 , the Air Line reported that the Black Ledge bridge had 25 @,@ 000 yards of earth moved to replace a high piling and 2 @,@ 500 cubic yards of masonry added in preparation for the installation of a new bridge . In 1881 , the Air Line announced the replacement of the Howe truss and the installation of a new 110 @-@ foot long ( 34 m ) iron bridge . On October 1 , 1882 , the line was leased to the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad for 99 years . The Air Line reported to the Railroad Commissioners in 1899 that a bridge over Blackledge River was completed . The New York , New Haven and Hartford dominated the region by 1905 , having acquiring over three dozen railroads . In 1907 , the company sought to improve and modernize the Air Line . On April 17 , 1911 , the company petitioned the Railroad Commissioners for alterations and changes . The approval for the changes came on July 7 , 1911 . 
 = = Second Bridge = = 
 The Blackledge River Railroad Bridge was rebuilt to increase the flood clearance and the load @-@ bearing capacity of the bridge , but its abutments were integrated into the new bridge . Completed c . 1912 , the replacement Blackledge River Railroad Bridge is a riveted steel , double @-@ intersection Warren deck truss . The original granite stone abutments which supported the previous bridge was reported to be five feet lower , were integrated with the brownstone abutments of the rebuilt bridge . The bottom chord of the span is 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) above the Blackledge River . The truss is 108 feet ( 33 m ) long and about 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) deep . The top and bottom chords are typical box girders with diagonal members and the deck is open . At some point , the bridge was altered with the addition of a sewer pipe . 
 = = Fate = = 
 The line continued to serve local passenger and freight trains for decades , but flooding in August 1955 destroyed the critical bridge work in Putnam and lead to its closure in the 1960s . Several years after its abandonment the railroad was sold to Connecticut 's Department of Transportation . By 1983 , the abandoned railroad bridge had its span sealed off and its tracks lifted . The bridge is in the Salmon River State Forest and is a part of the Air Line State Park Trail . A new wooden bridge allows transportation over the Blackledge River . Constructed prior to 2007 , the new wooden bridge decks the railroad bridge . The Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection was assisted by the Coast Guard Academy and the 192nd Engineering Battalion of the Connecticut National Guard . 
 The National Register of Historic Places nomination lists the Blackledge River Railroad Bridge under both criteria A and C. Criterion A requires the property must make a contribution to the major pattern of American history , and criterion C concerns the distinctive characteristics of the building by its architecture and construction . The basis for its criterion A , is that it was part of a major improvement to the engineering and lines under the operation of the New York , New Haven and Hartford Railroad . The bridge was listed under criterion C as " a representative example of the typical medium @-@ length railroad bridge of the early 20th century . " The bridge was added to the National Register of Historic Places on July 31 , 1986 . 
 = Live Undead = 
 Live Undead is the first live album by American thrash metal band Slayer . It was released through Metal Blade Records and recorded in New York City in front of a room of people . It has been questioned by both critics and authors that the audience sound may or may not be faked . However , in 1984 , <unk> Fingers Metal Shop , a radio station , held a contest to meet and hang out with Slayer during a live recording . The album was recorded at Tiki Recording Studios in Glen Cove , NY in front of around a dozen people . The album was originally intended to be recorded in front of a live audience , but things went wrong . Nevertheless , when asked if they were fake , producer Bill Metoyer said , " I don 't know if I should tell you . " The album begins with an extended introduction of " Black Magic " , followed by a small speech . The remaining tracks include both those of 1983 's Show No Mercy and 1984 's Haunting the Chapel . Ned Raggett of AllMusic gave the album two and a half out of five stars , and noted that it " isn 't really necessary except for the hardest of hardcore fans . 
 = = Conception = = 
 The seven @-@ track live record was recorded in front of a room full of people in New York City in the autumn of 1984 . It has been rumored that the crowd noise was added in a studio rather than recorded on stage . Joel McIver , author of The Bloody Reign of Slayer , asked Live Undead 's producer / engineer Bill Metoyer , who had worked on the album in Los Angeles . Metoyer responded : " I don 't know if I should tell you [ if the crowd noises were faked ] ! Isn 't that one of those great industry secrets ? Let 's just say that when you 're doing a live record , you want live sound — even if perhaps the microphones didn 't pick up the audience properly . " 
 Live Undead marked the beginning of a short association between Slayer and artist Albert <unk> . <unk> would design the sleeve image , which depicts the four band members as grinning , partially decayed zombies walking through a graveyard . 
 = = Music = = 
 The EP begins with " Black Magic " , with an extended introduction building alongside the audience 's yelling . The song is performed faster , heavier , and more confident than its original recording in 1983 . When the song is over , lead vocalist Tom Araya says , " They say the pen is mightier than the sword . Well I say fuck the pen ! " , and the band begins playing " Die by the Sword " . The band then run @-@ through " Captor of Sin " , " The Antichrist " , " Evil Has No Boundaries " , and " Show No Mercy " . " Aggressive Perfector " is performed with more " power " , as described by author Joel McIver , who described the entire track listing as , " a fearsome set , although the rest of the songs don 't quite have the visceral power of the opening track . In fact , the Live Undead version of " Black Magic " established a career @-@ long trend of Slayer 's live songs being more powerful than the studio versions , with very few exceptions " . 
 = = Reception and release = = 
 AllMusic 's employee Ned Raggett gave the album a two and a half star rating , noting that " Live Undead isn 't really necessary except for the hardest of hardcore fans in the end , especially in comparison to Decade of Aggression , " and saying that " Evil Has No Boundaries " was the best performance of the seven songs . Raggett also wrote that despite being an unnecessary release , " it does have its ' it could only be Slayer ' moments — including Araya 's almost casual way of rudely introducing ' Captor of Sin ' . " 
 The album was originally released in 1984 under Metal Blade Records . In both 1993 and 1994 , it was re @-@ released with the same catalog numbers . In 2006 , it was again re @-@ released as an eleven @-@ track record . It included " Chemical Warfare " , " Captor of Sin " , " Haunting the Chapel " , and the studio version of " Aggressive Perfector " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Original release 
 Bonus tracks 
 The album has also been re @-@ released with only " Chemical Warfare " as bonus . 
 Bonus tracks ( re @-@ release ) 
 This album has been re @-@ released with the entire Haunting the Chapel EP . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel can be sourced from both AllMusic and the album 's notes . 
 = Elizabeth Warren = 
 Elizabeth Ann Warren ( née Herring ; born June 22 , 1949 ) is an American academic and politician . She is a member of the Democratic Party , and is the senior United States Senator from Massachusetts . Warren was formerly a professor of law , and taught at the University of Texas School of Law , the University of Pennsylvania Law School , and most recently at Harvard Law School . A prominent scholar specializing in bankruptcy law , Warren was among the most cited in the field of commercial law before starting her political career . 
 Warren is an active consumer protection advocate whose scholarship led to the conception and establishment of the U.S. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau . She has written a number of academic and popular works , and is a frequent subject of media interviews regarding the American economy and personal finance . Following the 2008 financial crisis , Warren served as chair of the Congressional Oversight Panel created to oversee the Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) . She later served as Assistant to the President and Special Advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau under President Barack Obama . During the late 2000s , she was recognized by publications such as the National Law Journal and Time 100 as an increasingly influential public policy figure . 
 In September 2011 , Warren announced her candidacy for the U.S. Senate , challenging Republican incumbent Scott Brown . She won the general election on November 6 , 2012 , becoming the first female Senator from Massachusetts . She was assigned to the Senate Special Committee on Aging ; the Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs Committee ; and the Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions Committee . 
 Warren is a leading figure in the Democratic Party and is popular among American progressives . She was frequently mentioned by political pundits as a potential 2016 presidential candidate . However , Warren repeatedly stated that she had no intention of running for president . Warren remained neutral in the 2016 Democratic presidential primaries , endorsing presumptive nominee Hillary Clinton only after all fifty states had voted . On July 7 , CNN reported that Warren was on a five @-@ person shortlist to be Clinton 's vice @-@ presidential running mate .. However , Clinton eventually chose Tim Kaine . 
 = = Early life , education , and family = = 
 Warren was born on June 22 , 1949 , in Oklahoma City , Oklahoma , to middle class parents Pauline ( née Reed ) and Donald Jones Herring . She was their fourth child , with three older brothers . When she was 12 , her father , a janitor , had a heart attack — which led to many medical bills , as well as a pay cut because he could not do his previous work . Eventually , this led to the loss of their car from failure to make loan payments . To help the family finances , her mother found work in the catalog order department at Sears . When she was 13 , Warren started waiting tables at her aunt 's restaurant . 
 Warren became a star member of the debate team at Northwest Classen High School and won the title of " Oklahoma 's top high school debater " while competing with debate teams from high schools throughout the state . She also won a debate scholarship to George Washington University at the age of 16 . Initially aspiring to be a teacher , she left GWU after two years to marry her high school boyfriend , Jim Warren . 
 Warren moved to Houston with her husband , who was a NASA engineer . There she enrolled in the University of Houston , graduating in 1970 with a bachelor of science degree in speech pathology and <unk> . For a year , she taught children with disabilities in a public school , based on an " emergency certificate " , as she had not taken the education courses required for a regular teaching certificate . 
 Warren and her husband moved for his work to New Jersey , where , after becoming pregnant , she decided to remain at home to care for their child . After their daughter turned two , Warren enrolled at the Rutgers School of Law – Newark . She worked as a summer associate at Cadwalader , Wickersham & Taft . Shortly before her graduation in 1976 , Warren became pregnant with their second child . After receiving her J.D. and passing the bar examination , she began to work as a lawyer from home , writing wills and doing real estate closings . 
 After having two children , Amelia and Alexander , she and Jim Warren divorced in 1978 . She also has grandchildren . In 1980 , Elizabeth married Bruce Mann , a law professor , but retained the surname Warren . 
 = = = Political affiliation = = = 
 Warren voted as a Republican for many years , saying , " I was a Republican because I thought that those were the people who best supported markets " . According to Warren , she began to vote Democratic in 1995 because she no longer believed that to be true , but she states that she has voted for both parties because she believed that neither party should dominate . 
 = = Career = = 
 During the late 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s , Warren taught law at several universities throughout the country while researching issues related to bankruptcy and middle @-@ class personal finance . She became involved with public work in bankruptcy regulation and consumer protection in the mid @-@ 1990s . 
 = = = Academic = = = 
 Warren started her academic career as a lecturer at Rutgers School of Law – Newark ( 1977 – 78 ) . She moved to the University of Houston Law Center ( 1978 – 83 ) , where she became Associate Dean for Academic Affairs in 1980 , and obtained tenure in 1981 . She taught at the University of Texas School of Law as visiting associate professor in 1981 , and returned as a full professor two years later ( staying 1983 – 87 ) . In addition , she was a visiting professor at the University of Michigan ( 1985 ) and research associate at the Population Research Center of the University of Texas at Austin ( 1983 – 87 ) . Early in her career , Warren became a proponent of on @-@ the @-@ ground research based on studying how people actually respond to laws in the real world . Her work analyzing court records , and interviewing judges , lawyers , and debtors , established her as a rising star in the field of bankruptcy law . 
 Warren joined the University of Pennsylvania Law School as a full professor in 1987 and obtained an endowed chair in 1990 ( becoming William A <unk> Professor of Commercial Law ) . She taught for a year at Harvard Law School in 1992 as Robert <unk> Visiting Professor of Commercial Law . In 1995 , Warren left Penn to become Leo Gottlieb Professor of Law at Harvard Law School . As of 2011 , she was the only tenured law professor at Harvard who had attended law school at an American public university . At Harvard , Warren became one of the most highly cited law professors in the United States . Although she had published in many fields , her expertise was in bankruptcy . In the field of bankruptcy and commercial law , only Douglas Baird of Chicago , Alan Schwartz of Yale , and Bob Scott of Columbia have citation rates comparable to that of Warren . 
 = = = Advisory roles = = = 
 In 1995 , Warren was asked to advise the National Bankruptcy Review Commission . She helped to draft the commission 's report and worked for several years to oppose legislation intended to severely restrict the right of consumers to file for bankruptcy . Warren and others opposing the legislation were not successful ; in 2005 Congress passed the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 , which curtailed the ability of consumers to file for bankruptcy . 
 From November 2006 to November 2010 , Warren was a member of the FDIC Advisory Committee on Economic Inclusion . She is a member of the National Bankruptcy Conference , an independent organization that advises the U.S. Congress on bankruptcy law . She is a former Vice President of the American Law Institute and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 
 Warren 's scholarship and public advocacy was the impetus behind the establishment of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2011 . 
 = = = Public life = = = 
 Warren has a high public profile ; she has appeared in the documentary films <unk> Out and Michael Moore 's Capitalism : A Love Story . She has appeared numerous times on television programs , including Dr. Phil and The Daily Show , and has been interviewed frequently on cable news networks and radio programs . 
 = = = TARP oversight = = = 
 On November 14 , 2008 , Warren was appointed by U.S. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid to chair the five @-@ member Congressional Oversight Panel created to oversee the implementation of the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act . The Panel released monthly oversight reports that evaluate the government bailout and related programs . During Warren 's tenure , these reports covered foreclosure mitigation , consumer and small business lending , commercial real estate , AIG , bank stress tests , the impact of the Troubled Asset Relief Program ( TARP ) on the financial markets , government guarantees , the automotive industry , and other topics . 
 = = = Consumer Financial Protection Bureau = = = 
 Warren was an early advocate for the creation of a new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau ( CFPB ) . The bureau was established by the Dodd – Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act signed into law by President Obama in July 2010 . In September 2010 , President Obama named Warren Assistant to the President and Special Advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury on the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to set up the new agency . While liberal groups and consumer advocacy groups pushed for Obama to formally nominate Warren as the agency 's director , Warren was strongly opposed by financial institutions and by Republican members of Congress who believed Warren would be an overly zealous regulator . Reportedly convinced that Warren could not win Senate confirmation as the bureau 's first director , Obama turned to former Ohio Attorney General Richard Cordray and in January 2012 , over the objections of Republican senators , appointed Cordray to the post in a recess appointment . 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 = = = 2012 election = = = 
 On September 14 , 2011 , Warren declared her intention to run for the Democratic nomination for the 2012 election in Massachusetts for the U.S. Senate . The seat had been won by Republican Scott Brown in a 2010 special election after the death of Ted Kennedy . A week later , a video of Warren speaking in Andover became a viral video on the Internet . In it , Warren replies to the charge that asking the rich to pay more taxes is " class warfare " , pointing out that no one grew rich in the U.S. without depending on infrastructure paid for by the rest of society , stating : 
 There is nobody in this country who got rich on his own . Nobody . ... You moved your goods to market on the roads the rest of us paid for ; you hired workers the rest of us paid to educate ; you were safe in your factory because of police forces and fire forces that the rest of us paid for . You didn 't have to worry that marauding bands would come and seize everything at your factory , and hire someone to protect against this , because of the work the rest of us did . Now look , you built a factory and it turned into something terrific , or a great idea . God bless . Keep a big hunk of it . But part of the underlying social contract is , you take a hunk of that and pay forward for the next kid who comes along . 
 President Barack Obama later echoed her sentiments in a 2012 election campaign speech . 
 In April 2012 , the Boston Herald sparked a campaign controversy when it reported that from 1986 to 1995 Warren had listed herself as a minority in the Association of American Law Schools ( AALS ) directories . Harvard Law School had publicized her minority status in response to criticisms about a lack of faculty diversity , but Warren said that she was unaware of this until she read about it in a newspaper during the 2012 election . Scott Brown , her Republican opponent in the Senate race , speculated that she had fabricated Native American heritage to gain advantage in the job market . Former colleagues and supervisors at universities where she had worked stated that Warren 's ancestry played no role in her hiring . Warren responded to the allegations , saying that she had self @-@ identified as a minority in the directories in order to meet others with similar tribal roots . Her brothers defended her , stating that they " grew up listening to our mother and grandmother and other relatives talk about our family 's Cherokee and Delaware heritage " . In her 2014 autobiography , Warren described the allegations as untrue and hurtful . The New England Historic Genealogical Society found a family newsletter that alluded to a marriage license application that listed Elizabeth Warren ’ s great @-@ great @-@ great grandmother as a Cherokee , but could not find the primary document and found no proof of her descent . The Oklahoma Historical Society said that finding a definitive answer about Native American heritage can be difficult because of intermarriage and deliberate avoidance of registration . 
 Warren ran unopposed for the Democratic nomination and won it on June 2 , 2012 , at the state Democratic convention with a record 95 @.@ 77 % of the votes of delegates . She was endorsed by the Governor of Massachusetts , Deval Patrick . Warren and her opponent Scott Brown agreed to engage in four televised debates , including one with a consortium of media outlets in Springfield and one on WBZ @-@ TV in Boston . She encountered significant opposition from business interests . In August 2012 , Rob Engstrom , political director for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce , claimed that " no other candidate in 2012 represents a greater threat to free enterprise than Professor Warren . " She nonetheless raised $ 39 million for her campaign , the most of any Senate candidate in 2012 , and showed , according to the New York Times , " that it was possible to run against the big banks without Wall Street money and still win . " 
 Warren received a primetime speaking slot at the 2012 Democratic National Convention , immediately before Bill Clinton , on the evening of September 5 , 2012 . Warren positioned herself as a champion of a beleaguered middle class that " has been chipped , squeezed , and hammered . " According to Warren , " People feel like the system is rigged against them . And here 's the painful part : They 're right . The system is rigged . " Warren said Wall Street CEOs " wrecked our economy and destroyed millions of jobs " and that they " still strut around congress , no shame , demanding favors , and acting like we should thank them . " 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 On November 6 , 2012 , Warren defeated incumbent Scott Brown with a total of 53 @.@ 7 % of the votes . She is the first woman ever elected to the U.S. Senate from Massachusetts , as part of a sitting U.S. Senate that had 20 female senators in office , the largest female U.S. Senate delegation in history , following the November 2012 elections . In December 2012 , Warren was assigned a seat on the Senate Banking Committee , the committee that oversees the implementation of Dodd – Frank and other regulation of the banking industry . Warren was sworn in by Vice President Joe Biden on January 3 , 2013 . Upon John Kerry 's resignation to become U.S. Secretary of State , Warren became the state 's senior senator after having served for less than a month , making her the most junior senior senator in the 113th Congress . 
 At Warren 's first Banking Committee hearing on February 14 , 2013 , she pressed several banking regulators to answer when they had last taken a Wall Street bank to trial and stated , " I 'm really concerned that ' too big to fail ' has become ' too big for trial ' . " Videos of Warren 's questioning became popular on the Internet , amassing more than 1 million views in a matter of days . At a Banking Committee hearing in March , Warren asked Treasury Department officials why criminal charges were not brought against HSBC for its money laundering practices . With her questions being continually dodged and her visibly upset , Warren then compared money laundering to drug possession , saying : " If you 're caught with an ounce of cocaine , the chances are good you 're going to go to jail ... But evidently , if you launder nearly a billion dollars for drug cartels and violate our international sanctions , your company pays a fine and you go home and sleep in your own bed at night . " 
 In May 2013 , Warren sent letters to the Justice Department , Securities and Exchange Commission , and the Federal Reserve , questioning their decisions that settling rather than going to court would be more fruitful . Later that month , Warren introduced her first bill , the Bank on Student Loans Fairness Act , which would allow students to take out government education loans at the same rate that banks such as Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan Chase pay to borrow from the federal government . Suggesting that students should get " the same great deal that banks get " , Warren proposed that new student borrowers be able to take out a federally subsidized loan at 0 @.@ 75 % , the rate paid by banks , compared with the current 3 @.@ 4 % student loan rate . Endorsing her bill days after its introduction , Independent Senator from Vermont Bernie Sanders stated : " The only thing wrong with this bill is that [ she ] thought of it and I didn 't " on The Thom Hartmann Program . 
 During the 2014 election cycle , Warren was a top Democratic fundraiser , supporting candidates in Ohio , Minnesota , Oregon , Washington , West Virginia , Michigan , and Kentucky . In the aftermath of the election , Warren was appointed by Majority Leader Harry Reid ( the same man who made her chair of the Congressional Oversight Panel ) to become the first @-@ ever Strategic Advisor of the Democratic Policy and Communications Committee , a position that was created just for her . The move was widely seen as an effort by Reid to lean his party more to the left following major Democratic losses in the recent election ; it also boosted further speculation about a possible presidential run by Warren in 2016 . 
 Saying , " despite the progress we 've made since 2008 , the biggest banks continue to threaten our economy , " in July 2015 Senator Warren , along with John McCain ( R @-@ AZ ) , Maria Cantwell ( D @-@ WA ) , and Angus King ( I @-@ ME ) re @-@ introduced the 21st Century Glass @-@ Steagall Act , a modern version of the Banking Act of 1933 . The legislation is intended to reduce the risk for the American taxpayer in the financial system and decrease the likelihood of future financial crises . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Committee on Banking , Housing , and Urban Affairs 
 Subcommittee on Economic Policy ( Ranking Member ) 
 Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer Protection 
 Subcommittee on Securities , Insurance , and Investment 
 Committee on Health , Education , Labor , and Pensions 
 Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security 
 Special Committee on Aging 
 United States Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources 
 United States Senate Energy Subcommittee on Energy 
 = = = Political positions = = = 
 According to the UK magazine New Statesman , Warren is among the " top 20 US progressives " . 
 = = = 2016 speculation = = = 
 In the run @-@ up to the 2016 U.S. presidential election , Warren 's name was put forward by liberal Democrats as a possible presidential candidate . However , Warren repeatedly stated that she was not running for President in 2016 . In October 2013 , she joined with the other fifteen Senate Democratic women in signing a letter that encouraged Hillary Clinton to run . There has been much speculation about Warren being added to the Democratic ticket as a vice @-@ presidential candidate . On June 9 , 2016 , after the California Democratic primary , Warren formally endorsed Hillary Clinton for president . In response to questions when she endorsed Clinton , Warren said that she believed she was ready to be vice president , but she was not being vetted . 
 Warren has taken an active role in the 2016 presidential elections , and has publicly feuded with Republican presumptive nominee Donald Trump , in speeches and on Twitter , pointing to his business practices and describing him as dishonest , uncaring of people and " a loser " . In return , Trump has mocked her for her description of her Native American heritage , calling her " the Indian " , " goofy " and " Pocahontas " . Warren also criticized Trump for his stance on the Trump University case , calling him a " loud , nasty , thin @-@ skinned fraud who has never risked anything for anyone and serves nobody but himself . " 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 In 2009 , the Boston Globe named her the Bostonian of the Year and the Women 's Bar Association of Massachusetts honored her with the Lelia J. Robinson Award . She was named one of Time Magazine 's 100 Most Influential People in the World in 2009 , 2010 and 2015 . The National Law Journal repeatedly has named Warren as one of the Fifty Most Influential Women Attorneys in America , and in 2010 it honored her as one of the 40 most influential attorneys of the decade . In 2011 , Warren was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame . In January 2012 , Warren was named one of the " top 20 US progressives " by the New Statesman , a magazine based in the United Kingdom . 
 In 2009 , Warren became the first professor in Harvard 's history to win the law school 's The Sacks – Freund Teaching Award for a second time . In 2011 , she delivered the commencement address at the Rutgers School of Law – Newark , where she was awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree and was conferred membership in the Order of the Coif . 
 = = Books and other works = = 
 Warren and her daughter Amelia Tyagi wrote The Two @-@ Income Trap : Why Middle @-@ Class Mothers and Fathers Are Going Broke . Warren and Tyagi point out that a fully employed worker today earns less inflation @-@ adjusted income than a fully employed worker did 30 years ago . Although families spend less today on clothing , appliances , and other consumption , the costs of core expenses such as mortgages , health care , transportation , and child care have increased dramatically . The result is that even with two income earners , families are no longer able to save and have incurred greater and greater debt . 
 In an article in The New York Times , Jeff <unk> said of Warren 's book : 
 The authors find that it is not the free @-@ spending young or the incapacitated elderly who are declaring bankruptcy so much as families with children ... their main thesis is undeniable . Typical families often cannot afford the high @-@ quality education , health care , and neighborhoods required to be middle class today . More clearly than anyone else , I think , Ms. Warren and Ms. Tyagi have shown how little attention the nation and our government have paid to the way Americans really live . 
 In 2005 , Warren and David <unk> published a study on bankruptcy and medical bills , which found that half of all families filing for bankruptcy did so in the aftermath of a serious medical problem . They say that three @-@ quarters of such families had medical insurance . This study was widely cited in policy debates , although some have challenged the study 's methods and offered alternative interpretations of the data , suggesting that only seventeen percent of bankruptcies are directly attributable to medical expenses . 
 Warren 's book A Fighting Chance was published by Metropolitan Books in April 2014 . According to a review published in The Boston Globe , " [ t ] he book 's title refers to a time she says is now gone , when even families of modest means who worked hard and played by the rules had at a fair shot at the American dream . " 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 = Eta Carinae = 
 Eta Carinae ( abbreviated to η Carinae or η Car ) , formerly known as Eta Argus , is a stellar system containing at least two stars with a combined luminosity over five million times that of the Sun , located around 7500 light @-@ years ( 2300 parsecs ) distant in the direction of the constellation Carina . First recorded as a 4th magnitude star , it brightened considerably over the period 1837 to 1856 in an event known as the Great Eruption . Eta Carinae became the second brightest star in the sky between 11 and 14 March 1843 before fading well below naked eye visibility . It has brightened consistently since about 1940 , peaking above magnitude 4 @.@ 5 in 2014 . Eta Carinae is circumpolar south of latitude 30 ° S , so it is never visible north of latitude 30 ° N. 
 The two main stars of the Eta Carinae system have an eccentric orbit with a period of 5 @.@ 54 years . The primary is a peculiar star similar to a luminous blue variable ( LBV ) that was initially 150 @-@ 250 M ☉ of which it has lost at least 30 M ☉ already , and is expected to explode as a supernova in the astronomically near future . This is the only star known to produce ultraviolet laser emission . The secondary star is hot and also highly luminous , probably of spectral class O , around 30 @-@ 80 times as massive as the Sun . The system is heavily obscured by the Homunculus Nebula , material ejected from the primary during the Great Eruption . It is a member of the Trumpler 16 open cluster within the much larger Carina Nebula . Although unrelated to the star or Nebula , the weak Eta <unk> meteor shower has a radiant very close to Eta Carinae . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 = = = Discovery and naming = = = 
 There is no reliable evidence of Eta Carinae being observed or recorded before the 17th century , although Dutch navigator Pieter Keyser described a fourth magnitude star at approximately the correct position around 1595 – 96 , which was copied onto the celestial globes of Petrus Plancius and Jodocus Hondius and the 1603 Uranometria of Johann Bayer . However , Frederick de Houtman 's independent star catalogue from 1603 does not include Eta Carinae among the other fourth magnitude stars in the region . The earliest firm record was made by Edmond Halley in 1677 when he recorded the star simply as <unk> ( i.e. " following " relative to another star ) within a new constellation Robur Carolinum . His Catalogus <unk> Australium was published in 1679 . The star was also known by the Bayer designations Eta <unk> Caroli , Eta Argus or Eta Navis . In 1751 Nicolas Louis de Lacaille mapped the stars of Argo Navis and Robur Carolinum and divided them into separate smaller constellations . The star was placed within the keel portion of the ship named as the new constellation Carina . It was not generally known as Eta Carinae until 1879 , when the stars of Argo Navis were finally given the epithets of the daughter constellations in the Uranometria Argentina of Gould . 
 Eta Carinae is too far south to be part of the mansion @-@ based traditional Chinese astronomy , but it was mapped when the Southern <unk> were created at the start of the 17th century . Together with s Carinae , λ Centauri , and λ Muscae , Eta Carinae forms the asterism <unk> ( Sea and Mountain ) . Eta Carinae has the names <unk> She ( from the Chinese <unk> [ Mandarin : <unk> ] " Heaven 's altar " ) and Foramen . It is also known as <unk> ( Hǎi Shān <unk> , English : the Second Star of Sea and Mountain ) . 
 Halley gave an approximate apparent magnitude of " 4 " at the time of discovery , which has been calculated as magnitude 3 @.@ 3 on the modern scale . The handful of possible earlier sightings suggest that Eta Carinae was not significantly brighter than this for much of the 17th century . Further sporadic observations over the next 70 years show that Eta Carinae was probably around 3rd magnitude or fainter , until Lacaille reliably recorded it at 2nd magnitude in 1751 . It is unclear whether Eta Carinae varied significantly in brightness over the next 50 years ; there are occasional observations such as William Burchell 's at 4th magnitude in 1815 , but it is uncertain whether these are just re @-@ recordings of earlier observations . 
 = = = Great Eruption = = = 
 In 1827 Burchell specifically noted Eta Carinae 's unusual brightness at 1st magnitude , and was the first to suspect that it varied in brightness . John Herschel made a detailed series of accurate measurements in the 1830s showing Eta Carinae consistently shone around magnitude 1 @.@ 4 until November 1837 . On the evening of December 16 , 1837 , Herschel was astonished to see that it had brightened to just outshine Rigel . This event marked the beginning of a roughly 18 year period known as the Great Eruption . 
 Eta Carinae was brighter still on January 2 , 1838 , equivalent to Alpha Centauri , before fading slightly over the following three months . Herschel did not observe the star after this , but received correspondence from the Reverend W.S. Mackay in Calcutta , who wrote in 1843 , " To my great surprise I observed this March last ( 1843 ) , that the star Eta Argus had become a star of the first magnitude fully as bright as Canopus , and in colour and size very like Arcturus . " Observations at the Cape of Good Hope indicated it peaked in brightness , surpassing Canopus , over March 11 to 14 , 1843 before beginning to fade , then brightened to between the brightness of Alpha Centauri and Canopus between March 24 and 28 before fading once again . For much of 1844 the brightness was midway between Alpha Centauri and Beta Centauri , around magnitude + 0 @.@ 2 , before brightening again at the end of the year . At its brightest in 1843 it likely reached an apparent magnitude of − 0 @.@ 8 , then − 1 @.@ 0 in 1845 . The peaks in 1827 , 1838 , and 1843 are likely to have occurred at the periastron passage — the point the two stars are closest together — of the binary orbit . From 1845 to 1856 , the brightness decreased by around 0 @.@ 1 magnitudes per year , but with possible rapid and large fluctuations . 
 In their oral traditions , the Boorong people of northwestern Victoria , Australia told of a reddish star they knew as <unk> War , the wife of War ( Canopus , the Crow – <unk> ) . In 2010 , astronomers Duane <unk> and David Frew from Macquarie University in Sydney showed that this was Eta Carinae during its Great Eruption in the 1840s . From 1857 the brightness decreased rapidly until it faded below naked eye visibility by 1886 . This has been calculated to be due to the condensation of dust in the ejected material surrounding the star rather than an intrinsic change in luminosity . 
 = = = Lesser Eruption = = = 
 A new brightening started in 1887 , peaked at about magnitude 6 @.@ 2 in 1892 , then at the end of March 1895 faded rapidly to about magnitude 7 @.@ 5 . Although there are only visual records of the 1890 eruption , it has been calculated that Eta Carinae was suffering 4 @.@ 3 magnitudes of visual extinction due to the gas and dust ejected in the Great Eruption . An unobscured brightness would have been magnitude 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 9 , significantly brighter than the historical magnitude . This appeared to be a smaller copy of the Great Eruption , expelling much less material . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 Between 1900 and at least 1940 , Eta Carinae appeared to have settled at a constant brightness at around magnitude 7 @.@ 6 , but in 1953 it was noted to have brightened again to magnitude 6 @.@ 5 . The brightening continued steadily , but with fairly regular variations of a few tenths of a magnitude . 
 In 1996 the variations were first identified as having a 5 @.@ 52 year period , later measured more accurately at 5 @.@ 54 years . The binary theory was confirmed by observations of radio , optical , and near infrared radial velocity and line profile changes at the predicted time of periastron passage in late 1997 and early 1998 . At the same time there was a complete collapse of the X @-@ ray emission presumed to originate in a colliding wind zone . The confirmation of a luminous binary companion greatly modified the understanding of the physical properties of the Eta Carinae system and its variability . 
 A sudden doubling of brightness was observed in 1998 – 99 bringing it back to naked eye visibility . During the 2014 spectroscopic event , the apparent visual magnitude became brighter than magnitude 4 @.@ 5 . The brightness does not always vary consistently at different wavelengths , and does not always exactly follow the 5 @.@ 5 year cycle . Radio , infrared , and space @-@ based observations have expanded coverage of Eta Carinae across all wavelengths and revealed ongoing changes in the spectral energy distribution . 
 = = Visibility = = 
 As a 4th magnitude star , Eta Carinae is comfortably visible to the naked eye in all but the most light @-@ polluted skies in inner city areas according to the <unk> scale . However its brightness is variable over a wide range , from the second brightest star in the sky at one point in the 19th century to well below naked eye visibility . Its location at around 60 ° S in the far Southern Celestial Hemisphere means it cannot be seen by observers in Europe and much of North America . 
 Located between Canopus and the Southern Cross , Eta Carinae is easily pinpointed as the brightest star within the large naked eye Carina Nebula . In a telescope the " star " is framed within the dark " V " dust lane of the nebula and appears distinctly orange and clearly non @-@ stellar . High magnification will show the two orange lobes of a surrounding a reflection nebula known as the Homunculus Nebula on either side of a bright central core . Variable star observers can compare its brightness with several 4th and 5th magnitude stars closely surrounding the nebula . 
 Discovered in 1961 , the weak Eta <unk> meteor shower has a radiant very close to Eta Carinae . Occurring from 14 to 28 January , the shower peaks around 21 January . Meteor showers are not associated with bodies outside the Solar System , making the proximity to Eta Carinae merely a coincidence . 
 = = = Visual spectrum = = = 
 The strength and profile of the lines in the Eta Carinae spectrum are highly variable , but there are a number of consistent distinctive features . The spectrum is dominated by emission lines , usually broad although the higher excitation lines are overlaid by a narrow central component from dense ionised nebulosity , especially the Weigelt Blobs . Most lines show a P Cygni profile but with the absorption wing much weaker than the emission . The broad P Cygni lines are typical of strong stellar winds , with very weak absorption in this case because the central star is so heavily obscured . Electron scattering wings are present but relatively weak , indicating a clumpy wind . Hydrogen lines are present and strong , showing that Eta Carinae still retains much of its hydrogen envelope . <unk> lines are much weaker than the hydrogen lines , and the absence of <unk> lines provides an upper limit to the possible temperature of the primary star . NII lines can be identified but are not strong , while carbon lines cannot be detected and oxygen lines are at best very weak , indicating core hydrogen burning via the CNO cycle with some mixing to the surface . Perhaps the most striking feature is the rich FeII emission in both permitted and forbidden lines , with the forbidden lines arising from excitation of low density nebulosity around the star . 
