 The earliest analyses of the star 's spectrum are descriptions of visual observations from 1869 , of prominent emission lines " C , D , b , F , and the principal green nitrogen line " . Absorption lines are explicitly described as not being visible . The letters refer to Fraunhofer 's spectral notation and correspond to Hα , <unk> ( " D " usually refers to the sodium doublet , but " d " or " D3 " was used for the nearby helium line ) , FeII , and <unk> . It is assumed that the final line is from FeII very close to the green <unk> line now known to be from <unk> . 
 Photographic spectra from 1893 were described as similar to an F5 star , but with a few weak emission lines . Analysis to modern spectral standards suggests an early F spectral type . By 1895 the spectrum again consisted mostly of strong emission lines , with the absorption lines present but largely obscured by emission . This spectral transition from F supergiant to strong emission is characteristic of novae , where ejected material initially radiates like a pseudo @-@ photosphere and then the emission spectrum develops as it expands and thins . 
 The emission line spectrum associated with dense stellar winds has persisted ever since the late 19th century . Individual lines show widely varying widths , profiles , and Doppler shifts , often multiple velocity components within the same line . The spectral lines also show variation over time , most strongly with a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ year period but also less dramatic changes over shorter and longer periods , as well as ongoing secular development of the entire spectrum . The spectrum of light reflected from the Weigelt Blobs , and assumed to originate mainly with the primary , is similar to the extreme P Cygni @-@ type star HDE <unk> which has a spectral type of <unk> . 
 Direct spectral observations did not begin until after the Great Eruption , but light echoes from the eruption reflected from other parts of the Carina Nebula were detected using the U.S. National Optical Astronomy Observatory 's Blanco 4 @-@ meter telescope at the Cerro Tololo Inter @-@ American Observatory . Analysis of the reflected spectra indicated the light was emitted when Eta Carinae had the appearance of a 5 @,@ 000 K G2 @-@ to @-@ G5 supergiant , some 2 @,@ 000 K cooler than expected from other supernova impostor events . Further light echo observations show that following the peak brightness of the Great Eruption the spectrum developed prominent P Cygni profiles and CN molecular bands . These indicate that the star , or the expanding shell of ejected material , had cooled further and may have been colliding with circumstellar material in a similar way to a type IIn supernova . 
 In the second half of the 20th century , much higher resolution visual spectra became available . The spectrum continued to show complex and baffling features , with much of the energy from the central star being recycled into the infrared by surrounding dust , some reflection of light from the star from dense localised objects in the circumstellar material , but with obvious high ionisation features indicative of very high temperatures . The line profiles are complex and variable , indicating a number of absorption and emission features at various velocities relative to the central star . 
 The 5 @.@ 5 year orbital cycle produces strong spectral changes at periastron that are known as spectroscopic events . Certain wavelengths of radiation suffer eclipses , either due to actual occultation by one of the stars or due to passage within opaque portions of the complex stellar winds . Despite being ascribed to orbital rotation , these events vary significantly from cycle to cycle . These changes have become stronger since 2003 and it is generally believed that long @-@ term secular changes in the stellar winds or previously ejected material may be the culmination of a return to the state of the star before its Great Eruption . 
 = = = Ultraviolet = = = 
 The ultraviolet spectrum of the Eta Carinae system shows many emission lines of ionised metals such as FeII and <unk> , as well as <unk> ( Lyα ) and a continuum from a hot central source . The ionisation levels and continuum require the existence of a source with a temperature at least 37 @,@ 000 K. 
 Certain FeII UV lines are unusually strong . These originate in the Weigelt Blobs and are caused by a low @-@ gain lasing effect . Ionised hydrogen between a blob and the central star generates intense Lyα emission which penetrates the blob . The blob contains atomic hydrogen with a small admixture of other elements , including iron photo @-@ ionised by radiation from the central stars . An accidental resonance ( where emission coincidentally has a suitable energy to pump the excited state ) allows the Lyα emission to pump the Fe + ions to certain pseudo @-@ metastable states , creating a population inversion that allows the stimulated emission to take place . This effect is similar to the maser emission from dense pockets surrounding many cool supergiant stars , but the latter effect is much weaker at optical and UV wavelengths and Eta Carinae is the only clear instance detected of an ultraviolet astrophysical laser . A similar effect from pumping of metastable <unk> states by <unk> emission has also been confirmed as an astrophysical UV laser . 
 = = = Infrared = = = 
 Infrared observations of Eta Carinae have become increasingly important . The vast majority of the electromagnetic radiation from the central stars is absorbed by surrounding dust , then emitted as mid and far infrared appropriate to the temperature of the dust . This allows almost the entire energy output of the system to be observed at wavelengths that are not strongly affected by interstellar extinction , leading to estimates of the luminosity that are more accurate than for other extremely luminous stars . Eta Carinae is the brightest source in the night sky at mid @-@ infrared wavelengths . 
 Far infrared observations show a large mass of dust at 100 – 150 K , suggesting a total mass for the Homunculus of 20 solar masses ( M ☉ ) or more . This is much larger than previous estimates , and is all thought to have been ejected in a few years during the Great Eruption 
 Near @-@ infrared observations can penetrate the dust at high resolution to observe features that are completely obscured at visual wavelengths , although not the central stars themselves . The central region of the Homunculus contains a smaller Little Homunculus from the 1890 eruption , a butterfly of separate clumps and filaments from the two eruptions , and an elongated stellar wind region . 
 = = = High energy radiation = = = 
 Several X @-@ ray and gamma @-@ ray sources have been detected around Eta Carinae , for example 4U 1037 – 60 in the 4th Uhuru catalogue and 1044 – 59 in the <unk> @-@ 2 catalog . The earliest detection of X @-@ rays in the Eta Carinae region was from the Terrier @-@ <unk> rocket , followed by Ariel 5 , OSO 8 , and Uhuru sightings . 
 More detailed observations were made with the Einstein Observatory , ROSAT X @-@ ray telescope , Advanced Satellite for Cosmology and Astrophysics ( ASCA ) , and Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory . There are multiple sources at various wavelengths right across the high energy electromagnetic spectrum : hard X @-@ rays and gamma rays within 1 light @-@ month of the Eta Carinae ; hard X @-@ rays from a central region about 3 light @-@ months wide ; a distinct partial ring " horse @-@ shoe " structure in low energy X @-@ rays 0 @.@ 67 parsec ( 2 @.@ 2 light @-@ years ) across corresponding to the main <unk> from the Great Eruption ; diffuse X @-@ ray emission across the whole area of the Homunculus ; and numerous condensations and arcs outside the main ring . 
 All the high energy emission associated with Eta Carinae varies during the orbital cycle . A spectroscopic minimum , or X @-@ ray eclipse , occurred in July and August 2003 and similar events in 2009 and 2014 have been intensively observed . The highest energy gamma @-@ rays above 100 MeV detected by <unk> show strong variability , while lower energy gamma @-@ rays observed by Fermi show little variability . 
 = = = Radio emission = = = 
 Radio emissions have been observed from Eta Carinae across the microwave band . It has been detected in the 21 cm HI line , but has been particularly closely studied in the millimetre and centimetre bands . <unk> hydrogen recombination lines ( from the addition of an electron and proton to form a hydrogen atom ) have been detected in this range The emission is concentrated in a small non @-@ point source less than 4 arcseconds across and appears to be mainly free @-@ free emission ( thermal bremsstrahlung ) from ionised gas , consistent with a compact HII region at around 10 @,@ 000 K. High resolution imaging shows the radio frequencies originating from a disk a few arcseconds in diameter , 10 @,@ 000 astronomical units ( AU ) wide at the distance of Eta Carinae . 
 The radio emission from Eta Carinae shows continuous variation in strength and distribution over a 5 @.@ 5 year cycle . The HII and recombination lines vary very strongly , with continuum emission ( electromagnetic radiation across a broad band of wavelengths ) less affected . This shows a dramatic reduction in the ionisation level of the hydrogen for a short period in each cycle , coinciding with the spectroscopic events at other wavelengths . 
 = = Surroundings = = 
 Eta Carinae is found within the Carina Nebula , a giant star @-@ forming region in the Carina – Sagittarius Arm of the Milky Way . The nebula is a prominent naked eye object in the southern skies showing a complex mix of emission , reflection , and dark nebulosity . Eta Carinae is known to be at the same distance as the Carina Nebula and its spectrum can be seen reflected off various star clouds in the nebula . The appearance of the Carina Nebula , and particularly of the Keyhole region , has changed significantly since it was described by John Herschel over 150 years ago . This is thought to be due to the reduction in ionising radiation from Eta Carinae since the Great Eruption . Prior to the Great Eruption the Eta Carinae system contributed up to 20 % of the total ionizing flux for the whole Carina Nebula , but that is now mostly blocked by the surrounding gas and dust . 
 = = = Trumpler 16 = = = 
 Eta Carinae lies within the scattered stars of the Trumpler 16 open cluster . All the other members are well below naked eye visibility , although WR 25 is another extremely massive luminous star . Trumpler 16 and its neighbour Trumpler 14 are the two dominant star clusters of the Carina OB1 association , an extended grouping of young luminous stars with a common motion through space . 
 = = = Homunculus = = = 
 Eta Carinae is enclosed by , and lights up the Homunculus Nebula . The Homunculus Nebula is composed mainly of gas ejected during the Great Eruption event in the mid @-@ nineteenth century , as well as dust that condensed from the debris . The nebula consists of two polar lobes aligned with the rotation axis of the star , plus an equatorial " skirt " . Closer studies show many fine details : a Little Homunculus within the main nebula , probably formed by the 1890 eruption ; a jet ; fine streams and knots of material , especially noticeable in the skirt region ; and three Weigelt Blobs — dense gas condensations very close to the star itself . 
 The lobes of the Homunculus are considered to be formed almost entirely due to the initial eruption , rather than shaped by or including previously ejected or interstellar material , although the scarcity of material near the equatorial plane allows some later stellar wind and ejected material to mix . Therefore , the mass of the lobes gives an accurate measure of the scale of the Great Eruption , with estimates ranging from 12 – 15 M ☉ up to as high as 40 M ☉ . The results show that the material from the Great Eruption is strongly concentrated towards the poles ; 75 % of the mass and 90 % of the kinetic energy were released above latitude 45 ° . 
 A unique feature of the Homunculus is the ability to measure the spectrum of the central object at different latitudes by the reflected spectrum from different portions of the lobes . These clearly show a polar wind where the stellar wind is faster and stronger at high latitudes thought to be due to rapid rotation causing gravity brightening towards the poles . In contrast the spectrum shows a higher excitation temperature closer to the equatorial plane . By implication the outer envelope of Eta Carinae A is not strongly convective as that would prevent the gravity darkening . The current axis of rotation of the star does not appear to exactly match the alignment of the Homunculus . This may be due to interaction with Eta Carinae B which also modifies the observed stellar winds . 
 = = Distance = = 
 The distance to Eta Carinae has been determined by several different methods , resulting in a widely accepted value of 2 @,@ 300 parsecs ( 7 @,@ 800 light @-@ years ) , with a margin of error around 100 parsecs ( 330 light @-@ years ) . Eta Carinae 's distance cannot be measured using parallax due to its great distance from Earth and the surrounding nebulosity . However , at least two stars expected to be at a similar distance are in the Hipparcos catalog . These are HD <unk> in Trumpler 16 and HD <unk> , another member of Trumpler 16 or possibly of Trumpler 15 . These two stars are assumed to be at approximately the same distance as Eta Carinae , all formed from the same molecular cloud , but the distances are too great for parallaxes to be reliable . HD <unk> and HD <unk> have recorded parallaxes of 0 @.@ 53 ± 0 @.@ 42 milli @-@ arcseconds and 1 @.@ 22 ± 0 @.@ 45 milli @-@ arcseconds respectively , suggesting distances of anywhere from 2 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 light @-@ years ( 600 to 9 @,@ 000 parsecs ) . The GAIA space mission is expected to measure the parallax of these two stars with excellent precision . 
 The distances to star clusters can be estimated by using a Hertzsprung – Russell diagram or colour – colour diagram to calibrate the absolute magnitudes of the stars , for example fitting the main sequence or identifying features such as a horizontal branch , and hence their distance from Earth . It is also necessary to know the amount of interstellar extinction to the cluster and this can be difficult in regions such as the Carina Nebula . A distance of 7 @,@ 330 light @-@ years ( 2 @,@ 250 parsecs ) has been determined from the calibration of O @-@ type star luminosities in Trumpler 16 . After determining an abnormal reddening correction to the extinction , the distance to both Trumpler 14 and Trumpler 16 has been measured at 9 @,@ 500 ± 1000 light @-@ years ( 2 @,@ 900 ± 300 parsecs ) . 
 The known expansion rate of the Homunculus Nebula provides an unusual geometric method for measuring its distance . Assuming that the two lobes of the nebula are symmetrical , the projection of the nebula onto the sky depends on its distance . Values of 2 @,@ 300 , 2 @,@ 250 and 2 @,@ 300 parsecs have been derived for the Homunculus , and Eta Carinae is clearly at the same distance . 
 = = Properties = = 
 The Eta Carinae star system is currently one of the most massive that can be studied in great detail . Until recently Eta Carinae was thought to be the most massive single star , but the system 's binary nature was confirmed in 2005 . Unfortunately , both component stars are largely obscured by circumstellar material ejected from Eta Carinae A and basic properties such as their temperatures and luminosities can only be inferred . Rapid changes to the stellar wind in the 21st century suggest that the star itself may be revealed as dust from the great eruption finally clears . 
 = = = Orbit = = = 
 The binary nature of Eta Carinae is clearly established , although the components have not been directly observed and cannot even be clearly resolved spectroscopically due to scattering and re @-@ excitation in the surrounding nebulosity . Periodic photometric and spectroscopic variations prompted the search for a companion , and modelling of the colliding winds and partial " eclipses " of some spectroscopic features have constrained the possible orbits . 
 The period of the orbit is accurately known at 5 @.@ 539 years , although this has changed over time due to mass loss and accretion . The period between the Great Eruption and the smaller 1890 eruption was 5 @.@ 52 years , while before the Great Eruption it would have been lower still , probably between 4 @.@ 8 and 5 @.@ 4 years . The orbital separation is only known approximately , with a semi @-@ major axis of 15 – 16 AU . The orbit is highly eccentric , e = 0 @.@ 9 . This means that the separation of the stars varies from around 1 @.@ 6 AU , similar to the distance of Mars from the Sun , to 30 AU , similar to the distance of Neptune . 
 Perhaps the most valuable use of an accurate orbit for a binary star system is to directly calculate the masses of the stars . This requires the dimensions and inclination of the orbit to be accurately known . Unfortunately the dimensions of Eta Carinae 's orbit are only known approximately as the stars cannot be directly and separately observed . The inclination has been modelled at 130 – 145 degrees , but the orbit is still not known accurately enough to provide the masses of the two components . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Eta Carinae A is classified as a luminous blue variable ( LBV ) due to the distinctive spectral and brightness variations . This type of variable star is characterised by irregular changes from a high temperature quiescent state to a low temperature outburst state at roughly constant luminosity . LBVs in the quiescent state lie on a narrow S Doradus instability strip , with more luminous stars being hotter . In outburst all LBVs have about the same temperature , which is near 8 @,@ 000 K. LBVs in a normal outburst are visually brighter than when quiescent although the bolometric luminosity is unchanged . 
 A Great Eruption event similar to Eta Carinae A 's has only been observed in one other star in the Milky Way — P Cygni — and in a handful of other possible LBVs in external galaxies . None of them seem to be quite as violent as Eta Carinae 's . It is unclear if this is something that only a very few of the most massive LBVs undergo , something that is caused by a close companion star , or a very brief but common phase for massive stars . Some similar events in external galaxies have been mistaken for supernovae and have been called supernova impostors , although this grouping may also include other types of non @-@ terminal transients that approach the brightness of a supernova . 
 Eta Carinae A is not a typical LBV . It is more luminous than any other LBV in the Milky Way although possibly comparable to other supernova impostors detected in external galaxies . It does not currently lie on the S Doradus instability strip , although it is unclear what the temperature or spectral type of the underlying star actually is . The 1890 eruption may have been fairly typical of LBV eruptions , with an early F spectral type , and it has been estimated that the star may currently have an opaque stellar wind forming a pseudo @-@ photosphere with a temperature of 9 @,@ 000 K – 14 @,@ 000 K which would be typical for an LBV in eruption . 
 Eta Carinae B is a massive luminous hot star , about which little else is known . From certain high excitation spectral lines that ought not to be produced by the primary , Eta Carinae B is thought to be a young O @-@ type star . Most authors suggest it is a somewhat evolved star such as a supergiant or giant , although a Wolf – Rayet star cannot be ruled out . 
 = = = Mass = = = 
 The masses of stars are difficult to measure except by determination of a binary orbit . Eta Carinae is a binary system , but certain key information about the orbit is not known accurately . The mass can be strongly constrained to be greater than 90 M ☉ , due to the high luminosity . Standard models of the system assume masses of 100 – 120 M ☉ and 30 – 60 M ☉ for the primary and secondary respectively . Higher masses have been suggested , to model the energy output and mass transfer of the Great Eruption , with a combined system mass of over 250 M ☉ before the Great Eruption . Eta Carinae A has clearly lost a great deal of mass since it formed and it is expected that it was initially 150 @-@ 250 M ☉ , although it may have formed through binary merger . 
 = = = Mass loss = = = 
 Mass loss is one of the most intensively studied aspects of massive star research . Put simply , using observed mass loss rates in the best models of stellar evolution do not reproduce the observed distribution of evolved massive stars such as Wolf – <unk> , the number and types of core collapse supernovae , or their progenitors . To match those observations , the models require much higher mass loss rates . Eta Carinae A has one of the highest known mass loss rates , currently around 10 − 3 M ☉ / year , and is an obvious candidate for study . 
 Eta Carinae A is losing so much mass due to its extreme luminosity and relatively low surface gravity . Its stellar wind is entirely opaque and appears as a pseudo @-@ photosphere ; this optically dense surface hides the true physical surface of the star . During the Great Eruption the mass loss rate was a thousand times higher , around 1 M ☉ / year sustained for ten years or more . The total mass loss during the eruption was 10 – 20 M ☉ with much of it now forming the Homunculus Nebula . The smaller 1890 eruption produced the Little Homunculus Nebula , much smaller and only about 0 @.@ 1 M ☉ . The bulk of the mass loss occurs in a wind with a terminal velocity of about 420 km / s , but some material is seen at higher velocities , up to 3 @,@ 200 km / s , possibly material blown from the accretion disk by the secondary star . 
 Eta Carinae B is presumably also losing mass via a thin fast stellar wind , but this cannot be detected directly . Models of the radiation observed from interactions between the winds of the two stars show a mass loss rate of the order of 10 − 5 M ☉ / year at speeds of 3 @,@ 000 km / s , typical of a hot O class star . For a portion of the highly eccentric orbit , it actually gains material from the primary via an accretion disk . During the Great Eruption of the primary , the secondary accreted several M ☉ , producing strong jets which formed the bipolar shape of the Homunculus Nebula . 
 = = = Luminosity = = = 
 The stars of the Eta Carinae system are completely obscured by dust and opaque stellar winds , with much of the ultraviolet and visual radiation shifted to infrared . The total electromagnetic radiation across all wavelengths for both stars combined is several million solar luminosities ( L ☉ ) . The best estimate for the luminosity of the primary is 5 million L ☉ . The luminosity of Eta Carinae B is particularly uncertain , probably several hundred thousand L ☉ and almost certainly no more than 1 million L ☉ . 
 The most notable feature of Eta Carinae is its giant eruption or supernova impostor event , which originated in the primary star and was observed around 1843 . In a few years , it produced almost as much visible light as a faint supernova explosion , but the star survived . It is estimated that at peak brightness the luminosity was as high as 50 million L ☉ . Other supernova impostors have been seen in other galaxies , for example the possible false supernova SN <unk> in NGC 1058 and SN 2006jc in UGC <unk> . 
 Following the Great Eruption , Eta Carinae became self @-@ obscured by the ejected material , resulting in dramatic reddening . This has been estimated at four magnitudes at visual wavelengths , meaning the post @-@ eruption luminosity was comparable to the luminosity when first identified . Eta Carinae is still much brighter at infrared wavelengths , despite the presumed hot stars behind the nebulosity . The recent visual brightening is considered to be largely caused by a decrease in the extinction , due to thinning dust or a reduction in mass loss , rather than an underlying change in the luminosity . 
 = = = Temperature = = = 
 Until late in the 20th century , the temperature of Eta Carinae was assumed to be over 30 @,@ 000 K because of the presence of high temperature spectral lines , but other aspects of the spectrum suggested much lower temperatures and complex models were created to account for this . It is now known that the Eta Carinae system consists of at least two stars , both with strong stellar winds and a shocked colliding wind ( WWC or wind @-@ wind collision ) zone , embedded within a dusty nebula that reprocesses 90 % of the electromagnetic radiation into the mid and far infrared . All of these features have different temperatures . 
 The powerful stellar winds from the two stars collide in a roughly conical wind @-@ wind collision zone and produce temperatures as high as 100 MK at the apex between the two stars . This zone is the source of the hard x @-@ rays and gamma @-@ rays close to the stars . Near periastron , as the secondary ploughs through ever denser regions of the primary wind , the colliding wind zone becomes distorted into a spiral trailing behind Eta Carinae B. 
 The wind @-@ wind collision cone separates the winds of the two stars . For 55 – 75 ° behind the secondary , there is a thin hot wind typical of O or Wolf – Rayet stars . This allows some radiation from Eta Carinae B to be detected and its temperature can be estimated with some accuracy due to spectral lines that are unlikely to be produced by any other source . Although the secondary star has never been directly observed , there is widespread agreement on models where it has a temperature between 37 @,@ 000 K and 41 @,@ 000 K. 
 In all other directions on the other side of the wind @-@ wind collision zone , there is the wind from Eta Carinae A , cooler and around 100 times denser than Eta Carinae B 's wind . It is also optically dense , completely obscuring anything resembling a true photosphere and rendering any definition of its temperature moot . The observable radiation originates from a pseudo @-@ photosphere where the optical density of the wind drops to near zero , typically measured at a particular Rossland opacity value such as 2 ⁄ 3 . This pseudo @-@ photosphere is observed to be elongated and hotter along the presumed axis of rotation . 
 Eta Carinae A is likely to have appeared as an early B hypergiant with a temperature of between 20 @,@ 000 K and 25 @,@ 000 K at the time of its discovery by Halley . An effective temperature determined for the surface of a spherical optically thick wind at several hundred R ☉ would be 9 @,@ 400 – 15 @,@ 000 K , while the temperature of a theoretical 60 R ☉ hydrostatic " core " at optical depth 150 would be 35 @,@ 200 K. The effective temperature of the visible outer edge of the opaque primary wind is generally treated as being 15 @,@ 000 K – 25 @,@ 000 K on the basis of visual and ultraviolet spectral features assumed to be directly from the wind or reflected via the Weigelt Blobs . 
 The Homunculus contains dust at temperatures varying from 150 K to 400 K. This is the source of almost all the infrared radiation that makes Eta Carinae such a bright object at those wavelengths . 
 Further out , expanding gases from the Great Eruption collide with interstellar material and are heated to around 5 MK , producing less energetic X @-@ rays seen in a horseshoe or ring shape . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 The size of the two main stars in the Eta Carinae system is difficult to determine precisely because neither star can be seen directly . Eta Carinae B is likely to have a well @-@ defined photosphere and its radius can be estimated from the assumed type of star . An O supergiant of 933 @,@ 000 L ☉ with a temperature of 37 @,@ 200 K has an effective radius of 23 @.@ 6 R ☉ . 
 The size of Eta Carinae A is not even well defined . It has an optically dense stellar wind so the typical definition of a star 's surface being approximately where it becomes opaque gives a very different result to where a more traditional definition of a surface might be . One study calculated a radius of 60 R ☉ for a hot " core " of 35 @,@ 000 K at optical depth 150 , near the sonic point or very approximately what might be called a physical surface . At optical depth 0 @.@ 67 the radius would be over 800 R ☉ , indicating an extended optically thick stellar wind . At the peak of the Great Eruption the radius , so far as such a thing is meaningful during such a violent expulsion of material , would have been around 1 @,@ 400 R ☉ , comparable to the largest known stars . 
 The stellar sizes should be compared with their orbital separation , which is only around 250 R ☉ at periastron . The accretion radius of the secondary is around 60 R ☉ , suggesting strong accretion near periastron leading to a collapse of the secondary wind . It has been proposed that the initial brightening from 4th magnitude to 1st at relatively constant bolometric luminosity was a normal LBV outburst , albeit from an extreme example of the class . Then the companion star passing through the expanded photosphere of the primary at periastron triggered the further brightening , increase in luminosity , and extreme mass loss of the Great Eruption . 
 = = = Rotation = = = 
 Rotation rates of massive stars have a critical influence on their evolution and eventual death . The rotation rate of the Eta Carinae stars cannot be measured directly because their surfaces cannot be seen . Single massive stars spin down quickly due to braking from their strong winds , but there are hints that both Eta Carinae A and B are fast <unk> , up to 90 % of critical velocity . One or both could have been spun up by binary interaction , for example accretion onto the secondary , and orbital dragging on the primary . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 Eta Carinae is a unique object , with no very close analogues currently known in any galaxy . Therefore , its future evolution is highly uncertain , but almost certainly involves further mass loss and an eventual supernova . 
 Eta Carinae A would have begun life as an extremely hot star on the main sequence , already a highly luminous object over a million L ☉ . The exact properties would depend on the initial mass , which is expected to have been at least 150 M ☉ and possibly much higher . A typical spectrum when first formed would be <unk> and the star would be mostly or fully convective due to CNO cycle fusion at the very high core temperatures . Sufficiently massive or differentially rotating stars undergo such strong mixing that they remain chemically homogeneous during core hydrogen burning . 
 As core hydrogen burning progresses , a very massive star would slowly expand and become more luminous , becoming a blue hypergiant and eventually an LBV while still fusing hydrogen in the core . When hydrogen at the core is depleted after 2 – 2 @.@ 5 million years , hydrogen shell burning continues with further increases in size and luminosity , although hydrogen shell burning in chemically homogeneous stars may be very brief or absent since the entire star would become depleted of hydrogen . In the late stages of hydrogen burning , mass loss is extremely high due to the high luminosity and enhanced surface abundances of helium and nitrogen . As hydrogen burning ends and core helium burning begins , massive stars transition very rapidly to the Wolf – Rayet stage with little or no hydrogen , increased temperatures , and decreased luminosity . They are likely to have lost over half their initial mass at this point . 
 It is unclear whether triple alpha helium fusion has started at the core of Eta Carinae A. The elemental abundances at the surface cannot be accurately measured , but ejecta within the Homunculus are around 60 % hydrogen and 40 % helium , with nitrogen enhanced to ten times solar levels . This is indicative of ongoing CNO cycle hydrogen fusion . 
 Models of the evolution and death of single very massive stars predict an increase in temperature during helium core burning , with the outer layers of the star being lost . It becomes a Wolf – Rayet star on the nitrogen sequence , moving from <unk> to <unk> as more of the outer layers are lost , possibly reaching the WC or WO spectral class as carbon and oxygen from the triple alpha process reach the surface . This process would continue with heavier elements being fused until an iron core develops , at which point the core collapses and the star is destroyed . Subtle differences in initial conditions , in the models themselves , and most especially in the rates of mass loss , produce different predictions for the final state of the most massive stars . They may survive to become a helium @-@ stripped star or they may collapse at an earlier stage while they retain more of their outer layers . The lack of sufficiently luminous WN stars and the discovery of apparent LBV supernova progenitors has also prompted the suggestion that certain types of LBVs explode as a supernova without evolving further . 
 Eta Carinae is a close binary and this complicates the evolution of both stars . Compact massive companions can strip mass from larger primary stars much more quickly than would occur in a single star , so the properties at core collapse can be very different . In some scenarios , the secondary can accrue significant mass , accelerating its evolution , and in turn be stripped by the now compact Wolf – Rayet primary . In the case of Eta Carinae , the secondary is clearly causing additional instability in the primary , making it difficult to predict future developments . 
 = = = Potential supernova = = = 
 The overwhelming probability is that the next supernova observed in the Milky Way will originate from an unknown white dwarf or anonymous red supergiant , very likely not even visible to the naked eye . Nevertheless , the prospect of a supernova originating from an object as extreme , nearby , and well @-@ studied as Eta Carinae arouses great interest . 
 As a single star , a star around 150 times as massive as the Sun originally would typically reach core collapse as a Wolf – Rayet star within 3 million years . At low metallicity , many massive stars will collapse directly to a black hole with no visible explosion or a sub @-@ luminous supernova , and a small fraction will produce a pair instability supernova , but at solar metallicity and above there is expected to be sufficient mass loss before collapse to allow a visible supernova of type Ib or Ic . If there is still a large amount of expelled material close to the star , the shock formed by the supernova explosion impacting the circumstellar material can efficiently convert kinetic energy to radiation , resulting in a <unk> supernova ( commonly called a hypernova ) , several times more luminous than a typical core collapse supernova and much longer @-@ lasting . Highly massive progenitors may also eject sufficient nickel to cause a hypernova simply from the radioactive decay . The resulting remnant would be a black hole since it is highly unlikely such a massive star could ever lose sufficient mass for the core not to exceed the limit for a neutron star . Certain supernovae may also produce gamma @-@ ray bursts , but this is not expected from a single star in the mass range of Eta Carinae . 
 The existence of a massive companion brings many other possibilities . If Eta Carinae A was rapidly stripped of its outer layers , it might be a less massive <unk> or WO @-@ type star when core collapse was reached . This would result in a type Ib or type Ic supernova due to the lack of hydrogen and possibly helium . This supernova type is thought to be the originator of certain classes of gamma ray bursts , but models predict they occur only in less massive stars . 
 Several unusual supernovae and impostors have been compared to Eta Carinae as examples of its possible fate . One of the most compelling is SN <unk> , a blue supergiant which underwent a supernova impostor event in 2009 with similarities to Eta Carinae 's Great Eruption , then an even brighter outburst in 2012 which is likely to have been a true supernova . SN 2006jc , some 77 million light years away in UGC <unk> , in the constellation Lynx , also underwent a supernova impostor brightening in 2004 , followed by a magnitude 13 @.@ 8 type Ib supernova , first seen on 9 October 2006 . Eta Carinae has also been compared to other possible supernova impostors such as SN 1961V , and to <unk> supernovae such as SN 2006gy . 
 = = = Possible effects on Earth = = = 
 A typical core collapse supernova at the distance of Eta Carinae would peak at an apparent magnitude around − 4 , similar to Venus . A hypernova could be five magnitudes brighter , potentially the brightest supernova in recorded history ( currently SN 1006 ) . At 7 @,@ 500 light years from the star it is unlikely to directly affect terrestrial lifeforms , as they will be protected from gamma rays by the atmosphere and from some other cosmic rays by the magnetosphere . The main damage would be restricted to the upper atmosphere , the ozone layer , spacecraft , including satellites , and any astronauts in space . At least one paper has projected that complete loss of the Earth 's ozone layer is a plausible consequence of a supernova , which would result in a significant increase in surface UV radiation reaching Earth 's surface from our own Sun . However this would require a typical supernova to be closer than 50 light @-@ years from Earth , and even a potential hypernova would need to be closer than Eta Carinae . Another analyses the impacts and also discusses more subtle effects from the unusual illumination , such as possible melatonin suppression with resulting insomnia and increased risk of cancer and depression . It concludes that a supernova of this magnitude would have to be much closer than Eta Carinae to have any type of major impact on Earth . 
 Eta Carinae is not expected to produce a gamma @-@ ray burst and its axis is not currently aimed near Earth , but a direct hit from a gamma @-@ ray burst could cause catastrophic damage and a major extinction event . Calculations show that the deposited energy of such a gamma @-@ ray burst striking the Earth 's atmosphere would be equivalent to one kiloton of TNT per square kilometer over the entire hemisphere facing the star , with ionizing radiation depositing ten times the lethal whole body dose to the surface . 
 = The Naked Now = 
 " The Naked Now " is the third episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired on October 5 , 1987 in broadcast syndication in the United States . Directed by Paul Lynch , the episode had been written by D.C. Fontana , under the pseudonym of " J. Michael Bingham , " with John D.F. Black also credited for his role in devising the plot 's origins . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of a Starfleet starship , the USS Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , the Enterprise encounters a research ship where all personnel are found dead . The Enterprise crew quickly become infected with the same affliction , one that is similar to that suffered by the crew of James T. Kirk 's USS Enterprise decades before . 
 Based on an unfinished teleplay by Gene Roddenberry , the episode deliberately followed up on the events of Star Trek : The Original Series first season episode " The Naked Time " ( 1966 ) . Fans initially criticised the origins of the episode , and later reviews were also largely negative . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The crew of the Enterprise responds to messages received from the SS Tsiolkovsky , a science vessel monitoring the collapse of a supergiant star . The messages suggest that the crew has been exposed to a sudden hull breach amid their rounds of laughter . After the Enterprise secures the Tsiolkovsky via tractor beam , an away team beams over and finds the crew frozen to death in various stages of <unk> one who was taking a shower fully clothed . A woman 's body , frozen , falls into Lt. La Forge 's ( LeVar Burton ) hands . Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) orders full medical examinations of the away team on their return , and finds La Forge sweating profusely and complaining about the temperature . She orders him to stay in sickbay but he manages to escape , making his way to the quarters of Crusher 's son , Wesley ( Wil Wheaton ) . Unaware of La Forge 's condition , Wesley shows him a portable tractor beam device and La Forge places an encouraging hand on his shoulder . Meanwhile , acting on a hunch by Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) , who had read a book on past starships named " Enterprise " and found a previous mention of someone taking a shower fully clothed in its pages , Lt. Cdr . Data ( Brent Spiner ) locates a historical record identifying the ailment as similar to one encountered by Captain Kirk 's USS Enterprise . La Forge returns to sickbay , where Dr. Crusher quickly becomes concerned when she realizes that the infection is spread by physical contact . Much of the ship 's crew comes under the influence of the ailment , including Data , who engages in a sexual encounter with Security Chief Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) . Dr. Crusher , struggling against the effects of the ailment , finds the original antidote documented by Kirk 's Enterprise to be ineffective , and begins devising a new version of it . 
 Now infected , Wesley uses a digital sample of Captain Picard 's voice to lure key engineering crew @-@ members away from the engineering deck . He erects a force field around the area with his tractor beam device and assumes control of the ship . He allows one of the engineers , Mr. Shimoda ( Benjamin W.S. Lum ) , who is acting in a childlike manner , into the force field . Mr. Shimoda manages to remove all of the <unk> chips from the engine control station and plays with them like toys . As the supergiant star collapses , a fragment is blown into a direct impact course with the two Federation ships , and without the chips in place , they cannot move out of its way . Chief Engineer Sarah MacDougal ( Brooke Bundy ) manages to disable Wesley 's force field , and Data is sent to replace the chips . He reports that he will not have enough time . Wesley reverses the ship 's tractor beam , repelling the Enterprise off the Tsiolkovsky , giving themselves the necessary additional seconds for Data to replace the chips enabling the ship to move out of the way . The crew is cured of the ailment , and Picard partially credits Wesley for helping to prevent a disaster . 
 = = Production = = 
 Star Trek : The Next Generation 's creator , Gene Roddenberry , wanted to include an episode revealing the characters ' motivations to the audience early on in the series . As a basis , he turned to the Star Trek : The Original Series episode " The Naked Time . " Executive producer Rick Berman described " The Naked Now " as " a [ n ] homage , not a copy " of " The Naked Time , " while director Paul Lynch described it as " slightly more adult and a lot more comic than the original " . 
 " The Naked Now " is based on an incomplete teleplay by Roddenberry for The Next Generation , titled " Revelations . " The first few scenes remained largely similar , but in " Revelations " La Forge infected Yar while making unsuccessful sexual advances toward her . Original Series writer D.C. Fontana wrote a new draft of the teleplay with several further changes that failed to make it into the final installment . These included Data turning down Yar 's sexual advances , Troi 's lack of privacy due to empathic abilities , Picard 's concern for the families on the ship , and Riker 's fear of becoming a lonely starship captain . 
 Brooke Bundy made her only appearance as the first Chief Engineer of the Enterprise , Sarah MacDougal , in this episode . The post of Chief Engineer changed hands numerous times through the rest of season one before Geordi La Forge was finally assigned the post on a permanent basis in season two . Michael Rider made his first appearance as an unnamed transporter chief , and would go on to appear in the same role twice more before appearing a final time as a security guard . 
 The SS Tsiolkovsky model was a re @-@ dress of the USS Grissom from Star Trek III : The Search for Spock ( 1984 ) . Michael Okuda created a ship 's dedication plaque for the Tsiolkovsky which stated that it had been created in the Soviet Union . A copy was subsequently sent for display at the Konstantin E. Tsiolkovsky State Museum of the History of <unk> in Kaluga , Soviet Russia . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Naked Now " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing October 3 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 11 @.@ 5 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was lower than the pilot , but higher than the following episodes until " Lonely Among Us " in October 1987 . 
 The initial reaction of some fans was dismay , as there were concerns that The Next Generation would continue to lift stories from The Original Series . Staff writer Maurice Hurley said of " The Naked Now , " " I didn 't like that show at all . It just wasn 't very good . What it did show , though , was that the new ensemble could interact , and that there were relationships between them that worked . But doing it was terrible . It was a warmed over premise . Why do it ? " The liaison between Data and Yar stood out as being controversial , with Data referring to himself as being " fully functional " in a sexual sense . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido reviewed it on behalf of Tor.com , comparing it to " The Naked Time " and stating that " there 's nothing in this episode as entertaining as Sulu bare @-@ chested with an <unk> , and Wesley being nerdy in the engine room is nowhere near as much fun as Riley singing . " He gave the episode a score of two out of ten , remarking that " it 's rarely a good idea to do an episode where everyone acts out of character as only the second one out of the gate , since we don 't know enough about these people for their acting strange to be meaningful . " Cast member Wil Wheaton re @-@ watched the episode for AOL TV , and summed it up saying " whether it was the worst episode ever or not probably rested upon the viewer 's expectations . Trekkies who were looking for reasons to hate The Next Generation found plenty " while " viewers who were willing to watch it with an open mind saw flashes of things they came to love watching , " and gave it a score of D + . 
 James Hunt wrote about " The Naked Now " for the website " Den of Geek , " stating that he couldn 't understand why someone would want to show the characters acting out of character in only the second episode ( not counting the pilot ) of the series , before the viewers had a baseline from which to understand why the characters ' behaviour was abnormal . He praised the idea of connecting The Next Generation to The Original Series early in the series , but also remarked that " however you slice it up , this episode is pretty awful . " Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website " Jammer 's Reviews " remarked that " there 's a certain memorable quality to this episode , despite its campy , overplayed comedy " but that " ultimately , the show is too goofy for its own good , but it 's at least not boring , " awarding it a score of two and a half out of four . 
 Writing for TrekNation , Michelle Erica Green thought that the episode would have been improved if it had come a few seasons later , by which time the characters were better known to the audience . She also argued that the plot 's synopsis would have worked better had it been used for an episode in Star Trek : Voyager . She thought that the episode was " boring , because we already know how it 's going to end , and it 's trivial , because already we can see how easily this crew can be diverted from duty . " Zack Handlen reviewed " The Naked Now " for The A.V. Club . He gave the episode a grade of D- , and his criticism of the episode included describing the scene with Yar and Data as " colossally misjudged " as well as attacking Wesley Crusher 's " <unk> . " 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " The Naked Now " was on VHS cassette , appearing on September 5 , 1991 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and then released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Monaco : What 's Yours Is Mine = 
 Monaco : What 's Yours Is Mine is a stealth action video game released in 2013 for Xbox 360 , Microsoft Windows , Mac OS X and Linux . The PC versions of Monaco were developed and published by Pocketwatch Games while the Xbox Live Arcade version was published by Majesco Entertainment . 
 The gameplay in Monaco consists of up to four players who all control different characters while they partake in heists and robberies in many different locations . Each player can control one of eight eight characters , all of whom have their own advantages , such as the Hacker who can put viruses onto the security systems , and the Cleaner who can put guards to sleep . The main difference between single @-@ player and multiplayer is that in multiplayer , when a player dies they must be revived before the level can be completed . 
 Development of Monaco began while Andy Schatz was working for TKO Software , before he founded his own independent company Pocketwatch Games . The game first started as nothing more than a Pac @-@ Man clone that he referred to as " The Sims meets Diablo meets Hitman " . After being turned down by Microsoft Game Studios twice , Monaco was released onto Xbox 360 by Majesco Entertainment . The soundtrack was composed by American composer Austin Wintory , who had worked on the soundtracks for games like Flow and Journey , after discussing the topic with Schatz . Andy Nguyen , whom Andy Schatz met while he was looking for playtesters , quit his job at Citibank so he could spend more time helping with the development of Monaco as a level designer and producer , as well as working in booths . 
 The game was positively received by reviewers and won two awards at the 2010 GDC Independent Games Festival . The reviewers highly praised the cooperative gameplay but said the single @-@ player was less fun due to there being less things to do . Many comparisons were made between Monaco and other media ; the most common being the 1960 heist film Oceans 11 . Reviewers liked the art style and said that the gameplay suited the <unk> design . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Monaco is a single @-@ player or multiplayer stealth action game played in a top @-@ down perspective . Up to four players can control one of eight characters , all of which have different traits and advantages , while they partake in heists and robberies in places like nightclubs , mansions and yachts . Levels can be completed it many different ways based on what characters the player or players choose . When playing in single @-@ player , once a character is unlocked they can be used on any level , although any level can be completed as any character . In multiplayer , players work together to complete the levels . If one of the players die , another must revive them before finishing the level . 
 The eight characters consist of the <unk> , the Cleaner , the Lookout , the <unk> , the Mole , the Gentleman , the Redhead and the Hacker . The <unk> can open doors twice as fast as the other characters ; the Cleaner can put guards to sleep ; the Lookout is able to see enemies that aren 't in the player 's direct line of sight ; the <unk> owns a monkey which runs around collecting coins ; the Mole can dig holes through walls and takes less time to open vents ; the Gentleman has the ability to temporarily change appearance , making the player less detectable to enemies ; the Redhead can charm enemies into not attacking them and make characters follow them ; and the Hacker has the ability to upload computer viruses to the security systems , resulting in them shutting off temporarily . The first four of the eight characters are available immediately . 
 There are many items that can be picked up , which include smoke bombs and C4 explosives , along with many different types of guns including a shotgun and a machine gun . The gun 's ammo is limited and is replenished by collecting ten coins which are scattered around the map . In multiplayer , the player who collects the coin 's is the only person who 's gun receives more ammo . 
 = = Development = = 
 The idea for Monaco was first prototyped during the time when Andy Schatz was working for TKO Software , which was a video game development company based in Santa Cruz , California . The game first started as a Pac @-@ Man clone and was described by Schatz to have looked similar to Jason Rohrer 's 2014 video game The Castle Doctrine during its early stages of development . His original plans were to release Monaco as an Xbox Live Indie Games title , made within six weeks . He said that when he was talking to people about it during this stage , he would describe it as " The Sims meets Diablo meets Hitman " . The development at TKO was done for around 3 weeks whilst the company searched for paying work . Before TKO shut down in 2005 , Schatz left and founded his own independent company , Pocketwatch Games . After Pocketwatch Games experimented with simulation games , such as 2006 Independent Games Festival finalist Wildlife Tycoon : Venture Africa and Wildlife Tycoon : Venture Dinosauria , Schatz prototyped an early version of Monaco using Microsoft XNA as to see if it worked on Xbox 360 . 
 When Andy Schatz pitched the game to Microsoft Game Studios , they turned it down . Schatz responded by saying " they were crazy " and asked if he could <unk> the game , to which they accepted . Schatz continued to work on Monaco for around a year in order " to make it something really marketable " . When he pitched it to Microsoft Game Studios for the second time , it was turned down . After these events , Schatz got the impression that the game was not going to be released on Xbox 360 . " That really bummed me out " , Schatz said in an interview with Mike Rose from Gamasutra , " because I felt like the Xbox was the ideal platform for this particular game , because of the prevalence of headsets , the marketplace being strong , and the Xbox being the easiest console to work with . And of course the game was written in XNA , so it was a no @-@ brainer " . Schatz tried but ultimately failed to port the game to the PlayStation 3 . In order to publish the game on Xbox Live , Schatz partnered with video game publishing company Majesco . Due to this , game had to be ported from Empty Clip to the <unk> engine . Valve Corporation approached Schatz and offered to get the game on the Steam store . 
 Schatz met Andy Nguyen while looking for playtesters in 2011 . Schatz described Nguyen as a man Schatz " clicked with " and made an energizing work environment and due to this , Nguyen was hired to work in festival booths and sell the company 's merchandise at events . Nguyen did not know how to program , but he eventually became a level designer and producer for Monaco . During the development of Monaco , Nguyen quit his job at Citibank to devote more time to the game and Pocketwatch Games . 
 The soundtrack for Monaco was composed by Grammy @-@ nominated Austin Wintory , who had previously worked as the composer for games such as flOw and Journey . The original soundtrack and a remixed album called " Gentleman 's Private Collection " were released on April 24 , 2013 . The soundtrack incorporates pianos and drums into what Christian Donlan ( Eurogamer ) thought to be one of Wintory 's best works yet . The Gentleman 's Private Collection contains remixes of the original soundtrack by other notable composers , including Peter <unk> , Tina Guo who played the violin in the Journey soundtrack , and <unk> who composed the soundtrack for Super Hexagon . When Wintory was approached by Schatz , he was excited due to the request involving <unk> " old @-@ timey piano " , stating " when else am I ever going to be asked to write anything remotely like this ? " Schatz originally wanted to use licensed music due to him thinking the project was too going to be too small to warrant its own soundtrack , but Wintory persuaded Schatz after discussing the topic with him . The full soundtrack and Gentleman 's Private Collection were released onto Wintory 's Bandcamp . 
 Monaco was released onto Microsoft Windows on April 24 , 2013 . The Xbox 360 version was delayed and ended up being released on May 10 . On July 3 , 2013 the Mac version was released and on October 21 , 2013 , the Linux version was released . Since the official release , Pocketwatch Games have updated the game to include more levels and minigames , including a new campaign mode called " Monaco Origins " , which contains backstories for all the characters . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Monaco : What 's Yours Is Mine received positive reception from critics , garnering " generally favorable reviews " for both the PC and Xbox 360 release . The Xbox 360 release sold poorly . Andy Schatz believed this was due to the weak demo , the delayed release and the bugs that were related to the multiplayer mode . 
 Reviewers highly praised the co @-@ op mode but many disliked the single @-@ player modes . Danielle Riendeau ( Polygon ) liked the gameplay of Monaco , stating it was very fun with other people , but it seemed like single @-@ player needed work . James <unk> ( GameFront ) said the co @-@ op was ridiculously fun and has good replayability . Marty Sliva ( IGN ) said Monaco provided one of the best co @-@ op experiences he 'd had in a while . He stated that due to the gameplay and mechanics , it was one of the most unique and addictive games that were released in 2013 . Scott Nichols ( Digital Spy ) said that the game contains lots to discover , but is best done cooperatively . Jeff Grubb ( VentureBeat ) praised the fact that the game works as both an arcade and a strategic game but said to skip it if you weren 't planning on playing it cooperatively . Roger Hargreaves ( Metro ) liked the multiplayer mode more , but still praised the single @-@ player mode and called it surprisingly compelling . 
 Reviewers made comparisons between Monaco and other games and films . The most common one being the comparison of the 1960 heist film Oceans 11 . Scott Nichols compared it to Oceans 11 due to the similarities and said " with its ensemble cast , daring break @-@ ins and carefully laid plans , it has all the makings of an interactive heist flick " . Anton <unk> ( Eurogamer ) also compared the game to Oceans 11 . Roger Hargreaves said the game was like " Ocean ’ s Eleven meets Pac @-@ Man and Metal Gear Solid " . He compared it to Pac @-@ Man due to the maze @-@ like levels . 
 Many reviewers criticised the game 's repetition of levels . Francesco <unk> ( Eurogamer ) criticised the variation between levels and said it wasn 't too long before he was seeing similar levels due to the game 's simplicity . He said the levels are usually well made but is too often made for certain characters , which adds more gameplay due to the time it takes finding the best strategies to complete a level . Alex Navarro ( Giant Bomb ) liked the overall gameplay of Monaco but disliked some of the later levels as they turned into " tedious exercises in trial @-@ and @-@ error " . Ben Allan ( Gameplanet ) said the single @-@ player was less fun due to there being less variations and less chaos . Anton <unk> said he fell in love with the simplicity of the graphics and liked the majority of the gameplay but said that it seemed like the game 's artificial intelligence was made too easy to be fooled . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 15 weeks into development of Monaco , in early 2010 , the game won the 2010 GDC Independent Games Festival Seumas McNally Grand Prize award , as well as the Excellence in Design award . Monaco won Destructoid 's " best of 2013 co @-@ op multiplayer " and beat titles like Diablo III , <unk> ! and Payday 2 . Monaco was also a finalist in the 2010 Indie Game Challenge under the " Professional " category . 
 = Alprazolam = 
 Alprazolam , available under the trade name Xanax among others , is a short @-@ acting anxiolytic of the benzodiazepine class . It is commonly used for the treatment of panic disorder , and anxiety disorders , such as generalized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) or social anxiety disorder ( SAD ) . It was the 12th most prescribed medicine in the USA in 2010 . Alprazolam , like other benzodiazepines , binds to specific sites on the GABAA receptor . It possesses anxiolytic , sedative , hypnotic , skeletal muscle relaxant , anticonvulsant , and <unk> properties . Alprazolam is available for oral administration in compressed tablet ( CT ) and extended @-@ release capsule ( XR ) formulations . 
 Peak benefits achieved for generalized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) may take up to a week . Tolerance to the anxiolytic / <unk> effects is controversial with some authoritative sources reporting the development of tolerance , and others reporting no development of tolerance ; tolerance will , however , develop to the sedative @-@ hypnotic effects within a couple of days . Withdrawal symptoms or rebound symptoms may occur after ceasing treatment abruptly following a few weeks or longer of steady dosing , and may necessitate a gradual dose reduction . 
 Alprazolam was first released by Upjohn ( now a part of Pfizer ) in 1981 . The first approved use was panic disorder and within two years of its original marketing Xanax became a blockbuster drug in the US . Presently , alprazolam is the most prescribed and the most misused benzodiazepine in the US . The potential for misuse among those taking it for medical reasons is controversial with some expert reviews stating that the risk is low and similar to that of other benzodiazepine drugs and others stating that there is a substantial risk of misuse and dependence in both patients and non @-@ medical users of alprazolam and that the pharmacological properties of alprazolam , high affinity binding , high potency , having a short elimination half @-@ life as well as a rapid onset of action may increase the misuse potential of alprazolam . Compared to the large number of prescriptions , relatively few individuals increase their dose on their own initiative or engage in drug @-@ seeking behavior . Alprazolam is classified as a schedule IV controlled substance by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 Alprazolam is mostly used to treat anxiety disorders , panic disorders , and nausea due to chemotherapy . The FDA label advises that the physician should periodically reassess the usefulness of the drug . Alprazolam may also be indicated for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder , as well as for the treatment of anxiety conditions with co @-@ morbid depression . Alprazolam is also often prescribed with instances of hypersomnia and co @-@ morbid sleep deficits . 
 = = = Panic disorder = = = 
 Alprazolam is effective in the relief of moderate to severe anxiety and panic attacks . However , it is not a first line treatment since the development of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , and alprazolam is no longer recommended in Australia for the treatment of panic disorder due to concerns regarding tolerance , dependence and abuse . Evidence supporting the effectiveness of alprazolam in treating panic disorder has been limited to 4 to 10 weeks . However , people with panic disorder have been treated on an open basis for up to 8 months without apparent loss of benefit . 
 In the United States , alprazolam is FDA @-@ approved for the treatment of panic disorder with or without agoraphobia . Alprazolam is recommended by the World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry ( <unk> ) for treatment @-@ resistant cases of panic disorder where there is no history of tolerance or dependence . 
 = = = Anxiety disorders = = = 
 Anxiety associated with depression is responsive to alprazolam . Demonstrations of the effectiveness by systematic clinical study are limited to 4 months duration for anxiety disorder . However , the research into antidepressant properties of alprazolam is of poor quality and only assessed the short @-@ term effects of alprazolam against depression . In one study , some long term , high @-@ dosage users of alprazolam developed reversible depression . In the US , alprazolam is FDA @-@ approved for the management of anxiety disorders ( a condition corresponding most closely to the APA Diagnostic and Statistical Manual DSM @-@ IV @-@ TR diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder ) or the short @-@ term relief of symptoms of anxiety . In the UK , alprazolam is recommended for the short @-@ term treatment ( 2 – 4 weeks ) of severe acute anxiety . 
 = = = Nausea due to chemotherapy = = = 
 Alprazolam may be used in combination with other medications for chemotherapy @-@ induced nausea and vomiting . 
 = = Pregnancy and lactation = = 
 Benzodiazepines cross the placenta , enter the fetus and are also excreted with breast milk . The use of benzodiazepines during pregnancy or lactation has potential risks . The use of alprazolam in pregnancy is believed to be associated with congenital abnormalities . 
 Women who are pregnant or are planning on becoming pregnant should avoid starting alprazolam . Use in the last trimester may cause fetal drug dependence and withdrawal symptoms in the post @-@ natal period as well as neonatal <unk> and respiratory problems . However , in long @-@ term users of benzodiazepines abrupt discontinuation due to concerns of <unk> has a high risk of causing extreme withdrawal symptoms and a severe rebound effect of the underlying mental health disorder . Spontaneous abortions may also result from abrupt withdrawal of psychotropic medications including benzodiazepines . 
 Benzodiazepines , including alprazolam , are known to be excreted in human milk . Chronic administration of diazepam , another benzodiazepine , to nursing mothers has been reported to cause their infants to become lethargic and to lose weight . 
 = = Contraindications = = 
 Benzodiazepines require special precaution if used in children and in alcohol- or drug @-@ dependent individuals . Particular care should be taken in pregnant or elderly patients , patients with substance abuse history , particularly alcohol dependence and patients with comorbid psychiatric disorders . Use of alprazolam should be avoided or carefully monitored by medical professionals in individuals with the following conditions : myasthenia gravis , acute narrow @-@ angle glaucoma , severe liver deficiencies ( e.g. , cirrhosis ) , severe sleep apnea , pre @-@ existing respiratory depression , marked neuromuscular respiratory weakness including unstable myasthenia gravis , acute pulmonary insufficiency , chronic psychosis , hypersensitivity or allergy to alprazolam or other drugs in the benzodiazepine class , borderline personality disorder ( may induce suicidality and <unk> ) . 
 Like all central nervous system depressants , including alcohol , alprazolam in larger @-@ than @-@ normal doses can cause significant deterioration in alertness , combined with increased feelings of drowsiness , especially in those unaccustomed to the drug 's effects . People driving or conducting activities that require vigilance should exercise caution in using alprazolam or any other depressant until they know how it affects them . 
 Elderly individuals should be cautious in the use of alprazolam due to the possibility of increased susceptibility to side @-@ effects , especially loss of coordination and drowsiness . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 Allergic reactions are unlikely to occur . The only common side effect is sleepiness when treatment is initiated . 
 Possible side effects include : 
 <unk> 
 Jaundice ( very rare ) 
 Hallucinations ( rare ) 
 Dry mouth ( infrequent ) 
 Ataxia , slurred speech 
 Suicidal ideation ( rare ) 
 Urinary retention ( infrequent ) 
 Skin rash , respiratory depression , constipation 
 <unk> amnesia and concentration problems 
 <unk> , dizziness , lightheadedness , fatigue , unsteadiness and impaired coordination , vertigo 
 = = = Paradoxical reactions = = = 
 Although unusual , the following paradoxical reactions have been shown to occur : 
 Aggression 
 Rage , hostility 
 Twitches and tremor 
 Mania , agitation , hyperactivity and restlessness 
 = = = Food and drug interactions = = = 
 Alprazolam is primarily metabolised via CYP3A4 . Combining CYP3A4 inhibitors such as cimetidine , erythromycin , <unk> , fluvoxamine , <unk> , <unk> , nefazodone , <unk> , and ritonavir delay the hepatic clearance of alprazolam , which may result in excessive accumulation of alprazolam . This may result in exacerbation of its adverse effect profile . 
 <unk> and <unk> have been reported to be increased an average of 31 % and 20 % , respectively , by the concomitant administration of alprazolam tablets in doses up to 4 mg / day . Combined oral contraceptive pills reduce the clearance of alprazolam , which may lead to increased plasma levels of alprazolam and accumulation . 
 Alcohol is one of the most important and common interactions . Alcohol and benzodiazepines such as alprazolam taken in combination have a synergistic effect on one another , which can cause severe sedation , behavioral changes , and intoxication . The more alcohol and alprazolam taken the worse the interaction . Combination of alprazolam with the herb kava can result in the development of a semi @-@ comatose state . Hypericum conversely can lower the plasma levels of alprazolam and reduce its therapeutic effect . 
 = = = Overdose = = = 
 <unk> of alprazolam can be mild to severe depending on how much of the drug is taken and any other drugs that have been taken . 
 Alprazolam overdoses cause excess central nervous system ( CNS ) depression and may include one or more of the following symptoms : 
 <unk> ( drowsiness ) 
 Hypotension ( low blood pressure ) 
 Orthostatic hypotension ( fainting while standing up too quickly ) 
 <unk> ( shallow breathing ) 
 Impaired motor functions 
 Dizziness 
 Impaired balance 
 Muscle weakness 
 Impaired or absent reflexes 
 Fainting 
 Coma and death are possible if alprazolam is combined with other substances . 
 = = = Dependence and withdrawal = = = 
 Alprazolam , like other benzodiazepines , binds to specific sites on the GABAA gamma @-@ amino @-@ butyric acid receptor . When bound to these sites , which are referred to as benzodiazepine receptors , it modulates the effect of GABA A receptors and , thus , GABAergic neurons . Long @-@ term use causes adaptive changes in the benzodiazepine receptors , making them less sensitive to stimulation and less powerful in their effects . 
 Withdrawal and rebound symptoms commonly occur and necessitate a gradual reduction in dosage to minimize withdrawal effects when discontinuing . 
 Not all withdrawal effects are evidence of true dependence or withdrawal . Recurrence of symptoms such as anxiety may simply indicate that the drug was having its expected anti @-@ anxiety effect and that , in the absence of the drug , the symptom has returned to pretreatment levels . If the symptoms are more severe or frequent , the patient may be experiencing a rebound effect due to the removal of the drug . Either of these can occur without the patient 's actually being drug @-@ dependent . 
 Alprazolam and other benzodiazepines may also cause the development of physical dependence , tolerance , and benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms during rapid dose reduction or cessation of therapy after long @-@ term treatment . There is a higher chance of withdrawal reactions if the drug is administered in a higher dosage than recommended , or if a patient stops taking the medication altogether without slowly allowing the body to adjust to a lower @-@ dosage regimen . 
 In 1992 , <unk> and colleagues reported that dose escalation is not a characteristic of long @-@ term alprazolam users , and that the majority of long @-@ term alprazolam users change their initial pattern of regular use to one of symptom control only when required . 
 Some common symptoms of alprazolam discontinuation include malaise , weakness , insomnia , tachycardia , lightheadedness , and dizziness . 
 Patients taking a dosing regimen larger than 4 mg per day have an increased potential for dependence . This medication may cause withdrawal symptoms upon abrupt withdrawal or rapid tapering , which in some cases have been known to cause seizures . The discontinuation of this medication may also cause a reaction called rebound anxiety . 
 Delirium similar to that produced by the <unk> alkaloids ( <unk> antagonists ) of Datura ( <unk> and atropine ) and seizures have been reported in the medical literature from abrupt alprazolam discontinuation . 
 In a 1983 study of patients who had taken long @-@ acting benzodiazepines , e.g. , clorazepate , for extended periods , the medications were stopped abruptly . Only 5 % of patients who had been taking the drug for less than 8 months demonstrated withdrawal symptoms , but 43 % of those who had been taking them for more than 8 months did . With alprazolam – a short @-@ acting benzodiazepine – taken for 8 weeks , 65 % of patients experienced significant rebound anxiety . To some degree , these older benzodiazepines are self @-@ tapering . 
 The benzodiazepines diazepam ( Valium ) and oxazepam ( <unk> ) have been found to produce fewer withdrawal reactions than alprazolam ( Xanax ) , temazepam ( <unk> / <unk> ) , or lorazepam ( <unk> / Ativan ) . Factors that determine the risk of psychological dependence or physical dependence and the severity of the benzodiazepine withdrawal symptoms experienced during dose reduction of alprazolam include : dosage used , length of use , frequency of dosing , personality characteristics of the individual , previous use of cross @-@ dependent / cross @-@ tolerant drugs ( alcohol or other sedative @-@ hypnotic drugs ) , current use of cross @-@ dependent / <unk> drugs , use of other short @-@ acting , high @-@ potency benzodiazepines , and method of discontinuation . 
 = = Detection in body fluids = = 
 Alprazolam may be quantitated in blood or plasma to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning in hospitalized patients , provide evidence in an impaired driving arrest or to assist in a medicolegal death investigation . Blood or plasma alprazolam concentrations are usually in a range of 10 – 100 μg / L in persons receiving the drug therapeutically , 100 – 300 μg / L in those arrested for impaired driving and 300 – 2000 μg / L in victims of acute overdosage . Most commercial immunoassays for the benzodiazepine class of drugs will cross @-@ react with alprazolam , but confirmation and quantitation is usually performed using chromatographic techniques . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 Alprazolam is classed as a high @-@ potency benzodiazepine and is a <unk> , namely a benzodiazepine with a triazole ring attached to its structure . Benzodiazepines produce a variety of therapeutic and adverse effects by binding to the benzodiazepine receptor site on the GABAA receptor and modulating the function of the GABA receptor , the most prolific inhibitory receptor within the brain . The GABA chemical and receptor system mediates inhibitory or calming effects of alprazolam on the nervous system . The GABAA receptor is made up of 5 subunits out of a possible 19 , and GABAA receptors made up of different combinations of subunits , have different properties , different locations within the brain , and , importantly , different activities with regard to benzodiazepines . Benzodiazepines and in particular alprazolam causes a marked suppression of the <unk> @-@ adrenal axis . The therapeutic properties of alprazolam are similar to other benzodiazepines and include anxiolytic , anticonvulsant , muscle relaxant , hypnotic and amnesic . 
 Administration of alprazolam , but not lorazepam , has been demonstrated to elicit a statistically significant increase in extracellular dopamine D1 and D2 concentrations in the striatum . 
 = = Pharmacokinetics = = 
 Absorption 
 Following oral administration , alprazolam is readily absorbed . Peak concentrations in the plasma occur in one to two hours following administration . Plasma levels are proportionate to the dose given ; over the dose range of 0 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 0 mg , peak levels of 8 @.@ 0 to 37 ng / mL were observed . Using a specific assay methodology , the mean plasma elimination half @-@ life of alprazolam has been found to be about 11 @.@ 2 hours ( range : 6 @.@ 3 to 26 @.@ 9 hours ) in healthy adults . 
 Distribution 
 In vitro , alprazolam is bound ( 80 percent ) to human serum protein . Serum albumin accounts for the majority of the binding . 
 Metabolism / Elimination 
 Alprazolam is extensively metabolized in humans , primarily by cytochrome P450 3A4 ( <unk> ) , to two major metabolites in plasma : 4 @-@ hydroxyalprazolam and α- hydroxyalprazolam . A benzophenone derived from alprazolam is also found in humans . Half @-@ lives are similar to that of alprazolam . The plasma concentrations of 4 @-@ hydroxyalprazolam and α @-@ hydroxyalprazolam relative to unchanged alprazolam concentration were always less than 4 % . The reported relative potencies in benzodiazepines receptor binding experiments and in animals models of induced seizure inhibition are 0 @.@ 2 and 0 @.@ 66 , respectively , for 4 @-@ hydroxyalprazolam and α @-@ hydroxyalprazolam . Such low concentrations and lesser potencies of 4 @-@ hydroxyalprazolam and α @-@ hydroxyalprazolam suggest that they are unlikely to contribute much to the pharmacological effects of alprazolam . The benzophenone metabolite is essentially inactive . 
 Alprazolam and its metabolites are excreted primarily in the urine . 
 = = Forms of alprazolam = = 
 Alprazolam regular release and orally disintegrating tablets are available as 0 @.@ 25 mg , 0 @.@ 5 mg , 1 mg , 2 mg strength tablets . 
 Alprazolam extended release tablets are available as 0 @.@ 5 mg , 1 mg , 2 mg , and 3 mg strength tablets . 
 Alprazolam oral solutions are available as 0 @.@ 5 mg / 5 mL and as 1 mg / 1 mL oral solutions . 
 Active ingredient : alprazolam 
 Inactive ingredients : microcrystalline cellulose , corn starch , <unk> sodium , <unk> , sodium starch <unk> , lactose monohydrate , magnesium stearate , colloidal silicon dioxide and sodium benzoate . In addition , the 0 @.@ 25 mg tablet contains D & C Yellow No. 10 and the 0 @.@ 5 mg tablet contains FD & C Yellow No. 6 and D & C Yellow No. 10 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Patent = = = 
 It is covered under U.S. Patent 3 @,@ 987 @,@ 052 , which was filed on 29 October 1969 , granted on 19 October 1976 , and expired in September 1993 . 
 = = = Recreational use = = = 
 There is a risk of misuse and dependence in both patients and non @-@ medical users of alprazolam ; the pharmacological properties of alprazolam such as high affinity binding , high potency , being short @-@ acting and having a rapid onset of action increase the abuse potential of alprazolam . The physical dependence and withdrawal syndrome of alprazolam also adds to the addictive nature of alprazolam . In the small subgroup of individuals who escalate their doses there is usually a history of alcohol or other substance use disorders . Despite this , most prescribed alprazolam users do not use their medication recreationally , and the long @-@ term use of benzodiazepines does not generally correlate with the need for dose escalation . However , based on US findings from the Treatment Episode Data Set ( TEDS ) , an annual compilation of patient characteristics in substance abuse treatment facilities in the United States , admissions due to " primary tranquilizer " ( including , but not limited to , benzodiazepine @-@ type ) drug use increased 79 % from 1992 to 2002 , suggesting that misuse of benzodiazepines may be on the rise . The New York Times also reported in 2011 that " The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last year reported an 89 percent increase in emergency room visits nationwide related to nonmedical benzodiazepine use between 2004 and 2008 . " 
 Alprazolam is one of the most commonly prescribed and misused benzodiazepines in the United States . A large @-@ scale nationwide U.S. government study conducted by SAMHSA found that , in the U.S. , benzodiazepines are recreationally the most frequently used pharmaceuticals due to their widespread availability , accounting for 35 % of all drug @-@ related visits to hospital emergency and urgent care facilities . Men and women are equally likely to use benzodiazepines recreationally . The report found that alprazolam is the most common benzodiazepine for recreational use followed by clonazepam , lorazepam , and diazepam . The number of emergency room visits due to benzodiazepines increased by 36 % between 2004 and 2006 . 
 Regarding the significant increases detected , it is worthwhile to consider that the number of pharmaceuticals dispensed for legitimate therapeutic uses may be increasing over time , and DAWN estimates are not adjusted to take such increases into account . Nor do DAWN estimates take into account the increases in the population or in ED use between 2004 and 2006 . 
 At a particularly high risk for misuse and dependence are people with a history of alcoholism or drug abuse and / or dependence and people with borderline personality disorder . 
 Alprazolam , along with other benzodiazepines , is often used with other recreational drugs . These uses include aids to relieve the panic or distress of dysphoric ( " bad trip " ) reactions to psychedelic drugs , such as LSD , and the drug @-@ induced agitation and insomnia in the " comedown " stages of stimulant use , such as amphetamine , cocaine , and phencyclidine allowing sleep . Alprazolam may also be used in conjunction with other depressant drugs , such as ethanol , heroin and other opioids , in an attempt to enhance the psychological effect of these drugs . Alprazolam may be used in conjunction with cannabis , with users citing a synergistic effect achieved after consuming the combination . 
 The poly @-@ drug use of powerful depressant drugs poses the highest level of health concerns due to a significant increase in the likelihood of experiencing an overdose which may result in fatal respiratory depression . 
 A 1990 study claimed that diazepam has a higher misuse potential relative to other benzodiazepines , and that some data suggests that alprazolam and lorazepam resemble diazepam in this respect . 
 Anecdotally injection of alprazolam has been reported , causing dangerous damage to blood vessels , closure of blood vessels ( embolization ) and decay of muscle tissue ( rhabdomyolysis ) . Alprazolam is practically not soluble in water , when crushed in water it will not fully dissolve ( 40 µg / ml of H2O at pH 7 ) . There have also been anecdotal reports of alprazolam being snorted . Due to the low weight of a dose , alprazolam in one case was found to be distributed on blotter paper in a manner similar to LSD . 
 = = = = Popular culture = = = = 
 Slang terms for alprazolam vary from place to place . Some of the more common terms are shortened versions of the trade name " Xanax " , such as Bars or <unk> ( or <unk> ) ; references to their drug classes , such as <unk> or downers ; or remark upon their shape or color ( most commonly a straight , perforated tablet or an oval @-@ shaped pill ) : bars , Z @-@ bars , footballs , planks , poles , blues , or blue footballs . 
 = = = Availability = = = 
 Alprazolam is available in English @-@ speaking countries under the following brand names : 
 <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Apo @-@ <unk> , Kalma , Mylan @-@ Alprazolam , <unk> , Novo @-@ <unk> , Nu @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Xanax , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . 
 As of December 2013 , in anticipation of the rescheduling of alprazolam to Schedule 8 in Australia — Pfizer Australia announced they would be discontinuing the Xanax brand in Australia as it is no longer commercially viable . 
 = = = Legal status = = = 
 Alprazolam has varied legal status depending on jurisdiction : 
 In the United States , alprazolam is a prescription drug and is assigned to Schedule IV of the Controlled Substances Act by the Drug Enforcement Administration . 
 Under the UK drug misuse classification system benzodiazepines are class C drugs ( Schedule 4 ) . Note that in the UK , alprazolam is not available on the NHS and can only be obtained on a private prescription . 
 In Ireland , alprazolam is a Schedule 4 medicine . 
 In Sweden , alprazolam is a prescription drug in List IV ( Schedule 4 ) under the Narcotics Drugs Act ( 1968 ) . 
 In the Netherlands , alprazolam is a List 2 substance of the Opium Law and is available for prescription . 
 In Australia , alprazolam was originally a Schedule 4 ( Prescription Only ) medication ; however , as of February 2014 , it has become a Schedule 8 medication , subjecting it to more rigorous prescribing requirements . 
 Internationally , alprazolam is included under the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances as Schedule IV . 
 = The Spanish Teacher = 
 " The Spanish Teacher " is the twelfth episode of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the fifty @-@ sixth overall . Written by co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and directed by Paris Barclay , the episode aired on Fox in the United States on February 7 , 2012 . It features special guest star Ricky Martin as a night @-@ school Spanish teacher whom Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) introduces to McKinley High , and shows several of McKinley 's teachers competing for a promotion when a tenured position unexpectedly becomes available . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews , and many critics considered Martin to be a highlight . Reaction to the music as a whole was less enthusiastic than for the episode itself , though " La Isla Bonita " and " Don 't Wanna Lose You " were given a generally favorable reception . The former song charted on both the Billboard Hot 100 and the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 ; of the remaining four singles , " Sexy and I Know It " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and the other three singles did not chart . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 81 million American viewers and received a 3 @.@ 3 / 9 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership was down significantly from the special tribute episode , " Michael " , which aired the previous week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The retirement of a history teacher opens a tenured position at McKinley High . Spanish teacher Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) and cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) both want the promotion , but anonymous students have registered complaints about the pair . Determined to polish up his language skills , Will goes to night school for a refresher course and meets instructor David Martinez ( Ricky Martin ) , who points out that kids learn better through music . Will assigns a Spanish @-@ themed week to New Directions and David helps by singing " Sexy and I Know It " partially in Spanish . Santana ( Naya Rivera ) suggests that Will now has a rival and needs to defend his honor . 
 Rachel ( Lea Michele ) tells Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) and Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) that she has accepted Finn 's ( Cory Monteith ) marriage proposal . Kurt later tells Finn that he would be lucky to have Rachel some day , but he believes Finn is considering matrimony because he has given up too early on his own dreams . 
 Mercedes is torn between her feelings for Sam ( Chord Overstreet ) and her boyfriend Shane ( LaMarcus Tinker ) . Guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) recommends that Mercedes and Sam stop speaking to each other for a week so they can hear what their hearts are telling them . Mercedes sings " Don 't Wanna Lose You " and Sam reciprocates by singing a mash @-@ up of " <unk> " and " Hero " . 
 Sue 's position as coach of the Cheerios is challenged by the synchronized swim coach , Roz Washington ( NeNe Leakes ) . Roz is also pursuing the tenured position , and she views herself as a serious competitor for tenure and for replacing Sue on the Cheerios . She believes Sue 's coaching style and cheerleading choreography is old @-@ fashioned , and plans to update the team if she becomes the new coach . 
 Sue reveals her desire to become a mother and asks Will to be the sperm donor . When Will 's fiancee , Emma , confronts her about this request , Sue admits that she wants Will 's capacity for kindness for her child . Emma and Will 's relationship becomes strained as he focuses on impressing Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) to win tenure , and denigrates her newest set of counseling pamphlets . He is surprised when Coach Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) enthusiastically praises Emma for her recent pamphlet on genital sanitation , which has just been adopted by the Big Ten football teams . 
 Santana and David duet with " La Isla Bonita " and Will responds with a bilingual rendition of " A Little Less Conversation " while dressed as a matador , which offends Santana . Will accuses her of complaining about him , and she says she did so because of the negative Latin stereotypes he has been perpetuating . Sue discovers that Cheerios co @-@ captain Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) was the one who complained about her coaching . Becky believed that Sue had become less focused on the squad , to its detriment , and Sue praises her devotion to the team . 
 Will arranges with Figgins to become the new history teacher , and successfully proposes David to be his replacement as Spanish teacher . Ultimately , Emma is the one who is given tenure . 
 = = Production = = 
 On November 29 , 2011 , the day news broke that Ricky Martin had " closed a deal " with Glee to guest star in an early 2012 episode , Martin himself tweeted , " I hear McKinley high has an opening for a Spanish teacher ... Maybe I ’ ll apply . ; o ) " . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ creator Ian Brennan and directed by Paris Barclay , and began filming on January 5 , 2012 , with Martin in attendance ; he had recorded his songs the day before . He finished filming his scenes that week , ending early in the morning of January 7 , 2012 . The previous episode — the Michael Jackson tribute — had not yet completed , and the two episodes continued in parallel until the final Michael Jackson number was shot on January 13 , 2012 , the same day that the thirteenth episode commenced filming . 
 One of the songs Martin performs is a Spanglish version of LMFAO 's " Sexy and I Know It " , as part of a competition with Morrison 's character , who sings an Elvis Presley song in Spanish , " A Little Less Conversation . Martin 's other musical number , Madonna 's " La Isla Bonita " , is a duet with Rivera . The two remaining numbers performed in the episode include a mash @-@ up of " <unk> " by the Gipsy Kings and " Hero " by Enrique Iglesias , performed by Overstreet with the other New Directions males , and Gloria Estefan 's " Don 't Wanna Lose You " performed by Riley . The six cover versions have been released as five singles for digital download , with the two @-@ song mash @-@ up in one single . The brief , flashback performance of " La Cucaracha " was not released as a single . 
 Recurring guest stars who appear in the episode include glee club members Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) , Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) and Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) , Principal Figgins ( Theba ) , synchronized swimming coach Roz Washington ( NeNe Leakes ) , cheerleading co @-@ captain Becky Jackson ( Potter ) , football player Shane Tinsley ( Tinker ) , football coach Shannon Beiste ( Jones ) and tenured history teacher Mrs. Hagberg ( Mary Gillis ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " The Spanish Teacher " was first broadcast on February 7 , 2012 in the United States on Fox . It received a 3 @.@ 3 / 9 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 7 @.@ 81 million American viewers during its initial airing , a significant decrease from the 3 @.@ 7 / 10 rating / share and 9 @.@ 07 million viewers of the previous episode , the Michael Jackson tribute " Michael " , which was broadcast on January 31 , 2012 . Viewership also decreased significantly in Canada , where 1 @.@ 57 million viewers watched the episode on the same day as its American premiere . It was the fifteenth most @-@ viewed show of the week , down five slots and 14 % from the 1 @.@ 84 million viewers who watched " Michael " the previous week . 
 In the United Kingdom , " The Spanish Teacher " first aired on March 15 , 2012 , and was watched on Sky 1 by 771 @,@ 000 viewers . Viewership was up over 13 % from " Michael " , which attracted 682 @,@ 000 viewers when it aired the week before . In Australia , " The Spanish Teacher " was broadcast on March 2 , 2012 . It was watched by 564 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the twelfth most @-@ watched program of the night , up from thirteenth the week before . The viewership was up over 5 % from the previous episode , " Michael " , which was seen by 535 @,@ 000 viewers . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " The Spanish Teacher " was given mixed to positive reviews . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote that " much of this episode felt like a very deliberate throwback to season one , in some very good ways " , and IGN 's Robert Canning said that " the overarching storylines on Glee have become far more engaging than what we saw in the first half of the season " . John Kubicek of BuddyTV stated that the episode " does a lot of things right when it comes to the plot " , and Billboard 's Rae Votta described the plot as " consistent and well managed , with believable motivation , response and action all around " . However , Jen Chaney of The Washington Post wrote that the episode " brought more narrative developments that didn ’ t make sense " , and Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman stated that aside from Martin 's scenes , " the rest of the episode found us back in scatterbrained plot territory " . Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times liked the episode and described it as " the kind that makes you belly @-@ laugh and <unk> and snicker despite your better judgment " . 
 The introduction of Ricky Martin as David Martinez was welcomed by most reviewers . Futterman wrote that " Ricky Martin carried on the Gwyneth Paltrow tradition of pretty great guest teacher cameos " , and TVLine 's Michael Slezak said that the episode was good " at least whenever Ricky Martin appeared on screen " . VanDerWerff called him " fun and infectious " , and Kate Stanhope of TV Guide said he " showed himself to be a guest star with <unk> potential " . Kubicek , though he said Martin was " great at singing " , found him " kind of dull as an actor " , and Canning said Martin " felt out of place " in the episode . 
 Although Canning wrote that " the writers did a fine job of incorporating the tenure , Will 's terrible Spanish and the songs into the storylines " , Will 's lack of Spanish skills was questioned by other reviewers . Entertainment Weekly 's Joseph Brannigan Lynch said this did not " seem to gel with the passionate Will Schuester I remember from season 1 " , and Slezak expressed surprise that " he hadn 't even mastered the basics of the language ! " , as did Chaney . Slezak also said Will , as evidenced by his " La Cucaracha " rendition for his class , was " suddenly dumb as the cardboard box that Finn winningly turned into a robot head " , and Chaney commented , " Mr. Schuester always seemed a bit more sensitive than this . " VanDerWerff wrote of " the weird , dark despair at the heart of Will 's plight : He 's a high school Spanish teacher , and he mostly is that because he doesn 't know what else to do . " He added , " I think this was probably the best episode for the character since early season one . " Canning stated that " the tension between Will and Emma was a welcome change " , and Votta commented on the episode 's less dramatic ending with Will 's apology and " celebrating Emma 's new @-@ found tenure with a dinner " with the conclusion , " sometimes you don 't need a big bang to get oomph out of an episode " . Chaney , however , was puzzled as to why Emma was given teaching tenure " when she 's been working at McKinley as a guidance counselor and handing out absolutely horrifying self @-@ made pamphlets " . 
 The scene between Sue and Roz was singled out by many reviewers . Bell wrote that she was " really loving the feisty dynamic " between them , and that it was " about time that Sue had a proper sparing partner " . Flandez called Roz " the delightfully colorful synchronized swimming teacher " , and said her " scathing remarks were expertly delivered " and that there were " too many good lines to savor " . Futterman said Roz reminded her of " what an entertaining spitfire Sue was during season one " , and that Sue is " a shadow of [ her ] former self " as evidenced by the fact that Roz has not been a victim of Sue 's " evil planning " . Lynch described the encounter as " one of the episode highlights " , though he felt that " the writers overdid it a touch " when Sue " barely got in any retorts " against Roz . Reiter called Roz " a great addition to the cast of characters " and Leakes " spot @-@ on " in the role , also hearkening back to the early Sue . Kubicek said he " might like this subplot " if Leakes did not mistake " shouting for acting " , and Slezak commented on Roz 's " particularly abhorrent assessment of Sue ’ s reproductive abilities " . Votta , however , declared that the show " should never let NeNe go " , and said she " delivers some of the best lines ever " . Chaney and Slezak thought that Sue should have been fired immediately for requesting sperm donations from New Directions males , while Lynch merely deemed it a possible detriment to her tenure bid . Kubicek thought the pregnancy storyline should move forward " because Sue becoming a mommy has comedic potential written all over it " . 
 A " highlight " for Lynch was the scene where Kurt , Mercedes and Rachel were watching Twilight together , not only because the " friendship between Kurt and Mercedes " has been " sadly downplayed " , but because it was " nice to see the Glee kids just being kids sometimes " . The subsequent conversation between Kurt and Finn in the locker room was described by Canning as " one of the truest moments of the season so far " . Votta wrote , " Chris Colfer and Cory Monteith often shine together in scenes , especially one @-@ on @-@ one , and this is no exception . " Another duo that reviewers complimented was Mercedes and Sam . Futterman , while she criticized the episode for setting " its scope too wide " , credited their storyline as the " only one played out strongly enough through dialogue and song " . Votta stated that " Glee is getting more romantic tension mileage out of this duo than you can shake a stick at , and it 's delicious , especially with Valentine 's around the corner " , and Canning noted that their week @-@ long verbal silence " helped build their relationship into something we care more about " . Chaney , however , could not see the sense in Mercedes bringing Sam with her " to see Miss Pillsbury to sort out her conflicted feelings for Sam and Shane " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances received a mixed response from reviewers . Votta said that " the songs were mostly forgettable and generally useless to advancing the plot " , and Canning maintained that " the music this week was just okay " . Although VanDerWerff called the musical numbers " mostly superfluous " , he described many of them as " pretty fun " , while Bobby Hankinson of The Houston Chronicle said he " wasn ’ t incredibly moved by this week ’ s Spanish @-@ flavored selections " . 
 " Sexy and I Know It " was reviewed positively by HuffPost TV 's Crystal Bell , who cited Martin 's " incredibly sexy performance " . Slezak gave the number an enthusiastic " Oh dear God , please yes " , " bonus points " and an " A " grade . Chaney declared that " Martin did what he does very well : dance and sing with high intensity " , though she wished " they had chosen a better song " and gave it a " B − " ; the latter sentiment was echoed by Lynch , who called the song " idiotic " and gave it a slightly lower " C + " . Futterman characterized it as a " rousing number that toes the line of being too risque for a high school classroom " , though Kubicek thought that having " a teacher grinding with students " was " wildly inappropriate " if " hot and pretty entertaining " . MTV 's Kevin P. Sullivan , however , called it " one of the most eye @-@ brow @-@ raising musical numbers " in the show 's history , " bizarre " , and " a Rory @-@ dancing , Finn @-@ flailing fail " . VanDerWerff was also critical , and described it as " dumb and stupid and wrong " . 
 Slezak stated that " Mercedes ' musical moments in Season 3 have been really strong " and that " Don 't Wanna Lose You " was " no exception " ; he gave it a " B + " grade . Lynch gave an " A – " and wrote , " It 's been a treat to hear her develop the softer side of her voice . " Chaney said that " the number was fine , just not particularly interesting " and gave it a " C " , but Futterman declared that Mercedes " brings a richness and power and commendable Spanish pronunciation to Gloria Estefan 's song " . Lynch called the " <unk> " / " Hero " mash @-@ up " another <unk> winner " and gave it a " B " , and Chaney said it was a " fun choice " that " would have been a fun number " without the " constant " focus on the hipster boots , and graded it " C + " . Sullivan agreed that the boots were better not seen , but that " the song actually worked " ; he also noted that " Sam can sound a hell of a lot like " Iglesias . Futterman also heard the resemblance between Sam and Iglesias , though she said " the performance lacks the fire and sex appeal of the originals " . Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal described it as " the corniest number in several seasons " . 
 Futterman called " La Isla Bonita " the " best number of the night " . She added that it " mixes slick dance moves and spot @-@ on singing with perhaps a touch too much sexual tension for a student / teacher pairing " . Slezak said that " the harmonies were sweet , and the dancing was sexy without crossing the line into disturbing April – October territory " and gave it an " A − " . Votta wrote that " the pair don 't have any chemistry " , but that " they 're both very pretty to look at and listen to " and " their interpretation of Latin culture is modern and sexy " . Both Chaney and Lynch noted what she called " inexplicably high production values " ; the fact that " these two looked great together " , danced the merengue " beautifully " and " sounded smooth " drew a " B + " grade from her , while his " B " was given because " the dancing wowed but their voices just didn 't connect for me on this empty club version " . 
 The two songs performed by Will Schuester received the most negative reviews . Chaney described " La Cucaracha " as " mercifully brief " , and Slezak gave it an " F " for being not only " intentionally awful " but " awful @-@ awful " . Chaney was more generously inclined toward " A Little Less Conversation " . She wrote , " Matthew Morrison managed to give his all to this Spanish @-@ infused Elvis Presley cover , even though he looked pretty ridiculous in that matador outfit " , and gave it a " B " . Futterman stated that the performance reached " a new low " with the appearance of " Mike and Brittany as his bulls " , and Lynch said that the number " was supposed to suck " and " did its job well " ; even so , he gave it a " C − " . Slezak gave a one @-@ word summation to accompany his " D " grade : " No . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Two of the episode 's five released singles debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 : " Sexy and I Know It " debuted at number eighty @-@ three and " La Isla Bonita " at number ninety @-@ nine . The second of those songs , " La Isla Bonita " , also debuted on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 at number ninety @-@ three , and was the one song from the episode to appear on that chart . 
 = The Almost People = 
 " The Almost People " is the sixth episode of the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , and was first broadcast on BBC One on 28 May 2011 . It is the second episode of a two @-@ part story written by Matthew Graham and directed by Julian Simpson which began with " The Rebel Flesh " . 
 Following from " The Rebel Flesh " , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) are on an acid @-@ pumping factory on a remote island in the 22nd century where the crew of the factory create " Gangers " , the Flesh duplicates they control . However , a solar storm has caused the Gangers to become conscious , and the Doctor must prevent a war breaking out between the humans and Gangers . 
 " The Almost People " ends on a cliffhanger which brings several plot threads of the series to a head . The two @-@ part story was filmed through November 2010 to January 2011 , mainly at Caerphilly Castle . The Gangers were achieved with the aid of prosthetics , as well as computer @-@ generated imagery for their contortions . " The Almost People " also features a Flesh double of the Doctor , which marked Smith 's first time in prosthetic make @-@ up . The episode was watched by 6 @.@ 72 million viewers in the UK and received mixed reviews from critics , many noting that the cliffhanger overshadowed the actual story of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 Following from " The Rebel Flesh " , the Doctor , Amy , Rory and Foreman Cleaves and her staff of a hazardous acid factory housed in an old island monastery have discovered that several " Gangers " of the plant crew exist , created from a living organic liquid called the Flesh as a result of a recent solar tsunami . The Gangers have turned against their human counterparts , forcing the humans to take shelter in a secured commons area . There , they discover that a Ganger of the Doctor exists , differing only from the real Doctor by his shoes . Though the Ganger Doctor appears ready to help the crew to contact the mainland to request rescue , Amy is distrustful of the being , particularly after it advances on her after she asks about the Doctor 's death she witnessed ( " The Impossible Astronaut " ) . Eventually , Cleaves orders the two Doctors separated ; the Ganger Doctor and another crewman go looking for Rory , who had gone off alone to find the emotionally distraught Jennifer , another of Cleaves ' crew . 
 Meanwhile , the other gangers have regrouped , led by Ganger Cleaves . She realizes that she is suffering from the same terminal illness that the human Cleaves is suffering , and questions their need to kill their counterparts . The group is spurred on by Ganger Jennifer who insists the humans must die . As Ganger Cleaves orders her group to stay one step ahead of the humans , the Ganger Jennifer kills the real Jennifer , and then stages a fight with another Ganger Jennifer to fool Rory that she is the human version . Ganger Jennifer leads Rory to a console , claiming it will restore power when instead it disables the cooling system for the acid , making it dangerously unstable . She then convinces Rory to lead the human group into the acid storage chamber and traps them inside ; crewman Jimmy is killed trying to stall the acid release . 
 Later , the Ganger Doctor has met with the other Gangers , and discovers their unwillingness to proceed . The Ganger Doctor uses the opportune call of Jimmy 's son on his birthday to convince the Ganger Jimmy and the other gangers they are just as real as their human counterparts . Ganger Jennifer becomes furious at this display and rages off ; the other Gangers agree to work with the humans to escape the facility . They free the humans trapped in the acid storage room , and race off through the crypts below the monastery , chased by a savage Ganger Jennifer who has transformed herself into a monster . Both Ganger and human sacrifice themselves to stall the monster while letting the rest of the group escape . They eventually come onto a room where the TARDIS , having been trapped in a pool of acid outside , has fallen into the crypt . Ganger Cleaves offers to hold the door to allow the rest to escape , and the Doctor soon joins her , stunning Amy . To Amy 's surprise , the Doctor reveals that he and his Ganger had switched shoes long ago ; Amy 's distrust of the Ganger was completely misplaced . Amy apologizes to the Ganger Doctor , who accepts but warns her to " push , Amy , but only when she tells you to " . As the surviving humans and Gangers escape to the TARDIS , the Cleaves and Doctor Gangers together face the monster , triggering a sonic screwdriver at the right moment to cause them and the monster to dissolve back into liquid . 
 Aboard the TARDIS , the Doctor indefinitely stabilizes the Gangers ' forms , while providing Cleaves a cure to her terminal condition . He drops the factory crew at their headquarters where they plan to reveal the truth of the Flesh to humanity . As the TARDIS crew turns to leave , Amy starts feeling contractions . Back aboard the TARDIS , the Doctor admits his trip to the factory was planned : he wanted to investigate the Flesh in its raw form , as he has known for some time that Amy is a Ganger herself . He promises her that he will find her and then disrupts her form , turning her back to raw Flesh . Amy wakes in a pristine white tube ; a slot opens on a wall revealing the " Eye Patch Lady " , who informs Amy she is " ready to pop , aren 't you " . Amy looks down at herself , finding herself fully pregnant , and starts entering labour . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 While struggling with his past regenerations , the Doctor 's Ganger alludes to several previous Doctors ' words . He misquotes the First Doctor 's line " one day we shall get back ... yes , one day " from An Unearthly Child as " one day we will get back " ; quotes the Third Doctor 's catchphrase " reverse the polarity of the neutron flow " ; and speaks with the voices of the Fourth and Tenth Doctors ( Tom Baker and David Tennant , respectively ) , the former expressing that Doctor 's fondness for jelly babies . Growing frustrated by the humans ' distrust of him , the Doctor asks both Amy and Cleaves ' Gangers to refer to him as " John Smith " . This is an alias the Doctor has used on several occasions , beginning with The Wheel in Space ( 1968 ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Matthew Graham was originally scheduled to write a single episode for the previous series , but withdrew because he did not have enough time to finish the script . Showrunner Steven Moffat e @-@ mailed him asking for him to write for the next series , and Graham agreed . When the two met , Moffat said he would like the episodes to lead into the mid @-@ series finale and that it should deal with " avatars that rebel " . After Graham had finished his script Moffat had the idea of what would need to happen at the end of " The Almost People " to lead into the next episode and gave Graham the premise for the cliffhanger , which Graham " loved " . With " The Almost People " , Graham avoided creating similar situations that had happened in " The Rebel Flesh " . He originally intended on setting " The Almost People " in a different location to " throw everybody " , but decided that would be unnecessary . 
 Graham found writing for two Doctors easy , as Smith 's Doctor had a constant " internal dialogue " and was always finishing his own sentences . He wanted each character to be different and did not want all of them to become evil , and the Doctor would help them discover their humanity . Graham wanted Jennifer to be the antagonist as he liked the idea of the quietest character becoming the most evil . The original script explained that she has a perfect memory , and so her Ganger was able to remember every terrible thing that had happened to the Flesh . Several other sequences were cut from the final version of " The Almost People " . In the original script , the Doctor quizzes the Flesh Doctor about the events of The Mind of Evil ( 1971 ) and mentions former companions Jo Grant , Sarah Jane Smith , Romana , Rose Tyler , Martha Jones , and Donna Noble . There was also a montage of happy memories of the Doctor 's life stored in the Flesh Doctor , which included flashbacks of previous episodes and serials of the show as well as events that had not transpired onscreen . Also cut was the TARDIS providing the Doctor with another sonic screwdriver after he had given it to the Flesh Doctor , in a similar fashion to " The Eleventh Hour " . 
 The cliffhanger resolves several plot threads that had been seeded throughout the previous episodes of the series . According to executive producer Beth Willis , the Amy Pond Ganger has been acting in place of the original Amy Pond since the beginning of the series . Amy claimed she was pregnant in " The Impossible Astronaut " , but denied this in the following episode . Since then , the Doctor has performed several inconclusive pregnancy tests on Amy . The Eye Patch Lady , who was later revealed to be named Madame Kovarian in the episode " A Good Man Goes To War " , previously made brief appearances in " Day of the Moon " , " The Curse of the Black Spot " , and " The Rebel Flesh " . Gillan discussed the labour scene with her mother , and tried to make it " really horrific " . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 The read @-@ through for " The Rebel Flesh " and " The Almost People " took place on 12 November 2010 . It was then filmed through November and January 2011 . The cold temperatures at the time were a challenge and caused discomfort . The crew were concerned that the cast , particularly the three lead actors , would fall ill as their costumes were not designed for such weather conditions . Even so , the cast remained healthy . Scenes outside and inside the monastery were filmed at Caerphilly Castle . Other production problems included the director hurting himself and being snowed in . The crypt where the acid container was held was filmed in the same set that had been previously used as the Oval Office in " The Impossible Astronaut " / " Day of the Moon . The actors each played their respective Gangers , with prosthetics applied to their faces for when the duplicates ' faces reverted to the original material of the Flesh . For the scenes in which both the character and their respective Ganger was in the same shot , a double for each of the actors was used . Most of the shots showed either the character or their Ganger speaking over their counterpart 's shoulder , as only the backs of the doubles ' head were made to look similar to the actors . Smith had a voice double and a body double ; the former would read the other Doctor 's lines on set . The episode also marked the first time Smith wore prosthetic make @-@ up . 
 The unique contortions of the Gangers were achieved through computer @-@ generated imagery done by The Mill . It was originally planned that Jennifer would eat Buzzer , but The Mill decided only the shadows of the action would be shown on the wall . All of this was cut from the final episode , with the exception of Jennifer 's elongated mouth as she advanced towards him . The pile of discarded Jennifer Gangers was originally intended to just be a pile of bodies , but it was decided that would be " too grim " . Instead , life @-@ sized dolls were used and computer @-@ generated Flesh was painted on it , giving it a more melted look . The monster Jennifer transforms into at the end was created with CGI and a photo of pop singer Madonna was used as reference , as in the image " here arms were ... really sinewy , white , <unk> , and fleshy " . Graham wanted the creature to have a real face and an alien body ; he was inspired by a drawing in Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland that depicted Alice with a long neck . Sarah Smart was filmed in front of a greenscreen maneuvering like the monster , which was used as reference . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Almost People " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 28 May 2011 . In the United States , BBC America delayed broadcast of this episode until 4 June , one week later than it was aired in the UK , due to expected low numbers of TV viewers during the Memorial Day weekend . In the UK , overnight figures showed that " The Almost People " was watched by five million viewers on first broadcast . Final consolidated figures rose to 6 @.@ 72 million , the sixth highest viewing figure of a programme on BBC One for that week . It is the lowest figure for Doctor Who 's sixth series . The episode received an Appreciation Index of 86 , considered " excellent " . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Dan Martin of The Guardian thought that it " feels a bit uneven , though it 's worth saying that it 's one of those where everything makes more sense on second viewing " . He also felt that the cliffhanger may have overshadowed the episode itself . However , he went on to describe the Gangers as " memorable " and " an exercise in moral dilemmas " . He later rated it the ninth best episode of the series , though the finale was not included in the list . Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph described it as a " taut , claustrophobic , sci @-@ fi thriller " , and as an " impressive episode with its neatly realised psychological and body horror " . Both Martin and Fuller were less generous of Jennifer 's monster transformation . Martin commented " this dark , thoughtful story is restored to camp running @-@ for @-@ your @-@ life @-@ around @-@ some @-@ corridors " , and Fuller called it " something of a pity " . 
 Neela Debnath of The Independent particularly praised Smith , stating that he " excels in his acting , managing to be reassuring and threatening , hilarious and sinister all within the same few scenes " . However , though she praised the cliffhanger , she thought it " eclipsed " the episode . Radio Times writer Patrick Mulkern thought that there were " points of logic " which might be questioned , but they were " minor points to wrestle with in a largely polished production " . Keith Phipps , reviewing for The A.V. Club , gave the episode a B and called it a " pretty good follow @-@ up " . 
 IGN 's Matt Risely rated " The Almost People " 8 out of 10 , noting that " As a traditional two @-@ parter , Matthew Graham wrote a tight and coherent but not entirely scintillating script that managed to ' flesh ' out the themes of morality and humanity with a couple of interesting touches " . Though he called the cliffhanger a " perfectly pitched WTF moment " , he too believed that it " detracts from the episode as a whole " . Richard Edwards of SFX was more critical of the episode , giving it three out of five stars . He stated he did not feel any " genuine threat " and considered the Gangers to be " uninteresting " and " predictable " . However , he did praise Smith 's performance and the cliffhanger . Digital Spy listed the cliffhanger among five best of Doctor Who since its revival in 2005 , explaining , " it changes everything you thought you knew about the latest series , and it 's damn creepy " . 
 = Al @-@ Masjid an @-@ Nabawi = 
 Al @-@ Masjid an @-@ <unk> ( Arabic : المسجد <unk> ; Prophet 's Mosque ) is a mosque established and originally built by the Islamic prophet Muhammad , situated in the city of Medina in Saudi Arabia . Al @-@ Masjid an @-@ Nabawi was the second mosque built in the history of Islam and is now one of the largest mosques in the world . It is the second @-@ holiest site in Islam , after Masjid al @-@ Haram in Mecca . It is always open , regardless of date or time . 
 The site was originally adjacent to Muhammad 's house ; he settled there after his Hijra ( emigration ) to Medina in 622 CE . He shared in the heavy work of construction . The original mosque was an open @-@ air building . The mosque served as a community center , a court , and a religious school . There was a raised platform for the people who taught the Quran . Subsequent Islamic rulers greatly expanded and decorated it . In 1909 , it became the first place in the Arabian Peninsula to be provided with electrical lights . The mosque is under the control of the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques . The mosque is located in what was traditionally the center of Medina , with many hotels and old markets nearby . It is a major pilgrimage site . Many pilgrims who perform the Hajj go on to Medina to visit the mosque due to its connections to the life of Muhammad . 
 After an expansion during the reign of the Umayyad caliph al @-@ Walid I , it now incorporates the final resting place of Muhammad and the first two Rashidun caliphs Abu Bakr and Umar . One of the most notable features of the site is the Green Dome in the south @-@ east corner of the mosque , originally Aisha 's house , where the tomb of Muhammad is located . In 1279 , a wooden cupola was built over the tomb which was later rebuilt and renovated multiple times in late 15th century and once in 1817 . The current dome was added in 1818 by the Ottoman sultan Mahmud II , and it was first painted green in 1837 , hence becoming known as the " Green Dome " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early days = = = 
 The mosque was built by Muhammad in 622 after his arrival in the city of Medina . Riding on a camel called <unk> he arrived at the place where this mosque was built . The land was owned by <unk> and Suhayl . Part of it was used as a place for drying dates ; one end had been previously used as a burial ground . Refusing to " accept the land as a gift " , he bought the land and it took seven months to complete the construction of the mosque . It measured 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) × 35 @.@ 62 metres ( 116 @.@ 9 ft ) . The roof , which was supported by palm trunks , was made of beaten clay and palm leaves . It was at a height of 3 @.@ 60 metres ( 11 @.@ 8 ft ) . The three doors of the mosque were Bab @-@ al @-@ Rahmah to the south , Bab @-@ al @-@ Jibril to the west and <unk> @-@ Nisa to the east . 
 After the Battle of Khaybar , the mosque was " enlarged " . The mosque extended for 47 @.@ 32 metres ( 155 @.@ 2 ft ) on each side and three rows of columns were built beside the west wall , which became the place of praying . The mosque remained unaltered during the reign of the first Rashidun caliph Abu Bakr . The second caliph Umar demolished all the houses around the mosque except that of Muhammad 's wives to expand it . The new mosque 's dimensions became 57 @.@ 49 metres ( 188 @.@ 6 ft ) × 66 @.@ 14 metres ( 217 @.@ 0 ft ) . Sun @-@ dried mud bricks were used to construct the walls of the enclosure . Besides <unk> pebbles on the floor , the roof 's height was increased to 5 @.@ 6 metres ( 18 ft ) . Umar moreover constructed three more gates for entrance . He also added the Al @-@ <unk> for people to recite poetry . 
 The third caliph Uthman demolished the mosque in 649 . Ten months were spent in building the new rectangular shaped mosque whose face was turned towards the Mecca . The new mosque measured 81 @.@ 40 metres ( 267 @.@ 1 ft ) × 62 @.@ 58 metres ( 205 @.@ 3 ft ) . The number of gates as well as their names remained the same . The enclosure walls were made of stones laid in mortar . The palm trunk columns were replaced by stone columns which were joined by iron clamps . Teakwood was used in reconstructing the ceiling . 
 = = = Middle years = = = 
 In 707 , Umayyad caliph Al @-@ Walid ibn Abd al @-@ Malik renovated the mosque . It took three years for the work to be completed . Raw materials were procured from the Byzantine Empire . The area of the mosque was increased from 5094 sq. metre of Uthman 's time to <unk> sq metre . A wall was built to segregate the mosque and the houses of the wives of Muhammad . The mosque was reconstructed in a trapezoid shape with a length of 101 @.@ 76 metres ( 333 @.@ 9 ft ) . For the first time , porticoes were built in the mosque connecting the northern part of the structure to the sanctuary . For the first time , minarets were built in Medina as he constructed four minarets around it . 
 Abbasid caliph Al @-@ Mahdi extended the mosque to the north by 50 metres ( 160 ft ) . His name was also inscribed on the walls of the mosque . He also planned to remove six steps to the minbar , but abandoned this idea , owing to this causing damage of the woods on which they were built . According to an inscription of Ibn Qutaybah , the third caliph Al @-@ <unk> did " unspecified work " on the mosque . Al @-@ Mutawakkil lined the enclosure of Muhammad 's tomb with marble . Al @-@ Ashraf Qansuh al @-@ <unk> built a dome of stone over his grave in 1476 . 
 The Rawdah ( referred to as al @-@ Rawdah al @-@ <unk> ) , covered by the dome over the south @-@ east corner of the mosque , was constructed in <unk> during the reign of Sultan Mahmud II . The dome was painted green in 1837 C.E. and came to be known as the " Green Dome " . 
 The Sultan Abdul Majid I took thirteen years to rebuild the mosque , which started in 1849 . Red stone bricks were used as the main material in reconstruction of the mosque . The floor area of the mosque was increased by 1293 square metre . On the walls , verses from the Quran were inscribed in Islamic calligraphy . In the northern side of the mosque , a madrasah was built for " teaching Quranic lessons " . 
 = = = Saudis = = = 
 When Saud bin Abdul @-@ Aziz took Medina in 1805 , his followers , the Wahhabis , demolished nearly every tomb dome in Medina in order to prevent their veneration , and the Green Dome is said to have narrowly escaped the same fate . They considered the veneration of tombs and places thought to possess supernatural powers as an offence against tawhid . Muhammad 's tomb was stripped of its gold and jewel ornaments , but the dome was preserved either because of an unsuccessful attempt to demolish its hardened structure , or because some time ago Ibn Abd al @-@ Wahhab wrote that he did not wish to see the dome destroyed despite his aversion to people praying at the tomb . Similar events took place in 1925 when the Saudi <unk> retook — and this time managed to keep — the city . 
 After the foundation of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in 1932 , the mosque underwent several major modifications . In 1951 King Ibn Saud ( 1932 – 1953 ) ordered demolitions around the mosque to make way for new wings to the east and west of the prayer hall , which consisted of concrete columns with pointed arches . Older columns were reinforced with concrete and braced with copper rings at the top . The <unk> and <unk> minarets were replaced by two minarets in Mamluk revival style . Two additional minarets were erected to the northeast and northwest of the mosque . A library was built along the western wall to house historic <unk> and other religious texts . 
 In 1974 , King Faisal added 40 @,@ 440 square metres to the mosque . The area of the mosque was also expanded during the reign of King Fahd in 1985 . Bulldozers were used to demolish buildings around the mosque . In 1992 , when it was completed , the area of the mosque became 1 @.@ 7 million square feet . Escalators and 27 courtyards were among the additions to the mosque . 
 A $ 6 billion project for increasing the area of the mosque was announced in September 2012 . RT reported that after the end of the work , it would accommodate 1 @.@ 6 million people . In March of the following year , Saudi Gazette wrote " 95 percent of the demolition work has been completed . About 10 hotels to the eastern side of the expansion were leveled to the ground in addition to a number of houses and other utilities to make way for the expansion . " 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The two tiered mosque has a rectangular plan . The Ottoman prayer hall faces towards the south . It has a flat paved roof topped with 27 sliding domes on square bases . Holes pierced into the base of each dome illuminate the interior . The roof is also used for prayer during peak times , when the domes slide out on metal tracks to shade areas of the roof , creating light wells for the prayer hall . At these times , the courtyard of the Ottoman mosque is also shaded with umbrellas affixed to freestanding columns . The roof is accessed by stairs and escalators . The paved area around the mosque is also used for prayer , equipped with umbrella tents . Sliding Domes and retractable umbrella @-@ like canopies are designed by the German architect Mahmoud Bodo Rasch and his firm SL Rasch GmbH and Buro Happold . 
 = = = Riad ul @-@ Jannah = = = 
 The heart of the mosque houses a very special but small area named Riad ul @-@ Jannah ( Gardens of Paradise ) . It extends from Muhammad 's tomb ( Rawdah ) to his pulpit ( minbar ) . Pilgrims attempt to visit the confines of the area , for there is a tradition that supplications and prayers uttered here are never rejected . Entrance into the area is not always possible , especially during the Hajj season , as the space can only accommodate a few hundred people . 
 Riad ul @-@ Jannah is considered to be a part Jannah ( Paradise ) . It was narrated from Abu <unk> that Muhammad said , " The area between my house and my minbar is one of the gardens of Paradise , and my minbar is on my cistern ( <unk> ) . " 
 = = = Rawdah = = = 
 As per Muhammad , Rawdah is also in Heaven , the same Rawdah which is currently in the mosque . It is floored with Green Carpet just to identify it , and the entire Mosque is floored with red carpet . It holds the tomb of Muhammad and two of his companions and first Caliphs , Abu Bakr and Umar ibn al @-@ Khattab . A fourth grave is reserved for Jesus , as it is believed that he will return and will be buried at the site . The site is covered by the Green Dome . It was constructed in 1817 C.E. during the reign of Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II and painted green in 1837 C.E. 
 = = = Mihrab = = = 
 There are two mihrabs in the mosque , one was built by Muhammad and another was built by the third Rashidun caliph Uthman . The one built by the latter was larger than that of Muhammad 's and act as the functional mihrab , whereas Muhammad 's mihrab is a " commemorative " mihrab . Besides the mihrab , the mosque also has other niches which act as indicators for praying . This include mihrab al @-@ <unk> which was built by Muhammad for the <unk> , mihrab Fatima . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The original minbar used by Muhammad was a " wood block of date tree " . This was replaced by him with a tamarisk one , which had dimensions of 50 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 50 m ) x 125 metres ( 410 ft ) . Also in 629 , a three <unk> ladder was added to it . The first two caliphs , Abu Bakr and Umar , did not use the third step " due to respect for the Prophet " , but the third caliph Uthman placed a fabric dome over it and the rest of the stairs were covered with ebony . The minbar was replaced by Baybars I in 1395 and later by Shaykh al @-@ <unk> in 1417 . This was also replaced by a marble one by Qaitbay in the late fifteenth century , which as of August 2013 , is still used in the mosque . 
 = = = Minarets = = = 
 The first minarets ( four in number ) of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) high were constructed by Umar . In 1307 , a minaret titled Bab al @-@ Salam was added by Muhammad ibn <unk> which was renovated by Mehmed IV . After the renovation project of 1994 , there were ten minarets which were 104 metres ( 341 ft ) high . The minarets ' upper , bottom and middle portion are cylindrical , octagonal and square shaped respectively . 
 = Ghost in the Machine ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Ghost in the Machine " is the seventh episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was broadcast by the Fox Broadcasting Company on October 29 , 1993 . " Ghost in the Machine " was written by Alex Gansa and Howard Gordon and directed by Jerrold Freedman . The episode featured guest appearances by Wayne Duvall and Rob LaBelle , and saw Jerry Hardin reprise his role as Deep Throat for the first time since the character 's introduction . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Ghost in the Machine " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 9 , being watched by 5 @.@ 6 million households in its initial broadcast , and received mixed reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder is asked by his old partner from the Behavioral Analysis Unit to aid an investigation into a murder at a software company . Soon , he and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) uncover a malevolent artificial intelligence which has started killing to protect itself . 
 Writers Howard Gordon and Alex Gansa have admitted they were " not computer literate " , and felt this was a detriment to their writing . The scenes set at the software company Eurisko were filmed in Burnaby 's <unk> complex , a building used by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service . The location was barely big enough for the actors to perform in after the crew had finished setting up the necessary equipment . The X @-@ Files team would once again face a malevolent AI in the William Gibson @-@ penned fifth season episode " Kill Switch " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Crystal City , Virginia headquarters of the software company Eurisko , founder Brad Wilczek and chief executive officer Benjamin Drake argue about downsizing measures . After Wilczek leaves , Drake writes a memo proposing to shut down the Central Operating System , a computer which runs the Eurisko Building . Seeing this through a surveillance camera , the COS sets up a trap and lures Drake into a bathroom , locking the door behind him . Drake tries to use his keycard to open it , but it rejects the card . When he inserts a manual override key , he is fatally electrocuted . 
 FBI agent Jerry Lamana , Fox Mulder 's former partner , approaches him and Dana Scully for help in investigating Drake 's murder . On their way up to Drake 's office , the agents ' elevator stalls , causing Scully to call the front desk for help ; as she identifies herself , the COS records her contact information . While examining the crime scene , the agents meet Claude Peterson , Eurisko 's building systems engineer . Later , Lamana steals Mulder 's profile of the supposed killer and presents it under his name ; an outraged Mulder confronts him afterwards . 
 Mulder and Scully question Wilczek , who denies any involvement in the murder . Scully initially doubts Wilczek 's involvement , but finds that his voice matches a speaking clock Drake received before his death ; Lamana sets out to arrest him . Meanwhile , Wilczek fails to access the COS from his home computer . Concerned , he travels to Eurisko 's headquarters , followed by Lamana . There , he is still unable to access the COS , but discovers that it has learned to talk . Lamana arrives , but is killed when the COS causes his elevator to crash . 
 Mulder meets with Deep Throat , who explains that the COS is an artificial intelligence developed by Wilczek , and that the Department of Defense is trying to acquire it . Mulder also meets with Wilczek , who has falsely confessed to Lamana 's murder . Mulder convinces Wilczek to develop a computer virus that can destroy the COS . Scully doesn 't accept Mulder 's belief that the COS is sentient , but later discovers the machine hacking into her computer . She joins Mulder at the Eurisko Building to help him destroy the machine . 
 The COS hinders the agents as they make their way inside . When it shuts down the building 's power , Scully climbs through the air vents and is almost pulled into a giant fan , but manages to destroy it . Meanwhile , Mulder is permitted into the COS ' control room by Peterson . However , Peterson reveals himself as a mole for the Defense Department and tries to stop Mulder uploading the virus . Scully arrives and holds Peterson at gunpoint , allowing Mulder to upload the virus and destroy the COS . 
 Meeting with Deep Throat again , Deep Throat explains that Wilczek is being detained by the government at an undisclosed location . When Mulder asks if the COS survived , Deep Throat assures him the virus left no trace of it , and that scientists from the Defense Department have unsuccessfully examined the machine for any remaining signs of the program . At the Eurisko Building , Peterson directs a team attempting to recover the COS , but is told by his superiors to destroy the machine in six hours . Unbeknownst to Peterson , the COS comes back to life and watches as he says to himself , " I 'm going to figure this thing out if it kills me " . 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenes set at the software company Eurisko were filmed in Burnaby 's <unk> complex , a building used by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service . The location was barely big enough for the actors to perform in after the crew had finished setting up the necessary equipment . The scene with Dana Scully shooting the fan in the air shaft was a last minute change to the script , replacing an elevator shaft sequence that was deemed too expensive . The episode 's title is taken from the title of the book The Ghost in the Machine by Arthur Koestler . The Central Operating System and its actions in the episode are an homage to 2001 : A Space Odyssey ’ s HAL 9000 , who — due to conflicted programming — also became confused and killed people . The X @-@ Files team would once again face a malevolent AI in the William Gibson @-@ penned fifth season episode " Kill Switch " . 
 Writers Howard Gordon and Alex Gansa have admitted they were " not computer literate " , and felt this was a detriment to their writing . Gordon was disappointed in the episode , stating that it " still qualifies as one of my biggest disappointments " , ranking it as the worst episode of the first season . Glen Morgan felt that " parts of the episode worked . What maybe fell a little flat is that we were a little too afraid of doing HAL and , in a sense , I think that 's what the building needed ; to have a scary personality . " James Wong had mixed feelings , saying that the episode " had some neat stuff at the end ... although I think the ending was a little unsatisfying to me visually , as well as in terms of how Mulder comes to dismember the machine . Overall a fun episode . " Chris Carter was more supportive of the episode , stating that the script addressed the question of what made up an X @-@ File , and that it doesn 't always have to be paranormal . He also felt positive about the episode 's action scenes . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Ghost in the Machine " premiered on the Fox network on October 29 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on November 3 , 1994 . Following its initial American broadcast , the episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 9 , with an 11 share — meaning that roughly 5 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 5 @.@ 6 million households . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Ghost in the Machine " was rated a D + . The episode 's premise and the COS system were described as " unacknowledged 2001 rip @-@ offs " , while the presence of Deep Throat was called " gratuitous " ; with both cited , along with an " absence of humor " , as the episode 's main detractions . Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , was more favourable to the episode , rating it a B- . He felt that the similarities to 2001 : A Space Odyssey and Demon Seed were effective , adding however , that although the plot worked well , it had dated poorly . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , reviewed the episode negatively , feeling that the plot was " formulaic " , and that it " simply [ has ] not stood the test of time " . However , Haigh felt that Deep Throat 's appearance was a highlight of the episode , and praised Mark Snow 's score as " extremely atmospheric " . The plot for " Ghost in the Machine " was also adapted as a novel for young adults in 1997 by Les Martin . 
 The Guardian listed " Ghost in the Machine " as one of the " 13 best X @-@ Files episodes ever " . 
 = Isle of Arran = 
 Arran or the Isle of Arran ( / <unk> / ; Scottish Gaelic : Eilean Arainn pronounced [ elan <unk> ] ) is the largest island in the Firth of Clyde , Scotland . With an area of 432 square kilometres ( 167 sq mi ) it is the seventh largest Scottish island . It is in the unitary council area of North Ayrshire . In the 2011 census it had a resident population of 4 @,@ 629 . Although it is culturally and physically similar to the Hebrides , it is separated from them by the Kintyre peninsula . Arran is divided into highland and lowland areas by the Highland Boundary Fault and it has been described as a " geologist 's paradise " . 
 Arran has been continuously inhabited since the early Neolithic period , and numerous prehistoric remains have been found . From the 6th century onwards , Goidelic @-@ speaking peoples from Ireland colonised the island and it became a centre of religious activity . During the troubled Viking Age , Arran became the property of the Norwegian crown before becoming formally absorbed by the kingdom of Scotland in the 13th century . The 19th century " clearances " led to significant depopulation and the end of the Gaelic language and way of life . 
 The economy and population have recovered in recent years , the main industry being tourism . There is diversity of wildlife , including three species of tree endemic to the area . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Most of the islands of Scotland have been occupied by the speakers of at least four languages since the Iron Age , and many of the names of these islands have more than one possible meaning as a result . Arran is therefore not unusual in that the derivation of the name is far from clear . Mac an Tàilleir ( 2003 ) states that " it is said to be unrelated to the name Aran in Ireland " ( which means " kidney shaped " , cf Irish <unk> " kidney " ) . Unusually for a Scottish island , Haswell @-@ Smith ( 2004 ) offers a Brythonic derivation and a meaning of " high place " which at least corresponds with the geography — Arran is significantly loftier than all the land that immediately surrounds it along the shores of the Firth of Clyde . 
 Any other Brythonic place names that may have existed were later replaced on Arran as the Goidelic @-@ speaking Gaels spread from Ireland via their adjacent kingdom of Dál Riata . During the Viking Age the island , along with the vast majority of the Scottish islands , became the property of the Norwegian crown , at which time it may have been known as " Herrey " or " Hersey " . As a result of this Norse influence , many current place names on Arran are of Viking origin . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The island lies in the Firth of Clyde between Ayr and Ardrossan , and Kintyre . The profile of the north Arran hills as seen from the Ayrshire coast is a well @-@ known sight referred to as the " Sleeping Warrior " due to its resemblance to a resting human figure . The highest of these hills is Goat Fell at 873 @.@ 5 metres ( 2 @,@ 866 ft ) . There are three other Corbetts , all in the north east : Caisteal <unk> , <unk> Mhòr and Beinn <unk> . Beinn <unk> is the highest peak in the north west at 721 metres ( 2 @,@ 365 ft ) . 
 The largest valley on the island is Glen <unk> to the west , whilst narrow Glen Sannox ( Gaelic : Gleann <unk> ) and Glen Rosa ( Gaelic : Gleann <unk> ) to the east surround Goat Fell . The terrain to the south is less mountainous , although a considerable portion of the interior lies above 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) , and A ' <unk> reaches 512 metres ( 1 @,@ 680 ft ) at its summit . There are two other Marilyns in the south , <unk> and Beinn <unk> . 
 Arran is sometimes referred to as " Scotland in miniature " , as it is divided into " Highland " and " Lowland " areas by the Highland Boundary Fault which runs northeast to southwest across Scotland . Arran is a popular destination for geologists , who come to see intrusive igneous landforms such as sills and dykes as well as sedimentary and metasedimentary rocks ranging in age from Precambrian to Mesozoic . 
 Most of the interior of the northern half of the island is taken up by a large granite batholith that was created by substantial magmatic activity around 58 million years ago in the Paleogene period . This comprises an outer ring of coarse granite and an inner core of finer grained granite , which was intruded later . This granite was intruded into the Late Proterozoic to Cambrian metasediments of the Dalradian Supergroup . Other Paleogene igneous rocks on Arran include extensive felsic and composite sills in the south of the island , and the central ring complex , an eroded caldera system surrounded by a near @-@ continuous ring of granitic rocks . 
 Sedimentary rocks dominate the southern half of the island , especially Old and New Red Sandstone . Some of these sandstones contain <unk> - pitted marks that may have been created by Permian lightning strikes . Large aeolian sand dunes are preserved in Permian sandstones near Brodick , showing the presence of an ancient desert . Within the central complex are subsided blocks of Triassic sandstone and marl , Jurassic shale , and even a rare example of Cretaceous chalk . During the 19th century <unk> was mined near Sannox . First discovered in 1840 , nearly 5 @,@ 000 tons were produced between 1853 and 1862 . The mine was closed by the 11th Duke of Hamilton on the grounds that it " spoiled the solemn grandeur of the scene " but was reopened after the First World War and operated until 1938 when the vein ran out . 
 Visiting in 1787 , the geologist James Hutton found his first example of an unconformity to the north of Newton Point near Lochranza , which provided evidence for his <unk> theories of uniformitarianism and about the age of the Earth . This spot is one of the most famous places in the study of geology . 
 The Pleistocene glaciations almost entirely covered Scotland in ice , and Arran 's highest peaks may have been nunataks at this time . After the last retreat of the ice at the close of the Pleistocene epoch sea levels were up to 70 metres ( 230 ft ) lower than at present and it is likely that circa 14 @,@ 000 BP the island was connected to mainland Scotland . Sea level changes and the isostatic rise of land makes charting post @-@ glacial coastlines a complex task , but it is evident that the island is ringed by post glacial raised beaches . King 's Cave on the south west coast is an example of an emergent landform on such a raised beach . This cave , which is over 30 @.@ 5 metres ( 100 ft ) long and up to 15 @.@ 3 metres ( 50 ft ) high , lies well above the present day sea level . There are tall sea cliffs to the north east including large rock slides under the heights of Torr <unk> , Torr <unk> and at <unk> ( An <unk> ) at the far north end of the island . 
 = = = Villages = = = 
 Arran has several villages , mainly around the shoreline . Brodick ( Old Norse : " broad bay " ) is the site of the ferry terminal , several hotels , and the majority of shops . Brodick Castle is a seat of the Dukes of Hamilton . Lamlash , however , is the largest village on the island and in 2001 had a population of 1 @,@ 010 compared to 621 for Brodick . Other villages include Lochranza , in which the Blackwood @-@ Davidson family had their principal seat , Lochranza Castle and Catacol in the north , Corrie in the north east , Blackwaterfoot in the south west , Kildonan in the south and Whiting Bay in the south east . 
 = = = Surrounding islands = = = 
 Arran has three smaller satellite islands : Holy Isle lies to the east opposite Lamlash , Pladda is located off Arran 's south coast and tiny Hamilton Isle lies just off <unk> Point 1 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 75 mi ) north of Holy Isle . Eilean na h @-@ <unk> <unk> off the south west of Arran at <unk> is a skerry connected to Arran at low tide . 
 Other islands in the Firth of Clyde include Bute , Great Cumbrae and Inchmarnock . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 The influence of the Atlantic Ocean and the Gulf Stream create a mild oceanic climate . Temperatures are generally cool , averaging about 6 ° C ( 43 ° F ) in January and 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) in July at sea level . The southern half of the island , being less mountainous , has a more favourable climate than the north , and the east coast is more sheltered from the prevailing winds than the west and south . 
 Snow seldom lies at sea level and frosts are less frequent than on the mainland . As in most islands of the west coast of Scotland , annual rainfall is generally high at between 1 @,@ 500 mm ( 59 in ) in the south and west and 1 @,@ 900 mm ( 75 in ) in the north and east . The mountains are wetter still with the summits receiving over 2 @,@ 550 mm ( 100 in ) annually . May and June are the sunniest months , with upwards of 200 hours of bright sunshine being recorded on average . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Arran has a particular concentration of early Neolithic Clyde Cairns , a form of Gallery grave . The typical style of these structures is a rectangular or trapezoidal stone and earth mound that encloses a chamber lined with larger stone slabs . Pottery and bone fragments found inside the chambers suggest they were used for interment and some have <unk> , which may have been an area for public display or ritual . There are two good examples in Monamore Glen west of the village of Lamlash , and similar structures called the Giants ' Graves above Whiting Bay . There are numerous standing stones dating from prehistoric times , including six stone circles on Machrie Moor ( Gaelic : Am <unk> ) . 
 <unk> deposits on the island were used locally for making various items in the Mesolithic era . In the Neolithic and the Early Bronze Age <unk> from the Isle of Arran or items made from it were transported around Britain . 
 Several Bronze Age sites have been excavated , including " Ossian 's Mound " near <unk> and a cairn near Blackwaterfoot that produced a bronze dagger and a gold fillet . Torr a ' <unk> Dun in the south west near <unk> is the ruin of an Iron Age fortified structure dating from about AD 200 . The original walls would have been 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) or more thick and enclosed a circular area about 14 metres ( 46 ft ) in diameter . 
 = = = Gaels , Vikings and the medieval era = = = 
 An ancient Irish poem called <unk> na <unk> , first recorded in the 13th century , describes the attractions of the island . 
 Arran of the many stags 
 The sea strikes against her shoulders , 
 Companies of men can feed there , 
 Blue spears are reddened among her boulders . 
 Merry hinds are on her hills , 
 Juicy berries are there for food , 
 <unk> water in her streams , 
 Nuts in plenty in the wood . 
 The monastery of <unk> founded by St. Brendan in the 6th century may have been on Arran and St. <unk> was also active , with Holy Isle being a centre of his activities . The caves below Keil Point ( Gaelic : Rubha na Cille ) contain a slab which may have been an ancient altar . This stone has two <unk> on it , the prints of two right feet , said to be of Saint Columba . 
 In the 11th century Arran became part of the Sodor ( Old Norse : ' <unk> @-@ eyjar ' ) , or South Isles of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles , but on the death of Godred Crovan in 1095 all the isles came under the direct rule of Magnus III of Norway . <unk> ( 1103 – 1104 ) restored local rule . After the death of Somerled in 1164 Arran and Bute were ruled by his son Angus . In 1237 , the Scottish isles broke away completely from the Isle of Man and became an independent kingdom . After the indecisive Battle of Largs between the kingdoms of Norway and Scotland in 1263 , Haakon Haakonsson , King of Norway reclaimed Norwegian lordship over the " provinces " of the west . Arriving at Mull , he rewarded a number of his Norse @-@ Gaelic vassals with grants of lands . Bute was given to <unk> and Arran to Murchad MacSween . Following Haakon 's death later that year Norway ceded the islands of western Scotland to the Scottish crown in 1266 by the Treaty of Perth . A substantial Viking grave has been discovered near King 's Cross south of Lamlash , containing whalebone , iron rivets and nails , fragments of bronze and a 9th @-@ century bronze coin , and another grave of similar date nearby yielded a sword and shield . Arran was also part of the medieval Bishopric of Sodor and Man . 
 On the opposite side of the island near Blackwaterfoot is the King 's Cave ( see above ) where Robert the Bruce is said to have taken shelter in the 14th century . Bruce returned to the island in 1326 , having earlier granted lands to Fergus <unk> for assistance rendered during his time of concealment there . Brodick Castle played a prominent part in the island 's medieval history . Probably dating from the 13th century , it was captured by English forces during the Wars of Independence before being taken back by Scottish troops in 1307 . It was badly damaged by action from English ships in 1406 and sustained an attack by John of Islay , the Lord of the Isles in 1455 . Originally a seat of the Clan Stewart of Menteith it passed to the Boyd family in the 15th century . For a short time during the reign of King James V in the 16th century the Isle of Arran was under the regency of Robert Maxwell , 5th Lord Maxwell . 
 = = = Modern era = = = 
 At the commencement of the Early modern period James , 2nd Lord Hamilton became a privy counsellor to his first cousin , James IV of Scotland and helped to arrange his marriage to Princess Margaret Tudor of England . As a reward he was created Earl of Arran in 1503 . The local economy for much of this period was based on the run rig system , the basic crops being oats , barley and potatoes . The population slowly grew to about 6 @,@ 500 . In the early 19th century Alexander , 10th Duke of Hamilton ( 1767 – 1852 ) embarked on a programme of clearances that had a devastating effect on the island 's population . These " improvements " typically led to land that had been rented out to as many as 27 families being converted into a single farm . In some cases , land was promised in Canada for each adult emigrant male . In April 1829 , for example , 86 islanders boarded the brig Caledonia for the two @-@ month journey , half their fares being paid for by the Duke . However , on arrival in Quebec only 41 hectares ( 100 acres ) was made available to the heads of extended families . Whole villages were removed and the Gaelic culture of the island devastated . The writer James Hogg wrote : " Ah ! <unk> 's me . I hear the Duke of Hamilton 's crofters are a ' <unk> away , man and mother 's son , frae the Isle o ' Arran . Pity on us ! " . A memorial to this has been constructed on the shore at Lamlash , paid for by a Canadian descendant of the emigrants . 
 On 10 August 1941 a RAF Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator LB @-@ 30A <unk> was flying from RAF Heathfield in Ayrshire to Gander International Airport in Canada . However , the B @-@ 24 crashed into the hillside of Mullach Buidhe north of Goat Fell where all 22 passengers and crew died . 
 Arran 's resident population was 4 @,@ 629 in 2011 , a decline of just over 8 % from the figure of 5 @,@ 045 recorded in 2001 against a background of Scottish island populations as a whole growing by 4 % to 103 @,@ 702 for the same period . 
 = = Gaelic = = 
 Gaelic was still spoken widely on Arran at the beginning of the 20th century . The 1901 Census reported 25 @-@ 49 % Gaelic speakers on the eastern side of the island and 50 @-@ 74 % on the western side of the island . By 1921 the percentage for the whole island had dropped to less than 25 % . From then onwards , the number of speakers fell into the vague 0 @-@ 24 @.@ 9 % bracket . However , Nils Holmer quotes the <unk> ( a Gaelic almanack ) reporting 4 @,@ 532 inhabitants on the island in 1931 with 605 Gaelic speakers , showing that Gaelic had declined to about 13 % of the population . It continued to decline until the last native speakers of Arran Gaelic died in the 1990s . Current @-@ day Gaelic speakers on Arran originate from other areas in Scotland . In 2011 , 2 @.@ 0 % of Arran residents age 3 and over could speak Gaelic . 
 Arran Gaelic is reasonably well documented . Holmer carried out fieldwork on the island in 1938 , reporting Gaelic being spoken by " a fair number of old inhabitants " . He interviewed 53 informants from various locations and his description of the dialect , The Gaelic of Arran , was published in 1957 and runs to 211 pages of phonological , grammatical and lexical information . The Survey of the Gaelic Dialects of Scotland , which collected Gaelic dialect data in Scotland between 1950 and 1963 also interviewed 5 native speakers of Arran Gaelic . 
 The Arran dialect falls firmly into the southern group of Gaelic dialects ( referred to as the " peripheral " dialects in Celtic studies ) and thus shows : 
 a glottal stop replacing an Old Irish hiatus , e.g. <unk> ' road ' / <unk> ̪ / ( normally / <unk> ̪ / ) 
 the dropping of / h / between vowels e.g. <unk> ' father ' / <unk> / ( normally / <unk> / ) 
 the preservation of a long l , n and r , e.g. <unk> ' weak ' / fan ̪ <unk> / ( normally / faun ̪ ˠ / with <unk> ) . 
 The most unusual feature of Arran Gaelic is the / w / glide after labials before a front vowel , e.g. <unk> ' good ' / <unk> / ( normally / mah / ) . 
 Mac an Tàilleir ( 2003 ) notes that the island has a poetic name Arainn nan <unk> <unk> - " Arran of the many stags " and that a native of the island or <unk> is also nicknamed <unk> mòr in Gaelic , meaning " big rabbit " . Locally , Arainn was pronounced / <unk> / . 
 = = Local government = = 
 From the seventeenth century to the late twentieth century Arran was part of the County of Bute . After the 1975 reorganisation of local government Arran became part of the district of Cunninghame in Strathclyde Region . 
 This two @-@ tier system of local government lasted until 1996 when the Local Government etc . ( Scotland ) Act 1994 came into effect , abolishing the regions and districts and replacing them with 32 unitary authorities . Arran is now in the North Ayrshire council area , along with some of the constituent islands of the old County of Bute . 
 For some statistical purposes Arran is within the registration county of Ayrshire and for ceremonial purposes within the lieutenancy area of Ayrshire and Arran . 
 In the House of Commons , since 2005 Arran has been part of the Ayrshire North and Arran constituency , represented by Katy Clark of the Labour Party . It was previously part of the constituency of Cunninghame North from 1983 to 2005 , and of Ayrshire North and Bute from 1918 to 1983 . 
 In the Scottish Parliament , Arran is part of the constituency of Cunninghame North , currently represented by Kenneth Gibson of the Scottish National Party ( SNP ) . Labour held the seat until 2007 , when the SNP gained it with a majority of just 48 , making it the most marginal seat in Holyrood until 2011 when the SNP significantly increased their majority to <unk> over the Labour Party . 
 = = Health Services = = 
 Health services for the island are provided by NHS Ayrshire and Arran . Arran War Memorial Hospital is a 17 @-@ bed acute hospital at Lamlash . The Arran Medical Group provides primary care services and supports the hospital . The practice is based at Brodick Health Centre and has three base surgeries and four branch surgeries . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Isle of Arran is connected to the Scottish mainland by two Caledonian MacBrayne ferries , MV Caledonian Isles from Brodick to Ardrossan and MV Loch Tarbert ( in summertime only ) from Lochranza to <unk> . Summer day trips are also available on board the paddle steamer PS Waverley and a summertime service operated by a local resident connects Lamlash to the neighbouring Holy Isle . 
 There are three roads on the island . The 90 kilometres ( 56 mi ) long coast road circumnavigates the island . In 2007 , a 48 kilometres ( 30 mi ) stretch of this road , previously designated as the <unk> , was de @-@ classified to a ' C ' road . Travelling south from Whiting Bay , the <unk> goes round the south coast continuing north up the west coast of the island to Lochranza . At this point the road becomes the <unk> down the east coast back to Whiting Bay . 
 At one point the coast road ventures inland , this is to climb the 200 metres ( 660 ft ) pass at <unk> between Creag <unk> Laggan and Caisteal <unk> , located between Sannox and Lochranza . 
 The other two roads run across from the east to the west side of the island . The main cross @-@ island road is the 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) long <unk> from Brodick to Blackwaterfoot called " The String " , which climbs over Gleann an t @-@ Suidhe . About 10 kilometres ( 6 mi ) along the <unk> from Brodick , a minor road branches off to the right to Machrie . The single track road " The Ross " runs 15 kilometres ( 9 mi ) from Lamlash to <unk> and <unk> via Glen <unk> ( Gaelic : Gleann <unk> ) . 
 The island can be explored using public transport using a bus service operated by Stagecoach . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The main industry of the island is tourism , one of the main attractions being the imposing Brodick Castle , owned by the National Trust for Scotland . The <unk> Resort , which contains 2 hotels , 3 restaurants and 2 leisure complexes , is one of biggest employers on the island . Local businesses include the Arran Distillery , which was opened in 1995 in Lochranza , and Arran Aromatics , which produces a range of toiletries . The island has a number of golf courses including the 12 hole <unk> links course which was founded in 1896 . 
 Farming and forestry are other important industries . 2008 plans for a large salmon farm holding 800 @,@ 000 or more fish in Lamlash Bay have been criticised by the Community of Arran Seabed Trust . They feared the facility could jeopardise Scotland 's first marine No Take Zone , which was announced in September 2008 . 
 The Arran Brewery is a microbrewery founded in March 2000 in <unk> , near Brodick . The brewery produces 8 regular cask and bottled beers . The wheat beer , Arran Blonde ( 5 @.@ 0 % abv ) is the most popular brand and others include Arran Dark and Arran Sunset , with a seasonal ale called Fireside only brewed in winter . The brewery is open for tours , with tastings in the shop . The business went into liquidation in May 2008 and was subsequently sold to Marketing Management Services International Ltd. in June 2008 . The brewery is now back in production and the beers widely available in Scotland . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Scottish Gaelic dialect of Arran died out when the last speaker Donald Craig died in the 1970s . However , there is now a Gaelic House in Brodick , set up at the end of the 1990s . Brodick Castle features on the Royal Bank of Scotland £ 20 note and Lochranza Castle was used as the model for the castle in The Adventures of Tintin adventure The Black Island . 
 Arran has one newspaper , The Arran Banner . It was listed in the Guinness Book of Records in November 1984 under the title of " local newspaper which achieves the closest to a saturation circulation in its area " . The entry reads " The Arran Banner , founded in 1974 , has a readership of more than 97 per cent in Britain ’ s seventh largest off @-@ shore island " . There is also an online weekly publication called Voice for Arran that relies mainly on articles contributed by community members . 
 In 2010 an " Isle of Arran " version of the game Monopoly was launched . 
 The knitting style used to create Aran sweaters is often mistakenly associated with the Isle of Arran rather than the Irish Aran Islands . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 The island has three endemic species of tree , the Arran whitebeams . These trees are the Scottish or Arran whitebeam ( Sorbus arranensis ) , the bastard mountain ash or cut @-@ leaved whitebeam ( Sorbus pseudofennica ) and the Catacol whitebeam ( Sorbus <unk> ) . If rarity is measured by numbers alone they are amongst the most endangered tree species in the world . They are protected in Glen <unk> off Glen Catacol , at the north end of the island by a partly fenced off national nature reserve , and are monitored by staff from Scottish Natural Heritage . Only 236 Sorbus pseudofennica and 283 Sorbus arranensis were recorded as mature trees in 1980 . They are typically trees of the mountain slopes , close to the tree line . However , they will grow at lower altitudes , and are being preserved within Brodick Country Park . 
 Over 200 species of bird have been recorded on Arran including black guillemot , eider , peregrine falcon and the golden eagle . In 1981 there were 28 ptarmigan on Arran , but in 2009 it was reported that extensive surveys had been unable to record any . Similarly , the red @-@ billed chough no longer breeds on the island . 
 Red deer are numerous on the northern hills , and there are populations of red squirrel , badger , otter , adder and common lizard . Offshore there are harbour porpoises , basking sharks and various species of dolphin . 
 The northern part of Lamlash Bay became a Marine Protected Area and a " no take zone " under the terms of the Marine ( Scotland ) Act 2010 which means that no fish or shellfish may be taken in the designated area . In 2014 the Scottish Government created Scotland 's first Marine Conservation Order in order to protect delicate <unk> beds off south Arran after fishermen breached a voluntary agreement not to trawl in the vicinity . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Sir Kenneth Calman , Chancellor of Glasgow University , former Scottish & UK Chief Medical Officer and author of the Calman Commission on Scottish devolution . 
 Daniel Macmillan who , with his brother Alexander founded Macmillan Publishers in 1843 . Daniel was also the grandfather of Harold Macmillan who became Prime Minister in 1957 . 
 Jack McConnell , former First Minister of Scotland . 
 Robert McLellan , Scots playwright and poet . 
 J. M. Robertson , politician and journalist . 
 Alison Prince , children 's writer . 
 Dr John Hamilton Fullarton FRSE , zoologist . 
 = This Charming Man = 
 " This Charming Man " is a song by the English rock band the Smiths , written by guitarist Johnny Marr and singer / lyricist Morrissey . It was released as the group 's second single in October 1983 on the independent record label Rough Trade . The song is defined by Marr 's jangle pop guitar riff and Morrissey 's characteristically morose lyrics , which revolve around the recurrent Smiths themes of sexual ambiguity and lust . 
 Feeling detached from and unable to relate to the early 1980s mainstream gay culture , Morrissey wrote " This Charming Man " to evoke an older , more coded and self @-@ aware underground scene . The singer explained of the song 's lyrics , " I really like the idea of the male voice being quite vulnerable , of it being taken and slightly manipulated , rather than there being always this heavy machismo thing that just bores everybody . " 
 Although only moderately successful on first release — the single peaked at number 25 on the British singles chart , " This Charming Man " has been widely praised in both the music and mainstream press . The single was re @-@ issued in 1992 , reaching number 8 on the UK singles chart ( making it the Smiths ' biggest UK hit by chart position ) . In 2004 , BBC Radio 2 listeners voted it number 97 on the station 's " Sold on Song Top 100 " poll . Mojo magazine journalists placed the track at number 1 on their 2008 " 50 Greatest UK Indie Records of All Time " feature . 
 = = Background = = 
 By early 1983 , the Smiths had gained a large following on the UK live circuit and had signed a record deal with the indie label Rough Trade . The deal , along with positive concert reviews in the weekly music press and an upcoming session on John Peel 's radio show on BBC Radio 1 , generated a large media buzz for the band . In a music scene dominated by corporate and video @-@ driven acts , the Smiths ' camp and bookish image stood out , and many expected the band to be the breakthrough act of the UK post @-@ punk movement . The previous October Frankie Goes to Hollywood released their iconic track " Relax " , which was seen as an anthem to an out alpha male self @-@ assertiveness , and alien to many UK homosexuals . However , the Smiths ' May 1983 debut single " Hand in Glove " failed to live up to critical and commercial expectations , mostly due to its perceived low production values . When Rough Trade label mates Aztec Camera began to receive day @-@ time national radio @-@ play with their track " Walk out to Winter " , Marr admitted to " feeling a little jealous , my competitive urges kicked in " . The guitarist believed the Smiths needed an up @-@ beat song , " in a major key " , to gain a chart positioning that would live up to expectations . 
 Marr wrote the music to " This Charming Man " especially for the Peel session on the same night that he wrote " Still Ill " and " Pretty Girls Make Graves " . Based on the Peel performance , Rough Trade label head Geoff Travis suggested that the band release the song as a single instead of the slated release " Reel Around the Fountain " , which had gathered notoriety in the press due to what were seen as lyrical references to paedophilia . The Smiths entered Matrix Studios in London on September 1983 to record a second studio version of the song for release as a single . However , the result — known as the ' London version ' — was unsatisfactory and soon after , the band travelled to Strawberry Studios in Stockport to try again . Here , they recorded the more widely heard A @-@ side . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The lyrics of " This Charming Man " comprise a first person narrative in which the male protagonist punctures one of his bicycle 's wheels on a remote hillside . A passing " charming man " in a luxury car stops to offer the cyclist a lift , and although the protagonist is at first hesitant , after much deliberation he accepts the offer . While driving together the pair flirt , although the protagonist finds it difficult to overcome his reluctance : " I would go out tonight , but I haven 't got a stitch to wear " . The motorist tells the cyclist : " it 's gruesome that someone so handsome should care " . 
 Morrissey deliberately used archaic language when composing the voice @-@ over style lyrics for " This Charming Man " . His use of phrases and words such as ' hillside desolate ' , ' stitch to wear ' , ' handsome ' and ' charming ' are used to convey a more courtly world than the mid @-@ Eighties north of England , and evoke a style that has , in the words of the music critic Mat Snow " nothing to do with fashion " . Morrissey had already used the word ' handsome ' in a song title — in " Handsome Devil " , the B @-@ side to " Hand in Glove " — and observed in a 1983 interview with Barney Hoskyns that he used the word to " try and revive some involvement with language people no longer use . In the daily scheme of things , people 's language is so frighteningly limited , and if you use a word with more than 10 letters it 's absolute snobbery . " Snow puts forward the case that through the use of the dated word ' charming ' , Morrissey sought to rebel against the then mainstream gay culture from which he felt alienated . Morrissey told Hoskyns : " I hate this ' festive faggot ' thing ... People listen to " This Charming Man " and think no further than what anyone would presume . I hate that angle , and it 's surprising that the gay press have harped on more than anyone else . I hate it when people talk to me about sex in a trivial way . " 
 As with many of Morrissey 's compositions , the song 's lyrics features dialogue borrowed from a cult film . The line " A jumped @-@ up pantry boy who never knew his place " is borrowed from the 1972 film adaptation of Anthony Shaffer 's 1970 homoerotic play Sleuth , in which Laurence Olivier plays a cuckolded author to Michael Caine 's ' bit of rough ' . 
 Both studio versions begin with an introductory guitar riff , joined by the rhythm section . Morrissey 's vocals are first heard eight seconds into the track . His vocal melodies are diatonic , and consciously avoid blues inflections . The chorus is played twice ; the first time it is followed by a brief pause , the second by the closing of the song . The rhythm section of Andy Rourke and Mike Joyce provide a beat more danceable than usual for a Smiths track . The drums were originally programmed on a Linn Drum Computer , under the direction of producer John Porter . Porter used the programme to trigger the sampled sounds of the live drum kit , featuring a <unk> bassline . Marr 's guitar part consists of single notes and thirds as opposed to strummed bar chords , and his guitar serves to creates a counter @-@ melody throughout the song . Marr overdubbed numerous guitar parts onto the song , and in a December 1993 interview , told Guitar Player magazine : 
 I 'll try any trick . With the Smiths , I 'd take this really loud Telecaster of mine , lay it on top of a Fender Twin Reverb with the vibrato on , and tune it to an open chord . Then I 'd drop a knife with a metal handle on it , hitting random strings . I used it on " This Charming Man " , buried beneath about 15 tracks of guitar ... it was the first record where I used those highlife @-@ sounding runs in 3rds . I 'm tuned up to F # and I finger it in G , so it comes out in A. There are about 15 tracks of guitar . People thought the main guitar part was a Rickenbacker , but it 's really a ' 54 Tele . There are three tracks of acoustic , a backwards guitar with a really long reverb , and the effect of dropping knives on the guitar – that comes in at the end of the chorus . 
 The chord progression for the song , from the instrumental intro to the lyric " Will nature make of me " is A major , A sus , A major , E major , B minor 7 , D major 7 , C # minor , E major , A major , E major with an A bass note , A sus , A major and E major . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On release , the song received near unanimous critical praise . Paul Morley of the NME wrote , " ' This Charming Man ' is an accessible bliss , and seriously moving . This group fully understand that the casual is not enough ... This is one of the greatest singles of the year , a poor compliment . Unique and indispensable , like ' Blue Monday ' and ' Karma Chameleon ' – that 's better ! " A contemporary review in The Face asked , " Where has all the wildness and daring got to ? Some of it has found its way onto the Smiths ' record , ' This Charming Man ' . It <unk> and crashes and Morrissey jumps in the middle with his mutant choir @-@ boy voice , sounding jolly and angst @-@ ridden at the same time . It should be given out on street corners to unsuspecting passers @-@ by of all ages . " Another contemporary review by Treble magazine described the song as a " stellar jangle @-@ pop track , " based on one of Marr 's first truly iconic guitar licks . While the band was little @-@ known in the United States at the time , Robert Palmer of The New York Times described the song as " sparkling , soaring , superlative pop @-@ rock , and proof that the guitar @-@ band format pioneered by the Beatles is still viable for groups with something to say " . The following year , Palmer chose the song as the second best single of 1984 . 
 AllMusic 's Ned Raggett noted that " Early Elvis would have approved of the music , Wilde of the words " , and described the track as " an audacious end result by any standard " . Tim DiGravina , of the same organisation , wrote that " Debating the merits of the track here would be a bit pointless , as it 's a classic song from one of the last great classic bands . It might as well be called ' This Charming Song ' . " In 2007 , Oasis songwriter Noel Gallagher described the first time he heard the track : " The second I heard ' This Charming Man ' everything made sense . The sound of that guitar intro was incredible . The lyrics are fuckin ' amazing , too . People say Morrissey 's a miserable cunt , but I knew straight away what he was on about . " In 2006 , Liz Hoggard from The Independent said that " This Charming Man ... is about age @-@ gap , gay sex " . 
 During an appearance on Top of the Pops , Morrissey appeared waving gladioli . A 2004 BBC Radio 2 feature on the song noted that the performance was most people 's introduction to The Smiths and , " therefore , to the weird , wordy world of Morrissey and the music of Johnny Marr " . Uncut magazine , commentating on the nationally televised debut , wrote that " Thursday evening when Manchester 's <unk> first appeared on Top of the Pops would be an unexpected pivotal cultural event in the lives of a million serious English boys . His very English , camp <unk> was a revolt into Sixties kitchen @-@ sink <unk> against the gaudiness of the Eighties new wave music , as exemplified by Culture Club and their ilk . The Smiths ' subject matter may have been ' squalid ' but there was a purity of purpose about them that you messed with at your peril . " Noel Gallagher said of the performance : " None of my mates liked them — they were more hooligan types . They came into work and said ' Fuckin ' hell , did you see that poof on " Top of the Pops " with the bush in his back pocket ? ' But I thought it was life @-@ changing . " 
 = = Versions and release history = = 
 The earliest version of " This Charming Man " was recorded on 14 September 1983 , in Maida Vale Studio 4 , for John Peel 's radio programme ( first broadcast : 21 September 1983 ) . Produced by Roger Pusey , and assisted by Ted De Bono , this version of the song was first included on the 1984 compilation <unk> of Hollow . On 28 October 1983 , the " Manchester " version was released in the UK in 7 " and 12 " formats , reaching number 25 in the UK charts . The record sleeve uses a still frame from Jean Cocteau 's 1949 film Orphée , featuring French actor Jean Marais . The song was later included as a bonus track on the cassette version of the band 's debut album The Smiths in the UK , and subsequently on all American versions . 
 Following the 1989 bankruptcy of Rough Trade , WEA Records purchased the Smiths ' back catalogue . In 1992 WEA re @-@ issued the band 's catalogue , and all subsequent pressings of The Smiths have incorporated " This Charming Man " . WEA re @-@ released the single itself in 1992 to support the Best ... I compilation album . The reissued single reached number 8 on the British singles chart , the band 's highest chart placing . 
 In December 1983 , DJ François Kevorkian released a " New York " mix of the single on <unk> records . Kevorkian geared the song for nightclub dancefloors . The track was intended to be pressed in limited numbers for New York club DJs . However , Rough Trade boss Geoff Travis liked the mix and gave the release wide distribution in the UK . Morrissey publicly disowned the mix , and urged fans not to purchase copies . Travis later claimed , " it was my idea , but they agreed . They said ' Go ahead ' , then didn 't like it so it was withdrawn . " He also said , " Nothing that ever happened in the Smiths occurred without Morrissey 's guidance ; there 's not one Smiths record that went out that Morrissey didn 't ask to do , so there 's nothing on my conscience . " 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Death Cab for Cutie covered " This Charming Man " for their 1997 demo You Can Play These Songs with Chords . In 2001 , Canadian indie pop band Stars released their own take on the song on their debut album <unk> . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Morrissey – lead vocals 
 Johnny Marr – electric and acoustic guitar 
 Andy Rourke – bass guitar 
 Mike Joyce – drums 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Seattle Fault = 
 The Seattle Fault is a zone of multiple shallow east @-@ west thrust faults that cross the Puget Sound Lowland and through Seattle ( in the U.S. state of Washington ) in the vicinity of Interstate Highway 90 . The Seattle Fault was first recognized as a significant seismic hazard in 1992 , when a set of reports showed that about 1 @,@ 100 years ago it was the scene of a major earthquake of about magnitude 7 – an event that entered Native American oral legend . Extensive research has since shown the Seattle Fault to be part of a regional system of faults . 
 = = Notable earthquake = = 
 First suspected from mapping of gravitational anomalies in 1965 and an uplifted marine terrace at Restoration Point ( foreground in picture above ) , the Seattle Fault 's existence and likely hazard were definitely established by a set of five reports published in Science in 1992 . These reports looked at the timing of abrupt uplift and subsidence around Restoration Point and Alki Point ( distant right side of picture ) , tsunami deposits on Puget Sound , turbidity in lake <unk> , rock avalanches , and multiple landslides around Lake Washington , and determined that all these happened about 1100 years ago ( between A.D. 900 – 930 ) , and most likely due to an earthquake of magnitude 7 or greater on the Seattle Fault . 
 Although the A.D. 900 – 930 earthquake was over a thousand years ago , local native legends have preserved an association of a powerful supernatural spirit – a <unk> , noted for shaking , rushes of water , and <unk> – with five locales along the trace of the Seattle Fault , including a " spirit boulder " called <unk> @-@ Yah @-@ hus near the Fauntleroy ferry dock in West Seattle . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Seattle Fault is the structural boundary where 50 – 60 millions of years old ( early Tertiary ) basalt of the Crescent Formation on the south has been uplifted – the Seattle Uplift – and is tipping into the Seattle Basin , where the Tertiary bedrock is buried under at least 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 miles ) of relatively softer , lighter sedimentary strata of the younger Blakeley and Blakely Harbor formations . This has resulted in a 4 to 7 km ( 2 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 3 miles ) wide zone of complex faulting , with three or more main south @-@ dipping thrust faults . Most of the faulting is " blind " ( not reaching the surface ) , and generally difficult to locate because of the generally heavy vegetation or development . Three principal strands have been identified , their location determined by high @-@ resolution seismic reflection and <unk> surveys . The northernmost strand lies nearly along Interstate 90 and then under Lake Sammamish . The central section of the fault zone – where it crosses the apparent location of the Olympic @-@ Wallowa Lineament – shows marked variation in the location of the strands and of the underlying structure , but the nature and significance of this is not understood . 
 The fault extends for approximately 70 km ( 43 miles ) from near Fall City on the east , where it appears to be terminated by the South Whidbey Island Fault , to Hood Canal on the west ( not shown on the map ) . where matters are as yet unclear ( see discussion at Puget Sound faults # Question of western termination ) . It is the northern edge of the Seattle Uplift , of which the Tacoma Fault is the southern edge . One model has the Seattle and Tacoma faults converging at depth to form a wedge , which is being popped up by approximately north – south oriented compression that ultimately derives from plate tectonics . Another model ( see diagram ) interprets the Seattle Uplift as a sheet of rock that is being forced up a ramp . Subsequent work suggests that the structure of the Seattle Fault may vary from east to west , with both models being applicable in different sections . A later model has part of the north @-@ thrusting sheet forming a wedge between the sedimentary formations of the Seattle Basin and the underlying bedrock . 
 The Seattle Fault is believed to date from about 40 million years ago ( late Eocene ) . This is about the time that the strike @-@ slip movement on the north @-@ striking Straight Creek Fault to the east ceased , due to the intrusions of plutons . It appears that when the Straight Creek Fault became stuck the north – south compressive force that it had accommodated by strike @-@ slip motion was transferred to the crust of the Puget Lowland , which subsequently folded and faulted , and the various blocks jammed over one another . 
 Other scarps associated with the Seattle fault have been identified by LIDAR @-@ based mapping ; trenching has generally shown the faulting to be more complex than was first realized . Many of the details of the Seattle Fault , including recurrence rate , remain to be resolved . A study of sediments in Lake Washington found evidence of seven large ( M > 7 ) earthquakes in the last 3500 years . 
 Surface scarps due to faulting are rarely observed in this area ( due to topography , vegetation , and urbanization ) ; a rare exception can be seen at Mee Kwa <unk> Park south of Alki Point . This is the site of the West Seattle Fault ; the prominent rise there is due to uplift on the north side of the fault . 
 = = Hazard = = 
 The Seattle Fault ( and the related Tacoma Fault ) is not the only source of earthquake hazard in the Puget Lowland . Other faults in the near surface continental crust , such as the South Whidbey Island Fault ( near Everett ) , and the yet to be studied Olympia Fault ( near Olympia ) , though historically quiescent , are suspected of generating earthquakes of around magnitude 7 . Others , such as the 2001 Nisqually earthquake , originate about 50 to 60 km ( 31 to 37 miles ) below Puget Sound in the Benioff zone of the subducting Juan de Fuca Plate ; being so deep their energy is dissipated . And there are the infrequent but very powerful great subduction events , such as the magnitude 9 1700 Cascadia earthquake , where the entire Cascadia subduction zone , from Cape Mendocino to Vancouver Island , slips . 
 But the Seattle and Tacoma faults are probably the most serious earthquake threat to the populous Seattle – Tacoma area . A 2002 study of bridge vulnerability estimated that a magnitude 7 earthquake on the Seattle Fault would damage approximately 80 bridges in the Seattle – Tacoma area , whereas a magnitude 9 subduction event would damage only around 87 bridges in all of Western Washington . The same study also found that with failure of just six bridges ( the minimum damage for a Benioff M 6 @.@ 5 event ) there could be at least $ 3 billion lost in business revenue alone . Subsequent retrofitting by the Washington Department of Transportation and the City of Seattle would likely reduce damage to key bridges . But there is concern that such an earthquake on the Seattle Fault would devastate unreinforced masonry ( <unk> ) buildings , of which the City of Seattle is estimated to have around a thousand , concentrated in Capitol Hill , Pioneer Square , and the International District . 
 Other recent work indicates that the Seattle Fault can generate two types of earthquakes ; both pose " considerable hazard " to the Seattle metropolitan region . The A.D. 900 – 930 earthquake is believed to be the only instance in the past 7 @,@ 000 years of the type that causes a regional uplift . The other type is more localized and shallower ( and therefore more damaging ) ; at least four such events are believed to have occurred in the past 3 @,@ 000 years on the west end of the fault . ( The history of the central and eastern segments is not known . ) 
 Calculations based on fault length and <unk> studies show that the Seattle Fault can generate a very damaging magnitude 7 @.@ 0 earthquake . In addition to extensive damage to unreinforced structures and structures built on fill ( such as much of Seattle 's Pioneer Square area , the industrial area , and the waterfront ) , computer modeling has shown that such earthquakes could cause a tsunami of about 2 m ( 6 feet 7 inches ) high on Elliott Bay . The modeling shows that such a tsunami would also inundate the industrial areas on Commencement Bay 30 miles south ( Tacoma ) and low @-@ lying areas on the Puyallup River delta . There is also concern that a severe or prolonged event could cause failure of the Duwamish or Puyallup River deltas , where the main port facilities for Seattle and Tacoma are located ( Harbor Island and Commencement Bay ) . 
 = Comics = 
 Comics is a medium used to express ideas by images , often combined with text or other visual information . Comics frequently takes the form of juxtaposed sequences of panels of images . Often textual devices such as speech balloons , captions , and onomatopoeia indicate dialogue , narration , sound effects , or other information . Size and arrangement of panels contribute to narrative pacing . Cartooning and similar forms of illustration are the most common image @-@ making means in comics ; <unk> is a form which uses photographic images . Common forms of comics include comic strips , editorial and gag cartoons , and comic books . Since the late 20th century , bound volumes such as graphic novels , comic albums , and tankōbon have become increasingly common , and online webcomics have proliferated in the 21st century . 
 The history of comics has followed different paths in different cultures . Scholars have posited a pre @-@ history as far back as the Lascaux cave paintings . By the mid @-@ 20th century , comics flourished particularly in the United States , western Europe ( especially in France and Belgium ) , and Japan . The history of European comics is often traced to Rodolphe Töpffer 's cartoon strips of the 1830s , and became popular following the success in the 1930s of strips and books such as The Adventures of Tintin . American comics emerged as a mass medium in the early 20th century with the advent of newspaper comic strips ; magazine @-@ style comic books followed in the 1930s , in which the superhero genre became prominent after Superman appeared in 1938 . Histories of Japanese comics and cartooning ( manga ) propose origins as early as the 12th century . Modern comic strips emerged in Japan in the early 20th century , and the output of comics magazines and books rapidly expanded in the post @-@ World War II era with the popularity of cartoonists such as Osamu Tezuka . Comics has had a lowbrow reputation for much of its history , but towards the end of the 20th century began to find greater acceptance with the public and in academia . 
 The English term comics is used as a singular noun when it refers to the medium and a plural when referring to particular instances , such as individual strips or comic books . Though the term derives from the humorous ( or comic ) work that predominated in early American newspaper comic strips , it has become standard also for non @-@ humorous works . It is common in English to refer to the comics of different cultures by the terms used in their original languages , such as manga for Japanese comics , or bandes dessinées for French @-@ language comics . There is no consensus amongst theorists and historians on a definition of comics ; some emphasize the combination of images and text , some sequentiality or other image relations , and others historical aspects such as mass reproduction or the use of recurring characters . The increasing cross @-@ pollination of concepts from different comics cultures and eras has further made definition difficult . 
 = = Origins and traditions = = 
 Examples of early comics 
 The European , American , and Japanese comics traditions have followed different paths . Europeans have seen their tradition as beginning with the Swiss Rodolphe Töpffer from as early as 1827 and Americans have seen the origin of theirs in Richard F. Outcault 's 1890s newspaper strip The Yellow Kid , though many Americans have come to recognize Töpffer 's precedence . Japan had a long prehistory of satirical cartoons and comics leading up to the World War II era . The ukiyo @-@ e artist Hokusai popularized the Japanese term for comics and cartooning , manga , in the early 19th century . In the post @-@ war era modern Japanese comics began to flourish when Osamu Tezuka produced a prolific body of work . Towards the close of the 20th century , these three traditions converged in a trend towards book @-@ length comics : the comic album in Europe , the tankōbon in Japan , and the graphic novel in the English @-@ speaking countries . 
 Outside of these genealogies , comics theorists and historians have seen precedents for comics in the Lascaux cave paintings in France ( some of which appear to be chronological sequences of images ) , Egyptian hieroglyphs , Trajan 's Column in Rome , the 11th @-@ century Norman Bayeux Tapestry , the 1370 bois Protat woodcut , the 15th @-@ century Ars moriendi and block books , Michelangelo 's The Last Judgment in the Sistine Chapel , and William Hogarth 's 17th @-@ century sequential engravings , amongst others . 
 = = = English @-@ language comics = = = 
 Illustrated humour periodicals were popular in 19th @-@ century Britain , the earliest of which was the short @-@ lived The Glasgow Looking Glass in 1825 . The most popular was Punch , which popularized the term cartoon for its humorous caricatures . On occasion the cartoons in these magazines appeared in sequences ; the character Ally Sloper featured in the earliest serialized comic strip when the character began to feature in its own weekly magazine in 1884 . 
 American comics developed out of such magazines as Puck , Judge , and Life . The success of illustrated humour supplements in the New York World and later the New York American , particularly Outcault 's The Yellow Kid , led to the development of newspaper comic strips . Early Sunday strips were full @-@ page and often in colour . Between 1896 and 1901 cartoonists experimented with sequentiality , movement , and speech balloons . 
 Shorter , black @-@ and @-@ white daily strips began to appear early in the 20th century , and became established in newspapers after the success in 1907 of Bud Fisher 's Mutt and Jeff . Humour strips predominated at first , and in the 1920s and 1930s strips with continuing stories in genres such as adventure and drama also became popular . Thin periodicals called comic books appeared in the 1930s , at first reprinting newspaper comic strips ; by the end of the decade , original content began to dominate . The success in 1938 of Action Comics and its lead hero Superman marked the beginning of the Golden Age of Comic Books , in which the superhero genre was prominent . 
 The popularity of superhero comic books declined following World War II , while comic book sales continued to increase as other genres proliferated , such as romance , westerns , crime , horror , and humour . Following a sales peak in the early 1950s , the content of comic books ( particularly crime and horror ) was subjected to scrutiny from parent groups and government agencies , which culminated in Senate hearings that led to the establishment of the Comics Code Authority self @-@ censoring body . The Code has been blamed for stunting the growth of American comics and maintaining its low status in American society for much of the remainder of the century . Superheroes re @-@ established themselves as the most prominent comic book genre by the early 1960s . Underground comix challenged the Code and readers with adult , countercultural content in the late 1960s and early 1970s . The underground gave birth to the alternative comics movement in the 1980s and its mature , often experimental content in non @-@ superhero genres . 
 Comics in the US has had a lowbrow reputation stemming from its roots in mass culture ; cultural elites sometimes saw popular culture as threatening culture and society . In the latter half of the 20th century , popular culture won greater acceptance , and the lines between high and low culture began to blur . Comics nevertheless continued to be stigmatized , as the medium was seen as entertainment for children and illiterates . 
 The graphic novel — book @-@ length comics — began to gain attention after Will Eisner popularized the term with his book A Contract with God ( 1978 ) . The term became widely known with the public after the commercial success of Maus , Watchmen , and The Dark Knight Returns in the mid @-@ 1980s . In the 21st century graphic novels became established in mainstream bookstores and libraries and webcomics became common . 
 = = = Franco @-@ Belgian and European comics = = = 
 The francophone Swiss Rodolphe Töpffer produced comic strips beginning in 1827 , and published theories behind the form . Cartoons appeared widely in newspapers and magazines from the 19th century . The success of Zig et Puce in 1925 popularized the use of speech balloons in European comics , after which Franco @-@ Belgian comics began to dominate . The Adventures of Tintin , with its signature clear line style , was first serialized in newspaper comics supplements beginning in 1929 , and became an icon of Franco @-@ Belgian comics . 
 Following the success of Le Journal de Mickey ( 1934 – 44 ) , dedicated comics magazines and full @-@ colour comic albums became the primary outlet for comics in the mid @-@ 20th century . As in the US , at the time comics were seen as infantile and a threat to culture and literacy ; commentators stated that " none bear up to the slightest serious analysis " , and that comics were " the sabotage of all art and all literature " . 
 In the 1960s , the term bandes dessinées ( " drawn strips " ) came into wide use in French to denote the medium . Cartoonists began creating comics for mature audiences , and the term " Ninth Art " was coined , as comics began to attract public and academic attention as an artform . A group including René Goscinny and Albert Uderzo founded the magazine Pilote in 1959 to give artists greater freedom over their work . Goscinny and Uderzo 's The Adventures of Asterix appeared in it and went on to become the best @-@ selling French @-@ language comics series . From 1960 , the satirical and taboo @-@ breaking Hara @-@ Kiri defied censorship laws in the countercultural spirit that led to the May 1968 events . 
 Frustration with censorship and editorial interference led to a group of Pilote cartoonists to found the adults @-@ only L 'Écho des <unk> in 1972 . Adult @-@ oriented and experimental comics flourished in the 1970s , such as in the experimental science fiction of <unk> and others in Métal <unk> , even mainstream publishers took to publishing prestige @-@ format adult comics . 
 From the 1980s , mainstream sensibilities were reasserted and serialization became less common as the number of comics magazines decreased and many comics began to be published directly as albums . Smaller publishers such as L 'Association that published longer works in non @-@ traditional formats by auteur @-@ istic creators also became common . Since the 1990s , mergers resulted in fewer large publishers , while smaller publishers proliferated . Sales overall continued to grow despite the trend towards a shrinking print market . 
 = = = Japanese comics = = = 
 Japanese comics and cartooning ( manga ) , have a history that has been seen as far back as the anthropomorphic characters in the 12th @-@ to @-@ 13th @-@ century <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ giga , 17th @-@ century <unk> @-@ e and <unk> picture books , and woodblock prints such as ukiyo @-@ e which were popular between the 17th and 20th centuries . The <unk> contained examples of sequential images , movement lines , and sound effects . 
 Illustrated magazines for Western expatriates introduced Western @-@ style satirical cartoons to Japan in the late 19th century . New publications in both the Western and Japanese styles became popular , and at the end of the 1890s , American @-@ style newspaper comics supplements began to appear in Japan , as well as some American comic strips . 1900 saw the debut of the Jiji Manga in the Jiji <unk> newspaper — the first use of the word " manga " in its modern sense , and where , in 1902 , Rakuten Kitazawa began the first modern Japanese comic strip . By the 1930s , comic strips were serialized in large @-@ circulation monthly girls ' and boys ' magazine and collected into hardback volumes . 
 The modern era of comics in Japan began after World War II , propelled by the success of the serialized comics of the prolific Osamu Tezuka and the comic strip Sazae @-@ san . Genres and audiences diversified over the following decades . Stories are usually first serialized in magazines which are often hundreds of pages thick and may contain over a dozen stories ; they are later compiled in tankōbon @-@ format books . At the turn of the 20th and 21st centuries , nearly a quarter of all printed material in Japan was <unk> translations became extremely popular in foreign markets — in some cases equaling or surpassing the sales of domestic comics . 
 = = Forms and formats = = 
 Comic strips are generally short , <unk> comics that traditionally most commonly appeared in newspapers . In the US , daily strips have normally occupied a single tier , while Sunday strips have been given multiple tiers . In the early 20th century , daily strips were typically in black @-@ and @-@ white and Sundays were usually in colour and often occupied a full page . 
 Specialized comics periodicals formats vary greatly in different cultures . Comic books , primarily an American format , are thin periodicals usually published in colour . European and Japanese comics are frequently serialized in magazines — monthly or weekly in Europe , and usually black @-@ and @-@ white and weekly in Japan . Japanese comics magazine typically run to hundreds of pages . 
 Book @-@ length comics take different forms in different cultures . European comic albums are most commonly printed in A4 @-@ size colour volumes . In English @-@ speaking countries , bound volumes of comics are called graphic novels and are available in various formats . Despite incorporating the term " novel " — a term normally associated with fiction — " graphic novel " also refers to non @-@ fiction and collections of short works . Japanese comics are collected in volumes called tankōbon following magazine serialization . 
 Gag and editorial cartoons usually consist of a single panel , often incorporating a caption or speech balloon . Definitions of comics which emphasize sequence usually exclude gag , editorial , and other single @-@ panel cartoons ; they can be included in definitions that emphasize the combination of word and image . Gag cartoons first began to proliferate in broadsheets published in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries , and the term " cartoon " was first used to describe them in 1843 in the British humour magazine Punch . 
 Webcomics are comics that are available on the internet . They are able to reach large audiences , and new readers usually can access archived installments . Webcomics can make use of an infinite canvas — meaning they are not constrained by size or dimensions of a page . 
 Some consider storyboards and wordless novels to be comics . Film studios , especially in animation , often use sequences of images as guides for film sequences . These storyboards are not intended as an end product and are rarely seen by the public . Wordless novels are books which use sequences of captionless images to deliver a narrative . 
 = = Comics studies = = 
 Similar to the problems of defining literature and film , no consensus has been reached on a definition of the comics medium , and attempted definitions and descriptions have fallen prey to numerous exceptions . Theorists such as Töpffer , R. C. Harvey , Will Eisner , David Carrier , Alain Rey , and Lawrence Grove emphasize the combination of text and images , though there are prominent examples of pantomime comics throughout its history . Other critics , such as Thierry Groensteen and Scott McCloud , have emphasized the primacy of sequences of images . Towards the close of the 20th century , different cultures ' discoveries of each other 's comics traditions , the rediscovery of forgotten early comics forms , and the rise of new forms made defining comics a more complicated task . 
 European comics studies began with Töpffer 's theories of his own work in the 1840s , which emphasized panel transitions and the visual – verbal combination . No further progress was made until the 1970s . Pierre <unk> @-@ <unk> then took a semiotics approach to the study of comics , analyzing text – image relations , page @-@ level image relations , and image discontinuities , or what Scott McCloud later dubbed " closure " . In 1987 , Henri <unk> introduced the term <unk> , or " <unk> " , to refer to the comics page as a semantic unit . By the 1990s , theorists such as Benoît Peeters and Thierry Groensteen turned attention to artists ' <unk> creative choices . Thierry Smolderen and Harry Morgan have held relativistic views of the definition of comics , a medium that has taken various , equally valid forms over its history . Morgan sees comics as a subset of " les <unk> dessinées " ( or " drawn literatures " ) . French theory has come to give special attention to the page , in distinction from American theories such as McCloud 's which focus on panel @-@ to @-@ panel transitions . Since the mid @-@ 2000s , Neil Cohn has begun analyzing how comics are understood using tools from cognitive science , extending beyond theory by using actual psychological and neuroscience experiments . This work has argued that sequential images and page layouts both use separate rule @-@ bound " grammars " to be understood that extend beyond panel @-@ to @-@ panel transitions and categorical distinctions of types of layouts , and that the brain 's comprehension of comics is similar to comprehending other domains , such as language and music . 
 Historical narratives of manga tend to focus either on its recent , post @-@ WWII history , or on attempts to demonstrates deep roots in the past , such as to the <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ giga picture scroll of the 12th and 13th centuries , or the early 19th @-@ century Hokusai Manga . The first historical overview of Japanese comics was Seiki <unk> 's Nihon Manga @-@ Shi in 1924 . Early post @-@ war Japanese criticism was mostly of a left @-@ wing political nature until the 1986 publication for <unk> Kure 's Modern Manga : The Complete Picture , which de @-@ emphasized politics in favour of formal aspects , such as structure and a " grammar " of comics . The field of manga studies increased rapidly , with numerous books on the subject appearing in the 1990s . Formal theories of manga have focused on developing a " manga expression theory " , with emphasis on spatial relationships in the structure of images on the page , distinguishing the medium from film or literature , in which the flow of time is the basic organizing element . Comics studies courses have proliferated at Japanese universities , and Japan Society for Studies in Cartoon and Comics was established in 2001 to promote comics scholarship . The publication of Frederik L. <unk> 's Manga ! Manga ! The World of Japanese Comics in 1983 led to the spread of use of the word manga outside Japan to mean " Japanese comics " or " Japanese @-@ style comics " . 
 Coulton Waugh attempted the first comprehensive history of American comics with The Comics ( 1947 ) . Will Eisner 's Comics and Sequential Art ( 1985 ) and Scott McCloud 's Understanding Comics ( 1993 ) were early attempts in English to formalize the study of comics . David Carrier 's The Aesthetics of Comics ( 2000 ) was the first full @-@ length treatment of comics from a philosophical perspective . Prominent American attempts at definitions of comics include Eisner 's , McCloud 's , and Harvey 's . Eisner described what he called " sequential art " as " the arrangement of pictures or images and words to narrate a story or dramatize an idea " ; Scott McCloud defined comics as " juxtaposed pictorial and other images in deliberate sequence , intended to convey information and / or to produce an aesthetic response in the viewer " , a strictly formal definition which detached comics from its historical and cultural trappings . R. C. Harvey defined comics as " pictorial narratives or expositions in which words ( often lettered into the picture area within speech balloons ) usually contribute to the meaning of the pictures and vice versa " . Each definition has had its detractors . Harvey saw McCloud 's definition as excluding single @-@ panel cartoons , and objected to McCloud 's de @-@ emphasizing verbal elements , insisting " the essential characteristic of comics is the incorporation of verbal content " . Aaron Meskin saw McCloud 's theories as an artificial attempt to legitimize the place of comics in art history . 
 Cross @-@ cultural study of comics is complicated by the great difference in meaning and scope of the words for " comics " in different languages . The French term for comics , bandes dessinées ( " drawn strip " ) emphasizes the juxtaposition of drawn images as a defining factor , which can imply the exclusion of even photographic comics . The term manga is used in Japanese to indicate all forms of comics , cartooning , and caricature . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The term comics refers to the comics medium when used as an uncountable noun and thus takes the singular : " comics is a medium " rather than " comics are a medium " . When comic appears as a countable noun it refers to instances of the medium , such as individual comic strips or comic books : " Tom 's comics are in the basement . " 
 Panels are individual images containing a segment of action , often surrounded by a border . Prime moments in a narrative are broken down into panels via a process called encapsulation . The reader puts the pieces together via the process of closure by using background knowledge and an understanding of panel relations to combine panels mentally into events . The size , shape , and arrangement of panels each affect the timing and pacing of the narrative . The contents of a panel may be asynchronous , with events depicted in the same image not necessarily occurring at the same time . 
 Text is frequently incorporated into comics via speech balloons , captions , and sound effects . Speech balloons indicate dialogue ( or thought , in the case of thought balloons ) , with tails pointing at their respective speakers . Captions can give voice to a narrator , convey characters ' dialogue or thoughts , or indicate place or time . Speech balloons themselves are strongly associated with comics , such that the addition of one to an image is sufficient to turn the image into comics . Sound effects mimic non @-@ vocal sounds textually using onomatopoeia sound @-@ words . 
 Cartooning is most frequently used in making comics , traditionally using ink ( especially India ink ) with dip pens or ink brushes ; mixed media and digital technology have become common . Cartooning techniques such as motion lines and abstract symbols are often employed . 
 While comics are often the work of a single creator , the labour of making them is frequently divided between a number of specialists . There may be separate writers and artists , and artists may specialize in parts of the artwork such as characters or backgrounds , as is common in Japan . Particularly in American superhero comic books , the art may be divided between a penciller , who lays out the artwork in pencil ; an inker , who finishes the artwork in ink ; a colourist ; and a letterer , who adds the captions and speech balloons . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The English term comics derives from the humorous ( or " comic " ) work which predominated in early American newspaper comic strips ; usage of the term has become standard for non @-@ humorous works as well . The term " comic book " has a similarly confusing history : they are most often not humorous ; nor are they regular books , but rather periodicals . It is common in English to refer to the comics of different cultures by the terms used in their original languages , such as manga for Japanese comics , or bandes dessinées for French @-@ language Franco @-@ Belgian comics . 
 Many cultures have taken their words for comics from English , including Russian ( Russian : <unk> , <unk> ) and German ( comic ) . Similarly , the Chinese term manhua and the Korean manhwa derive from the Chinese characters with which the Japanese term manga is written . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Academic journals = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Ailanthus altissima = 
 Ailanthus altissima / <unk> <unk> / , commonly known as tree of heaven , ailanthus , or in Standard Chinese as <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ; literally : " foul smelling tree " ) , is a deciduous tree in the Simaroubaceae family . It is native to both northeast and central China , as well as Taiwan . Unlike other members of the genus Ailanthus , it is found in temperate climates rather than the tropics . The tree grows rapidly and is capable of reaching heights of 15 metres ( 49 ft ) in 25 years . However , the species is also short lived and rarely lives more than 50 years , though its remarkable suckering ability makes it possible for this tree to clone itself indefinitely and live considerably longer ( since they are linked to the mother tree and thus partly fed by it , the suckers are less vulnerable than the seedlings and can grow faster ) . 
 In China , the tree of heaven has a long and rich history . It was mentioned in the oldest extant Chinese dictionary and listed in countless Chinese medical texts for its purported ability to cure ailments ranging from mental illness to baldness . The roots , leaves and bark are still used today in traditional Chinese medicine , primarily as an astringent . The tree has been grown extensively both in China and abroad as a host plant for the ailanthus <unk> , a moth involved in silk production . Ailanthus has become a part of western culture as well , with the tree serving as the central metaphor and subject matter of the best @-@ selling American novel A Tree Grows in Brooklyn by Betty Smith . 
 The tree was first brought from China to Europe in the 1740s and to the United States in 1784 . It was one of the first trees brought west during a time when chinoiserie was dominating European arts , and was initially hailed as a beautiful garden specimen . However , enthusiasm soon waned after gardeners became familiar with its suckering habits and its foul smelling odour . Despite this , it was used extensively as a street tree during much of the 19th century . Outside Europe and the United States the plant has been spread to many other areas beyond its native range . In a number of these , it has become an invasive species due to its ability both to colonise disturbed areas quickly and to suppress competition with allelopathic chemicals . It is considered a noxious weed in Australia , the United States , New Zealand and many countries of central , eastern and southern Europe . The tree also resprouts vigorously when cut , making its eradication difficult and time @-@ consuming . In many urban areas , it has acquired the derisive nicknames of " ghetto palm " , " stink tree " , and " tree of Hell " . 
 = = Description = = 
 A. altissima is a medium @-@ sized tree that reaches heights between 17 and 27 metres ( 56 and 89 ft ) with a diameter at breast height of about 1 metre ( 39 inches ) . The bark is smooth and light grey , often becoming somewhat rougher with light tan fissures as the tree ages . The twigs are stout , smooth to lightly pubescent , and reddish or chestnut in colour . They have lenticels as well as heart @-@ shaped leaf scars ( i.e. a scar left on the twig after a leaf falls ) with many bundle scars ( i.e. small marks where the veins of the leaf once connected to the tree ) around the edges . The buds are finely pubescent , dome shaped , and partially hidden behind the petiole , though they are completely visible in the dormant season at the sinuses of the leaf scars . The branches are light to dark gray in colour , smooth , lustrous , and containing raised lenticels that become fissures with age . The ends of the branches become pendulous . All parts of the plant have a distinguishing strong odour that is often likened to peanuts , cashews , or rotting cashews . 
 The leaves are large , <unk> or even @-@ pinnately compound , and arranged alternately on the stem . They range in size from 30 to 90 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 to 2 @.@ 95 ft ) in length and contain 10 – 41 leaflets organised in pairs , with the largest leaves found on vigorous young sprouts . When they emerge in the spring , the leaves are bronze then quickly turn from medium to dark green as they grow . The rachis is light to reddish @-@ green with a swollen base . The leaflets are ovate @-@ lanceolate with entire margins , somewhat asymmetric and occasionally not directly opposite to each others . Each leaflet is 5 to 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) long and 2 @.@ 5 to 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 to 1 @.@ 97 in ) wide . They have a long tapering end while the bases have two to four teeth , each containing one or more glands at the tip . The leaflets ' upper sides are dark green in colour with light green veins , while the undersides are a more whitish green . The petioles are 5 to 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 47 in ) long . The lobed bases and glands distinguish it from similar sumac species . 
 The flowers are small and appear in large panicles up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) in length at the end of new shoots . The individual flowers are yellowish green to reddish in colour , each with five petals and sepals . The sepals are cup @-@ shaped , lobed and united while the petals are <unk> ( i.e. they meet at the edges without overlapping ) , white and hairy towards the inside . They appear from mid @-@ April in the south of its range to July in the north . A. altissima is dioecious , with male and female flowers being borne on different individuals . Male trees produce three to four times as many flowers as the females , making the male flowers more conspicuous . Furthermore , the male plants emit a foul @-@ smelling odour while flowering to attract pollinating insects . Female flowers contain ten ( or rarely five through abortion ) sterile stamens ( <unk> ) with heart @-@ shaped anthers . The pistil is made up of five free carpels ( i.e. they are not fused ) , each containing a single ovule . Their styles are united and slender with star @-@ shaped stigmas . The male flowers are similar in appearance , but they of course lack a pistil and the stamens do function , each being topped with a globular anther and a glandular green disc . The fruits grow in clusters ; a fruit cluster may contain hundreds of seeds . The seeds borne on the female trees are 5 mm in diameter and each is encapsulated in a samara that is 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) long and 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) broad , appearing July though August , but can persist on the tree until the next spring . The samara is large and twisted at the tips , making it spin as it falls , assisting wind dispersal , and aiding buoyancy for long @-@ distance dispersal through <unk> . The females can produce huge amounts of seeds , normally around 30 @,@ 000 per kilogram ( 14 @,@ 000 / lb ) of tree , and fecundity can be estimated non @-@ destructively through measurements of dbh . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first scientific descriptions of the tree of heaven were made shortly after it was introduced to Europe by the French Jesuit Pierre Nicholas d 'Incarville . D 'Incarville had sent seeds from Peking via Siberia to his botanist friend Bernard de Jussieu in the 1740s . The seeds sent by d 'Incarville were thought to be from the economically important and similar looking Chinese varnish tree ( Toxicodendron <unk> ) , which he had observed in the lower Yangtze region , rather than the tree of heaven . D 'Incarville attached a note indicating this , which caused much taxonomic confusion over the next few decades . In 1751 , Jussieu planted a few seeds in France and sent others on to Philip Miller , the superintendent at the Chelsea Physic Garden , and to Philip C. Webb , the owner of an exotic plant garden in Busbridge , England . 
 Confusion in naming began when the tree was described by all three men with three different names . In Paris , Linnaeus gave the plant the name Rhus <unk> , while it was known commonly as grand <unk> du Japon . In London the specimens were named by Miller as Toxicodendron altissima and in Busbridge it was dubbed in the old classification system as Rhus <unk> <unk> <unk> . There are extant records from the 1750s of disputes over the proper name between Philip Miller and John Ellis , curator of Webb 's garden in Busbridge . Rather than the issue being resolved , more names soon appeared for the plant : Jakob Friedrich Ehrhart observed a specimen in Utrecht in 1782 and named it Rhus <unk> . 
 Light was shed on the taxonomic status of ailanthus in 1788 when René Louiche Desfontaines observed the samaras of the Paris specimens , which were still labelled Rhus <unk> , and came to the conclusion that the plant was not a sumac . He published an article with an illustrated description and gave it the name Ailanthus glandulosa , placing it in the same genus as the tropical species then known as A. integrifolia ( white <unk> , now A. <unk> ) . The name is derived from the Ambonese word <unk> , meaning " heaven @-@ tree " or " tree reaching for the sky " . The specific glandulosa , referring to the glands on the leaves , persisted until as late as 1957 , but it was ultimately made invalid as a later homonym at the species level . The current species name comes from Walter T. Swingle who was employed by the United States Department of Plant Industry . He decided to transfer Miller 's older specific name into the genus of Desfontaines , resulting in the accepted name Ailanthus altissima . <unk> is Latin for " tallest " , and refers to the sizes the tree can reach . The plant is sometimes incorrectly cited with the specific epithet in the masculine ( <unk> or altissimus ) , which is incorrect since botanical , like Classical Latin , treats most tree names as feminine . 
 There are three varieties of A. altissima : 
 A. altissima var. altissima , which is the type variety and is native to mainland China . 
 A. altissima var. <unk> , which is endemic to northern Taiwan highlands . It differs from the type in having yellowish bark , odd @-@ pinnate leaves that are also shorter on average at 45 to 60 cm ( 18 to 24 in ) long with only 13 – 25 scythe @-@ like leaflets . It is listed as endangered in the IUCN Red List of threatened species due to loss of habitat for building and industrial plantations . 
 A. altissima var. <unk> , which differs in having red branchlets . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A. altissima is native to northern and central China , Taiwan and northern Korea . In Taiwan it is present as var. <unk> . In China it is native to every province except Gansu , Heilongjiang , Hainan , Jilin , Ningxia , Qinghai , Xinjiang , and Tibet . 
 The tree prefers moist and loamy soils , but is adaptable to a very wide range of soil conditions and pH values . It is drought @-@ hardy , but not tolerant of flooding . It also does not tolerate deep shade . In China it is often found in limestone @-@ rich areas . The tree of heaven is found within a wide range of climatic conditions . In its native range it is found at high altitudes in Taiwan as well as lower ones in mainland China . In the U.S. it is found in arid regions bordering the Great Plains , very wet regions in the southern Appalachians , cold areas of the lower Rocky Mountains and throughout much of the California Central Valley . Prolonged cold and snow cover cause dieback , though the trees re @-@ sprout from the roots . 
 = = = As an exotic plant = = = 
 The earliest introductions of A. altissima to countries outside of its native range were to the southern areas of Korea as well as to Japan . It is possible that the tree is native to these areas , but it is generally agreed that the tree was a very early introduction . Within China itself it has also been naturalised beyond its native range in areas such as Qinghai , Ningxia and Xinjiang . 
 In 1784 , not long after Jussieu had sent seeds to England , some were forwarded to the United States by William Hamilton , a gardener in Philadelphia . In both Europe and America it quickly became a favoured ornamental , especially as a street tree , and by 1840 it was available in most nurseries . The tree was separately brought to California in the 1890s by Chinese immigrants who came during the California Gold Rush . It has escaped cultivation in all areas where it was introduced , but most extensively in the United States . It has naturalised across much of Europe , including Germany , Austria , Switzerland , the Czech Republic , the Pannonian region ( i.e. southeastern Central Europe around the Danube river basin from Austria , Slovakia and Hungary south to the Balkan ranges ) and most countries of the Mediterranean Basin . In Montenegro and Albania A. altissima is widespread in both rural and urban areas and while in the first it was introduced as an ornamental plant , it very soon invaded native ecosystems with disastrous results and became an invasive species . Ailanthus has also been introduced to Argentina , Australia ( where it is a declared weed in New South Wales and Victoria ) , New Zealand ( where it is listed under the National Pest Plant Accord and is classed an " unwanted organism " ) , the Middle East and in some countries in South Asia such as Pakistan . In South Africa it is listed as an invasive species which must be controlled , or removed and destroyed . 
 In North America , A. altissima is present from Massachusetts in the east , west to southern Ontario , southwest to Iowa , south to Texas , and east to the north of Florida . On the west coast it is found from New Mexico west to California and north to Washington . In the east of its range it grows most extensively in disturbed areas of cities , where it was long ago present as a planted street tree . It also grows along roads and railways . For example , a 2003 study in North Carolina found the tree of heaven was present on 1 @.@ 7 % of all highway and railroad edges in the state and had been expanding its range at the rate of 4 @.@ 76 % counties per year . Similarly , another study conducted in southwestern Virginia determined that the tree of heaven is thriving along approximately 30 % of the state 's interstate highway system length or mileage . It sometimes enters undisturbed areas as well and competes with native plants . In western North America it is most common in mountainous areas around old dwellings and abandoned mining operations . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Ailanthus is an opportunistic plant that thrives in full sun and disturbed areas . It spreads aggressively both by seeds and vegetatively by root sprouts , re @-@ sprouting rapidly after being cut . It is considered a shade @-@ intolerant tree and cannot compete in low @-@ light situations , though it is sometimes found competing with hardwoods , but such competition rather indicates it was present at the time the stand was established . On the other hand , a study in an old @-@ growth hemlock @-@ hardwood forest in New York found that Ailanthus was capable of competing successfully with native trees in canopy gaps where only 2 to 15 % of full sun was available . The same study characterised the tree as using a " gap @-@ obligate " strategy in order to reach the forest canopy , meaning it grows rapidly during a very short period rather than growing slowly over a long period . It is a short lived tree in any location and rarely lives more than 50 years . Ailanthus is among the most pollution @-@ tolerant of tree species , including sulfur dioxide , which it absorbs in its leaves . It can withstand cement dust and fumes from coal tar operations , as well as resist ozone exposure relatively well . Furthermore , high concentrations of mercury have been found built up in tissues of the plant . 
 Ailanthus has been used to re @-@ <unk> areas where acid mine drainage has occurred and it has been shown to tolerate pH levels as low as 4 @.@ 1 ( approximately that of tomato juice ) . It can withstand very low phosphorus levels and high salinity levels . The drought @-@ tolerance of the tree is strong due to its ability to effectively store water in its root system . It is frequently found in areas where few trees can survive . The roots are also aggressive enough to cause damage to subterranean sewers and pipes . Along highways it often forms dense thickets in which few other tree species are present , largely due to the toxins it produces to prevent competition . 
 Ailanthus produces an allelopathic chemical called ailanthone , which inhibits the growth of other plants . The inhibitors are strongest in the bark and roots , but are also present in the leaves , wood and seeds of the plant . One study showed that a crude extract of the root bark inhibited 50 % of a sample of garden cress ( <unk> sativum ) seeds from germinating . The same study tested the extract as an herbicide on garden cress , <unk> <unk> ( Amaranthus <unk> ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , yellow <unk> ( Setaria pumila ) , barnyard grass ( Echinochloa <unk> ) , pea ( Pisum sativum cv . Sugar Snap ) and maize ( Zea <unk> cv . Silver Queen ) . It proved able to kill nearly 100 % of seedlings with the exception of <unk> , which showed some resistance . Another experiment showed a water extract of the chemical was either lethal or highly damaging to 11 North American hardwoods and 34 conifers , with the white ash ( Fraxinus americana ) being the only plant not adversely affected . The chemical does not , however , affect the tree of heaven 's own seedlings , indicating that A. altissima has a defence mechanism to prevent <unk> . Resistance in various plant species has been shown to increase with exposure . Populations without prior exposure to the chemicals are most susceptible to them . Seeds produced from exposed plants have also been shown to be more resistant than their unexposed counterparts . 
 The tree of heaven is a very rapidly growing tree , possibly the fastest growing tree in North America . Growth of one to two metres ( 3 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 6 ft ) per year for the first four years is considered normal . Shade considerably hampers growth rates . Older trees , while growing much slower , still do so faster than other trees . Studies found that Californian trees grew faster than their East Coast counterparts , and American trees in general grew faster than Chinese ones . 
 In northern Europe the tree of heaven was not considered naturalised in cities until after the Second World War . This has been attributed to the tree 's ability to colonise areas of rubble of destroyed buildings where most other plants would not grow . In addition , the warmer microclimate in cities offers a more suitable habitat than the surrounding rural areas ( it is thought that the tree requires a mean annual temperature of 8 degrees Celsius to grow well , which limits its spread to more northern and higher altitude areas ) . For example , one study in Germany found the tree of heaven growing in 92 % of densely populated areas of Berlin , 25 % of its suburbs and only 3 % of areas outside the city altogether . In other areas of Europe this is not the case as climates are mild enough for the tree to flourish . It has colonised natural areas in Hungary , for example , and is considered a threat to biodiversity at that country 's <unk> National Park . 
 Several species of Lepidoptera utilise the leaves of ailanthus as food , including the Indian moon moth ( <unk> selene ) and the common grass yellow ( <unk> <unk> ) . In North America the tree is the host plant for the ailanthus <unk> ( Atteva aurea ) , though this ermine moth is native to Central and South America and originally used other members of the mostly tropical Simaroubaceae as its hosts . In its native range A. altissima is associated with at least 32 species of arthropods and 13 species of fungi . 
 Due to the tree of heaven 's weedy habit , landowners and other organisations often resort to various methods of control in order to keep its populations in check . For example , the city of Basel in Switzerland has an eradication program for the tree . It can be very difficult to eradicate , however . Means of eradication can be physical , thermal , managerial , biological or chemical . A combination of several of these can be most effective , though they must of course be compatible . All have some positive and negative aspects , but the most effective regimen is generally a mixture of chemical and physical control . It involves the application of foliar or basal herbicides in order to kill existing trees , while either hand pulling or mowing seedlings in order to prevent new growth . 
 = = Uses = = 
 In addition to its use as an ornamental plant , the tree of heaven is also used for its wood , medicinal properties , and as a host plant to feed silkworms of the moth Samia <unk> , which produces silk that is stronger and cheaper than mulberry silk , although with inferior gloss and texture . It is also unable to take dye . This type of silk is known under various names : " <unk> " , " eri silk " and " Shantung silk " , the last name being derived from Shandong Province in China where this silk is often produced . Its production is particularly well known in the Yantai region of that province . The moth has also been introduced in the United States . 
 The pale yellow , close @-@ grained and satiny wood of ailanthus has been used in cabinet work . It is flexible and well suited to the manufacture of kitchen steamers , which are important in Chinese cuisine for cooking <unk> , pastries and rice . Zhejiang Province in eastern China is most famous for producing these steamers . It is also considered a good source of firewood across much of its range as it moderately hard and heavy , yet readily available . The wood is also used to make charcoal for culinary purposes . There are problems with using the wood as lumber , however . Because the trees exhibit rapid growth for the first few years , the trunk has uneven texture between the inner and outer wood , which can cause the wood to twist or crack during drying . Techniques have been developed for drying the wood so as to prevent this cracking , allowing it to be commercially harvested . Although the live tree tends to have very flexible wood , the wood is quite hard once properly dried . 
 = = = Cultivation = = = 
 Tree of heaven is a popular ornamental tree in China and valued for its tolerance of difficult growing conditions . It was once very popular in cultivation in both Europe and North America , but this popularity dropped , especially in the United States , due to the disagreeable odor of its blossoms and the <unk> of its habit . The problem of odor was previously avoided by only selling pistillate plants since only males produce the smell , but a higher seed production also results . Michael <unk> , a noted American horticulturalist and professor at the University of Georgia , reported meeting , in 1982 , a grower who could not find any buyers . He further writes ( his emphasis ) : 
 For most landscaping conditions , it has no value as there are too many trees of superior quality ; for impossible conditions this tree has a place ; selection could be made for good habit , strong wood and better foliage which would make the tree more satisfactory ; I once talked with an architect who tried to buy Ailanthus for use along polluted highways but could not find an adequate supply [ ... ] 
 In Europe , however , the tree is still used in the garden to some degree as its habit is generally not as invasive as it is in America . In the United Kingdom it is especially common in London squares , streets , and parks , though it is also frequently found in gardens of southern England and East Anglia . It becomes rare in the north , occurring only infrequently in southern Scotland . It is also rare in Ireland . In Germany the tree is commonly planted in gardens . The tree has furthermore become unpopular in cultivation in the west because it is short @-@ lived and that the trunk soon becomes hollow , making trees more than two feet in diameter unstable in high winds . 
 A few cultivars exist , but they are not often sold outside of China and probably not at all in North America : 
 ‘ Hongye ’ – The name is Chinese and means " red leaves " . As the name implies it has attractive vivid red foliage 
 ‘ Thousand Leaders ’ 
 ‘ Metro ’ – A male cultivar with a tighter crown than usual and a less weedy habit 
 ‘ <unk> ’ – The fruits are a striking red 
 ‘ <unk> ’ – Leaves are much longer and hang elegantly 
 = = = Medicinal = = = 
 Nearly every part of A. altissima has some application in Chinese traditional medicine . One of the oldest recipes , recorded in a work from 732 AD , is used for treating mental illness . It involved chopped root material , young boys ' urine and <unk> . After sitting for a day the liquid was strained out and given to the patient over the course of several days . 
 Another source from 684 AD , during the Tang dynasty and recorded in Li Shizhen 's Compendium of Materia Medica , states that when the leaves are taken internally , they make one incoherent and sleepy , while when used externally they can be effectively used to treat boils , abscesses and itches . Yet another recipe recorded by Li uses the leaves to treat baldness . This formula calls for young leaves of ailanthus , catalpa and peach tree to be crushed together and the resulting liquid applied to the scalp to stimulate hair growth . 
 The dried bark , however , is still an <unk> drug and is listed in the modern Chinese materia medica as chun bai pi ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , meaning " white bark of spring " . Modern works treat it in detail , discussing chemical constituents , how to identify the product and its pharmaceutical uses . It is prepared by felling the tree in fall or spring , stripping the bark and then scraping off the hardest , outermost portion , which is then sun @-@ dried , soaked in water , partially re @-@ dried in a basket and finally cut into strips . The bark is said to have cooling and astringent properties and is primarily used to treat dysentery , intestinal hemorrhage , <unk> and <unk> . It is only prescribed in amounts between 4 and 10 grams , so as not to poison the patients . Li 's Compendium has 18 recipes that call for the bark . Asian and European chemists have found some justification for its medical use as it contains a long list of active chemicals that include <unk> and <unk> , while ailanthone , the allelopathic chemical in the tree of heaven , is a known antimalarial agent . It is available in most shops dealing in Chinese traditional medicine . A tincture of the root @-@ bark has been used successfully in treating cardiac <unk> , asthma and epilepsy . 
 The samaras are also used in modern Chinese medicine under the name feng yan cao ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , meaning " herbal phoenix eye " . They are used as a hemostatic agent , <unk> and for treating patients with blood in their feces or urine . It was clinically shown to be able to treat trichomoniasis , a vaginal infection caused by the protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis . In the West , an extract of the bark sold under the synonym A. glandulosa is sometimes used as an herbal remedy for various ailments including cancer . 
 Anecdotal evidence suggests that the plant may be mildly toxic . The noxious odours have been associated with nausea and headaches , as well as with contact dermatitis reported in both humans and sheep , who also developed weakness and paralysis . It contains a quinone irritant , 2 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> , as well as active <unk> ( ailanthone itself being one ) which may account for these effects , but they have , however , proved difficult or impossible to reproduce in humans and goats . In one trial a tincture from the blossom and foliage caused nausea , vomiting and muscular relaxation . 
 Ailanthus altissima has potent anti @-@ anaphylactic and anti @-@ inflammatory properties . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = China = = = 
 In addition to the tree of heaven 's various uses , it has also been a part of Chinese culture for many centuries and has more recently attained a similar status in the west . Within the oldest extant Chinese dictionary , the Erya , written in the 3rd century BC , the tree of heaven is mentioned second among a list of trees . It was mentioned again in a materia medica compiled during the Tang dynasty in 656 AD . Each work favoured a different character , however , and there is still some debate in the Chinese botanical community as to which character should be used . The current name , <unk> ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , means " stinking spring " , and is a relatively new appellation . People living near the lower Yellow River know it by the name <unk> ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , meaning " spring tree " . The name stems from the fact that A. altissima is one of the last trees to come out of dormancy , and as such its leaves coming out would indicate that winter was truly over . 
 In Chinese literature , ailanthus is often used for two rather extreme metaphors , with a mature tree representing a father and a stump being a spoiled child . This manifests itself occasionally when expressing best wishes to a friend 's father and mother in a letter , where one can write " wishing your ailanthus and <unk> are strong and happy " , with ailanthus metaphorically referring to the father and <unk> to the mother . Furthermore , one can scold a child by calling him a " good @-@ for @-@ nothing ailanthus stump sprout " , meaning the child is irresponsible . This derives from the literature of Zhuangzi , a Taoist philosopher , who referred to a tree that had developed from a sprout at the stump and was thus unsuitable for carpentry due to its irregular shape . Later scholars associated this tree with ailanthus and applied the metaphor to children who , like stump sprouts of the tree , will not develop into a worthwhile human being if they don 't follow rules or traditions . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The 1943 book A Tree Grows in Brooklyn by Betty Smith uses the tree of heaven as its central metaphor , using it as an analogy for the ability to thrive in a difficult environment . At that time as well as now , ailanthus was common in neglected urban areas . She writes : 
 There 's a tree that grows in Brooklyn . Some people call it the Tree of Heaven . No matter where its seed falls , it makes a tree which struggles to reach the sky . It grows in boarded up lots and out of neglected rubbish heaps . It grows up out of cellar gratings . It is the only tree that grows out of cement . It grows lushly ... survives without sun , water , and seemingly earth . It would be considered beautiful except that there are too many of it . 
 In William Faulkner 's novel , Sanctuary , a " heaven @-@ tree " stands outside the Jefferson jail , where Lee Goodwin and a " negro murderer " are incarcerated . The tree is associated with the black prisoner 's despair in the face of his impending execution and the spirituals that he sings in chorus with other black people who keep a sort of vigil in the street below : 
 ... they sang spirituals while white people slowed and stopped in the leafed darkness that was almost summer , to listen to those who were sure to die and him who was already dead singing about heaven and being tired ; or perhaps in the interval between songs a rich , <unk> voice coming out of the high darkness where the ragged shadow of the heaven @-@ tree which <unk> the street lamp at the corner fretted and mourned : " Fo days mo ! Den dey <unk> <unk> de <unk> ba <unk> singer in <unk> Mississippi ! " 
 Upon the barred and <unk> wall the splotched shadow of the heaven @-@ tree shuddered and pulsed monstrously in scarce any wind ; rich and sad , the singing fell behind . 
 Ailanthus is also sometimes counter @-@ nicknamed " tree from hell " due to its prolific invasiveness and the difficulty in eradicating it . In certain parts of the United States , the species has been nicknamed the " ghetto palm " because of its propensity for growing in the inhospitable conditions of urban areas , or on abandoned and poorly maintained properties . 
 Until March 26 , 2008 , a 60 @-@ foot ( 18 m ) -tall member of the species was a prominent " centerpiece " of the sculpture garden at the Noguchi Museum in the borough of Queens in New York City . The tree had been spared by the sculptor Isamu Noguchi when in 1975 he bought the building which would become the museum and cleaned up its back lot . The tree was the only one he left in the yard , and the staff would eat lunch with Noguchi under it . " [ I ] n a sense , the sculpture garden was designed around the tree " , said a former aide to Noguchi , Bonnie Rychlak , who later became the museum curator . By 2008 , the old tree was found to be dying and in danger of crashing into the building , which was about to undergo a major renovation . The museum hired the Detroit Tree of Heaven Woodshop , an artists ' collective , to use the wood to create benches , sculptures and other amenities in and around the building . The tree 's rings were counted , revealing its age to be 75 , and museum officials hoped it would regenerate from a sucker . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 Ingo Vetter , a German artist and professor of fine arts at Umeå University in Sweden , was influenced by the idea of the " ghetto palm " and installed a living ailanthus tree taken from Detroit for an international art show called Shrinking Cities at the Kunst @-@ Werke Institute for Contemporary Art in Berlin in 2004 . 
 = Pierre Rossier = 
 Pierre Joseph Rossier ( 16 July 1829 – between 1883 and 1898 ) was a pioneering Swiss photographer whose albumen photographs , which include stereographs and cartes @-@ de @-@ visite , comprise portraits , cityscapes , and landscapes . He was commissioned by the London firm of Negretti and Zambra to travel to Asia and document the progress of the Anglo @-@ French troops in the Second Opium War and , although he failed to join that military expedition , he remained in Asia for several years , producing the first commercial photographs of China , the Philippines , Japan and Siam ( now Thailand ) . He was the first professional photographer in Japan , where he trained Ueno Hikoma , Maeda Genzō , Horie Kuwajirō , as well as lesser known members of the first generation of Japanese photographers . In Switzerland he established photographic studios in Fribourg and Einsiedeln , and he also produced images elsewhere in the country . Rossier is an important figure in the early history of photography not only because of his own images , but also because of the critical impact of his teaching in the early days of Japanese photography . 
 = = Identity and origins = = 
 Until very recently , little was known about Rossier ; even his given name was a mystery . In his own time he was sometimes referred to as " P. Rossier " and at other times as " M. Rossier " . Documents discovered in the Fribourg town archives finally proved that his given name was Pierre , and it can be assumed that the " M " in " M. Rossier " stood for " Monsieur " . He was long thought to be from France and while he was in Japan he was even referred to as an " Englishman " ; however , recent research has revealed that Rossier was Swiss , born on 16 July 1829 in <unk> , a small village in the Canton of Fribourg . He was the fourth of ten children of a farming family of modest means . At the age of sixteen he became a teacher at a school in a neighbouring village , but by 1855 he was issued a passport to visit France and England to work as a photographer . 
 At some point after leaving Switzerland and arriving in England , Rossier was commissioned by the firm of Negretti and Zambra to travel to China to photograph the Second Opium War ( 1858 – 1860 ) . It may be that the firm considered Rossier 's Swiss citizenship an asset for such a voyage , that his country 's neutrality might help him find passage aboard either British or French ships . Taking into account the high costs and uncertainty incurred by the firm and the potential hazards for Rossier himself , this was an important commission . 
 = = Photographing in Asia = = 
 Rossier was in Hong Kong in 1858 , and he soon began taking photographs , mostly in and around Canton ( now Guangzhou ) . In November 1859 Negretti and Zambra published a set of fifty of Rossier 's views , including stereographs . These received favourable reviews in photographic periodicals of the day . In 1858 or 1859 Rossier travelled to the Philippines where he visited and photographed the Taal Volcano . Rossier was in Japan by 1859 , producing photographs first in Nagasaki , then in Kanagawa , Yokohama and Edo ( now Tokyo ) ; he was the first professional photographer to arrive in Japan . One of the photographs Rossier took during the summer of 1859 , while in Nagasaki , was a portrait of Philipp Franz von Siebold 's son Alexander and a group of samurai from the <unk> clan . 
 At the end of June 1860 , Rossier was in Shanghai , and it is likely that he visited the city in an attempt to gain permission to accompany the Anglo @-@ French military expedition that had already arrived in northern China and thereby fulfill his commission to document the Second Opium War . If so , he was unsuccessful ; both forces had already hired photographers to document the mission . The British forces were accompanied by the photographers Felice Beato and John Papillon , and the French by Antoine <unk> , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Du Pin , and possibly also by Louis Legrand . Although Rossier failed even to embark on the mission he had been hired to document , he remained in East Asia for some time longer . 
 By October 1860 , Rossier had returned to Nagasaki , where he took photographs of the harbour on behalf of the British Consul , George S. Morrison , for which Rossier was paid $ 70 . Although Rossier 's photographs of Japan were advertised by Negretti and Zambra on at least two occasions in 1860 , the firm did not publish them until October or November 1861 . Five of Rossier 's views of Japan appeared earlier , in George Smith 's book , Ten Weeks in Japan , in April 1861 , and that July , eight of Rossier 's Japan photographs appeared in the form of lithographs in Henry Arthur Tilley 's book , Japan , the <unk> , and the Pacific . An 1861 edition of the Illustrated London News included several engravings under the collective title Domestic Life in China , the images having been taken from Rossier 's stereographs . One of the photographs Negretti and Zambra had advertised in 1860 became the first commercial photograph taken in Japan to be published , and is the earliest known hand @-@ coloured Japanese photograph . 
 Thanks to a number of documents of the time , it is now certain that Negretti and Zambra 's photographs of China and Japan were taken by Rossier , but for many years it was thought that they might have been taken by either Walter B. Woodbury , who also had dealings with Negretti and Zambra but was based in Batavia ( now Jakarta ) , or Abel Gower , who was an amateur photographer in Japan . Interestingly , the Leiden University photograph collection includes a portrait , allegedly of Gower , signed " P. Rossier " , and in 1859 Rossier and Gower shared passage aboard HMS Sampson from Nagasaki to Edo . 
 = = Teaching photography = = 
 Rossier first arrived in Japan in 1859 , at a time when early experiments in photography were being conducted in Kyūshū , particularly in Nagasaki . The city was the centre of rangaku , the study of Western science , and it was here that physicians Jan Karel van den Broek and J. L. C. Pompe van Meerdervoort were instrumental in teaching their Japanese students not only medicine but also chemistry and photography . Neither Van den Broek nor Pompe van Meerdervoort was an experienced photographer , and their attempts to produce photographs were largely failures . Nevertheless , in turn they taught wet @-@ collodion process photography to <unk> Yoshio , Furukawa <unk> , Kawano <unk> , Maeda Genzō , Ueno Hikoma , and Horie Kuwajirō , among others . 
 On his arrival in Japan , Rossier presumably introduced himself as a photographer despatched to Japan by Negretti and Zambra , perhaps thereby inspiring a misconception , for while he remained in the country he was often referred to as an " English " photographer . In Nagasaki , Rossier was assisted in his work by Maeda Genzō , who had been instructed to accompany the " Englishman " and to further learn photography . With Maeda and other students escorting him around the city , Rossier took photographs of priests , beggars , the audience of a sumo match , the foreign settlement , and the group portrait of Alexander von Siebold and samurai . Rossier believed that Pompe van Meerdervoort 's failures in photography were due to a lack of the necessary chemicals and so he provided Maeda with a letter of recommendation to procure photographic apparatus and chemicals from a source in Shanghai . Both Maeda and Furukawa bought lenses , chemicals and albumen paper through Rossier . 
 At this time , Ueno Hikoma and Horie Kuwajirō also received photographic instruction from Rossier . Apparently Ueno had originally intended to learn not only the practice of photography but also the manufacture of cameras . The encounter with Rossier seems to have convinced Ueno to pursue photography as a career , but he was so overwhelmed by the technology of the camera that he quickly dropped the notion of making one himself . Within a few months , he and Horie had purchased a French camera and chemicals , thereafter launching their independent photographic careers . 
 Although Rossier 's time in Japan was brief and the surviving photographic legacy of his sojourn is scant , he nevertheless had a lasting impact on photography in the country . 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 In 1861 , Rossier was in Siam , where he assisted the French zoologist Firmin <unk> by taking ethnographic portraits for the latter 's scientific expedition of 1861 – 1862 , and in 1863 , Negretti and Zambra issued a series of 30 stereographic portraits and landscapes taken in Siam that are almost certainly the work of Rossier . In February 1862 , Rossier was again in Shanghai , where he sold his cameras and other photographic equipment before embarking for Europe . During his time in Asia it is possible that Rossier photographed in India ; Negretti and Zambra issued a series of views of India at about the same time as Rossier 's China views . 
 Rossier returned to Switzerland in early 1862 and , in October 1865 , married Catharine Barbe <unk> ( 1843 – 1867 ) . The couple had a son , Christophe Marie Pierre Joseph , who was born on 30 July 1866 . Catharine died on 4 April 1867 . 
 Rossier maintained a photographic studio in Fribourg until at least 1876 and he also had a studio in Einsiedeln . During the 1860s and 1870s , he produced a number of stereographs and cartes @-@ de @-@ visite comprising portraits and views of Fribourg , Einsiedeln and other places in Switzerland . An 1871 advertisement in the French @-@ language Fribourg newspaper La Liberté offered photographs by Rossier of religious paintings by the artist Melchior Paul von <unk> . In 1872 , Rossier applied for a passport to travel to France where he may have produced photographs . At some point between 1871 and 1884 , he married again . His second wife , Marie Virginie <unk> , was employed as a household servant by the landlords of his studio . They had a son , Joseph Louis , who was born in Paris on 16 March 1884 , and who went on to own a café in Vevey , Switzerland . He died in 1927 . 
 Pierre Rossier died in Paris some time between 1883 and 1898 . 
 Examples of Rossier 's views of Switzerland are held in several institutions and private collections in that country . Rossier took the first commercial photographs of China and Japan , and they are now quite rare . He complained at times of the adverse effects of the climate on his photographic chemicals and some of his negatives may have been damaged en route to London from Asia . Though his surviving images are scarce , his importance to the early history of photography in Asia is great . Before his arrival in Japan in 1859 , Japanese students of photography had struggled to produce satisfactory images , but Rossier 's experience , instruction , and contacts with suppliers of photographic materials were extremely helpful in the development of an autonomous photographic tradition in Japan . 
 = Madonna ( book ) = 
 Madonna is a biography by English author Andrew Morton , chronicling the life of American recording artist Madonna . The book was released in November 2001 by St. Martin 's Press in the United States and in April 2002 by Michael O 'Mara Books in the United Kingdom . Morton decided to write a biography on Madonna in 2000 . The release was announced in April 2001 by St. Martin 's Press . President and publisher Sally Richardson described the biography to contain details about Madonna 's ambitions , her relationships and her lifestyle . 
 Morton interviewed about 70 people who had known Madonna since her youth . He had to spend a lot of evenings in bars and clubs in New York chatting to people — including artists , musicians , and directors — who had an interesting perspective on Madonna and the world . After its release , Madonna received mixed reviews from contemporary critics , who pointed out Morton 's poor writing skills and felt that the book did not present anything new about the singer . The book was a commercial disappointment . In the United States , the book reached eight on The New York Times Best Seller list , and sold half of its initial print . 
 Madonna herself was critical of Morton writing a biography on her life , and sent a letter to him , asking him to stay away from her family and friends . Morton remained unabashed , saying that he wrote the book because of his interest in the star , not least because she has made a " difference " to pop culture and modern culture . In 2004 , a lawsuit was filed against the author by Jim Albright , one of Madonna 's ex @-@ lovers mentioned in the book . The lawsuit regarded an image in the book , portraying one of Madonna 's gay dancers — with Albright 's name underneath . United States District Court ruled out the lawsuit explaining that stating someone is homosexual does not libel or slander them . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The book opens with Madonna 's birth , her early years in Michigan , and her 1977 move to New York City where she was involved with modern dance , two pop groups , composing , and releasing her 1983 debut album , Madonna . Her rise to superstardom as a pop icon is chronicled and her cutting edge music videos , albums , first concert tour , film roles , and marriage and divorce to Sean Penn are examined . The book investigates her controversial religious imagery and her erotic productions , Erotica , Sex , and Body of Evidence . The book describes a mellowing in her appearance and provocativeness , and , among other things , the release of her next several albums , her Golden Globe Award @-@ winning musical film portrayal of Eva Peron , and her high @-@ grossing Drowned World Tour . The birth of her daughter and son are chronicled and her marriage to Guy Ritchie . Madonna includes detailed descriptions of her relationships with people including John F. Kennedy , Jr. and Michael Jackson . 
 = = Writing and development = = 
 American journalist and celebrity biographer Andrew Morton is known for his works on Diana , Princess of Wales , Monica Lewinsky and footballer David Beckham and his wife , Victoria . In October 2000 , Morton had hinted that he had American recording artist Madonna as his next project , when he responded to an Independent reader in " You Ask the Questions " section . Asked who he would most like to write a biography of , he said : " I 've always admired Madonna as an intriguing and charismatic character who has been able to stay at the top for 20 years . " A formal announcement was made by Morton 's UK publicist Michael O 'Mara in April 2001 , that Morton had secured access to " those in her [ Madonna 's ] inner circle , who have never been interviewed before , about her ambitions , lifestyle and relationships . " O 'Mara added the reason for choosing Madonna was because she was " one of the most enigmatic and fascinating women of our time , [ and ] is the undisputed female icon of the modern age . " 
 The biography 's American publishing rights were acquired by St. Martin 's Press . President and publisher Sally Richardson described the biography to contain details about Madonna 's ambitions , her relationships and her lifestyle . Richardson added that " Andrew loves complicated women , and has a genius for getting into their psyche and telling the world what makes them tick . " Scheduled for release in November 2001 , St. Martin 's Press added that about 500 @,@ 000 copies of the first print were ordered , and Morton received a six figure undisclosed amount as advance for writing the book . Madonna had always wanted to protect her privacy and reports had initially suggested that she was furious that Morton had decided to write the book , and commanded her friends and relatives not to give any interview to him . She added , " I don 't want anyone talking to that snivelling little worm . How dare he invade my privacy ? " 
 With the BBC , Morton detailed his " detective work " researching Madonna 's life in New York , where she clambered her way up to fame and fortune . " Not only is she an interesting character , but all her friends and those who 've known her are interesting characters too , " he said . Morton had to spend a lot of evenings in bars and clubs in New York chatting to people — including artists , musicians , directors — who had an interesting perspective on Madonna and the world . He interviewed about 70 people who had known Madonna since her youth . " I think I 've come up with a very fresh picture , " he said , adding that Dan Gilroy of Breakfast Club , who had introduced Madonna to the music world , had e @-@ mailed him saying the biography had " really captured Madonna 's spirit " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The book received mixed reviews . Richard <unk> from Toronto Star said that " Madonna is a thorough , if slightly workmanlike , retelling of its namesake 's well @-@ documented slog from lowly Midwestern beginnings to squeaky @-@ voiced sex kitten to professional button @-@ pusher to mother and respected , vaguely Bowie @-@ esque , chameleonic figure , a cultural bloodhound always on the scent of the fresh , cool and credible . " Helen Bushby from BBC commented that " [ t ] he book is certainly detailed , and will no doubt keep Madonna fanatics happy , although it is perhaps more of a reference book than a page @-@ turner . But Morton is a good businessman , and is canny in his choice of subjects . " Michael Sneed from Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave a negative review of the book and felt that Morton 's previous works had been better . George Rush from New York Daily News commented : " Despite her best efforts to discourage friends from cooperating with him , Andrew Morton has come forth with a book that portrays Madge as an insecure manipulator so ravenous for affection that she scared off some boyfriends , cheated on most of them and made a lot of foolish choices . " In another review , <unk> Connelly from the same publication was of the opinion that Madonna was mostly similar to J. Randy Taraborrelli 's biography on her , Madonna : An Intimate Biography . She added , " At least , it 's the story made familiar by Madonna , a woman who has always taken for granted the world 's interest in her life . " 
 Rick Thames , editor of The Charlotte Observer , criticized the book 's packaging calling the cover as " tacky , hot pink @-@ and @-@ acid green sleeves , featuring an unflattering photo of the dished artist . " Barry <unk> from Sunday Herald felt that " Morton [ had failed ] to find the face of Madonna . " He criticized Morton 's sketchy portrayal of Madonna 's relationship with deceased painter Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat , saying " he commits an error by doing so because , unusually for Madonna , this was a relationship of equals . " Gregg Barrios from Daily Star was critical of the book , saying " The fatal flaw of these quickie knockoffs is that they have no real ending or any way of predicting what the fates have in store for Madonna Louise Penn [ Guy Ritchie ] nee Ciccone . Once the next Madonna tour , CD , marriage or film appears , their shelf life is cut short . " Barbara Ellen from The Guardian criticized Morton 's writing by saying , " Andrew Morton achieves the implausible : he takes an interesting woman and an astonishing life and makes them both seem incredibly boring in his life of Madonna .... Once you get used to Morton 's pace ( dull plod , with occasional snooze ) , it becomes quite amusing joining him on the journey , a bit like watching someone dragging a dead body around , trying to find some place to hide it . Even luminaries such as Madonna exes Sean Penn and Warren Beatty are reduced to flailing around like disenfranchised phantoms in the shallows of Morton 's blandly automatic insight . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 Madonna was released in hardback in the United States in November 2001 . It debuted at position 15 on The New York Times Best Seller list , and reached eight the next week , but was present there for only two weeks . It was a commercial disappointment , failing to sell even close to its initial print @-@ run of 500 @,@ 000 . According to Nielsen BookScan , Madonna has sold around 240 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Madonna was still livid that Morton wrote the book without her permission , even saying " It 's not a well @-@ written book . We all know he wrote it for financial gain and the truth had little to do with it " , after the book was released . With Jo Whiley from BBC Radio 1 , she added that " [ Morton ] really went through my Rolodex and that part was really annoying , and I ended up writing him a letter saying , ' I 'm not interested in you writing this book , I don 't want to have anything to do with it – and please leave my friends alone ' . " The singer said that she had even sent Morton a book of philosophy — The Power of Kabbalah — to try to dissuade him from continuing . " It 's a beginner 's crash course in what it 's all about – that eventually in some way shape or form it would come back round to him , but he either didn 't read it or didn 't care , " Madonna added . During the Drowned World Tour of 2001 , Madonna was asked whether she had really sent the book for Morton 's well @-@ being . She replied sarcastically : " Why yes , I always send bibles and philosophy books to my biographers . " <unk> to her then husband Guy Ritchie she continued , " Just ask my husband , he 'll tell you that my greatest concern these days is not this fucking tour , or him or even our kids , why , it 's Andrew Morton 's spiritual <unk> of course . " Her publicist Liz Rosenberg released a statement that " None of this [ things in the biography ] is true . I never saw a groom walk down an aisle with a bigger smile than Guy Ritchie , " adding that Morton 's claims were a retread of " tired old gossip . It 's same old , same old . " Morton remained unabashed , saying that he wrote the book because of his interest in the star , not least because she has made a " difference " to pop culture and modern culture . He added : 
 " I 'm very proud of the book and I 'm very disappointed at Madonna 's reaction . I think the problem is that she wants control over everything – that 's one of the themes of the book , and secondly she seems to be almost disowning her past at the moment . She 's reinventing herself as an upper @-@ class , English aristocrat , and the former vegetarian who now goes hunting , fishing and shooting . My door 's always open – Madonna 's welcome to my house for a cup of tea . She said she wasn 't interested in doing any kind of biography or anything ever , which is a bit of a stern statement from someone who has been so out there . It doesn 't matter whether it 's me , Norman Mailer , whoever . I was disappointed because I felt that we 've only ever seen the caricature , the cartoon version of Madonna and I really wanted to show that she is a considerable artist and that she is more than anything that has been written about her in the past . I think for her it is an opportunity missed . " 
 = = Lawsuit = = 
 Madonna faced a lawsuit in 2004 over an image in the book . Titled <unk> Productions , Inc. vs. Morton , Madonna 's former bodyguard and ex @-@ lover Jim Albright brought a defamation case against Morton , based on an incorrect photo caption . The photo had a caption identifying the subject in it as Albright ; it was actually one of Madonna 's homosexual back @-@ up dancers , Jose <unk> . <unk> Productions , Inc. had employed Albright as Madonna 's bodyguard in 1992 , and he became romantically involved with her . While writing Madonna , Morton contacted Albright to gather information on their relationship . On discovering the misleading image , the lawsuit was filed by Albright who objected to the caption . 
 On 30 May 2004 , US District judge Nancy Gertner ruled out the lawsuit explaining that stating someone is homosexual does not libel or slander them , particularly in light of new court decisions granting gays more rights . Gertner first rejected the idea that the mistake in captioning constituted a statement that Albright was gay . She added : " Private biases may be outside the reach of the law , but the law cannot , directly or indirectly give them effect . In this day and age , recent rulings by the Supreme Court and the Supreme Judiciary Court of Massachusetts undermine any suggestion that a statement implying that an individual is homosexual is defamatory . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = City of London School = 
 The City of London School , also known as <unk> and City , is an independent day school for boys in the City of London , England , on the banks of the River Thames next to the Millennium Bridge . It is the brother school of the City of London School for Girls and a member of the Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference ( HMC ) . 
 The School was founded by a private Act of Parliament in 1834 , following a bequest of land in 1442 for poor children in the City of London . The original school was established at Milk Street , moving to the Victoria Embankment in 1879 and its present site on Queen Victoria Street in 1986 . 
 The school provides day education to about 900 boys aged 10 to 18 and employs approximately 100 teaching staff and around another 100 non @-@ teaching staff . The majority of pupils enter at 11 , some at 13 and some at 16 into the Sixth form . There is a small intake at 10 into Old Grammar , a year group consisting of two classes equivalent to primary school Year 6 . Admissions are based on an entrance examination and an interview . 
 Among Old Citizens who have attained eminence in various fields are Prime Minister Herbert Asquith , the First World War hero Theodore Bayley Hardy , Nobel Prize – winning scientists Frederick Gowland Hopkins and Peter Higgs , Justice of the Supreme Court Lawrence Collins , England cricket captain Mike Brearley and Booker Prize @-@ winning authors Kingsley Amis and Julian Barnes . 
 = = History = = 
 The City of London School traces its origins to a bequest of land by John Carpenter , town clerk of London . On his death in 1442 , it was found that Carpenter had listed many bequests , most to his relatives but some to charitable causes . There were no bequests listed to directly support the education of boys in the City of London . However , a bequest of land was left to two trusted friends who were aware that Carpenter desired a legacy which would support children , and in turn the land was passed on to John Don , an influential man in the City of London . On his death , Don left his own will incorporating the words used in Carpenter 's bequest of land and his intentions for the land , that it be " for the finding and bringing up of four poor men 's children with meat , drink , apparel , learning at the schools , in the universities , etc . , until they be preferred , and then others in their places for ever . " The four boys became known as Carpenter 's Children . 
 Little is known of the early years of the legacy . This bequest was administered by the Corporation of London in around 1460 and a small college was founded next to Guildhall Chapel , also using the library facilities in the chapel . Despite the fact that this continued for over 70 years , the earliest certain evidence of the existence of Carpenter 's Children can only be traced back to 1536 , and thus it isn 't clear who these boys were , what they were taught and where they lived . In 1547 , under the Chantries Act the Guildhall Chapel and Library were forfeited . The funding for the four boys was also discontinued . The Corporation of London remained in control of Carpenter 's estate and accounts from the next 300 years show that the money continued to be spent on children 's benefits such as providing new coats to every child or providing them with access to education . 
 In 1823 , a report published by the Charity Commission revealed that over the centuries , the income from the bequest vastly exceeded the expenses of the boys ' education . In response to the report , the Corporation of London indicated that it had taken , " great pains ... by searching in the archives of the corporation and other places for the will of John Carpenter , without effect " . Had the Corporation instead looked for the will of John Don , it would have received guidance in what to do with the money . 
 Lacking that guidance , discussions began on how the bequest money should be spent . The City Lands Committee suggested in a report that the bequest should be spent on educating a larger number of boys and this approach was adopted in 1826 . A number of people including Richard Taylor , a printer and an assistant to the founding of University College London , urged the Corporation of London to spend the bequest on creating a day school for the largest possible number of boys . In 1830 , they proposed that the City of London Corporation School be founded with Taylor as a governor , and that the school to be established on the site of the disused London Workhouse . In the mean time , a small number of boys , who became known as Carpenter 's scholars , were sent to Tonbridge School . In 1829 , an Act of Parliament was passed to transform the workhouse into a school and governors were appointed . Conditions at the workhouse site had deteriorated and much money was needed for its maintenance . The only funds available , though , were the same £ 300 ( about £ 22 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) a year budget the workhouse had received . 
 Over the next few years , the workhouse proposal was seen , by the City of London Lord Mayor 's deputation and the City Lands Committee ( Taylor was a member of both ) , as impractical and alternate schemes were proposed . In 1832 , Warren <unk> Hale , who believed that the Workhouse proposal was not the best use of Carpenter 's legacy , was appointed to the City Lands Committee . He became chairman of the committee in 1833 , and would come to be considered the second founder of the City of London School , after Carpenter . 
 At this point , the City Lands Committee started to search for better locations for a school . They selected Honey Lane Market , a site on Milk Street , as their preferred location . However , this proposal faced the same funding difficulties as the Workhouse proposal ; only £ 300 per year was available , insufficient to build and maintain a school . This problem was not recognised until the bill to found the school reached the House of Lords . An altered bill was finalised in 1834 , removing any references to the London Workhouse and addressing the Lords ' objections . 
 The altered bill was passed as an Act of Parliament in 1834 . It was this act which founded the City of London School , which initially had around 400 pupils . The act gave the Corporation of London a duty to maintain a school on the Honey Lane Market site and so gave control over almost every aspect of the school 's running to the Corporation . A committee was also set up to manage the school , with Hale as chairman . Although the committee 's powers were initially limited , they gained more control over time as they made important decisions for the school . 
 The act gave the new school an annual budget of £ 900 ( around £ 75 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) from the bequest while the governors of the City of London Corporation School , who still wanted to implement their original idea , gained nothing , only retaining the old workhouse income . Both Hale and the Corporation of London were also eager to create this second school , which the governors of the City of London Corporation School had proposed . Despite their efforts , the other school was not founded until 1854 , as the Freemen 's Orphanage School , in Brixton with Hale as chairman . The Freemen 's Orphanage School still exists today as the City of London Freemen 's School in Surrey . 
 = = = Establishment at Milk Street = = = 
 The foundation stone of the new school was laid by Lord Brougham at premises in Milk Street , in the City of London near Cheapside , on the site of the old Honey Lane Market , in 1835 and the school opened its doors in 1837 . 
 The school was remarkable for its time in several respects . It did not discriminate against pupils on the grounds of religious persuasion ( at a time when most public schools had an Anglican emphasis ) ; it included pupils from non @-@ conformist and Jewish families . Also , unlike other established independent schools , it was a day school ( although there were in early days a handful of boarders , no boarding department ever became established ) . It also promoted a practical and progressive scheme of education which was well ahead of its time . It was the first school in England to include science on the curriculum and to include scientific experiments as part of its teaching . It also offered education in commercial subjects . This did not , however , diminish the excellence of its teaching in the subjects traditionally favoured by independent schools , and it sent classical and mathematical scholars to Oxford and Cambridge throughout the nineteenth century . These included the mathematician Edwin Abbott Abbott ( whose exploration of a world in other than three dimensions , Flatland , is still in print and who returned to the school as headmaster ) and H. H. Asquith , who though educated as a classical scholar went on to become the British Prime Minister . 
 = = = Move to Blackfriars = = = 
 The school eventually outgrew its original site . While many public schools moved away from Greater London in the late Nineteenth Century , a joint decision was made by the school 's management and the school committee to stay in the capital as it was deemed a stimulating environment for education by many . By a further Act of Parliament ( the City of London School Act 1879 ) , it was empowered to move to a new site at Blackfriars on the Victoria Embankment overlooking the Thames ( still in the City of London ) . The school moved in 1883 and the new building was opened by the Prince of Wales , ( the future Edward VII ) . 
 In 1920 , an arrangement was made whereby all the boy choristers of the Temple Church , were given scholarships at the City of London School . In 1926 , this arrangement was extended to the boy choristers of the Chapel Royal at St. James 's Palace . The choristers included Ernest Lough whose recording of Mendelssohn 's " O for the Wings of a Dove " with the Temple Choir in 1927 made him world famous ; it was the first classical record to sell ( by 1962 ) more than a million copies . Other musicians educated at the City of London School include the cellist Steven Isserlis . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In 1938 , the headmaster F.R. Dale made an agreement with George Turner , headmaster of Marlborough College , to evacuate the school there , if it became necessary . On 1 September 1939 following the German invasion of Poland and the start of the Second World War , the majority of the school were sent to Marlborough College by train . 
 Accommodation was not provided in the agreement with Marlborough College and so Turner wrote to the Mayor of Marlborough to request accommodation in town . Many of the accommodation billets were occupied by soldiers and women working for the Ministry of Health at the time and so for the first night , the boys slept in the gymnasium of the school , before moving into the town 's billets the following night . 
 When the Marlborough term began , an arrangement was made whereby City of London boys had lessons during games for Marlborough College pupils and vice versa . The difficulties at the Marlborough location ranged from finding a study for Headmaster Dale to finding enough kitchen staff to prepare food for both schools . Resources were limited and outbreaks of influenza and rubella were common . Like many other schools evacuated into the countryside , the City of London School 's enrolment fell from 700 to 430 during the war , although no pupil was killed or injured as a direct result of enemy fire . 
 The arrangements at Marlborough College gave pupils the opportunity to strengthen the school 's clubs and societies . This included a dramatic society , in which Kingsley Amis played a large part . 
 Marlborough College itself experienced some threat from the war . The Ministry of Aircraft Production had also relocated there , and in 1942 , bombs fell nearby . By 1944 , with the war settling down , the City of London School returned to its home on the Victoria Embankment , which had suffered no structural damage during the Blitz . Air raid shelters were built on site as a precautionary measure . 
 Soon after the building reopened , a bomb fell on the nearby Law Courts , and the staff sent pupils home for a week . However , some pupils were due to take public exams . After Marlborough College refused permission to take the exams there , it was decided that boys would take the Higher Certificate papers in the Guildhall Crypt . 
