 It took the school over five years to fully recover from the effects of the war . Many Old Citizens had lost their lives fighting in the war . Today , a memorial exists on the school 's current grounds to remember those Old Citizens who had lost their lives in both the Second World War and the First World War . An annual remembrance service , involving members of the Combined Cadet Force , is held in November . 
 = = = Modernisation and move to Queen Victoria Street = = = 
 The school underwent many changes during its time on the Victoria Embankment . The curriculum had been consolidated at the turn of the century , the Combined Cadet Force was modernised , the house system had been reorganised , the " mission " , what is now the annual charity appeal , had been started and a Community Service Organisation had been set up as an alternative to the Combined Cadet Force . It was compulsory for a boy , above the third form , to serve in one of these organisations for at least four school terms . This is a tradition which still exists today . In 1925 , the school acquired its sports grounds at Grove Park , Lewisham . This site included a pavilion , containing offices , changing rooms , toilets and showers , which was designed , by Old Citizen Ralph Knott , to also be a memorial to those Old Citizens who had lost their lives in the First World War . When J. A. Boyes became headmaster in 1964 , further modernisations were made in the building . As the number of pupils increased over the years , overcrowding became a problem . Headmaster Boyes , believed that a new , modern building was needed for the school , and his efforts managed to secure a site on the banks of the River Thames for a new facility . 
 In 1986 , the City of London School moved to its present site in purpose @-@ built facilities in Queen Victoria Street ( where it is opposite the College of Arms and just below St Paul 's Cathedral ) on one side and facing onto the banks of the River Thames on the other side . It was officially opened in 1987 by HRH The Princess Anne . The Millennium Bridge is next to the school buildings . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Milk Street ( 1837 – 1883 ) = = = 
 The original building at Milk Street was designed by architect J.B. Bunning , who was the architect to the City of London and also an Old Citizen of the school . The building was designed in a neo <unk> Tudor style . 
 = = = Victoria Embankment ( 1883 – 1987 ) = = = 
 The Victoria Embankment building , a grand building said to be in the Italian Renaissance style but actually in a high Victorian style with a steep pitched roof resembling that of a French chateau , was designed by Davis and Emanuel and constructed by John Mowlem & Co at a cost exceeding £ 100 @,@ 000 ( about £ 7 @,@ 570 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) . The designers designed the school as " amazingly <unk> , rather like a permanent Exhibition Palace . " 
 On the front of the building are statues of Shakespeare , Milton , Bacon , Newton and Sir Thomas More with " the first four emphasising the school 's literary and scientific traditions [ and ] the last being a religious martyr , a famous lawyer and the author of Utopia . " 
 The building remained the home of the City of London School for a hundred years , although the site expanded to include not only the original building on the Victoria Embankment itself , but a range of buildings at right angles along the whole of John Carpenter Street , which was named after the founder of the school , and further buildings constructed at the back along Tudor Street , with the school playground , Fives courts and cloisters enclosed within the site . These other buildings were demolished when the school moved again in 1986 . Here the school was adjacent to the City of London School for Girls , which was founded by the City of London Corporation as a sister school in 1894 and moved in 1969 to its present site in the Barbican , and the Guildhall School of Music and Drama which has also since moved to the Barbican . It was also next to the traditional home of the British newspaper industry in Fleet Street . 
 This building still stands and is now protected by a preservation order ; it is presently occupied by the investment bank JPMorgan and it appeared on the left of the famous Thames Television ident for 20 years from 1968 to 1989 . The building still features the school 's name above the door . 
 = = = Queen Victoria Street ( 1987 – present ) = = = 
 The present building on Queen Victoria Street was designed by City of London architect Thomas Meddings , an Old Citizen of the school as well as a former Temple Church chorister . It is a wholly modern building , although some of the stained glass and sculptures from the Victoria Embankment building has been relocated to this new building . A design and technology block was added to the building in 1990 , though in 2008 , the block was transformed into a building mainly used by the ICT and music departments , although some design and technology facilities remain . The building was designed on a structural grid and non @-@ load bearing walls were used so that the internal layout of the building could easily be changed when necessary . The school 's design is also slightly unusual in that it was built avoiding a road tunnel in the centre of the premises . This meant that the first and second floors of the building could only be built on either side of the road tunnel . The load on the third floor directly above the road tunnel is also limited and so a courtyard , surrounded by the building , which goes up to the fifth floor , exists in that area . The current building is opened to the public annually on one weekend in September as part of the Open House London event . 
 The front view of the building beside the River Thames with St Paul 's Cathedral in the background and the Millennium Bridge on the right is occasionally seen in popular media such as in the BBC News 60 @-@ second countdown as well as in an early scene of the 2005 movie , The Constant Gardener and in the 2009 film Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince . 
 = = School life = = 
 The school seeks to provide a community " to foster good relationships between members of the staff , the pupils themselves and between members of the staff and pupils " , so that pupils can develop their social confidence as well as thrive on academic excellence . The school 's aims and range of extracurricular activities reflect this ethos . 
 = = = Houses = = = 
 City of London School has six Houses . As well as houses named after the founder of the school John Carpenter and former headmaster Edwin Abbott and Mortimer , they include houses named after important Old Citizens or school benefactors including Beaufoy , a philanthropist who donated the sum of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( about £ 540 @,@ 000 in 2008 ) in the eighteenth century , Hale who played a significant role in the school 's founding and Seeley , a famous historian who attended the school . Boys are assigned to a House in the Third Form ( 13 years old ) , which they stay in throughout their school career . There are <unk> events ( e.g. sports , literature among others ) which contribute points to an overall <unk> Competition that is decided at the end of the year and in which Hale has been very successful . 
 = = = School uniform = = = 
 The school requires school uniform for all pupils up to the fifth form . Sixth formers do not have to wear the uniform but they are required to wear suits and the sixth form school tie . The uniform is a blazer with the school crest ( black for winter or maroon with black stripes for summer , though both are now allowed throughout the year ) , white shirt , black trousers , shoes , black socks and school tie which has black and maroon stripes . There are a selection of other ties worn by some pupils ; these are given out as awards for achievements within the school . These include house colours which are awarded to those who have represented their house in multiple events . School colours are awarded to those who have represented the school in multiple events . School colours include junior colours normally awarded to boys in the fourth form and below who have represented the school on a number of occasions , half colours which are awarded to those who have competed in several events for the school , and full colours for those who have shown a good commitment in representing the school . Other ties include the prefects tie for elected prefects , the senior prefects tie for the four senior prefects and the John Carpenter Club tie which is awarded to those who have competed in events at an international level . 
 = = = Curriculum = = = 
 In 2013 , the Daily Telegraph placed the school 27th in its League Table of Independent School A @-@ level results , with 73 % of pupils gaining A * or A grades at A @-@ level . Currently around 20 pupils take up places at Oxbridge each year . 
 Pupils are required to take a minimum of ten GCSE subjects in the fourth and fifth form of which six , Mathematics , English Language , English Literature , Biology , Chemistry and Physics are chosen for all students . The confines on the remaining four options are that one must be a humanity and another a modern foreign language . Additional subjects and qualifications are taken by some students . In 2007 , the school also started offering IGCSE in some subjects . 
 In the sixth form , boys take four subjects at AS @-@ Level and continue three of those four subjects into their A2 year . Subjects on offer include Geography , History and Politics , Economics , Mathematics , Language and Literature , Modern Languages , Chemistry , Biology , Physics , Drama and Theatre , Classical Languages / Studies , Design and Visual Arts , Religious Education , Information Technology and Physical Education . There is also a programme of PSHE , and games at all levels , and a ICT programme for the first and second forms . 
 = = = Extracurricular activities = = = 
 The school offers many extracurricular activities . These include over 50 clubs and societies including a Model United Nations , public speaking and debating society which frequently participates in international competitions , and the Square Mile Club which in the past has attracted notable speakers such as Sir Trevor Macdonald , Brian Paddick , Sir David Pepper and Ian Livingston . Boys themselves can create and manage clubs , with school funding available for activities . There are also trips , opportunities to carry out community service and a Combined Cadet Force . The school also gives boys the opportunity to receive instrumental tuition as well as join music groups including orchestras and choirs . The school also offers sports including Football , Cricket , Basketball , Water polo , Swimming , Sailing , Fencing , Squash , Badminton , Fives , Athletics , Cross @-@ country , Judo , Karate and Indoor rowing . Most of these sports take place on school facilities . Sports such as sailing and climbing take place on non @-@ school facilities . Boys also represent the school in competitions at varying levels . The school has a tradition of supporting a charity , chosen by the boys through a ballot , each academic year . The fundraising activities are coordinated by the boys and events take place throughout the year to raise money for the selected charity . An average of £ 50 @,@ 000 is raised each year . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 The school 's sports facilities include a multi purpose indoor sports hall , a fencing <unk> , three squash courts , a 25 @-@ metre swimming pool , a conditioning room and playing fields , astroturf and athletics tracks at Grove Park , Lewisham . Music facilities include three ensemble rooms , ten rehearsal rooms and a music technology lab . Other facilities include the Great Hall , a sixth form common room , a bookshop , a library , an archive room , three ICT labs , facilities for the Combined Cadet Force , a drama studio , two playgrounds and a drama theatre . The Great Hall houses a Walker organ which was moved from the previous school building and put into a new casing . The organ has 3 manual departments , 61 notes and a pedal department with 32 notes as well as 43 stops , 4 <unk> and 6 couplers . The drama theatre was rebuilt in 2009 at a value of £ 1 @.@ 3 million . The project was jointly funded by City entrepreneur Brian <unk> and the City of London Corporation . The new theatre was designed by architectural firm <unk> and built by <unk> Dixon Construction . 
 = = = Traditional events = = = 
 Although the school provides a very modern atmosphere in most aspects of school life , there are some traditional events held annually , although attendance of these events is no longer compulsory for all boys . This includes the annual prize giving ceremony at Guildhall , London and the annual carol service at Temple Church , among others . The school is also home to the annual London Classical Reading Competition , participated in by schools nationwide . Another traditional event is " muck @-@ up day " celebrated by each year group at the end of formal schooling in their final year at the school . In 2015 this attracted police attention when plans to bring in paint for " raucous " celebrations led to concerns about disruption to the city 's financial district . The headmistress reluctantly decided to bar the year group from school grounds " for their own safety " . 
 = = = Governance = = = 
 Today , the City of London School 's policies are maintained by a board of governors . It continues to be under the governance of the City of London Corporation ( the governing body of the City of London headed by the Lord Mayor of the City of London , as opposed to Greater London , as well as an independent corporation ) . The school is under the governance of the City of London Corporation 's corporate arm as opposed to its Local Authority arm . 
 The school is one of the three independent schools owned by the City of London Corporation , the other two being the City of London School for Girls and the City of London Freemen 's School . The City of London School for Girls located in the Barbican is a fifteen @-@ minute walk away from the school and there are joint events , such as social evenings , concerts and plays , with the school throughout the year . 
 = = School fees = = 
 Although the City of London School has always charged fees to most of its pupils , those fees have been moderate relative to other independent schools , and it has always offered scholarships , both on the basis of academic and musical ability ( it educates ten boys selected for the Choir of Her Majesty 's Chapel Royal ) . In 2008 , the school began offering sports scholarships . In addition , due to the withdrawal of the Government Assisted Places scheme in 1998 , the school has been able to offer full @-@ fee bursaries ( or Sponsored Awards ) to pupils from families on lower incomes with the help of contributions from parties including private companies , the John Carpenter Club and parents of current pupils . 
 For the 2013 – 14 academic year , the annual school fees were £ 13 @,@ 803 , and lunch is added extra at £ 212 a term ( £ 636 a year ) . Music lessons are an additional £ 198 a term ( £ 594 a year ) 
 = = Charitable status = = 
 The school currently has six charities registered with the Charity Commission . These are The City of London School Bursary Fund which contributes to the funding of the bursary schemes , The City of London School Bursary Trust which provides bursaries to boys who have gained admission to the school but whose parents cannot afford the fees , The City of London School Scholarships and Prize Fund which allows the school and other parties to offer scholarships , prizes or sponsored awards to current or former pupils without incurring taxes , The City of London School War Memorial Fund which was originally established to support boys affected by the World Wars but now supports means @-@ tested bursaries at the School , The City of London School Charitable Trust which is the annual charity appeal and The City of London School Education Trust which exempts the school from taxes as an independent school providing education for pupils within the school , as well as providing educational and recreational facilities for children and young people in the surrounding communities . Recent charities have included WaterAid , GOSH , Teenage Cancer Trust and Malaika Kids . Events such as the 24 @-@ hour ' <unk> ' , 48 @-@ hour row , cake sales , sponsored swims and an 11 @-@ mile sponsored walk generate money for the charity appeal . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Many distinguished people have been part of the school either as pupils ( see List of Old Citizens ) or staff . 
 Notable recent pupils include the actors Daniel Radcliffe from Harry Potter movies , Skandar Keynes , of The Chronicles of Narnia film series , and Harry Michell of Tom Brown 's Schooldays and Feather Boy . 
 Jack Crawford is a British born American football player who was drafted with the 158th overall pick in the 2012 NFL Draft by the Oakland Raiders . 
 Jonathan Keates , a prize @-@ winning writer , was an English master at the school . Sheila Gallagher MBE was honoured for her service as a lollipop lady at the crossing to the school on Queen Victoria Street , in 2002 . 
 Old boys of the City of London School are known as Old <unk> and may join the John Carpenter Club . Over 140 people listed in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography were educated at the City of London School , and that includes only those who were already deceased at the time of writing . 
 = = Headmasters = = 
 The school has had thirteen headmasters . The first was Rev J. A. Giles , a scholar of Anglo @-@ Saxon history and a Fellow at Corpus Christi College , Oxford , who also wrote a number of scholarly works , including the 34 volume <unk> <unk> <unk> . He was however , " temperamentally unsuited " to be headmaster of the school , and was replaced by Rev Dr G. F. Mortimer , a liberal who had written an anti @-@ slavery pamphlet . Mortimer 's religious tolerance led him to open the school to boys from Jewish families . He was replaced in 1865 by a former boy , Edwin Abbott Abbott , author of the novella Flatland . Abbott oversaw the education of future Prime Minister H. H. Asquith , before retiring in 1889 to devote himself to literary and theological pursuits . The Rev. Prebendary Dr Arthur Chilton MVO , DD was appointed Headmaster in 1905 , an appointment he held for 24 years and throughout World War One , until 1929 . In 1950 Dr. Arthur Willoughby Barton a scholar and top @-@ class football referee , took over as headmaster until 1965 . David R. Levin , who was also the chair of the Headmasters ' and Headmistresses ' Conference for the 2009 – 2010 academic year , held the position from 1999 to 2014 . He left the school in January 2014 to become the managing director of all the independent schools owned by United Learning , and was succeeded by Sarah Fletcher , who had been the head of Kingston Grammar School , in May 2014 . Gary Griffin was acting as head in the interim . 
 = Lucy Stone = 
 Lucy Stone ( August 13 , 1818 – October 19 , 1893 ) was a prominent American orator , abolitionist , and suffragist , and a vocal advocate and organizer promoting rights for women . In 1847 , Stone became the first woman from Massachusetts to earn a college degree . She spoke out for women 's rights and against slavery at a time when women were discouraged and prevented from public speaking . Stone was known for using her maiden name after marriage , as the custom was for women to take their husband 's surname . 
 Stone 's organizational activities for the cause of women 's rights yielded tangible gains in the difficult political environment of the 19th century . Stone helped initiate the first National Women 's Rights Convention in Worcester , <unk> she supported and sustained it annually , along with a number of other local , state and regional activist conventions . Stone spoke in front of a number of legislative bodies to promote laws giving more rights to women . She assisted in establishing the Woman 's National Loyal League to help pass the Thirteenth Amendment and thereby abolish slavery , after which she helped form the American Woman Suffrage Association , which built support for a woman suffrage Constitutional amendment by winning woman suffrage at the state and local levels . 
 Stone wrote extensively about a wide range of women 's rights , publishing and distributing speeches by herself and others , and convention proceedings . In the long @-@ running and influential Woman 's Journal , a weekly periodical that she founded and promoted , Stone aired both her own and differing views about women 's rights . Called " the orator " , the " morning star " and the " heart and soul " of the women 's rights movement , Stone influenced Susan B. Anthony to take up the cause of women 's suffrage . Elizabeth Cady Stanton wrote that " Lucy Stone was the first person by whom the heart of the American public was deeply stirred on the woman question . " Together , Anthony , Stanton , and Stone have been called the 19th @-@ century " triumvirate " of women 's suffrage and feminism . 
 = = Early life and influences = = 
 Lucy Stone was born on August 13 , 1818 , on her family 's farm at Coy 's Hill in West Brookfield , Massachusetts . She was the eighth of nine children born to Hannah Matthews and Francis Stone ; she grew up with three brothers and three sisters , two siblings having died before her own birth . Another member of the Stone household was Sarah Barr , “ Aunt Sally ” to the children – a sister of Francis Stone who had been abandoned by her husband and left dependent upon her brother . Although farm life was hard work for all and Francis Stone tightly managed the family resources , Lucy remembered her childhood as one of “ opulence , ” the farm producing all the food the family wanted and enough extra to trade for the few store @-@ bought goods they needed . 
 Although Stone recalled that “ There was only one will in our family , and that was my father ’ s , ” she described the family government characteristic of her day . Hannah Stone earned a modest income through selling eggs and cheese but was denied her any control over that money , sometimes denied money to purchase things Francis considered trivial . Believing she had a right to her own earnings , Hannah sometimes stole coins from his purse or secretly sold a cheese . As a child , Lucy resented instances of what she saw as her father ’ s unfair management of the family ’ s money . But she later came to realize that custom was to blame , and the injustice only demonstrated “ the necessity of making custom right , if it must rule . ” 
 From the examples of her mother , Aunt Sally , and a neighbor neglected by her husband and left destitute , Stone early learned that women were at the mercy of their husbands ’ good will . When she came across the biblical passage , “ and thy desire shall be to thy husband , and he shall rule over thee , ” she was distraught over what appeared to be divine sanction of women ’ s subjugation , but then reasoned that the injunction applied only to wives . Resolving to “ call no man my master , ” she determined to keep control over her own life by never marrying , obtaining the highest education she could , and earning her own livelihood . 
 = = = Teaching at “ a woman ’ s pay ” = = = 
 At age sixteen , Stone began teaching in district schools , as her brothers and sister Rhoda also did . Her beginning pay of $ 1 @.@ 00 a day was much lower than that of male teachers , and when she substituted for her brother Bowman one winter , she received less pay than he received . When she protested to the school committee that she had taught all the subjects Bowman had , it replied that they could give her “ only a woman ’ s pay . ” Lower pay for women was one of the arguments cited by those promoting the hiring of women as teachers : “ To make education universal , it must be at moderate expense , and women can afford to teach for one @-@ half , or even less , the salary which men would ask . ” Although Stone ’ s salary increased along with the size of her schools , until she finally received $ 16 a month , it was always lower than the male rate . 
 = = = The “ woman question ” = = = 
 In 1836 , Stone began reading newspaper reports of a controversy raging throughout Massachusetts that some referred to as the “ woman question ” – what was woman ’ s proper role in society ; should she assume an active and public role in the reform movements of the day ? Developments within that controversy over the next several years shaped her evolving philosophy on women ’ s rights . 
 A debate over whether women were entitled to a political voice had begun when many women responded to William Lloyd Garrison ’ s appeal to circulate antislavery petitions and sent thousands of signatures to Congress only to have them rejected , in part because women had sent them . Women abolitionists responded by holding a convention in New York City to expand their petitioning efforts , and declaring that “ as certain rights and duties are common to all moral beings , ” they would no longer remain within limits prescribed by “ corrupt custom and a perverted application of Scripture . ” After sisters Angelina and Sarah Grimke began speaking to audiences of men and women , instead of women @-@ only as was acceptable , a state convention of Congregational ministers issued a Pastoral letter condemning women ’ s assuming “ the place of man as a public reformer ” and “ <unk> [ ing ] in the character of public lecturers and teachers . ” Stone attended the convention as a spectator , and was so angered by the letter that she determined " if ever [ I ] had anything to say in public , [ I ] would say it , and all the more because of that pastoral letter . " 
 Stone read Sarah Grimke ’ s “ Letters on the Province of Woman ” ( later republished as “ Letters on the Equality of the Sexes ” ) , and told a brother they only reinforced her resolve “ to call no man master . ” She drew from these " Letters " when writing college essays and her later women ’ s rights lectures . 
 Having determined to obtain the highest education she could , Stone enrolled at Mount Holyoke Female Seminary in 1839 , at the age of 21 . But she was so disappointed in Mary Lyons ’ intolerance of antislavery and women ’ s rights that she withdrew after only one term . The very next month she enrolled at Wesleyan Academy ( later Wilbraham & Monson Academy ) , which she found more to her liking : “ It was decided by a large majority in our literary society the other day , ” she reported to a brother , “ that ladies ought to mingle in politics , go to Congress , etc. etc . ” Stone read a newspaper account of how a Connecticut antislavery meeting had denied the right to speak or vote to Abby Kelley , recently hired as an antislavery agent to work in that state . Refusing to relinquish her right , Kelly had defiantly raised her hand every time a vote was taken . “ I admire the calm and noble bearing of Abby K , ” Stone wrote to a brother , “ and cannot but wish there were more kindred spirits . ” 
 Three years later , Stone followed Kelley ’ s example . In 1843 , a deacon of her church was recommended for expulsion because of certain antislavery activities , including giving countenance to Abby Kelley ’ s anti @-@ church views by driving her to lectures and entertaining her at his home . When the first vote was taken , Stone raised her hand in his defense . The minister discounted her vote , saying that , though she was a member of the church , she was not a voting member . Like Kelly , she stubbornly raised her hand for each of the remaining five votes . 
 After completing a year at coeducational Monson Academy in the summer of 1841 , Stone learned that Oberlin Collegiate Institute in Ohio had become the first college in the nation to admit women and had bestowed college degrees on three women . Stone enrolled at Quaboag Seminary in neighboring Warren , where she read Virgil and Sophocles and studied Latin and Greek grammar in preparation for Oberlin ’ s entrance examinations . 
 = = Oberlin = = 
 In August 1843 , just after she turned 25 , Stone traveled by train , steamship , and stagecoach to Oberlin College in Ohio , the country 's first college to admit both women and African Americans . She entered the college believing that women should vote and assume political office , that women should study the classic professions and that women should be able to speak their minds in a public forum . Oberlin College did not share all of these sentiments . 
 In her third year at Oberlin , Stone befriended Antoinette Brown , an abolitionist and suffragist who came to Oberlin in 1845 to study to become a minister . Stone and Brown would eventually marry abolitionist brothers and thus become sisters @-@ in @-@ law . 
 = = = Equal pay strike = = = 
 Stone hoped to earn most of her college expenses through teaching in one of the institute ’ s lower departments . But because of its policy against employing first @-@ year students as teachers , the only work Stone could get other than teaching at district schools during the winter break was house keeping chores through the school ’ s manual labor program . For this she was paid three cents an hour — less than half what male students received for their work in the program . Among measures taken to reduce her expenses , Stone prepared her own meals in her dormitory room . In 1844 Stone was given a position teaching arithmetic in the Ladies Department , but again received reduced pay because of her sex . 
 Oberlin ’ s compensation policies required Stone to do twice the labor a male student had to do to pay the same costs . Stone frequently rose at two o 'clock to fit in work and study , and she found her health declining . In February 1845 , having decided to submit to the injustice no longer , she asked the Faculty Board for the same pay given two lesser @-@ experienced male colleagues . When her request was denied , she resigned her position . Pleading with the faculty to restore Stone , her former students said they would pay Stone “ what was right ” if the college would not . Stone had planned to borrow money from her father when funds ran out , but Francis Stone , moved by his daughter ’ s description of her struggles , promised to provide money when needed . Help from home was not needed , however , because after three months of pressure , the faculty yielded and hired Stone back , paying both her and other women student teachers at the same rate paid male student teachers . 
 = = = Public speaking = = = 
 In February 1846 Stone intimated to Abby Kelley Foster that she was thinking of becoming a public speaker , but not until the following summer did a storm of controversy over Foster ’ s speaking at Oberlin decide the matter for her . Faculty opposition to Foster ignited impassioned discussion of women ’ s rights among the students , especially of woman ’ s right to speak in public , which Stone vigorously defended in a joint meeting of the men ’ s and women ’ s literary societies . She followed that campus demonstration by making her first public speech at Oberlin ’ s August 1 commemoration of Emancipation in the West Indies . 
 In the fall of 1846 Stone informed her family of her intention to become a woman ’ s rights lecturer . Her brothers were at once supportive , her father encouraged her to do what she considered her duty , but her mother and only remaining sister begged her to reconsider . To her mother 's fears that she would be reviled , Stone said she knew she would be <unk> and even hated , but she must " pursue that course of conduct which , to me , appears best calculated to promote the highest good of the world . ” 
 Stone then tried to gain practical speaking experience . Although women students could debate each other in their literary society , it was considered inappropriate for them to participate in oral exercises with men ; women members of the collegiate rhetoric class were expected to learn by observing their male classmates . So Stone and first @-@ year student Antoinette Brown , who also wanted to develop skill in public speaking , organized an off @-@ campus women ’ s debating club . After gaining a measure of competence , they sought and received permission to debate each other before Stone ’ s rhetoric class . The debate attracted a large student audience as well as attention from the Faculty Board , which thereupon formally banned women ’ s oral exercises in coeducational classes . Shortly thereafter , Stone accepted a challenge from a former editor of a county newspaper to a public debate on women ’ s rights , and she soundly defeated him . She then submitted a petition to the Faculty Board , signed by most members of her graduating class , asking that women chosen to write graduation essays be permitted to read them themselves , as men so honored did , instead of having them read by faculty members . When the Faculty Board refused and Stone was elected to write an essay , she declined , saying she could not support a principle that denied women “ the privilege of being co @-@ laborers with men in any sphere to which their ability makes them adequate . ” 
 Stone received her baccalaureate degree from Oberlin College on August 25 , 1847 , becoming the first female college graduate from Massachusetts . 
 = = Antislavery apprenticeship = = 
 Stone gave her first public speeches on women 's rights in the fall of 1847 , first at brother Bowman ’ s church in Gardner , Massachusetts , and a little later in neighboring Warren . Stone became a lecturing agent for the Massachusetts Anti @-@ Slavery Society in June 1848 , persuaded by Abby Kelley Foster that the experience would give her the speaking practice she still felt she needed before beginning her women ’ s rights campaign . Stone immediately proved to be an effective speaker , reported to wield extraordinary persuasive power over her audiences . She was described as “ a little meek @-@ looking <unk> body , with the sweetest , modest manners and yet as <unk> and self @-@ possessed as a loaded canon . ” One of her assets , in addition to a storytelling ability that could move audiences to tears or laughter as she willed , was said to be an unusual voice that contemporaries compared to a “ silver bell , ” and of which it was said , “ no more perfect instrument had ever been bestowed upon a speaker . ” 
 In addition to helping Stone develop as an orator , the antislavery agency introduced her to a network of progressive reformers within the <unk> wing of the abolition movement who assisted her women ’ s rights work . In the fall of 1848 , she received an invitation from Phoebe Hathaway of Farmington , New York , to lecture for the women who had organized the Seneca Falls and Rochester women ’ s rights conventions earlier that summer . Although Stone accepted and expected to begin working for them in the fall of 1849 , the agency never materialized . In April 1849 , Stone was invited to lecture for the Philadelphia Female Anti @-@ Slavery Society , and Lucretia Mott took advantage of her presence to hold Pennsylvania ’ s first women ’ s rights meeting , on May 4 , 1849 . With the help of abolitionists , Stone conducted Massachusetts ’ first petition campaigns for the right of women to vote and hold public office . Wendell Phillips drafted the first petitions and accompanying appeals for circulation , and William Lloyd Garrison published them in the Liberator for readers to copy and circulate . When Stone sent petitions to the legislature in February 1850 , over half were from towns where she had lectured . 
 = = National Woman 's Rights Convention = = 
 In April 1850 , a woman ’ s rights convention was held in Salem , Ohio , to a petition drive asking its constitutional convention to revise the state constitution to secure women ’ s equal legal and political rights as well as woman and Negro suffrage . Stone sent a letter praising their initiative and said , “ Massachusetts ought to have taken the lead in the work you are now doing , but if she chooses to linger , let her young sisters of the West set her a worthy example ; and if the ‘ Pilgrim spirit is not dead , ’ we ’ ll pledge Massachusetts to follow her . ” Some of the leaders asked Stone and Lucretia Mott to address the constitutional convention on their behalf , but believing such appeals should come from residents of the state , they declined . 
 With the support of Garrison and other abolitionists , Stone arranged the May 30 , 1850 , meeting at Boston ’ s <unk> Hall that called the first National Woman ’ s Rights Convention . Paulina Wright Davis presided while Stone addressed the large audience and served as secretary . Seven women were appointed to organize the convention , with Davis and Stone appointed to conduct the correspondence needed to solicit signatures to the call and recruit speakers and attendance . 
 A few months before the convention , Stone contracted typhoid fever while traveling in Indiana and nearly died . Frail health limited her participation in the National Woman ’ s Rights Convention held October 23 – 24 , 1850 , in Worcester , Massachusetts , and she made no formal address until the closing session . The convention decided not to establish a formal association , but to exist as an annual convention with a standing committee to arrange its meetings , publish its proceedings , and execute adopted plans of action . Stone was appointed to the Central Committee of nine women and nine men . The following spring she became secretary of the committee and , except for one year , retained that position until 1858 . As secretary , Stone took a leading part in organizing and setting the agenda for the national conventions throughout the decade . 
 = = Woman ’ s rights orator = = 
 In May 1851 , while in Boston attending the New England Anti @-@ Slavery Society ’ s annual meeting , Stone went to the exhibit of Hiram ’ s Powers ’ s statue of The Greek Slave . She was so moved by the sculpture that when she addressed the meeting that evening , she poured out her heart about the statue being emblematic of all enchained womanhood . Stone said the society ’ s general agent , Samuel May , Jr . , reproached her for speaking on women ’ s rights at an antislavery meeting , and she replied : “ I was a woman before I was an abolitionist . I must speak for women . ” Three months later Stone notified May that she intended to lecture on women ’ s rights full @-@ time and would not be available for antislavery work . Stone launched her career as an independent women ’ s rights lecturer on October 1 , 1851 . When May continued to press antislavery work upon her , she agreed to lecture for the Massachusetts Anti @-@ Slavery Society on Sundays . Arranging women ’ s rights lectures around these engagements , she used pay for her antislavery work to defray expenses of her independent lecturing until she felt confident enough to charge admission . 
 = = = Dress reform = = = 
 When Stone resumed lecturing in the fall of 1851 , she wore a new style of dress that she had adopted during her winter convalescence , consisting of a loose , short jacket and a pair of baggy trousers under a skirt that fell a few inches below the knees . The dress was a product of the health @-@ reform movement and intended to replace the fashionable French dress of a tight bodice over 
 a whalebone @-@ fitted corset , and a skirt that dragged several inches on the floor , worn over several layers of starched petticoats with straw or horsehair sewn into the hems . Ever since the fall of 1849 , when the [ 1 ] Water @-@ Cure Journal urged women to invent a style of dress that would allow them the free use of their legs , women across the country had been wearing some form of pants and short skirt , generally called the “ Turkish costume ” or the “ American dress . ” Most wore it as a walking or gardening dress , but a letter writer to the National Woman ’ s Rights Convention urged women to adopt it as common attire . 
 By the spring of 1851 , women in several states were wearing the dress in public . In March , Amelia Bloomer , editor of the temperance newspaper The Lily , announced that she was wearing it and printed a description of her dress along with instructions on how to make it . Soon newspapers had dubbed it the “ Bloomer dress ” and the name stuck . 
 The Bloomer became a fashion fad during the following months , as women from Toledo to New York City and Lowell , Massachusetts , held reform @-@ dress social events and festivals . Supporters gathered signatures to a “ Declaration of Independence from the Despotism of Parisian Fashion ” and organized dress @-@ reform societies . A few <unk> supporters of women ’ s rights took prominent part in these activities , and one offered silk to any of his friends who would make it into a short skirt and trousers for a public dress . Stone accepted the offer . 
 When Stone lectured in the dress in the fall of 1851 , hers was the first Bloomer most of her audiences had ever seen . But by then , the dress had become controversial . Although newspapers had initially praised the practicality of the new style , they soon turned to ridicule and condemnation , now viewing the trousers as a usurpation of the symbol of male authority . Many women retreated in the face of criticism , but Stone continued to wear the short dress exclusively for the next three years . She also wore her hair short , cut just below her jaw line . After Stone lectured in New York City in April 1853 , the report of her speeches in the Illustrated News was accompanied by this engraving of Stone in the Bloomer dress . 
 Stone found the short skirt convenient during her travels and defended it against those who said it was a distraction that hurt the women ’ s rights cause . Nevertheless , she disliked the instant attention it drew whenever she arrived in a new place . In the fall of 1854 , she added a dress a few inches longer , for occasional use . In 1855 , she abandoned the dress altogether and was not involved in the formation of a National Dress Reform Association in February , 1856 . Her resumption of long skirts drew the condemnation of such dress @-@ reform leaders as Gerrit Smith and Lydia Sayer <unk> , who accused her of sacrificing principle for the sake of pleasing a husband . 
 = = = Western tour = = = 
 On October 14 , 1853 , following the National Woman 's Rights Convention held in Cleveland , Ohio , Stone and Lucretia Mott addressed Cincinnati ’ s first women ’ s rights meeting , arranged by Henry Blackwell , a local businessman from a family of capable women , who had taken an interest in Stone . After that successful meeting , Stone accepted Blackwell 's offer to arrange a lecturing tour for her in the western states – considered then to be those west of Pennsylvania and Virginia . Over the following thirteen weeks , Stone gave over forty lectures in thirteen cities , during which a report to the New York Tribune said she was stirring the West on women ’ s rights “ as it is seldom stirred on any subject whatsoever . ” After four lectures in Louisville , Stone was begged to repeat the entire course and told she was having more effect there than she could have anywhere else . An Indianapolis newspaper reported that Stone “ set about two @-@ thirds of the women in the town crazy after women ’ s rights and placed half the men in a similar predicament . ” St. Louis papers said her lectures attracted the largest crowds ever assembled there , filling the city ’ s largest auditorium beyond its capacity of two thousand . Chicago papers praised her lectures as the best of the season , and said they were inspiring discussion and debate in the city ’ s homes and meeting places . When Stone headed home in January 1854 , she left behind incalculable influence . 
 From 1854 through 1858 , Stone lectured on women ’ s rights in Massachusetts , Maine , New Hampshire , Vermont , Connecticut , Rhode Island , New York , Pennsylvania , Delaware , New Jersey , Washington , D.C. , Ohio , Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin , and Ontario . Elizabeth Cady Stanton would later write that " Lucy Stone was the first speaker who really stirred the nation 's heart on the subject of woman 's wrongs . " 
 = = <unk> and hearings = = 
 In addition to being the women ’ s rights movement ’ s most prominent spokesperson , Lucy Stone led the movement ’ s petitioning efforts . She initiated petition efforts in New England and several other states and assisted the petitioning efforts of state and local organizations in New York , Ohio , and Indiana . 
 = = = Massachusetts = = = 
 After petitioning the Massachusetts legislature for the right of women to vote and serve in public office from 1849 through 1852 , Stone aimed her 1853 petitions at the convention that would meet on May 4 , 1853 , to revise the state constitution . Wendell Phillips drafted both the petition asking that the word “ male ” be stricken wherever it appeared in the constitution , and an appeal urging Massachusetts citizens to sign it . After canvassing the state for nine months , Stone sent the convention petitions bearing over five thousand signatures . On May 27 , 1853 , Stone and Phillips addressed the convention ’ s Committee on Qualifications of Voters . In reporting Stone ’ s hearing , the Liberator noted : “ Never before , since the world was made , in any country , has woman publicly made her demand in the hall of legislation to be represented in her own person , and to have an equal part in framing the laws and determining the action of government . ” 
 = = = Multi @-@ state campaigns = = = 
 Stone called a New England Woman ’ s Rights Convention in Boston on June 2 , 1854 , to expand her petitioning efforts . The convention adopted her resolution for petitioning all six New England legislatures as well as her proposed form of petition , and it appointed a committee in each state to organize the work . In a speech before the second New England Woman ’ s Rights Convention , held in June 1855 , Stone urged that one reason women needed suffrage was to protect any gains achieved , reminding them that “ the next Legislature may undo all that the last have done for women . ” The convention adopted a resolution calling the ballot “ woman ’ s sword and shield ; the means of achieving and protecting all other civil rights ” and another urging the national convention to make suffrage petitioning its priority . 
 The next National Woman ’ s Rights Convention met in Cincinnati on October 17 and 18 , 1855 . It was here that Stone delivered impromptu remarks that became famous as her " disappointment " speech . When a heckler interrupted the proceedings , calling female speakers " a few disappointed women , " Stone retorted that yes , she was indeed a " disappointed woman . " " In education , in marriage , in religion , in everything , disappointment is the lot of woman . It shall be the business of my life to deepen this disappointment in every woman 's heart until she bows down to it no longer . The convention adopted Stone ’ s resolution calling for the circulation of petitions and saying it was “ the duty of women in their respective States to ask the legislators for the elective franchise . ” Following the convention , suffrage petitioning took place in the New England states , New York , Ohio , Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin , and Nebraska , with resultant legislative hearings or action in Nebraska and Wisconsin . Amelia Bloomer , recently moved to Iowa near the Nebraska border , took up the work in that area , while the Indiana Woman ’ s Rights Society , at least one of whose officers was at the Cincinnati convention , directed the work in Indiana . Stone had helped launch the New York campaign at a state woman ’ s rights convention in Saratoga Springs in August , and at the Cleveland convention recruited workers for it as well as for the work in Illinois , Michigan , and Ohio . Stone took charge of the work in Ohio , her new home state , drafting its petition , placing it in Ohio newspapers , and circulating it during lectures across southern Ohio while her recruit worked in the northern part of the state . Stone also lectured in Illinois and Indiana in support of the petition drives there , and personally introduced the work in Wisconsin , where she found volunteers to circulate the petition and legislators to introduce them in both houses of the legislature . 
 At the national convention of 1856 , Stone presented a new strategy suggested by Antoinette Brown Blackwell to send a memorial to the various state legislatures signed by the officers of the National Woman ’ s Rights Convention . Antoinette Brown had married Samuel Charles Blackwell on January 24 , 1856 , becoming Stone 's sister @-@ in @-@ law in the process . Stone , Brown Blackwell , and Ernestine Rose were appointed a committee to carry out the plan . Stone drafted and printed the appeal and Brown Blackwell mailed it to twenty @-@ five state legislatures . Indiana and Pennsylvania referred the memorial to select committees , while both Massachusetts and Maine granted hearings . On March 6 , 1857 , Stone , Wendell Phillips , and James Freeman Clarke addressed the Judiciary Committee of the Massachusetts senate , and on March 10 Stone and Phillips addressed a select committee of the Maine legislature . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Henry Blackwell began a two @-@ year courtship of Stone in the summer of 1853 . Stone told him she did not wish to marry because she did not want to surrender control over her life and would not assume the legal position occupied by a married woman . Blackwell maintained that despite the law , couples could create a marriage of equal partnership , governed by their mutual agreement . They could also take steps to protect the wife against unjust laws , such as placing her assets in the hands of a trustee . He also believed that marriage would allow each partner to accomplish more than he or she could alone , and to show how he could help advance Stone ’ s work , he arranged her highly successful western lecturing tour of 1853 . Over an eighteen @-@ month courtship conducted primarily through correspondence , Stone and Blackwell discussed the nature of marriage , actual and ideal , as well as their own natures and suitability for marriage . Stone gradually fell in love and in November 1854 agreed to marry Blackwell . 
 Stone and Blackwell developed a private agreement aimed at preserving and protecting Stone ’ s financial independence and personal liberty . In monetary matters , they agreed that the marriage be like a business partnership , with the partners being “ joint proprietors of everything except the results of previous labors . ” Neither would have claim to lands belonging to the other , nor any obligation for the other ’ s costs of holding them . While married and living together they would share earnings , but if they should separate , they would relinquish claim to the other ’ s subsequent earnings . Each would have the right to will their property to whomever they pleased unless they had children . Over Blackwell ’ s objections , Stone refused to be supported and insisted on paying half of their mutual expenses . In addition to financial independence , Stone and Blackwell agreed that each would enjoy personal independence and autonomy : “ Neither partner shall attempt to fix the residence , employment , or habits of the other , nor shall either partner feel bound to live together any longer than is agreeable to both . ” During their discussion of marriage , Stone had given Blackwell a copy of Henry C. Wright ’ s book Marriage and Parentage ; Or , The Reproductive Element in Man , as a Means to His Elevation and Happiness , and asked him to accept its principles as what she considered the relationship between husband and wife should be . Wright proposed that because women bore the results of sexual intercourse , wives should govern a couple ’ s marital relations . In accordance with that view , Blackwell agreed that Stone would choose “ when , where and how often ” she would “ become a mother . ” In addition to this private agreement , Blackwell drew up a protest of laws , rules , and customs that conferred superior rights on husbands and , as part of the wedding ceremony , pledged never to avail himself of those laws . 
 The wedding took place at Stone ’ s home in West Brookfield , Massachusetts , on May 1 , 1855 , with Stone ’ s close friend and co @-@ worker Thomas Wentworth Higginson officiating . Higginson sent a copy of Stone and Blackwell ’ s Protest to the Worcester Spy , and from there it spread across the country . While some commentators viewed it as a protest against marriage itself , others agreed that no woman should resign her legal existence without such formal protest against the despotism that forced her to forgo marriage and motherhood or submit to the degradation in which law placed a married woman . It inspired other couples to make similar protests part of their wedding ceremonies . 
 = = = Keeping her name = = = 
 Stone viewed the tradition of wives abandoning their own surname to assume that of their husbands as a manifestation of the legal annihilation of a married woman ’ s identity . Immediately after her marriage , with the agreement of her husband , she continued to sign correspondence as “ Lucy Stone ” or “ Lucy Stone – only . ” But during the summer , Blackwell tried to register the deed for property Stone purchased in Wisconsin , and the registrar insisted she sign it as “ Lucy Stone Blackwell . ” The couple consulted Blackwell ’ s friend , Salmon P. Chase , a Cincinnati lawyer and future Chief Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court , who was not immediately able to answer their question about the legality of her name . So while continuing to sign her name as Lucy Stone in private correspondence , for eight months she signed her name as Lucy Stone Blackwell on public documents and allowed herself to be so identified in convention proceedings and newspaper reports . But upon receiving assurance from Chase that no law required a married woman to change her name , Stone made a public announcement at the May 7 , 1856 , convention of the American Anti @-@ Slavery Society in Boston that her name remained Lucy Stone . In 1879 , when Boston women were granted the franchise in school elections , Stone registered to vote . But officials notified her that she would not be allowed to vote unless she added “ Blackwell ” to her signature . This she refused to do , and because her time and energy were consumed with suffrage work , she did not challenge the action in a court of law . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Stone and Blackwell had one daughter , Alice Stone Blackwell , born September 14 , 1857 , who became a leader of the suffrage movement and wrote the first biography of her mother , Lucy Stone : Pioneer Woman Suffragist . In 1858 , while the family was living temporarily in Chicago , Stone miscarried and lost a baby boy . 
 = = Waning activism = = 
 After her marriage , from the summer of 1855 to the summer of 1857 , Stone continued a full lecturing , petitioning , and organizing schedule . In January 1856 , Stone was accused in court , and spoke in defense of a rumor put forward by the prosecution that Stone gave a knife to former slave Margaret Garner , on trial for the killing of her own child to prevent it from being enslaved . Stone was said to have slipped the prisoner the knife so that Garner could kill herself if she was forced to return to slavery . Stone was referred to by the court as " Mrs. Lucy Stone Blackwell " and was asked if she wanted to defend herself ; she preferred to address the assembly off the record after adjournment , saying " ... With my own teeth I would tear open my veins and let the earth drink my blood , rather than wear the chains of slavery . How then could I blame her for wishing her child to find freedom with God and the angels , where no chains are ? " 
 But the birth of her daughter in September 1857 made it impossible for her to maintain a high level of activism . Stone had made preliminary arrangements for the 1857 national convention to be held in Providence , but because she would not be able to attend it , she handed responsibility to Susan B. Anthony and Thomas Wentworth Higginson . When the Panic of 1857 disrupted Anthony ’ s plan to move the convention to Chicago , Stone made the announcement that the next National Woman ’ s Rights Convention would be in May 1858 . Anthony helped Stone arrange the 1858 convention and then took sole responsibility for the 1859 meeting , and Elizabeth Cady Stanton took charge of the 1860 convention . 
 Before her own marriage , Stone felt that women should be allowed to divorce drunken husbands , to formally end a " loveless marriage " so that " a true love may grow up in the soul of the injured one from the full enjoyment of which no legal bond had a right to keep her ... Whatever is pure and holy , not only has a right to be , but it has a right also to be recognized , and further , I think it has no right not to be recognized . " Stone 's friends often felt differently about the issue ; " <unk> " Brown wrote to Stone in 1853 that she was not ready to accept the idea , even if both parties wanted divorce . Stanton was less inclined to clerical orthodoxy ; she was very much in favor of giving women the right to divorce , eventually coming to the view that the reform of marriage laws was more important than women 's voting rights . 
 In the process of planning for women 's rights conventions , Stone worked against Stanton to remove from any proposed platform the formal advocacy of divorce . Stone wished to keep the subject separate , to prevent the appearance of moral laxity . She pushed " for the right of woman to the control of her own person as a moral , intelligent , accountable being . " Other rights were certain to fall into place after women were given control of their own bodies . Years later , Stone 's position on divorce would change . 
 = = = Differences with Douglass = = = 
 In his newspaper , Frederick Douglass printed a rebuke of Stone 's free combination of women 's rights and abolitionism , saying that she was diminishing the focus and power of the anti @-@ slavery movement . Douglass later found Stone at fault for speaking at a whites @-@ only Philadelphia lecture hall , but Stone insisted that she had replaced her planned speech that day with an appeal to the audience to boycott the facility . It took years before the two were reconciled . 
 = = = Tax protest = = = 
 In January 1858 , Stone staged a highly publicized protest that took the issue of taxation without representation across the nation . The previous summer she and Blackwell had purchased a house in Orange , New Jersey , and when the first tax bill came , Stone returned it unpaid with the explanation that taxing women while denying them the right to vote was a violation of America ’ s founding principles . On January 22 , 1858 , the city auctioned some of her household goods to pay the tax and attendant court costs . The following month , Stone and Blackwell spoke on taxation without representation before two large meetings in Orange , and circulated petitions asking the New Jersey legislature for woman suffrage . Stone ’ s protest inspired other tax @-@ paying women to action : some followed her example and refused to pay taxes , with one case reaching the Massachusetts Supreme Court in 1863 , while others went to the polls to demand their right as tax @-@ payers to vote . 
 = = National organizations = = 
 During the Civil War , Stone joined with Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Susan B. Anthony , Martha Coffin Wright , Amy Post , Antoinette Brown Blackwell , Ernestine Rose , and Angelina Grimké Weld to form the Woman 's National Loyal League in 1863 . The group held a convention in New York City , and resolved to fight for full emancipation and enfranchisement of African Americans . In 1864 , the organization gathered 400 @,@ 000 signatures to petition the United States Congress , significantly assisting in the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment abolishing slavery . Once Reconstruction began , Stone helped form the American Equal Rights Association ( AERA ) . AERA 's main goal was to achieve equal voting rights for people of either gender and any race . 
 During the May , 1869 AERA conference , a division arose between the great majority of participants such as Stone who wanted to voice support for the proposed fifteenth amendment which would grant suffrage to African @-@ American men , and a vocal minority who opposed any amendment to voting rights which would not provide universal suffrage . The conflict led to the adoption of a muted resolution in favor of the fifteenth amendment , one which expressed disappointment that Congress had not offered the same privilege to women . The AERA could not hold together from the internal strife between these two positions . Heading the minority , Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony formed the female @-@ only National Woman Suffrage Association ( NWSA ) to focus on women gaining voting rights . In Cleveland on November 24 , Stone , along with her husband and Julia Ward Howe , founded the more moderate American Woman Suffrage Association ( AWSA ) , that admitted both men and women . The goals of AWSA were to get the fifteenth amendment passed after which the effort would be redoubled to win women the vote . Beyond membership and the timing of women 's suffrage , the groups differed only on minor points of policy . 
 = = = Divorce and " free love " = = = 
 In 1870 , at the twentieth anniversary celebration of the first National Women 's Rights Convention in Worcester , Stanton spoke for three hours rallying the crowd for women 's right to divorce . By then , Stone 's position on the matter had shifted significantly . Personal differences between Stone and Stanton came to the fore on the issue , with Stone writing " We believe in marriage for life , and deprecate all this loose , pestiferous talk in favor of easy divorce . " Stone made it clear that those wishing for " free divorce " were not associated with Stone 's organization AWSA , headed at that time by Reverend Henry Ward Beecher . Stone wrote against ' free love : ' " Be not deceived — free love means free lust . " 
 This editorial position would come back to haunt Stone . Also in 1870 , Elizabeth Roberts Tilton told her husband Theodore Tilton that she had been carrying on an adulterous relation with his good friend Henry Ward Beecher . Theodore Tilton published an editorial saying that Beecher " has at a most unseemly time of life been detected in improper <unk> with certain ladies of his congregation . " Tilton also informed Stanton about the alleged affair , and Stanton passed the information to Victoria Woodhull . Woodhull , a free love advocate , printed innuendo about Beecher , and began to woo Tilton , convincing him to write a book of her life story from imaginative material that she supplied . In 1871 , Stone wrote to a friend " my one wish in regard to Mrs. Woodhull is , that [ neither ] she nor her ideas , may be so much as heard of at our meeting . " Woodhull 's self @-@ serving activities were attracting disapproval from both centrist AWSA and radical NWSA . To divert criticism from herself , Woodhull published a denunciation of Beecher in 1872 saying that he practiced free love in private while speaking out against it from the pulpit . This caused a sensation in the press , and resulted in an inconclusive legal suit and a subsequent formal inquiry lasting well into 1875 . The furor over adultery and the friction between various camps of women 's rights activists took focus away from legitimate political aims . Harry Blackwell wrote to Stone from Michigan where he was working toward putting woman suffrage into the state constitution , saying " This Beecher @-@ Tilton affair is playing the deuce with [ woman suffrage ] in Michigan . No chance of success this year I fancy . " 
 = = Voting rights = = 
 Stone and Blackwell moved to Pope 's Hill in Dorchester , Massachusetts in 1870 , relocating from New Jersey to organize the New England Woman Suffrage Association . Many of the town 's women had been active in the Dorchester Female Anti @-@ Slavery Society and , by 1870 , a number of local women were suffragists . At the same time , Stone founded the Woman 's Journal , a Boston publication voicing the concerns of the AWSA . Stone continued to edit the journal for the rest of her life , assisted by her husband and their daughter . 
 = = = " The Colorado Lesson " = = = 
 In 1877 , Stone was asked by Rachel Foster Avery to come assist Colorado activists in the organization of a popular referendum campaign with the aim of gaining suffrage for <unk> women . Together , Stone and Blackwell worked the northern half of the state in late summer , while Susan Anthony traveled the less @-@ promising rough @-@ and @-@ tumble southern half . Patchwork and scattered support was reported by activists , with some areas more receptive . Latino voters proved largely uninterested in voting reform ; some of that resistance was blamed on the extreme opposition to the measure voiced by the Roman Catholic bishop of Colorado . All but a handful of politicians in Colorado ignored the measure , or actively fought it . Stone concentrated on convincing Denver voters during the October ballot , but the measure lost heavily , with 68 % voting against it . Married working men showed the greatest support , and young single men the least . Blackwell called it " The Colorado Lesson " , writing that " Woman suffrage can never be carried by a popular vote , without a political party behind it . " 
 = = = School board vote = = = 
 In 1879 , after Stone organized a petition by suffragists across the state , Massachusetts women were given strictly delimited voting rights : a woman who could prove the same qualifications as a male voter was allowed to cast her vote for members of the school board . Stone applied to the voting board in Boston but was required to sign her husband 's surname as her own . She refused , and never participated in that vote . 
 = = Reconciliation = = 
 In 1887 , eighteen years after the rift formed in the American women 's rights movement , Stone proposed a merger of the two groups . Plans were drawn up , and , at their annual meetings , propositions were heard and voted on , then passed to the other group for evaluation . By 1890 , the organizations resolved their differences and merged to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association ( NAWSA ) . Stone was too weak with heart problems and respiratory illness to attend its first convention , but was elected to chair the executive committee . 
 Starting early in January , 1891 , Carrie Chapman Catt visited Stone repeatedly at Pope 's Hill , for the purpose of learning from Stone about the ways of political organizing . Stone had previously met Catt at an Iowa state woman 's suffrage convention in October , 1889 , and had been impressed at her ambition and sense of presence , saying " Mrs. Chapman will be heard from yet in this movement . " Stone mentored Catt the rest of that winter , giving her a wealth of information about lobbying techniques and fund @-@ raising . Catt later used the teaching to good effect in leading the final drive to gain women the vote in 1920 . 
 Catt , Stone and Blackwell went together to the January , 1892 NAWSA convention in Washington , DC . Along with Isabella Beecher Hooker , Stone , Stanton and Anthony , the " triumvirate " of women 's suffrage , were called away from the convention 's opening hours by an unexpected woman suffrage hearing before the United States House Committee on the Judiciary . Stone told the assembled congressmen " I come before this committee with the sense which I always feel , that we are handicapped as women in what we try to do for ourselves by the single fact that we have no vote . This cheapens us . You do not care so much for us as if we had votes ... " Stone argued that men should work to pass laws for equality in property rights between the sexes . Stone demanded an eradication of coverture , the folding of a wife 's property into that of her husband . Stone 's impromptu speech paled in comparison to Stanton 's brilliant outpouring which preceded hers . Stone later published Stanton 's speech in its entirety in the Woman 's Journal as " Solitude of Self " . Back at the NAWSA convention , Anthony was elected president , with Stanton and Stone becoming honorary presidents . 
 = = Final appearance = = 
 In 1892 , Stone was convinced to sit for a portrait in sculpture , rendered by Anne Whitney , sculptor and poet . Stone had previously protested the proposed portrait for more than a year , saying that the funds to engage an artist would be better spent on suffrage work . Stone finally yielded to pressure from Frances Willard , the New England Women 's Club and some of her friends and neighbors in the Boston area , and sat while Whitney produced a bust . In February 1893 , Stone invited her brother Frank and his wife Sarah to come see the bust , before it was shipped to Chicago for display at the upcoming World 's Columbian Exposition . 
 Stone went with her daughter to Chicago in May , 1893 and gave her last public speeches at the World 's Congress of Representative Women where she saw a strong international involvement in women 's congresses , with almost 500 women from 27 countries speaking at 81 meetings , and attendance topping 150 @,@ 000 at the week @-@ long event . Stone 's immediate focus was on state referenda under consideration in New York and Nebraska . Stone presented a speech she had prepared entitled " The Progress of Fifty Years " wherein she described the milestones of change , and said " I think , with never @-@ ending gratitude , that the young women of today do not and can never know at what price their right to free speech and to speak at all in public has been earned . " Stone met with Carrie Chapman Catt and Abigail Scott <unk> to form a plan for organizing in Colorado , and Stone attended two days of meetings about getting a woman suffrage drive restarted in Kansas . Stone and her daughter returned home to Pope 's Hill on May 28 . 
 Those who knew Stone well thought her voice was lacking strength . In August when she and her husband Harry wanted to take part in more meetings at the Exposition , she was too weak to go . Stone was diagnosed as suffering from advanced stomach cancer in September . She wrote final letters to friends and relatives . Having " prepared for death with serenity and an unwavering concern for the women 's cause , " Lucy Stone died on October 18 , 1893 , at the age of 75 . At her funeral three days later , 1 @,@ 100 people crowded the church , and hundreds more stood silently outside . Six women and six men served as pallbearers , including sculptor Anne Whitney , and Stone 's old abolitionist friends Thomas Wentworth Higginson and Samuel Joseph May . Mourners lined the streets for a sight of the funeral procession , and front @-@ page banner headlines ran in news accounts . Stone 's death was the most widely reported of any American woman 's up to that time . 
 According to her wishes , her body was cremated , making her the first person cremated in Massachusetts , though a wait of over two months was undertaken while the crematorium at Forest Hills Cemetery could be completed . Stone 's remains are <unk> at Forest Hills ; a chapel there is named after her . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Lucy Stone 's refusal to take her husband 's name , as an assertion of her own rights , was controversial then , and is largely what she is remembered for today . Women who continue to use their birth name after marriage are still occasionally known as " Lucy <unk> " in the United States . In 1921 , the Lucy Stone League was founded in New York City by Ruth Hale , described in 1924 by Time as the " ' Lucy Stone ' <unk> " of Heywood Broun . The League was re @-@ instituted in 1997 . 
 Susan B. Anthony , Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Matilda Joslyn Gage and Ida Husted Harper began in 1876 to write the History of Woman Suffrage . They planned for one volume but finished four before the death of Anthony in 1906 , and two more afterward . The first three volumes chronicled the beginnings of the women 's rights movement , including the years that Stone was active . Because of differences between Stone and Stanton that had been highlighted in the schism between NWSA and AWSA , Stone 's place in history was marginalized in the work . The text was used as the standard scholarly resource on 19th @-@ century American feminism for much of the 20th century , causing Stone 's extensive contribution to be overlooked in many histories of women 's causes . 
 On August 13 , 1968 , the 150th anniversary of her birth , the U.S. Postal Service honored Stone with a 50 ¢ postage stamp in the Prominent Americans series . The image was adapted from a photograph included in Alice Stone Blackwell 's biography of Stone . 
 Until 1999 , the Massachusetts State House displayed only portraits of influential male leaders of the state of Massachusetts . That year , a project called " Hear Us " , initiated by the state legislature , came to fruition : the portraits of six female leaders were mounted in the historic building . Lucy Stone was among the women so honored . 
 In 2000 , Amy Ray of the Indigo Girls included a song entitled <unk> on her first solo recording , Stag . 
 An administration and classroom building on Livingston Campus at Rutgers University in New Jersey is named for Lucy Stone . Warren , Massachusetts contains a Lucy Stone Park , along the Quaboag River . Anne Whitney 's 1893 bust of Lucy Stone is on display in Boston 's Faneuil Hall building . 
 She is featured on the Boston Women 's Heritage Trail . 
 = = Home = = 
 The Lucy Stone Home Site is owned and managed by The Trustees of Reservations , a non @-@ profit land conservation and historic preservation organization dedicated to preserving natural and historic places in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts . The site includes 61 acres of forested land on the side of <unk> Hill in West Brookfield , Massachusetts . Although the farmhouse in which Stone was born and married burned to the ground in 1950 , its ruins are at the center of the property . At the time of Stone ’ s wedding , both her parents and a married brother and his family lived in the two @-@ and @-@ one @-@ half @-@ story house , and family descendants continued to live there until 1936 . In 1915 , a pilgrimage of suffragists placed a memorial tablet on the house , which read : “ This house was the birthplace of Lucy Stone , pioneer advocate of equal rights for women . Born August 13 , 1818 . Married May 1 , 1855 , died October 18 , 1893 . In grateful memory Massachusetts suffragists placed this tablet August 13 , 1915 . ” That tablet , severely damaged but surviving the 1950 fire , is now in the Quaboag Historical Society Museum . After the fire , the surrounding farmland was abandoned and left to revert to forest , and it is now used for hunting and harvesting timber . The Trustees acquired the home site in 2002 and have been maintaining the property ever since . 
 = Italian cruiser Etruria = 
 Etruria was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) built in the 1891 by Cantiere navale fratelli Orlando <unk> . She was the third of six vessels of the Regioni class , all of which were named for current , or in the case of Etruria , former regions of Italy . The ship was equipped with a main armament of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns , and she could steam at a speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 Etruria spent her early career with the main fleet in the Mediterranean Sea . In the early 1900s , she spent much of her time in North and South American waters ; she visited the United States for the Jamestown Exposition and the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in 1907 and 1909 . The ship took part in the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , primarily by providing gunfire support to Italian troops in North Africa . 
 Reduced to a training ship by World War I , Etruria was deliberately sunk by the Regia Marina in Livorno to convince Austria @-@ Hungary that its espionage network had not been compromised by double agents . 
 = = Design = = 
 Etruria was 84 @.@ 8 meters ( 278 ft ) long overall , had a beam of 12 @.@ 03 m ( 39 @.@ 5 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 87 m ( 16 @.@ 0 ft ) . She displaced up to 3 @,@ 110 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 060 long tons ; 3 @,@ 430 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of a pair of horizontal triple @-@ expansion engines , with steam supplied by four cylindrical water @-@ tube boilers . On her speed trials , she reached a maximum of 18 @.@ 3 knots ( 33 @.@ 9 km / h ; 21 @.@ 1 mph ) at 7 @,@ 018 indicated horsepower ( 5 @,@ 233 kW ) . The ship had a cruising radius of about 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 213 @-@ 78 . 
 Etruria was armed with a main battery of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 40 guns mounted singly , with two side by side forward and two side by side aft . Six 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) L / 40 guns were placed between them , with three on each broadside . Light armament included eight 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) guns two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns , and a pair of machine guns . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes . Etruria was protected by a 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick deck , and her conning tower had 50 mm thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Etruria was laid down at the Odero @-@ Terni @-@ Orlando shipyard in Livorno on 1 April 1889 . Shortages of funding slowed the completion Etruria and her sister ships . Tight budgets forced the navy to reduce the pace of construction so that the funds could be used to keep the active fleet in service . As a result , it took two years to complete her hull , which was launched on 23 April 1891 . Fitting @-@ out work proceeded even more slowly ; she was not ready for commissioning until 11 July 1894 . Following her commissioning , Etruria was assigned to the Second Division of the Italian fleet in October 1894 , along with the ironclad battleships Francesco Morosini , two cruisers and six torpedo boats . In 1895 , she the other ships were replaced by the ironclads Sardegna and Ruggiero di Lauria and the torpedo cruiser Partenope . On 20 June 1895 , Etruria and a fleet that included the battleships Sardegna , Re Umberto , Andrea Doria , and Ruggiero di Lauria , visited Germany for the ceremony of the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . Contingents from Britain , France , Russia , Spain , and several other countries joined the celebration . 
 In April 1907 , Etruria and the armored cruiser Varese crossed the Atlantic to represent Italy during the Jamestown Exposition , the commemoration of the 300th anniversary of the Jamestown colony , the first permanent English settlement in the Americas . In addition to the Austro @-@ Hungarian delegation , the international fleet consisted of warships from Great Britain , Japan , Germany , Austria @-@ Hungary , and several other nations . Etruria returned to the United States in September 1909 for the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration in New York City , which also included ships from the German , British , and French fleets , among others , in addition to the hosting US Navy . On this occasion , she was joined by the training cruiser Etna . 
 Etruria also represented Italy at the commemoration of Peruvian pilot Jorge Chávez on 27 October 1910 , who had been killed in a crash attempting to cross the Alps from France to Italy a month before . The French cruiser Montcalm joined Etruria for the event . The ship made another visit to the United States in March 1911 , this time in San Francisco . Her visit coincided with the 50th anniversary of the proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy on 17 March ; Etruria fired a 21 @-@ gun salute in honor of the anniversary , which was returned by the US Navy training facility in the harbor . 
 On 29 September 1911 , Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya . At the time , Etruria was still in American waters , but she was quickly recalled . On 18 October , she joined the escort for a troop convoy headed to Benghazi . The convoy was heavily protected against a possible Ottoman attack : the escort comprised the four Regina Elena @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships , her sister Liguria and another cruiser , and five destroyers . The Italian fleet bombarded the city the next morning after the Ottoman garrison refused to surrender . During the bombardment , parties from the ships and the infantry from the troopships went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . 
 By December , Etruria had been moved to Tobruk , where she provided gunfire support to the Italians defending the city . She was joined there by Etna and twelve torpedo boats . In the meantime , most of the fleet had returned to Italy for refitting . In January 1912 , Etruria was moved back to Benghazi . For the next six months she remained here , supporting the garrison against Ottoman counter @-@ attacks . The ship repeatedly shelled the Ottoman camps outside the city . On 15 October , the Ottomans surrendered , ending the war . 
 Etruria was stationed in Libya as part of the local defense force , which included the old ironclad battleships Lepanto and Enrico Dandolo , along with several smaller vessels . By the outbreak of World War I , the ship had been reduced to a training cruiser . The Italian Navy deliberately blew up Etruria in Livorno on 13 August 1918 , ostensibly as an act of sabotage by Austro @-@ Hungarian agents in Italy . The purported agents had in fact been coopted as double agents , and the destruction of Etruria was meant to strengthen Austro @-@ Hungarian confidence in their espionage network . 
 = Battle of Kham Duc = 
 The Battle of Kham Duc was a major battle of the Vietnam War ( also known , in Vietnam , as the " American War " ) . The event occurred in Khâm Đức , now district capital of Phước Sơn District , then in Quảng Tín Province ( now part of Quảng Nam Province , South Vietnam ) , between 10 – 12 May 1968 . During the Tet Offensive of 1968 , the Vietnam People 's Army ( PAVN ) 2nd Division tried to capture Đà Nẵng but their attacks were quickly blunted by elements of the U.S. 1st Marine Division , the Americal Division , and the Korean Brigade that were guarding the city . North Vietnamese General Chu Huy Mân decided to disengage from the fight in the outskirts of the city , and pull the 2nd Division into the mountains where they could rest , rebuild , and prepare for the next major operation . Khâm Đức , a small district in the north of Quảng Tín , was chosen as the next target for the PAVN 2nd Division . Following the defeat of the North Vietnamese in Đà Nẵng , U.S. military intelligence agencies in I Corps Tactical Zone were confused by the movements of the North Vietnamese 2nd Division , because they could not track down the mysterious enemy unit . 
 During March and April , U.S. military intelligence began to detect elements of the PAVN 2nd Division moving towards Khâm Đức , but their opponent 's true intentions were largely unknown . In response to what could be a major attack , General William Westmoreland decided to build up the defenses of the Khâm Đức Special Forces , by sending in U.S. Army engineers to upgrade the local airstrip for sustained use by large transport aircraft , as well as airlifting weapons and ammunition for the U.S.-led Detachment A @-@ 105 . Australian @-@ led 11th Mobile Strike Force ( MSF ) Company was ordered to take up positions in Ngok Tavak ( Ngok Ta Vak ) , an outpost serving Khâm Đức , to boost allied intelligence @-@ gathering capabilities in the area . However , unbeknownst to the United States and other allied forces , the Viet Cong ( VC ) 1st Regiment had been watching the build @-@ up around Khâm Đức for some time , and were preparing to initiate the assault by taking out Ngok Tavak . 
 In the early hours of 10 May , elements of the VC 1st Regiment attacked Ngok Tavak , and they successfully overran much of the outpost . By dawn , the 11th MSF Company was devastated , but they later received reinforcements which came in the form of the 12th Mobile Strike Force Company . Despite having received assurances that further reinforcements would arrive to relieve the outpost , the commander of the 11th MSF Company decided to evacuate his troops and move towards Khâm Đức . By that time , however , the VC 1st Regiment had already turned their attention to the main target at Khâm Đức , and they only left behind some local force units to destroy allied reinforcements . Meanwhile , elements of the Americal Division had been airlifted into Khâm Đức as part of Operation Golden Valley , to bolster the strength of the Special Forces Camp there . On the morning of 11 May , the North Vietnamese 2nd Division surrounded Khâm Đức , and they gradually forced United States @-@ led forces into their bases after several outposts were overrun . Westmoreland then ordered Khâm Đức to be evacuated , so the 834th Air Division was told to make an all @-@ out effort to extract all the people in Khâm Đức , both military and civilian . By the time the evacuation was completed , nine U.S. military aircraft had been shot down , including two C @-@ 130s . On 12 May , the North Vietnamese were in complete control of Khâm Đức . 
 = = Background = = 
 1968 marked a decisive turning point in the history of the Vietnam War . Towards the end of January , regular units of the Vietnam People 's Army and the Viet Cong ( VC ) initiated large @-@ scale attacks on Saigon and all 34 provincial cities of South Vietnam . Several major towns , villages , and allied military installations throughout the country were also attacked during the same period . In doing so , the North Vietnamese and their southern VC allies violated the Tết holiday truce , which had enabled South Vietnamese military personnel to go on leave . Subsequently , the combined PAVN forces were able to achieve the element of surprise , and quickly gain ground in various parts of the country . Despite early victories , the PAVN could only sustain their offensive for several weeks , or a few months in parts of South Vietnam where they were closest to their bases in Cambodia and Laos . Ultimately , North Vietnamese and VC units were gradually driven out from Saigon and the provincial cities . 
 In I Corps Tactical Zone , the North Vietnamese military had mixed successes against allied military forces . On 7 February 1968 , a North Vietnamese infantry contingent armed with satchel charges , tear gas , and flamethrowers , and reinforced with Soviet @-@ made PT @-@ 76 amphibious tanks , successfully breached the wires of the Lang Vei Special Forces Camp . The combined American , South Vietnamese , and indigenous Civilian Irregular Defense Group ( CIDG ) personnel absorbed more than 300 casualties while trying to hold their positions . During the battle Lieutenant Colonel Daniel F. Shungel – Commander of Company C , 5th Special Forces Group – had to fight his way out of the camp in order to escape the North Vietnamese attack , until rescued by a relief task force led by Major George <unk> . At Khe Sanh , located about 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) east of Lang Vei , the U.S. 26th Marine Regiment was able to hold their ground against a multi @-@ division North Vietnamese assault . During the siege U.S. Air Force , Navy , and Marine fighter @-@ bombers dropped 40 @,@ 000 tonnes of bombs on North Vietnamese positions , while B @-@ 52 bombers unleashed more than 60 @,@ 000 tonnes of ordnance on areas where the North Vietnamese were believed to have concentrated their forces . 
 In the same period , the PAVN 2nd Division under the command of General Giáp Văn <unk> clashed with elements of the Americal Division , the U.S. 1st Marine Division , and the South Korean Brigade in their attempts to capture Đà Nẵng . However , due to mixed up signals between the PAVN 2nd Division and other VC units the North Vietnamese were defeated . After 9 February , the PAVN 2nd Division seemed to be withdrawing from the battlefield , so Lieutenant General Robert E. Cushman , Jr . Commander of III Marine Amphibious Force ordered his troops to continue their attacks on the retreating forces . In the aftermath of the battle for Đà Nẵng , U.S. military commanders in I Corps held different views on the fighting ability of the PAVN 2nd Division . Major @-@ General Samuel W. Koster claimed losses sustained by the PAVN 2nd Division had " impaired its future effectiveness " , after his units allegedly killed more than 1 @,@ 000 enemy soldiers in the month of January alone . In contrast , Major @-@ General Donn J. Robertson told his superiors that the 2nd Division may have several uncommitted units they could deploy for future operations , which was a threat to the remaining South Vietnamese units and a U.S. Marine battalion in the region that had sustained significant losses of their own . 
 Whether the PAVN 2nd Division had been rendered ineffective or not was uncertain , as U.S. military intelligence did not know the whereabouts of the enemy unit or their intentions . Since January 1968 , the North Vietnamese had been fighting continuously with U.S. and other allied military forces in I Corps , so their resupply capabilities were overstretched , and their soldiers were not given the opportunity to rest before the Tet Offensive . Thus , following the failed attack on Đà Nẵng , North Vietnamese General Chu Huy Mân , Commander of Military Region 5 , made the decision to pull the 2nd Division into the mountains where they could rest , resupply , and integrate their replacement manpower before going on the offensive again . Mân ordered <unk> to split the 2nd Division into two fighting arms ; one regiment would tie down the Americans in the Que Son Valley , while the rest of the division would withdraw to their base areas near Laos , to link up with the 70th Transport Regiment . Then , their next target would be Khâm Đức and the surrounding areas ; Mân told his senior officers that they would attack Khâm Đức to force an American retreat . 
 Khâm Đức was situated in the northern section of Quảng Tín Province , South Vietnam , in I Corps Tactical Zone . It sat beside National Highway 14 , which paralleled the international border with Laos , and it was surrounded by high mountains on all sides . The Special Forces Camp was named after the main village which was located about 800 meters ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) to the northeast , and was constructed about mid @-@ way along a 6 @,@ 000 @-@ foot asphalt runway . Before his assassination , President Ngô Đình Diệm had used Khâm Đức as a hunting lodge , so an airfield was constructed there for Diệm 's use . The Khâm Đức Special Forces Camp was under the responsibility of Detachment A @-@ 105 , United States Army 5th Special Forces Group ; the camp functioned as a training centre for CIDG personnel , reconnaissance of enemy movements , and combat operations . The village had 272 inhabitants , most of whom were dependents of the South Vietnamese and Montagnard CIDG soldiers . Ngok Tavak , located about 7 kilometers ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) southwest of Khâm Đức , was an observation outpost for Detachment A @-@ 105 . Following the loss of Lang Vei , Khâm Đức was the last remaining Special Forces camp adjacent to the Ho Chi Minh Trail in I Corps . In May 1968 , both Ngok Tavak and Khâm Đức were overrun by PAVN forces and American , Australian and South Vietnamese forces had to retreat after being defeated . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 From their base area positioned between Highway 14 and the <unk> Mi river , elements of the PAVN 2nd Division were planning for their attack on Khâm Đức and the surrounding outposts . The VC 's 1st " Ba Gia " Regiment – commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Nguyễn Văn Trí – was given the task of initiating the attack , including sweeping aside the small outpost of Ngok Tavak ( Ngok Ta Vak ) . However , before the plan of attack was finalized , the VC remained hidden as to avoid detection by the South Vietnamese and their American allies . Consequently , during that period the <unk> Anti @-@ Aircraft Battalion was prohibited from opening fire on U.S. reconnaissance aircraft that flew over their area . At the same time , the <unk> Engineer Battalion was told to conduct training on their new equipment , such as satchel charges , tear gas , and flamethrowers , before the deadline of early May 1968 . The VC 1st Regiment Headquarters also made their preparations for the initial attack , by regularly sending out Local Force Montagnard units to conduct reconnaissance patrols around Ngok Tavak in order to observe enemy activities in the area . 
 Throughout March and April , allied intelligence was baffled by the movements of the units belonging to the North Vietnamese 2nd Division , and that was reflected in the information obtained by U.S. military forces . For example , the U.S. 1st Marine Division reported that the enemy 's 2nd Division Headquarters , the 3rd Regiment , the 21st Regiment , and the VC 's 1st Regiment were within the vicinity of Khâm Đức , <unk> Đức , and Hội An , respectively . In contrast , information released by the U.S. 27th Marines Regiment showed the presence of the 3rd and 21st Regiments near <unk> Noi Island , whereas the 2nd Division Headquarters was reported to be in the Que Son Valley . Despite the lack of accurate information , allied intelligence generally agreed the North Vietnamese might begin attacking isolated outposts and units as their next course of action . Subsequently , on 4 May 1968 , the Americal Division made amendments to their Golden Valley Plan , the plan for the relief and reinforcements of CIDG camps , to enable the deployment of the 1st Battalion , 46th Infantry Regiment , 196th Light Infantry Brigade to support Khâm Đức . 
 To counter a possible major North Vietnamese attack , the U.S. military began taking steps to reinforce Khâm Đức . Starting on 9 April , the U.S. 70th Engineer Battalion was flown in from Pleiku , about 160 kilometers ( 99 mi ) to the south , to repair and upgrade the airfield for sustained use by C @-@ 130 Hercules transport aircraft . By 8 May , the U.S. Air Force had airlifted about 400 tonnes of cargo into Khâm Đức , including two bulldozers , by a C @-@ 124 Globemaster . In addition , 33 U.S. Marines from Battery D , 2nd Battalion , 13th Marine Regiment were also deployed to support the defenders at Ngok Tavak . From 16 April , the Marines artillerymen used Khâm Đức as a staging area where they could assemble their entire detachment , which included two 105mm howitzers , ammunition , and supplies . On 4 May , 33 Marines , along with 35 @,@ 380 kilograms ( 78 @,@ 000 lb ) of equipment and supplies , were lifted into Ngok Tavak by helicopters . Meanwhile , towards the end of April , the VC 1st Regiment received orders to leave their base and take positions in the valley on the western side of Ngok Tavak , and wait there until the attack signal was given . The 40th Battalion – commanded by Major Đặng Ngọc Mai – spearheaded the assault . 
 The outpost of Ngok Tavak was manned by the 11th Mobile Strike Force Company since March 1968 . Earlier in the year , Company C , 5th Special Forces Group in Đà Nẵng came up with a plan to supplement the intelligence agencies in the Khâm Đức area , by deploying a Mike Force Company to operate south of the Special Forces Camp ; subsequently , the 11th MSF Company was selected for the task . The unit was led by three members of the Australian Army Training Team Vietnam ( AATTV ) : Captain John White and Warrant Officers Frank Lucas and Don Cameron . The Australian @-@ led unit included eight U.S. Special Forces and 173 South Vietnamese and Nùng CIDG soldiers , and they were joined by 33 U.S. Marines on 4 May . Since their arrival , White and his men had set up camp on top of the hill feature in Ngok Tavak . They also made improvements to the camp 's defensive perimeter , which included an old minefield left by the French . Despite their preparations , in the days leading up to the battle , the unit was plagued by a number of problems with their defense . 
 Even though the Marine artillerymen of the 2nd Battalion , 13th Marines Regiment were supposed to support the Ngok Tavak garrison , their arrival created significant logistical issues for Captain White . Due to the poor condition of the road that connected Ngok Tavak and Khâm Đức , where most of the ammunition was stocked , the Marines had to rely on transport aircraft to bring in ammunition supplies . However , due to high demand and scarce resources , the U.S. 1st Marine Aircraft Wing simply did not have the flexibility to provide the support required by the soldiers at Ngok Tavak . Furthermore , only 31 % of the Marines ' heavy @-@ lift aircraft was available for operations . The lack of logistical support was exemplified by the manner in which the 105mm howitzers were deployed ; when the Marines arrived at Ngok Tavak , White ordered the Marine detachment to place their howitzers on a downhill position outside the camp 's perimeter , as the hill @-@ top position was still covered by trees , making the position of the howitzers a non @-@ ideal location for security . 
 In an effort to bolster the strength of White 's 11th MSF Company , Shungel sent a mortar platoon of about 35 Montagnard CIDG out from Khâm Đức to reinforce the small garrison at Ngok Tavak during the last days of April . It was intended that the Montagnards would provide local security for the garrison , when the 11th MSF Company was out on patrol . Mistrust developed between White 's men and the Montagnard soldiers , because the latter was known to contain VC infiltrators . On 28 April , elements of the PAVN 2nd Division received a message which stated that ' scouts ' were ready to cause confusion and disruption in the allies ' defensive plan around Khâm Đức . The Montagnards were placed outside the camp 's perimeter , where they roamed freely inside the Marines ' area during the days before and after the arrival of the howitzers . On 9 May , the Montagnards decided to return to Khâm Đức , but shortly afterwards they turned back to Ngok Tavak , claiming they had been ambushed by an unknown enemy unit . White and his Nung soldiers were skeptical about the claim , as they believed the story about an ambush was a lie and that no real fighting had occurred . As a result , White insisted that the Montagnards stay outside his perimeter . 
 From early May , the VC 's 1st Regiment began to tighten its noose around the Ngok Tavak position . On 6 May , a platoon @-@ sized patrol from Ngok Tavak made contact with VC units about 1 kilometer ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) south of the garrison . On the evening of 7 May , enemy soldiers were believed to have set off trip flares , which prompted the Nung soldiers to hurl grenades at the perimeter . On 8 May , White ordered the Marines to pull their artillery guns inside the defensive perimeter , so they could better defend their position from the top of the 738 @-@ meter ( 2 @,@ 421 ft ) -high hill feature . The Marines spent the entire evening of 8 May taking the first howitzer completely apart in order to take it up the hill . That night , enemy soldiers set off trip flares and again the Nung soldiers threw grenades in response . On 9 May , Captain Chris Silva flew to Ngok Tavak to discuss the reliability of his troops with his Australian counterpart , but was prevented from returning to Khâm Đức due to poor weather . On that day , the second howitzer was dragged into the garrison , so the Nungs and Marines both guarded the perimeter of Ngok Tavak . Infantry protection was provided by the 1st and 2nd Nung platoons , which held the eastern side of the garrison , while the suspect Montagnard CIDG soldiers guarded the eastern entrance . Overlooking them were some Marines of Battery D , 2nd Battalion . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = The fight at Ngok Tavak = = = 
 In the early hours of 10 May , the VC 40th Battalion of the 1st " Ba Gia " Regiment , reinforced by Local Force Montagnard units , moved into position and made final preparations for the attack on Ngok Tavak . Special assault squads were formed to breach the camp 's perimeters , while the second squad would fan out to destroy key targets inside the garrison . White was alerted to the movements of enemy troops outside his perimeter , so he quickly organized his Nung soldiers and placed his troops on 50 % alert . The Marine detachment – commanded by Lieutenant Bob Adams – was unable to operate their howitzers due to the lack of flechette rounds , which were designed for battery defense and anti @-@ personnel fire . Shortly after 3 am , the suspect Montagnard CIDG soldiers approached the garrison from the eastern entrance , where they asked the U.S. Marine guarding the outer perimeter to let them through ; as the Montagnards entered the perimeter , satchel charges were hurled at allied positions while VC soldiers lit up the perimeters with flamethrowers , marking the first double @-@ cross of the battle . 
 The initial VC attack had split allied formations within the garrison ; the 1st and 2nd Platoons of the 11th MSF Company were pushed away from the eastern perimeter , while the Marines were either alone or had organized themselves into small groups of two or three , but none were in contact with each another . Meanwhile , from inside his command post , White called in air @-@ support which later came in the form of an AC @-@ 47 Spooky gunship , a modified version of the C @-@ 47 Skytrain equipped with 7.62mm General Electric miniguns for the support of ground troops . On the eastern side of the garrison , VC soldiers of the 40th Battalion continued to charge up the hill firing their AK @-@ 47 assault rifles . Simultaneously , other elements of the VC 1st Regiment probed the southern and western end of the garrison , now held by Captain White 's 1st and 3rd Platoons , to test the strength of allied defenses in that part of the garrison . By that stage , however , most Nung soldiers had retreated from their positions on the eastern end of the garrison , while the U.S. Marines were pinned down around the perimeters . By 03 : 30 , the VC had captured the Marines ' gun position . Captain White was able to maintain contact with Warrant Officers Cameron and Lucas through telephone , but they could not coordinate their forces . 
 Although the VC held a greater portion of the Ngok Tavak garrison , particularly on the eastern side , their attack was stalled . After the 40th Battalion had overrun the command post , they tried to advance on the landing zone where allied soldiers had set up a strong position from fortified underground bunkers , which the VC had failed to detect in their previous reconnaissance patrols . At 04 : 20 , an AC @-@ 47 gunship from the 4th Air Commando Squadron was reported to be flying over the garrison , so White directed the aircraft to fire down on VC @-@ held positions around the perimeter . After he had shouted warnings to the Marines and the Nungs , White approved the aircraft to fire on the position area of the 105mm howitzers . The arrival of the AC @-@ 47 enabled the allied forces to hold their last remaining ground , and repulse the final attack . By 05 : 30 , fighting in and around Ngok Tavak was limited to the hurling of grenades , and random fire on any movement that was believed to be that of the VC . In one of their final attempts to overcome the last allied position , the VC set off tear gas of such low density that it had little effect on most of the allied soldiers . 
 As events in Ngok Tavak unfolded , White sent urgent messages to Company C , 5th Special Forces Headquarters in Đà Nẵng , as well as to the Americal Division , to request support . In response , the 5th Special Forces Headquarters ordered Captain Eugene Makowski to fly to Khâm Đức , where he would assume command of the 12th Mobile Strike Force Company , to reinforce White 's beleaguered soldiers at Ngok Tavak . Then , just before sunrise , Colonel Trí ordered the 40th Battalion to pull out of Ngok Tavak in order to deal with an enemy relief force , and leave behind only a blocking force to hold the captured positions inside the garrison . Following those events , Australian Warrant Officers Cameron and Lucas mounted a counter @-@ attack using a handful of Nung soldiers in an attempt to retake captured positions . At that point , those Marines who had survived the main battle decided to join the fight , and as the Australian @-@ led formation moved through the Ngok Tavak garrison , they gradually pushed the last remaining enemy soldiers beyond the defensive perimeter . 
 By early morning White had expected further assaults from the VC 40th Battalion , but his opponents had moved out towards Khâm Đức with the rest of the PAVN 2nd Division . Simultaneously , the AC @-@ 47 flying overhead continued to direct fighter @-@ bombers against suspected Viet Cong positions around Ngok Tavak , but the garrison continued to receive sporadic mortar , RPG , and small @-@ arms fire . In addition to close air support missions , medivac helicopters flew in to evacuate the wounded , and U.S. aircrews reported that they did not receive fire while flying over the enemy 's area of operations . Captain Silva and Lieutenant Adams , who were both wounded during the main battle , were also evacuated . While the wounded were being flown out , the surviving elements of the 11th MSF Company and the Marines re @-@ consolidated their positions , even though cohesion had broken down between the allied soldiers as a result of the double @-@ cross that occurred earlier in the battle . At the same time , Makowski 's 12th MSF Company had departed Khâm Đức and was approaching Ngok Tavak onboard four U.S. Marine CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight helicopters . 
 At around 09 : 30 , the four CH @-@ 46 helicopters arrived in Ngok Tavak , and they were able to unload Makowski and about 45 soldiers of the 12th MSF Company . However , the VC demonstrated their domination of the landing zone when the first helicopter was hit with anti @-@ aircraft fire , and was forced to land on the ground , intact , though with damages to the fuel line . Moments later , the third helicopter was struck by a rocket propelled grenade as it turned around to rescue the crews of the first downed helicopter , and it was destroyed immediately . Now , with two downed helicopters blocking the landing zone , the remaining helicopters were prevented from landing on the ground , so the wounded men had to be evacuated while the helicopters were still hovering . As the last helicopter took off , two Nungs and one stranded U.S. soldier grabbed the helicopter skids to get out of Ngok Tavak , but they all fell to their deaths . Shortly after his arrival , Makowski placed the 12th MSF Company under the command of his Australian counterpart , as the situation continued to worsen . 
 Because his Nung soldiers were exhausted , with their ammunition and water supplies running low , White believed they could not defend the Ngok Tavak garrison in case the VC launched another major attack . At 10 : 45 , White requested permission to evacuate the garrison , but he was told to stay and wait for the arrival of reinforcements . However , both White and Makowski knew that reinforcement was unlikely , because the two downed helicopters would prevent the insertion of additional soldiers , and the road between Ngok Tavak and Khâm Đức was likely to be covered by the opposing forces waiting in ambush positions . White then decided to evacuate Ngok Tavak and withdraw his troops to safety . As part of the evacuation plan , any type of equipment that could not be taken or was considered to be of value to the opponent was dumped into the command bunker and set alight using captured enemy flamethrowers . The Marines were ordered to fire their last remaining shells , about nine rounds in total , after their ammunition storage was set ablaze by the VC , and disable their 105mm guns . 
 As White had expected the survivors to fight their way out of Ngok Tavak , he made the decision to leave the dead allied soldiers behind ; the decision caused distress amongst the survivors of the battle , but White believed evacuating the deceased soldiers through enemy lines would have been suicidal . After the Marines and Mobile Strike Force personnel had destroyed their unneeded equipment , they were directed to form an order @-@ of @-@ march out of Ngok Tavak , in order to protect the wounded and those with little infantry experience . Just before they left the garrison , Cameron blew up the first CH @-@ 46 helicopter that was still intact on the landing zone , using the M @-@ 72 anti @-@ tank weapon . The order @-@ of @-@ march was led by a group of Nung soldiers , who were followed by White and the survivors of the Marine artillery detachment , and behind them was another group of Nung soldiers covering the tail of the column . Together they evaded VC formations surrounding the hill feature of Ngok Tavak and marched eastward towards Khâm Đức . 
 About halfway between Ngok Tavak and Khâm Đức , White and the rest of the column climbed a mountain where they cleared the jungle to create a landing zone , and called for helicopters to evacuate the survivors . A flight of CH @-@ 46 Sea Knights later arrived and , in a scene that would be repeated at Khâm Đức , chaos descended on the allied formation as Nung and U.S personnel fought their way onto the helicopters . Some of the Nung soldiers had to be thrown off because the helicopters quickly reached their limit capacity ; eventually U.S. aircrews had to dump some of their equipment overboard to accommodate the last remaining Nungs on the landing zone . By 08 : 00 , the evacuation of the Ngok Tavak survivors was completed , and White immediately flew out to Đà Nẵng along with the two Australian Warrant Officers after they arrived in Khâm Đức . The fight at Ngok Tavak , though short in duration , took a heavy toll on the allied forces . An unknown number of Nung soldiers and 12 U.S. military personnel were killed , and 52 ( including two U.S. Army and 21 U.S Marines ) were wounded . 
 = = = Khâm Đức surrounded = = = 
 At 02 : 45 on 10 May , in conjunction with the ground assault on the Ngok Tavak outpost , elements of the VPA 2nd Division subjected Khâm Đức to a heavy barrage of mortar fire . The North Vietnamese 21st Regiment , later reinforced by the VC 1st Regiment , were in position to attack the U.S.-led Detachment A @-@ 105 . At 08 : 30 , the Americal Division activated Operation Golden Valley to reinforce the beleaguered Khâm Đức Special Forces Camp , and at 8 : 45 am the division requested permission from III MAF to change the reaction force so the 2nd Battalion , 1st Infantry Regiment , 196th Light Infantry Brigade ( 2 – 1st Inf ) would replace the 1st Battalion , 46th Infantry Regiment , 198th Light Infantry Brigade ( 1 – 46th Inf ) . In the meantime , however , Company A of 1 – 46th Inf provide the needed reinforcement , until the 2 – 1st Inf was in position . At around 10 : 50 Company A of 1 – 46th Infantry – led by Lieutenant Bobby Thompson – arrived in Khâm Đức along with some supporting artillery and ammunition , and they were immediately assigned to their task . Thompson 's company dug in at the end of the runway nearest OP 1 with XO Peter Everts ' platoon overlooking the deep ravine where caves kept the NVA from harm due to B @-@ 52 strikes called in on their location . 
 About six hours later , the 2 Battalion / 1st Infantry – commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert B. Nelson – also touched down on the battlefield , and they immediately set up defensive positions in support of Detachment A @-@ 105 . Under constant enemy mortar and artillery attacks , U.S. and allied forces were able to strengthen their defenses , because there were no significant ground probes during the period between 10 – 11 May . Allied defenses at Khâm Đức remained thin and the North Vietnamese had occupied the high ground in the surrounding hills , where they could target allied ground targets and support aircraft with a high level of accuracy . On 11 May , in response to increasing North Vietnamese pressure , about 30 B @-@ 52 Stratofortress bombers were called in to hit North Vietnamese @-@ held positions , but those strikes had little effect as artillery and mortar rounds continued to fall on Khâm Đức and the surrounding outposts . Consequently , Cushman recommended to Westmoreland that Khâm Đức , now defended by more than 1 @,@ 500 allied soldiers along with 272 civilians , be evacuated . Westmoreland agreed , believing that Khâm Đức lacked the " defensive potential of Khe Sanh " . 
 By 01 : 00 on 12 May , U.S. commanders on the ground in Khâm Đức were notified of Westmoreland 's decision to evacuate all military personnel , both American and Vietnamese , as well as their civilian dependents . However , most army units on the ground were left uninformed about the decision , and it led to chaos later when evacuation was underway . During the predawn hours of 12 May , elements of the PAVN 2nd Division continued to increase their pressure on the main compound of the Special Forces Camp . The North Vietnamese made final preparations for the main assault by capturing one mountain outpost at a time , which were manned by U.S. soldiers of the Americal Division , who had placed machine @-@ guns around the main camp as advanced defensive positions . At 04 : 23 , U.S. soldiers reported that outpost number 1 had been overrun , and fighter @-@ bombers were scrambled in an attempt to save it . About 30 minutes later , the defenders of outpost number 7 reported that their position had been surrounded . They attempted to hold their position by calling on an AC @-@ 47 gunship to fire directly into their position , in order to stop the attack , but soon afterwards outpost 7 succumbed to the North Vietnamese and the defenders retreated back to Khâm Đức . 
 U.S. soldiers at outpost number 3 called on supporting artillery units at Khâm Đức to fire directly at their own position in an attempt to hold off the North Vietnamese , but they too were defeated a few moments later . Before sunrise , all seven outposts were firmly in North Vietnamese hands , so U.S. and allied soldiers were placed in a perilous position . The North Vietnamese had occupied all the high ground , from which they could fire down on any support aircraft that tried to resupply the camp or to evacuate people from it . By sunrise , the North Vietnamese moved closer to the Special Forces Camp under the cover of the early morning fog . About one hour before the fog was lifted , an additional 24 B @-@ 52 bombers flew in and dropped several hundred tons of bombs on suspected North Vietnamese positions south of Khâm Đức . At 08 : 20 , General Burl W. McLaughlin – commander of the 834th Air Division – was ordered by the U.S. 7th Air Force to make an all @-@ out effort to evacuate the besieged Special Forces Camp at Khâm Đức . By 09 : 35 , the B @-@ 52 strikes had clearly failed to stop the North Vietnamese advance , when the camp 's south @-@ eastern perimeter was subjected to a massive ground assault . 
 To stop the opponent 's onslaught , U.S. fighter @-@ bombers were called in to strafe North Vietnamese and VC formations , while U.S. soldiers on the ground used small @-@ arms and artillery fire to break up the attack at point @-@ blank range . Meanwhile , a U.S. Army UH @-@ 1 Huey and an O @-@ 2 Skymaster were shot down while circling the compound . By the time the first attack was stopped , the opposite end of the compound also came under fire , and by early morning tactical air @-@ support became difficult , as North Vietnamese troops were in close proximity with U.S. and allied forces . A U.S. Army CH @-@ 47 Chinook then arrived to begin the process of evacuation , but it took several hits from anti @-@ aircraft fire . The helicopter then burst into flames , exploded , and blocked the runway . U.S. soldiers of the 70th Engineer Battalion first tried to remove the wreckage with a forklift ( their only operating vehicle , the bulldozers having been disassembled in preparation for airlift out ) ; the forklift caught fire from the burning plane , and the engineers then assembled one of their bulldozers to push the downed helicopter off the runway ; North Vietnamese troops mortared the bulldozer but <unk> Don <unk> cleared the wreckage and then tracked the dozer back into Camp Conroy and shut it down . By 10 : 00 they had cleared the obstacles which would prevent other fixed @-@ wing aircraft from using the airfield . Almost simultaneously , a single U.S. Air Force A @-@ 1 Skyraider flown by Major James N. Swain Jr. was shot down outside the camp perimeter . 
 The unfolding events seemed to have a negative impact on the cohesion between U.S. and South Vietnamese indigenous forces . The resolve of the South Vietnamese , Montagnard CIDG soldiers in particular , had apparently been shaken and they disobeyed an order to carry out a sweep operation at the rear end of the camp , and their Vietnamese commander even refused to leave his bunker to encourage the soldiers . The morale and discipline of the indigenous forces had sunk so low that they began to leave their defensive positions without permission , although their section of the camp was never subjected to a major ground attack . Consequently , the behavior of indigenous CIDG soldiers during the various stages of the battle , coupled with information that ' friendly ' Montagnard soldiers had turned on U.S. Marines at Ngok Tavak , had the effect of unnerving U.S. Army soldiers in Khâm Đức . To ensure CIDG soldiers would not abandon their posts , U.S. soldiers threatened to shoot anyone attempting to run away . 
 = = = Evacuation = = = 
 At approximately 10 : 00 , the runway at Khâm Đức was cleared of the wrecked helicopter . Moments later , a C @-@ 130 piloted by Lieutenant Colonel Daryl D. Cole touched down on the runway under heavy fire , which flattened one tire and caused extensive damage to the wing tanks . Almost immediately , Cole 's aircraft was rushed by hysterical Vietnamese civilians from ditches along the runway , filling the aircraft so the loadmaster was prevented from unloading the aircraft 's cargo . Under heavy fire , Cole decided to navigate his aircraft down the cratered and shrapnel @-@ littered runway , in order to take off . However , the combined weight of the cargo and civilians , in addition to the damage sustained during landing , prevented the aircraft from gathering enough speed to take off . So the aircrew aborted the take off , offloaded the civilians , and proceeded to cut off the blown tire to stop it from flapping and slowing down the aircraft . They were able to cut off the rubber with the bayonet , and were able to cut through the steel beading thanks to the engineers carefully cutting the steel cords with a blowtorch . A fire extinguisher was kept handy because of fear of catching the magnesium wheel on fire . About two hours later , realizing that enemy artillery rounds were coming closer to his aircraft , Colonel Cole tried to take off for the second time , and managed to get the C @-@ 130 into the air . This time his only passengers were three members of Air Force Combat Control Team ( CCT ) , whose radio equipment had been destroyed . 
 Just after Cole 's C @-@ 130 left Khâm Đức , a C @-@ 123 flown by Major Ray D. Shelton landed and took out 44 U.S. engineers and 21 South Vietnamese civilians . Shortly after Shelton had landed his aircraft , he reported that enemy fire was coming in from all quadrants , but he was able to take off safely after just three minutes on the ground . By 11 : 10 , just 145 people had been evacuated by Shelton 's aircraft , and a handful of helicopters . After that , another three C @-@ 130s also arrived in the vicinity of Khâm Đức , but the pilots were told not to try landings . In the afternoon , the C @-@ 130 Hercules resumed their operations ; at 15 : 25 , Major Bernard L. Bucher 's C @-@ 130 approached Khâm Đức 's airfield from the south and landed despite taking numerous hits . Some 150 Vietnamese women and children rushed onto the aircraft ; as soon as the aircraft was full , Bucher made his takeoff in the north direction , unaware that opposing forces were concentrated in that area . At 15 : 30 Bucher took off , and his aircraft was quickly riddled by ground fire ; it crashed less than a mile from the end of the runway . All the South Vietnamese civilians and the entire U.S. aircrew died in the crash . 
 With the loss of Bucher and his aircraft , the C @-@ 130 Hercules had not completed a successful evacuation , and there were more than 600 people still on the ground . Next in line was Lieutenant Colonel William Boyd ; he was flying an airlift mission into Chu Lai , until he was diverted into Khâm Đức to extract forces and civilians there . Just before Boyd touched down , an artillery shell exploded about 100 feet in front of his aircraft , so he was forced to pull the throttle forward . Boyd then pulled up and went around for a second approach , because he could see the desperation of the people on the ground . As he landed , hundreds of civilians and soldiers poured out of the ditches and rushed onto the aircraft . Because he had witnessed the destruction of Bucher 's C @-@ 130 while taking off in the north direction , Boyd decided to fly out from the southwest . After Boyd 's aircraft was airborne , he banked the aircraft so it would be masked by the rolling terrain . The aircraft sustained damages to the left wing , the fuselage , and the leading edge of both wings , but it landed safely in Chu Lai with all the passengers . 
 As Boyd took off , another C @-@ 130 piloted by Lieutenant Colonel John Delmore closed in on Khâm Đức . At an altitude of about 300 to 400 feet , Delmore 's aircraft began to receive North Vietnamese fire , and both sides of the cockpit were opened up by bullets that had ripped through the floorboards . Subsequently , just before touch down , Delmore and his co @-@ pilot shut down the engine and forced the aircraft to remain upright . With no brakes and little directional control , the aircraft crashed into the CH @-@ 47 that had been destroyed early in the morning , but Delmore managed to turn his aircraft off the runway to avoid blocking it . When the aircraft had stopped completely , the five @-@ man crew got out as quickly as they could . About 20 minutes later , U.S. soldiers on the ground guided them to safety , and they were rescued by a U.S. Marine CH @-@ 46 . After witnessing the destruction of two C @-@ 130 Hercules , Lieutenant Colonel Franklin Montgomery landed his C @-@ 130 and extracted more than 150 Vietnamese civilians , and some CIDG and U.S. soldiers . Montgomery 's aircraft suffered no hits , but the loadmaster was knocked down and trampled by panic @-@ stricken Vietnamese civilians whilst trying to maintain order . 
 Once Montgomery had flown out , another two C @-@ 130s arrived in Khâm Đức to continue the evacuation ; the first aircraft picked up 130 people , and the one after that took out 90 . There were now only a few people remaining on the ground in Khâm Đức , and most of them were U.S. Special Forces soldiers and indigenous CIDG personnel . Major James L. Wallace flew into Khâm Đức and extracted the last group of people , as the ammunition dumps began to explode , and the aircrews reported witnessing hysteria among the Vietnamese soldiers who had lost family members in Bucher 's crash . However , just when the aircrews believed the mission was over , a C @-@ 130 piloted by Lieutenant Colonel Jay Van Cleeff was ordered to reinsert the three @-@ man Combat Control Team , which had been airlifted out of the compound earlier in the day by Colonel Cole . In protest , Van Cleeff argued that the camp was almost completely evacuated , but the control center insisted that the Combat Control Team be reinserted to complete their task of coordinating the evacuation . At about 16 : 20 , Van Cleeff landed his aircraft on the runway and the Combat Control Team – led by Major John W. Gallagher – immediately disembarked from the aircraft . 
 After Gallagher 's team had returned to the Special Forces Camp , Van Cleeff waited on the runway for two minutes to extract the survivors , but when nobody appeared he pulled the throttle and took off . As soon as Van Cleeff 's aircraft was airborne , another C @-@ 130 pilot reported to General McLaughlin that the evacuation had been completed , and the facility could now be destroyed at will . Van Cleeff quickly notified all aircraft in the vicinity that he had just reinserted the CCT . Gallagher 's team searched the Special Forces compound , the Americal Division battalion command post , and the artillery compound , but everybody either had been evacuated or was dead . Additionally , Khâm Đức was in North Vietnamese hands , so Gallagher and the other two men ran to the ditch beside the runway , where they tried to make contact with the aircraft overhead , but the radio was disabled along with all other equipment . While waiting for a miracle , members of the CCT clashed with North Vietnamese troops who had set up a machine gun position beneath the wing of Delmore 's crashed C @-@ 130 , and successfully disabled their opponent 's weapon . 
 During the ordeal , several forward air @-@ controllers were sent out to make low passes over Khâm Đức , to locate the position of the CCT , but none were successful . Then , in response to a call for the nearest aircraft to land on the runway to search for the stranded members of the CCT , Lieutenant Colonel Alfred J. Jeanotte approached the airfield from the south and landed his C @-@ 123 on the runway with support from fighter @-@ bombers , which were used to suppress enemy fire . Not seeing the men , Jeanotte applied full power and took off to avoid taking hits from North Vietnamese anti @-@ aircraft fire . As the C @-@ 123 rolled past the CCT 's position , the three men came out of their position chasing the aircraft with their arms waving . Believing that the aircraft may have missed them , the three men ran back to the ditch on the left side of the runway . As the C @-@ 123 was airborne , Jeanotte banked his aircraft to the left , and that enabled the aircrew to see the three men running back towards the ditch . However , Jeanotte was deterred from making another attempt at landing , because of low fuel . The next C @-@ 123 in line , piloted by Lieutenant Colonel Joe M. Jackson , landed on the runway as fire swept through the Khâm Đức facility , and the aircrew were able to extract the stranded CCT under heavy fire , and they flew out to Đà Nẵng . By 17 : 00 , the evacuation was over . On 13 May , 60 B @-@ 52s bombed the Khâm Đức camp . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The battle for Khâm Đức and Ngok Tavak was considered a defeat for U.S. forces , described by one historian as " a Khe Sanh in reverse . " Unlike the previous fight at Khe Sanh , the application of American airpower " averted a massacre " but could not prevent the North Vietnamese from dominating the high ground surrounding Khâm Đức . General Creighton Abrams described the loss at Khâm Đức as a " minor disaster " . U.S. decisions at Khâm Đức may have been influenced at a higher command level by the events of Battle of Khe Sanh in 1968 , which were subjected to intense media comparison with the French defeat at Dien Bien Phu , and the clash of operational thinking between General Westmoreland and the senior USMC generals . If there was any lesson to be learned for General Westmoreland and other U.S. commanders , the battle of Khâm Đức showed that " air power was not a cure @-@ all " . The command and control system of the United States Air Force during the ordeal was imperfect , as demonstrated by the " blunders involving the combat control teams . " A final , notable outcome of Khâm Đức was that it closed the last Special Forces CIDG camp in the I Corps Tactical Zone in close proximity to the border with Laos . This made ground surveillance of the Ho Chi Minh Trail much more difficult , allowing North Vietnam to move supplies and develop new branches of the trail . Despite setbacks , the evacuation of the Khâm Đức Special Forces Camp strongly highlighted the morale , discipline and the motivation of the U.S. Air Force personnel who took part in the operation . From the very first day of the struggle at Khâm Đức , it was clear that ground units were not prepared for an emergency evacuation , due to the lack of experience in terms of integrating the numbers and types of aircraft in such a small geographical area . U.S. aircrews had to improvise by establishing their own procedures , in order to extract both military and civilian personnel from the besieged Special Forces Camp . Despite having lost two C @-@ 130 aircraft , U.S. pilots were undeterred from completing their mission , indeed , their bravery was exemplified by Lieutenant Colonel Joe M. Jackson , who received a Medal of Honor for the rescue of the three @-@ man Combat Control Team . 
 The U.S. Army lost one killed in action and 71 wounded at Khâm Đức and the U.S. Marines lost 12 marines killed in action and 21 wounded at Ngok Tavak . The combined services reported the highest number of missing in any battle in Vietnam , with 31 U.S. military personnel reported missing in action . Of the 31 MIA , 19 were from the 2 / 1st Infantry : of these 3 were rescued within 5 days , 1 was captured and kept as a POW until March 1973 , and 15 listed as KIA ( 9 recovered , 6 not recovered ) . The U.S. lost 9 aircraft : 7 within the vicinity of Khâm Đức and 2 helicopters in Ngok Tavak . The North Vietnamese , however , claimed to have killed about 300 American soldiers and captured 104 enemy troops , including two American advisors , as well as capturing vast quantities of weapons and ammunition that were left behind . For South Vietnam , several hundred South Vietnamese Special Forces and indigenous CIDG soldiers were believed to have been killed , as well as about 150 civilians who perished in Major Bucher 's crash . The total number of North Vietnamese casualties is unknown , but the United States military claimed to have killed roughly 345 enemy soldiers . 
 In July 1970 , troops from the 196th Infantry Brigade <unk> Khâm Đức as part of Operation Elk Canyon I and II to disrupt North Vietnamese logistics system in Quảng Tín Province and forestall a VPA offensive in the autumn and winter . While they occupied Khâm Đức U.S. forces conducted searches for the remains of the Americans MIA in the battle two years earlier . 
 In 1993 – 94 teams from the Joint POW / MIA Accounting Command located the Bucher crash site and recovered the remains of the six crewmen , the remains were buried together at Arlington National Cemetery in December 2008 . In 1998 , teams from the Joint Task Force @-@ Full Accounting ( later renamed Joint POW / MIA Accounting Command ) located the 12 ODA @-@ 105 Green Berets killed on Outpost 7 . All 12 Green Berets were returned to Fort Campbell for a ceremony and then buried at Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = White House Farm murders = 
 The White House Farm murders took place near the village of Tolleshunt D 'Arcy , Essex , England , during the night of 6 – 7 August 1985 . Nevill Bamber , a farmer and magistrate , and his wife , June , were shot and killed inside their farmhouse , along with their adoptive daughter , Sheila Caffell , and Sheila 's six @-@ year @-@ old twin sons . The only surviving member of the immediate family was Nevill and June 's adoptive son , Jeremy Bamber , then 24 years old , who said he had been at home a few miles away when the shooting took place . 
 The police at first believed that Sheila , diagnosed with schizophrenia , had fired the shots then turned the gun on herself . But weeks after the murders Jeremy Bamber 's ex @-@ girlfriend told police that he had implicated himself . The prosecution argued that , motivated by a large inheritance , Bamber had shot the family with his father 's semi @-@ automatic rifle , then placed the gun in his unstable sister 's hands to make the case appear as a murder – suicide . A silencer the prosecution said was on the rifle would have made it too long , they argued , for Sheila 's fingers to reach the trigger to shoot herself . Bamber was convicted in October 1986 by a 10 – 2 majority , and sentenced to a minimum of 25 years ' imprisonment . In 1994 , Bamber was informed that he would never be released from prison . 
 Bamber has protested his innocence throughout , although his extended family remain convinced of his guilt . Between 2004 and 2012 his lawyers submitted several unsuccessful applications to the Criminal Cases Review Commission . They argued that the silencer might not have been used during the killings ; that the crime scene may have been damaged then reconstructed ; that crime @-@ scene photographs were taken weeks after the murders ; and that the time of Sheila 's death was miscalculated . A key issue was whether Bamber received a call from his father that night to say Sheila had " gone berserk " with a gun . Bamber said that he did , that he alerted police , and that Sheila fired the final shot while he and the officers were standing outside the house . It became a central plank of the prosecution 's case that the father had made no such call , and that the only reason Bamber would have lied about it – indeed , the only way he could have known about the shootings when he alerted the police – was that he was the killer himself . 
 = = Bambers = = 
 = = = Nevill and June Bamber = = = 
 Ralph Nevill Bamber ( known as Nevill , born 8 June 1924 , 61 when he died ) , was a farmer , former RAF pilot , and a local magistrate at Witham Magistrates ' Court . He and his wife , June ( née Speakman , born 3 June 1924 , also 61 when she died ) , had married in 1949 and moved into the Georgian White House Farm on Pages Lane , Tolleshunt D 'Arcy , set among 300 acres of tenant farmland that had belonged to June 's father . Nevill was described in court as 6 ' 4 " tall and in good physical health , a point that became significant because Bamber 's defence was that Sheila , a slim woman of 28 , was able to beat and subdue her father , something the prosecution contested . 
 Unable to have biological children , the couple adopted Sheila and Jeremy as babies ; the children were not related to one another . The Bambers were wealthy and gave the children a good home and private education , but June was intensely religious and reportedly tried to force her children and grandchildren to adopt the same ideas . She had a poor relationship with Sheila , who felt June disapproved of her , and June 's relationship with Jeremy was so troubled that he had apparently stopped speaking to her . The court heard that Sheila 's ex @-@ husband was concerned about the effect June was having on his sons ; she apparently made them kneel and pray with her , which upset him . She suffered from depression and in 1982 was treated by the same psychiatrist who would later treat Sheila . 
 = = = Sheila Caffell = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 Sheila Jean Caffell ( born 18 July 1957 , 28 when she died ) was born to the daughter of a chaplain of the Archbishop of Canterbury and adopted by the Bambers when she was eight weeks old . She attended private schools , first Moira House in Eastbourne , Sussex , then Old Hall School in <unk> , Norfolk , followed by secretarial college in Swiss Cottage , London . 
 In 1974 , when she was 17 , Sheila discovered she was pregnant by her boyfriend , Colin Caffell ( later her husband ) ; the Bambers arranged an abortion . Her relationship with her adoptive mother deteriorated significantly that summer , when June found Sheila and Colin sunbathing naked in a field . June reportedly started calling Sheila the " devil 's daughter , " which the psychiatrist identified as the trigger for Sheila 's paranoid delusions about having been taken over by the devil . 
 Sheila continued with her secretarial course , then trained as a hairdresser , and briefly found work as a model with the Lucie Clayton agency , which included two months ' work in Tokyo . She and Colin married in May 1977 when Sheila was 19 . She suffered two more miscarriages , before giving birth to identical twins Nicholas and Daniel on 22 June , 1979 . The birth led to a deterioration in her mental health . She became increasingly erratic , throwing pots and pans at her husband , and once pushing her hands through a window , cutting herself . The couple separated just four months after the birth , and divorced in May 1982 . 
 After the breakdown of the marriage , Nevill bought Sheila a flat in Morshead Mansions , Maida Vale , London , and Colin continued to help raise the children from his home in nearby Kilburn . Sheila became friendly with a group of young women who nicknamed her " Bambi , " and who later told reporters that she was vulnerable and desperately insecure , often complaining about her poor relationship with her adoptive mother . One said there was a lot of partying and drugs , particularly cocaine , and older men who were interested in the women for all the wrong reasons . Sheila 's brief modelling career ended after the birth of the boys , and she lived on welfare or took low @-@ paying jobs , including as a waitress at School Dinners , a London restaurant in which a traditional British menu is served up by young women in stockings and suspenders . There were also cleaning jobs , and there was one episode of nude photography , much regretted . 
 = = = = Mental health = = = = 
 Sheila 's mental health continued to decline , with episodes of banging her head against walls and becoming agitated to the point where one of her boyfriends feared for his safety . She decided to trace her birth mother , then living in Canada , and with the help of social services they met at Heathrow Airport in 1982 for a brief reunion , but it seems the relationship did not develop . The boys were briefly placed in foster care in 1982 and 1983 , an arrangement that seemed to cause no problems . 
 In August 1983 , Sheila was referred by her family doctor to Dr. Hugh Ferguson , the psychiatrist who had earlier treated June . He said she was in an agitated , paranoid and psychotic state ; he admitted her to St Andrew 's Hospital in Northampton , where she was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder . 
 Ferguson wrote that Sheila believed the devil had given her the power to project evil onto others , and that she could make her sons have sex and cause violence with her . She called them the " devil 's children , " the phrase June had apparently used of Sheila , and said she believed she was capable of murdering them or of getting them to kill others . She spoke about suicide , though the court heard that Ferguson did not regard her as a suicide risk . She was discharged on 10 September 1983 . Ferguson continued treating her as an outpatient ; he diagnosed schizophrenia and prescribed <unk> , an antipsychotic drug . 
 In 1985 Sheila became more enthusiastic about religion , to the surprise of her friends who were apparently unaware that she came from a religious family . She was re @-@ admitted to St Andrew 's in March 1985 , five months before the murders , believing her boyfriend at the time to be the devil and herself to be in direct communication with God . She was discharged just under four weeks later , and as an outpatient received a monthly injection of haloperidol , an antipsychotic drug that has a sedative effect . 
 She went to stay at White House Farm to recuperate . It was obvious to her friends and family that her mental health was getting worse . Just before the murders , Colin complained that he was doing 95 percent of the work with the boys ; he drafted a letter to Sheila 's father in late March or early April 1985 , which was never sent , asking him to persuade Sheila to let the twins live with Colin most of the time . According to Bamber , the family discussed placing the boys in daytime foster care over dinner on the night of the murders , with little response from Sheila . 
 Despite Sheila 's erratic mental state , her psychiatrist told the court that the kind of violence necessary to commit the murders was not consistent with his view of her . In particular , he said he did not believe she would have killed her father or children , because her difficult relationship was confined to her mother . Her ex @-@ husband said the same : that , despite her tendency to throw things and sometimes hit him , she had never harmed the children . June Bamber 's sister , Pamela Boutflour , testified that Sheila was not a violent person and that she had never known Sheila to use a gun ; June 's niece , Ann Eaton , told the court that Sheila did not know how to use one . Bamber disputed this , telling police on the night of the shooting , as they stood outside the house , that he and Sheila had gone target shooting together . He acknowledged later that he had not seen her fire a gun as an adult . 
 = = = Jeremy Bamber = = = 
 Jeremy Nevill Bamber ( born 13 January 1961 ) is the son of a vicar 's daughter who , after an affair with a married army sergeant , gave her baby to the Church of England Children 's Society when he was six weeks old . His biological parents later married each other and had other children . They were working at Buckingham Palace when Bamber was convicted , reportedly unaware that he was their son until reporters informed them . 
 Nevill and June adopted Bamber when he was six months old . They sent him to private schools , first to Maldon Court , a preparatory school , then to Gresham 's School , a boarding school in Holt , Norfolk . He left Gresham 's with no qualifications , but attended sixth @-@ form college and in 1978 passed seven O @-@ levels . Nevill paid for him to visit Australia , where Bamber took a scuba diving course , then New Zealand . Former friends alleged that he had broken into a jeweller 's shop while in New Zealand and had stolen an expensive watch , and had also boasted , they said , of being involved in smuggling heroin . 
 He returned to England to work on his adoptive parents ' farm for £ 170 a week , and set up home rent @-@ free in a cottage Nevill owned at 9 Head Street , <unk> ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 0 @.@ <unk> ° E ) . The cottage lay 3 – 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) from the farmhouse ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° N 0 @.@ 8032 ° E ) , a five @-@ minute drive by car and at least 15 minutes by bicycle . His father also gave him a car to use , and eight percent of a family company , Osea Road Camp Sites Ltd , which ran a caravan site . 
 To Bamber 's supporters , who over the years have included several MPs and journalists , he is the victim of Britain 's most serious miscarriage of justice . The Guardian took up his case at one point ; two Guardian journalists who interviewed him in 2011 called him " clever and strategic . " They wrote that there was something about him that made the public unsympathetic toward him : he was " handsome in a rather cruel , caddish way – he seemed to exude arrogance and indifference . ... Like <unk> in the Camus novel L <unk> , he did not seem to display the appropriate emotions . " 
 His detractors , a group that includes his extended family , see him as a psychopath , and regard his long fight to have the conviction declared unsafe as part of the clinical picture . His father 's secretary , Barbara Wilson , told a documentary in November 2013 that Bamber used to provoke his parents , riding in circles around his mother on a bicycle , wearing make @-@ up in public to upset his father , and allegedly once hiding a bag of live rats in his mother 's car . She said that Bamber 's father did not trust him , and that whenever Bamber visited the farmhouse there were arguments . She also said tension had increased in the weeks before the murders , and that Bamber 's father had said something to her about foreseeing a " shooting accident . " Bamber underwent several assessments in prison , and according to the Guardian no indication of mental illness or psychopathy was found . He also passed a lie detector test in 2007 . 
 = = = Extended family , inheritance = = = 
 The financial ties and inheritance issues within the immediate and extended family added a layer of complexity to the case . The prosecution argued that Bamber had killed his family to inherit £ 436 @,@ 000 , the farmhouse where the murders took place , 300 acres ( 1 @.@ 2 km2 ) of land , and the caravan site in Maldon . Because of his conviction , the estate passed instead to the cousins who had found the silencer in the gun cupboard after the murders , with the flecks of blood and paint that proved pivotal to the prosecution 's case . 
 After Bamber 's conviction , one cousin on his mother 's side moved into White House Farm , and that cousin and several others acquired ownership of the caravan site . Bamber argues that they set him up , a claim another cousin dismissed in 2010 as " an absolute load of piffle . " Bamber has launched two legal actions to secure a share of the estate , which the cousins said in 2004 were part of an attempt to harass and vilify them . 
 = = Murder weapon = = 
 Nevill kept several guns at the farm . He was reportedly careful with them , cleaning them after use and securing them . The murder weapon was a .22 Anschütz semi @-@ automatic rifle , model 525 , which Nevill purchased on 30 November 1984 , along with a Parker Hale sound moderator ( a " suppressor " ) , telescopic sights , and 500 rounds of ammunition . The rifle used cartridges , which were loaded into a magazine that had a ten round capacity . Twenty @-@ five shots were fired during the killing , so assuming it was fully loaded to begin with , it would have been reloaded at least twice . The court heard that the gun became progressively harder to load as the number of cartridges increased ; loading the tenth was described as exceptionally hard . 
 The rifle had normally been used , with the silencer and telescopic sights attached , to shoot rabbits . The court heard that a screwdriver was needed to remove the sights , but they were usually left in place because it was time @-@ consuming to realign them . Nevill 's nephew , Anthony <unk> , visited the farmhouse around 26 July 1985 , and told the court that he had seen the rifle , with the sights and suppressor attached , in the gun cupboard in the ground @-@ floor office . Bamber testified that he had visited the farmhouse on the evening of 6 August , hours before the murders , and that he had loaded the gun , thinking he heard rabbits outside , then left it with a full magazine and a box of ammunition on the kitchen table . 
 = = White House Farm , 6 – 7 August 1985 = = 
 = = = Sheila 's visit = = = 
 On 4 August 1985 , three days before the murders , Sheila and the boys arrived at her parents ' home at White House Farm to spend the week with them . The housekeeper saw her that day and noticed nothing unusual . Sheila was seen the next day with her children by two farm workers , Julie and Leonard Foakes , who said she seemed happy . One of the crime @-@ scene photographs shows that someone , possibly Sheila , had carved " I hate this place " into the cupboard doors of the bedroom the twins were sleeping in . 
 Bamber visited the farm on the evening of Tuesday , 6 August . He told the court that his parents suggested to Sheila that evening that the boys be placed in day @-@ time foster care with a local family , because of her mental @-@ health problems . Bamber said Sheila did not seem bothered by the suggestion and had simply said she would rather stay in London . The boys had been in foster care before , although in London rather than near White House Farm , and it had not appeared to cause a problem for Sheila . Her psychiatrist , Dr. Ferguson , told the Court of Appeal in 2002 that any suggestion that the children be removed from her care would have provoked a strong reaction from Sheila , but that she might have welcomed daytime help . 
 Barbara Wilson , the farm 's secretary , telephoned the farmhouse at 9 @.@ 30 pm that evening and spoke to Nevill . She said he was short with her , and Wilson was left with the impression that she had interrupted an argument . June Bamber 's sister , Pamela Boutflour , also telephoned that evening at about 10 pm . She spoke to Sheila , who she said was quiet , then to June , who seemed normal . 
 = = = Telephone calls = = = 
 There was one telephone line and normally four telephones at the farm . There was a cordless phone with a memory @-@ recall feature in the kitchen ; a beige digital phone , also kept in the kitchen ; a blue digital phone in the first @-@ floor office ; and a cream rotary phone ( dial phone ) in the main bedroom . The cordless phone had been sent away for repair on 5 August , so on the night of the murders there were three phones in the house . 
 The rotary phone that was normally in the main bedroom had been moved into the kitchen where the beige digital phone normally sat . Police found the latter under a pile of magazines . They found the rotary phone in the kitchen with its receiver off the hook . The implication was that someone – Nevill , according to Bamber – had been interrupted mid @-@ call . 
 A central issue is whether Nevill telephoned Bamber before the murders to say that Sheila had gone crazy with a gun . Bamber said he did receive such a call , and that the line went dead in the middle of it , which was consistent with the phone being found off the hook . The prosecution said that he had not received such a call , and that his claim to have done so was part of his setting the scene to blame Sheila ; it was Bamber himself , they said , who had left the phone off the hook . This was one of three key points the jury was asked to consider by the trial judge during his summing up . In 2010 Bamber 's lawyers highlighted two police phone logs ( below ) in support of Bamber 's application to have his case referred back to the Court of Appeal . The question was whether these logs described one call to the police , from Bamber alone , or two calls , one from Bamber and another from his father . 
 = = = = Telephone log 1 = = = = 
 A police log timed at 3 : 26 am on 7 August 1985 ( see right ) was entered as evidence at the trial but not shown to the jury . It discusses a telephone call made that night to a local police station . According to the prosecution , the log discusses a call known to have been made by Bamber . According to Bamber 's defence team , it may show that a separate call was made by Nevill . 
 The log is headed " Daughter gone berserk " : " Mr Bamber , White House Farm , Tolleshunt d ’ Arcy – daughter Sheila Bamber , aged 26 years , has got hold of one of my guns . " It adds : " Message passed to CD by the son of Mr Bamber after phone went dead . " It goes on to say : " Mr Bamber has a collection of shotguns and <unk> , " and it includes the telephone number <unk> , the number at the time for White House Farm . The final entry says : " <unk> GPO [ the telephone operator ] have checked phone line to farmhouse and confirm phone left off hook . " The log shows that a patrol car , Charlie Alpha 7 ( <unk> ) , was sent to the scene at 3 @.@ 35 am . 
 = = = = Telephone log 2 = = = = 
 A different police log shows that , at 3 @.@ 36 am , Bamber rang Chelmsford Police Station using a direct line , rather than the emergency number ( 999 ) , and spoke to PC West . The court accepted that the officer who recorded the log misread a digital clock , and that the call had probably come in at around 3 : 26 am , around the time of the call mentioned in the first log . 
 Bamber said : " You 've got to help me . My father has just rung me and said , ' Please come over . Your sister has gone crazy and has got the gun . ' Then the line went dead . " Bamber said he had tried to ring his father back , but there was no reply . The log continues : " Father Mr. Bamber , White House Farm , Tolleshunt D 'Arcy ... Sister Sheila Bamber age 27 . Has history of mental illness . ... Dispatched <unk> [ Charlie Alpha 5 ] to scene ... Informant requested to attend scene . " 
 = = = = Police response = = = = 
 PC West contacted civilian dispatcher Malcolm Bonnet at the Chelmsford HQ Information Room using a radio link ; this conversation was recorded as having taken place at 3 @.@ 26 am . PC West then spoke to Bamber again , who apparently complained about the time the police response was taking , and said : " When my father rang he sounded terrified . " He was told to go to the farm and wait for the police . At 3 @.@ 35 am Bonnet sent a police car to White House Farm . A telephone operator checked the line to the farm at 03 : 56 , according to a police log , or at 04 : 30 , according to the Court of Appeal . The phone was off the hook , the line was open and a dog could be heard barking . 
 Explaining why he had called a local police station and not 999 , Bamber told police that night that he had not thought it would make a difference in terms of how fast they arrived . He said he had spent time looking up the number , and even though his father had asked him to come quickly , he had first telephoned his girlfriend , Julie Mugford , in London , then had driven slowly to the farmhouse . He also said he could have called one of the farm workers , but had not at the time considered it . In his early witness statements , Bamber said he had telephoned the police immediately after receiving his father 's call , then telephoned Mugford . During later police interviews , he said he had called Mugford first . He said he was confused about the sequence of events . 
 = = = Scene outside = = = 
 After the telephone calls , Bamber made his way to the farmhouse , as did PS <unk> , PC Myall and PC Saxby from Witham Police Station , passing Bamber in their car on the way there . They told the court that , in their view , he was driving much slower than them . Bamber 's cousin , Ann Eaton , testified that Bamber was normally a fast driver . 
 Bamber arrived at the farmhouse one or two minutes after the police . They waited for a tactical firearms group to arrive , which turned up at 5 am . Police determined that all the doors and windows to the house were shut , except for the window in the main bedroom on the first floor . They decided to wait until daylight . They eventually entered at 7 : 54 am through the back door , which had been locked from the inside . The only sound they reported from the house was a dog barking . 
 While waiting outside , the police questioned Bamber , who they said seemed calm . He told them about the phone call from his father , and that it sounded as though someone had cut him off . He said he did not get along with his sister . When asked whether she might have gone berserk with the gun , the police said he replied : " I don 't really know . She is a nutter . She 's been having treatment . " The police asked why Nevill would have called Bamber and not the police . Bamber replied that his father was the sort of person who might want to keep things within the family . 
 Bamber told the police that Sheila was familiar with guns and that they had gone target shooting together . He said he had been at the farmhouse himself a few hours earlier , and that he had loaded the rifle because he thought he had heard rabbits outside . He had left it on the kitchen table fully loaded , with a box of ammunition nearby . After the bodies were discovered , a doctor , Dr. Craig , was called to the house to certify the deaths , which he testified could have occurred at any time during the night . He said Bamber appeared to be in a state of shock ; he broke down , cried and seemed to vomit . The doctor said Bamber told him at that point about the discussion the family had had about possibly having Sheila 's sons placed in foster care . 
 = = = Inside farmhouse = = = 
 = = = = Nevill = = = = 
 When police entered the house , they found five bodies with multiple gunshot wounds . Twenty @-@ five shots had been fired , mostly at close range . Nevill was found downstairs in the kitchen , dressed in pyjamas , lying over an overturned chair next to the fireplace , amid a scene suggestive of a struggle . A telephone was lying on one of the kitchen surfaces with its receiver off the hook , next to several .22 shells . The police said chairs and stools were overturned , and there was broken crockery , a broken sugar basin , and what looked like blood on the floor . A ceiling light lampshade had been broken . 
 Nevill had been shot eight times , six times to the head and face , fired when the rifle was a few inches from his skin . The remaining shots to his body had occurred from at least two feet away . Based on where the empty cartridges were found – three were in the kitchen and one on the stairs – the police concluded he had been shot four times upstairs , but had managed to get downstairs where a struggle took place , during which he was hit several times with the rifle and shot again , this time fatally . 
 There were two wounds to his right side , and two to the top of his head , which would probably have resulted in unconsciousness . The left side of his lip was wounded , his jaw was fractured , and his teeth , neck and larynx were damaged . The pathologist said he would have had difficulty speaking . There were gunshot wounds to his left shoulder and left elbow . He also had black eyes , a broken nose , bruising to the cheeks , cuts on the head , bruising to the right forearm , and circular burn @-@ type marks on his back , consistent with his having been hit with the rifle . One of the pillars of the prosecution case was that Sheila would not have been strong enough to inflict this beating on Nevill , who was 6 ft 4 in ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) tall and by all accounts in good health . 
 = = = = June = = = = 
 The court heard that the other four bodies were found upstairs . June 's body was heavily bloodstained . She was found lying on the floor in the master bedroom by the doorway , bare @-@ footed and wearing her nightdress . She had been shot seven times ; one shot to her forehead between her eyes , and another to the right side of her head , would have caused her death quickly . There were also shots to the right side of her lower neck , her right forearm , and two injuries on the right side of her chest and her right knee . The police believed she had been sitting up during part of the attack , based on the pattern of blood on her clothing . Five of the shots occurred when the gun was at least a foot from her body . The shot between her eyes was from less than one foot . 
 = = = = Daniel and Nicholas = = = = 
 The boys were found in their beds , shot through the head . They appeared to have been shot while in bed . Daniel had been shot five times in the back of the head , four times with the gun held within one foot of his head , and once from over two feet away . Nicholas had been shot three times , all contact or close @-@ proximity shots . 
 = = = = Sheila = = = = 
 The court heard that Sheila was found on the floor of the master bedroom with her mother . She was in her nightdress and bare @-@ footed , with two bullet wounds under her chin , one on her throat . The pathologist , Dr. Peter Vanezis , said that the lower of the injuries had occurred from three inches ( 76 mm ) away , and that the higher one was a contact injury . The higher of the two would have killed her immediately . The lower injury would have killed her too , he said , but not necessarily straightaway . Vanezis testified that it would be possible for a person with such an injury to stand up and walk around , but the lack of blood on her nightdress suggested to him that she had not done this . He believed that the lower of her injuries had happened first , because it had caused bleeding inside the neck ; the court heard that if the immediately fatal wound had happened first , the bleeding would not have occurred to the same extent . <unk> said that the pattern of blood stains on her nightdress suggested she had been sitting up when she received both injuries . 
 There were no marks on her body suggestive of a struggle . The firearms officer who first saw her said her feet and hands were clean , her fingernails manicured and not broken , and her fingertips free of blood , dirt or powder . There was no trace of lead dust . The rifle magazine would have been loaded at least twice during the killings ; this would usually leave lubricant and material from the bullets on the hands . A scenes @-@ of @-@ crimes officer , DC Hammersley , said there were blood stains on the back of her right hand , but that otherwise her hands were clean . 
 There was no blood on her feet or other debris , such as the sugar that was on the downstairs floor . Low traces of lead were found on her hands and forehead at postmortem , but the levels were consistent with the everyday handling of things around the house . A scientist , Mr Elliott , testified that if she had loaded 18 cartridges into a magazine he would expect to see more lead on her hands . The blood on her nightdress was consistent with her own , and no trace of firearm @-@ discharge residue was on it . Blood and urine samples indicated that she had taken the anti @-@ psychotic drug haloperidol , and several days earlier had used cannabis . 
 The rifle , without the suppressor or sights attached , was lying on her body pointing up at her neck . June 's Bible lay on the floor to the right of Sheila . It was normally kept in a bedside cupboard . June 's fingerprints were on it , as were others that could not be identified , including one made by a child . 
 = = Police investigation = = 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Journalist David Connett , who attended the trial , writes that it was by common consent a poor investigation . The trial judge , Mr Justice Drake , expressed concern about what he called a " less than thorough investigation . " Claire Powell wrote that " doing a Bamber " briefly became police slang for making a mess of a case . 
 According to Connett , the officer in charge , DCI " Taff " Jones , deputy head of CID , was told that it was a " domestic , " and went off to play golf . Jones became so convinced of the murder – suicide theory that he ordered Bamber 's cousins out of his office when they asked him to consider whether Bamber had set the whole thing up . Evidence was not recorded or preserved , and three days after the killings the police burned bloodstained bedding and a carpet , apparently to spare Bamber 's feelings . The inquest opened on 14 August 1985 , and the police gave evidence that it was a murder – suicide . 
 The scenes @-@ of @-@ crime officer did not find the silencer in the cupboard . It was found by one of Bamber 's cousins days later , and it took the police three days to collect it from them . The same officer moved the rifle without wearing gloves , and it was not examined for fingerprints until weeks later . The Bible found with Sheila was not examined at all . Connett writes that a hacksaw blade that might have been used to gain entry to the house lay in the garden for months . Officers did not take contemporaneous notes ; those who had dealt with Bamber wrote down their statements weeks later . Bamber 's clothes were not examined until one month later . The bodies were cremated . Ten years later all blood samples were destroyed . 
 Unlike DCI Jones , his junior officers were suspicious of Bamber , and when Jones was removed from the case , they began to look more closely at him . ( Jones died before the case came to court after falling from a ladder at his home . ) Bamber 's behaviour after the funeral increased suspicion that he had been involved . The Times reported that , immediately after the bodies were found , he broke down and was offered tea and whisky by police , and apparently managed to persuade them to burn bedding and carpets inside the house . He wept openly at the funerals , supported by his girlfriend , Julie Mugford , after which he flew to Amsterdam , where he apparently tried to buy a consignment of drugs and offered to sell nude photographs of Sheila to tabloid newspapers . He also invited friends to expensive champagne @-@ and @-@ lobster dinners . His behaviour served to draw police attention to him . 
 = = = Fingerprints on rifle = = = 
 A print from Sheila 's right ring finger was found on the right side of the butt , pointing downwards . A print from Bamber 's right forefinger was on the breech ( rear ) end of the barrel , above the stock and pointing across the gun . He said he had used the gun to shoot rabbits . There were three further prints of insufficient detail to be identified . 
 = = = Silencer = = = 
 On the day of the murders , the police searched the gun cupboard in the ground @-@ floor office , but did not examine it closely or search for the silencer or sights for the rifle . Three days later , members of Bamber 's extended family visited the farm with Basil Cock , the estate 's executor . During that visit one of Bamber 's cousins , David Boutflour , found the silencer and sights in the cupboard . The court heard that several people had witnessed this discovery : Boutflour 's father and sister ; the farm secretary ; and Basil Cock . The family took the silencer to Boutflour 's sister 's home to examine it . They said they found the surface of it had been damaged and that there seemed to be red paint and blood on it . They told the police about their find , and the police collected the silencer from them on 12 August , five days after the murders . At that point the police reportedly noticed an inch @-@ long grey hair attached to the silencer , but this was lost before the silencer arrived at the Forensic Science Service at Huntingdon . 
 The family returned to the farmhouse to search for the source of the red paint , and found what they said was recent damage to the underside of the red @-@ painted mantelpiece above the Aga cooker in the kitchen . A scenes @-@ of @-@ crime officer , DI Cook , took a paint sample from the mantelpiece on 14 August , and it contained the same 15 layers of paint and varnish that were in the paint flake on the silencer . On 1 October casts were taken of the marks on the mantel , and the marks were deemed consistent with the silencer having come into contact with the mantelpiece more than once . In February 2010 Bamber 's legal team submitted evidence that they said showed the marks had been created after the crime @-@ scene photographs were taken ( see below ) . 
 A scientist at the Forensic Science Laboratory , Mr. Hayward , found blood on the inside and outside surface of the silencer , the latter not enough to permit analysis . The blood inside was found to be the same blood group as Sheila 's , although it might have been a mixture of Nevill 's and June 's . A firearms expert , a Mr. Fletcher , said the blood was <unk> , caused by a close @-@ contact shooting . Tests at the lab indicated that it would have been physically impossible for Sheila to have reached the trigger to shoot herself with the silencer attached . 
 = = = Julie Mugford 's allegations = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 A month after the murders Bamber 's girlfriend , Julie Mugford , changed her statement , as a result of which Bamber was arrested . He and Mugford had started dating in 1983 when she was a 19 @-@ year @-@ old student at Goldsmith 's College in London ; she was still studying there when the killings occurred . Mugford admitted to a brief background of dishonesty . She had been cautioned in 1985 for using a friend 's <unk> to obtain goods worth around £ 700 , after it had been reported stolen ; she said she and the friend had repaid the money to the bank . She also acknowledged having helped Bamber in March or April 1985 to steal just under £ 1 @,@ 000 from the office of the Osea Road caravan site his family owned ; she said he had staged a break @-@ in to make it appear that strangers were responsible . The admission added to the picture of her own and Bamber 's lack of credibility . 
 As part of their submission to the Criminal Cases Review Commission in 2012 , Bamber 's lawyers found a letter dated 26 September 1985 showing that the assistant director of public prosecutions who prepared the case against Bamber had suggested that Mugford not be prosecuted for the burglary , the cheque fraud , and for a further offence of selling cannabis . She subsequently testified against Bamber during his trial in October 1986 . The judge told the jury that they could convict Bamber on Mugford 's testimony alone . 
 = = = = Statements to police = = = = 
 Mugford was at first supportive of Bamber after the murders ; newspaper photographs of the funeral show him weeping and hanging onto her arm . On the day after the killings , she told police that she had received a telephone call from him at about 3 : 30 am on 7 August , shortly after the murders , during which he sounded worried and said , " There 's something wrong at home . " She said she had been tired and had not asked what it was . 
 Her position toward Bamber changed on 3 September 1985 , after they rowed about his involvement with another woman . She threw something at him , slapped him , and he twisted her arm up her back . She went to the police four days later and changed her statement . In the second statement she said he had talked disparagingly about his " old " father , his " mad " mother , his sister who he said had nothing to live for , and the twins who he said were disturbed . Bamber denied having said these things and argued that Mugford was motivated by jealousy , but other witnesses offered similar testimony . Mugford 's mother said Bamber had told her he hated his adoptive mother , and that he had described her as mad . A friend of Mugford 's testified that Bamber had said around February 1985 that his parents kept him short of money , his mother was a religious freak , and " I fucking hate my parents . " A farm worker testified that Bamber seemed not to get on with Sheila and had once said : " I 'm not going to share my money with my sister . " 
 In discussions Mugford said she had dismissed as fantasies , she alleged that Bamber had said he wanted to sedate his parents and set fire to the farmhouse . He reportedly said Sheila would make a good scapegoat . Mugford alleged he had discussed entering the house through the kitchen window because the catch was broken , and leaving it via a different window that latched when it was shut from the outside . 
 She said she had spent the weekend before the murders with him in his cottage in <unk> , where he had dyed his hair black . She also said that she had seen his mother 's bicycle there . This was significant because the prosecution alleged that he had used the bicycle to cycle between his cottage and the farmhouse on the night of the murders . She told police Bamber had telephoned her at 9 : 50 pm on 6 August to say he had been thinking about the crime all day , was pissed off , and that it was " tonight or never . " A few hours later , at 3 : 00 – 3 : 30 am on 7 August , she said he phoned her again to say : " Everything is going well . Something is wrong at the farm . I haven 't had any sleep all night ... bye honey and I love you lots . " Her flatmates ' evidence suggested that call had come through closer to 3 am . He called her later during the morning of 7 August to tell her that Sheila had gone mad , and that a police car was coming to pick her up and bring her to the farmhouse . When she arrived there , she said he had pulled her to one side and said : " I should have been an actor . " 
 Later that evening , on 7 August , she asked Bamber whether he had done it . He said no , but that a friend of his had , whom he named ; the man was a plumber the family had used in the past . Bamber allegedly said he had told this friend how he could enter and leave the farmhouse undetected , and that one of his instructions had been for the friend to telephone him from the farm on one of the phones in the house that had a memory redial facility , so that if the police checked it , it would give him an alibi . Everything had gone as planned , he said , except that Nevill had put up a fight , and the friend had become angry and shot him seven times . The friend had allegedly told Sheila to lie down and shoot herself last , Bamber said . The friend then placed the Bible on her chest so she appeared to have killed herself in a religious frenzy . The children were shot in their sleep , he said . Mugford said Bamber claimed to have paid the friend £ 2 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Bamber 's arrest = = = 
 As a result of Mugford 's statement Bamber was arrested on 8 September 1985 , as was the friend Mugford said he had implicated , although the latter had a solid alibi and was released . Bamber told police Mugford was lying because he had jilted her . He said he loved his parents and sister , and denied that they had kept him short of money ; he said the only reason he had broken into the caravan site with Mugford was to prove that security was poor . He said he had occasionally gained entry to the farmhouse through a downstairs windows , and had used a knife to move the catches from the outside . He also said he had seen his parents ' wills , and that they had left the estate to be shared between him and Sheila . As for the rifle , he told police the gun was used mostly with the silencer off because it would otherwise not fit in its case . 
 He was bailed from the police station on 13 September , after which he went on holiday to Saint @-@ Tropez . Before leaving England , he returned to the farmhouse , gaining entry by the downstairs bathroom window . He said he did this because he had left his keys in London and needed some papers from the house for the trip to France ; he entered through the window rather than borrow keys from the farm 's housekeeper who lived nearby . When he returned to England on 29 September , he was re @-@ arrested and charged with the murders . 
 = = Trial , October 1986 = = 
 Bamber was tried in October 1986 before Mr Justice Drake and a jury at Chelmsford Crown Court , during a trial that lasted 19 days . The prosecution was led by Anthony <unk> QC , and the defence by Geoffrey <unk> QC , supported by Ed Lawson , QC . The Times wrote that Bamber cut an arrogant figure in the witness box . At one point when prosecutors accused him of lying , he replied : " That is what you have got to establish . " 
 = = = Prosecution case = = = 
 The prosecution case was that Bamber had been motivated by hatred and greed . They argued that he had left the farm around 10 pm on 6 August 1985 , and returned by bicycle in the early hours of the morning , using a route that avoided the main roads . He had entered the house through a downstairs bathroom window , taken the rifle with the silencer attached , and gone upstairs . 
 He had shot June in her bed , but she had managed to get up and walk a few steps before collapsing and dying . He had shot Nevill in the bedroom too , but Nevill was able to get downstairs where he and Bamber had fought in the kitchen , before Bamber shot him several times in the head . He had shot Sheila in the main bedroom , and had shot the children in their beds , in their own bedroom , as they slept . 
 They argued that Bamber had then set about arranging the scene to make it appear that Sheila was the killer . He had discovered that she could not have reached the trigger with the silencer attached , so he had removed it and placed it in the cupboard , then placed a Bible next to her body to introduce a religious theme . He had removed the kitchen phone from its hook , left the house via a kitchen window , and banged it from the outside so that the catch dropped back into position . He had then cycled home . Shortly after 3 am , he had telephoned Mugford , then the police at 3 : 26 am to say he had just received a frantic call from his father . To create a delay before the bodies were discovered , he had not called 999 , had driven slowly to the farmhouse , and had told police that his sister was familiar with guns , so that they would be reluctant to enter . 
 The prosecution argued that Bamber had not received a call from his father , that Nevill was too badly injured after the first shots to have spoken to anyone , that there was no blood on the kitchen phone that had been left dangling , and that Nevill would have called the police before calling Bamber . The prosecution position was that , if the call to Bamber really had been the last thing the father had done before shots were fired , and if he thereafter dropped the receiver , the line to Bamber 's home would have remained open for one to two minutes , and Bamber would not have been able to telephone the police immediately to let them know about his father 's call , as he said he had . That the line would not have cleared in time for him to call the police is one of several disputed points . 
 The silencer played a central role . It was deemed to have been on the rifle when it was fired , because of the blood found inside it . The prosecution said the blood had come from Sheila 's head , when the silencer was pointed at her . Expert evidence was submitted that , given her injuries after the first shot , Sheila could not have shot herself , placed the silencer in the downstairs cupboard , then run back upstairs to where her body was found . There was also expert testimony that there were no traces of gun oil on her nightdress , despite 25 shots having been fired and the gun having been reloaded at least twice . 
 Prosecutors argued that , had Sheila killed her family then discovered she could not commit suicide with the silencer fitted , it would have been found next to her ; there was no reason for her to have returned it to the gun cupboard . That she had carried out the killings was further discounted because , it was argued , she was mentally well at the time , had no interest in or knowledge of guns , lacked the strength to overcome her father , and there was no evidence on her clothes or body that she had moved around the crime scene or been involved in a struggle . 
 = = = Defence case = = = 
 The defence maintained that the witnesses who said Bamber disliked his family were lying or had misinterpreted his words . Mugford had further lied about Bamber 's confession , they said , because he had betrayed her , and she wanted to stop him from being with anyone else . No one had seen him cycle to and from the farm . There were no marks on him on the night that suggested he had been in a fight , and no blood @-@ stained clothing of his was recovered . The reason he had not gone to the farm as quickly as he should have when his father telephoned was that he was afraid . 
 They argued that Sheila was the killer , and that she did know how to handle guns , because she had been raised on a farm and had attended shoots when she was younger . She had a very serious mental illness , had said she felt she was capable of killing her children , and the loaded rifle had been left on the kitchen table by Bamber . There had been a recent family argument about placing the children in foster care . 
 The defence also argued that people who have carried out so @-@ called " altruistic " killings have been known to engage in ritualistic behaviour before killing themselves , and that Sheila might have placed the silencer in the cupboard , changed her clothes and washed herself , which would explain why there was little lead on her hands , or sugar from the floor on her feet . There was also a possibility that the blood in the silencer was not hers , the defence said , but was a mixture of Nevill 's and June 's . 
 = = = Summing up , verdict = = = 
 The judge said there were three crucial points , in no particular order . Did the jury believe Julie Mugford or Jeremy Bamber ? Were they sure that Sheila was not the killer who then committed suicide ? He said this question involved another : was the second , fatal , shot fired at Sheila with the silencer on ? If yes , she could not have fired it . Finally , did Nevill call Bamber in the middle of the night ? If there was no such call , it undermined the entirety of Bamber 's story , and the only reason he would have had to invent the phone call was that he was responsible for the murders . The jury found Bamber guilty on 28 October 1986 by a majority of ten to two ; had one more juror supported him , he would not have been convicted . The judge told him he was " evil , almost beyond belief " and sentenced him to five life terms , with a recommendation that he serve at least 25 years . 
 = = Appeals = = 
 = = = Leave to appeal refused , 1989 , 1994 = = = 
 Bamber first sought leave to appeal in November 1986 , arguing that the judge had misdirected the jury . The application was heard and refused by a single judge in April 1988 . Bamber 's lawyer requested a full hearing before three judges , arguing that the trial judge 's summing up had been biased against Bamber , that his language had been too forceful , and that he had undermined the defence by advancing his own theory . The lawyer also argued that the defence had not pressed Julie Mugford about her dealings with the media , but should have , because as soon as the trial was over her story began to appear in newspapers . The judges rejected the application in March 1989 . 
 Because the trial judge had criticized the police investigation , Essex Police held an internal inquiry , conducted by Detective Chief Superintendent Dickinson . Bamber alleged this report confirmed that evidence had been withheld by the police , so he made a formal complaint , which was investigated in 1991 by the City of London Police . This process uncovered more documentation , which Bamber used to petition the Home Secretary in September 1993 for a referral back to the Court of Appeal , refused in July 1994 . 
 During this process , the Home Office declined to give Bamber the expert evidence it had obtained , so Bamber applied for judicial review of that decision in November 1994 ; this resulted in the Home Office handing over its expert evidence . In February 1996 the Essex police destroyed many of the original trial exhibits without informing Bamber or his lawyers . The officer responsible said he had not been aware that the case was on @-@ going . 
 = = = Court of Appeal , 2002 = = = 
 The Criminal Cases Review Commission ( CCRC ) was established in April 1997 to review allegations of miscarriage of justice , and Bamber 's case was passed to them at that time . The CCRC referred the case to the Court of Appeal in March 2001 on the grounds that new DNA testing on the silencer constituted fresh evidence . 
 The appeal was heard by Lord Justice Kay , Mr Justice Wright , and Mr Justice Henriques from 17 October to 1 November 2002 , and the decision published on 12 December . The prosecution was represented by Victor Temple QC , and Bamber by Michael Turner QC . Bamber brought 16 issues to the attention of the court , 14 about failure to disclose evidence or the fabrication of evidence , and two ( points 14 and 15 ) related to the silencer and DNA testing . Point 11 was withdrawn by the defence . 
 Although most of the issues were reviewed by the court , the reason for the referral was point 15 , the discovery of DNA on the silencer , the result of a test not available in 1986 . The silencer evidence during the original trial came from a Mr. Hayward of the Forensic Science Laboratory . He had found human blood inside the silencer , and had stated that its blood group was consistent with it having come from Sheila . He said there was a remote possibility that it was a mixture of blood from Nevill and June . 
 Mark Webster , an expert instructed by Bamber 's defence team , argued that Hayward 's tests had been inadequate , and that there was a real possibility , not a remote one , that the blood had come from Nevill and June . This was a critical point , because the prosecution case rested on the silencer having been on the gun when Sheila was shot , something she could not have done herself because of the length of her arms . If she was shot with the silencer on the gun , it meant that someone else had shot her . If her blood was inside the silencer it supported the prosecution 's position , but if the blood belonged to someone else , that part of the prosecution case collapsed . 
 The defence argued that new tests comparing DNA in the silencer to a sample from Sheila 's biological mother suggested that the " major component " of the DNA in the silencer had not come from Sheila . A DNA sample from June 's sister suggested that the major component had come from June , they argued . 
 The court concluded that June 's DNA was in the silencer , that Sheila 's DNA may have been in the silencer , and that there was evidence of DNA from at least one male . The judges ' conclusion was that the results were complex , incomplete , and also meaningless because they did not establish how June 's DNA came to be in the silencer years after the trial , did not establish that Sheila 's was not in it , and did not lead to a conclusion that Bamber 's conviction was unsafe . In a 522 @-@ point judgment dismissing the appeal , the judges said that there was no conduct on the part of the police or prosecution that would have adversely affected the jury 's verdict , and that the more they examined the details of the case , the more they thought the jury had been right . 
 = = = Against whole @-@ life tariff = = = 
 The trial judge recommended a minimum term of 25 years , but in December 1994 Home Secretary Michael Howard ruled that Bamber should remain in prison for the rest of his life . In May 2008 Bamber lost a High Court appeal against the whole @-@ life tariff before Mr. Justice <unk> . This was upheld by the Appeal Court in May 2009 . 
 Bamber and three other British whole @-@ life prisoners appealed to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg , France , but the appeal was rejected in January 2012 . Bamber and two prisoners , Douglas Vinter and Peter Moore , appealed that decision too , and in July 2013 the European Court 's Grand Chamber ruled that keeping the prisoners in jail with no prospect of release or review may not be compatible with Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights , which prohibits inhuman and degrading treatment or punishment . 
 = = Criminal Cases Review Commission = = 
 = = = Campaign = = = 
 A campaign gathered pace over the years to secure Bamber 's release , and from March 2001 several websites were set up to discuss the evidence . Bamber used one of the websites in 2002 to offer a £ 1m reward for evidence that would overturn his conviction . 
 His case was taken up by MPs George Galloway and Andrew Hunter , and journalist Bob Woffinden . Woffinden argued between 2007 and 2011 that Sheila had shot her family , then watched as police gathered outside the house before shooting herself . He changed his mind in May 2011 , arguing that evidence in the house had convinced him that Bamber was guilty . 
 In 2004 Bamber launched a fresh attempt to obtain another appeal , with a new defence team that included Giovanni di Stefano . ( In March 2013 di Stefano was sentenced in the UK to 14 years in prison for having fraudulently presented himself as a lawyer to several clients between 2001 and 2011 . ) Di Stefano applied unsuccessfully in March 2004 to have the Criminal Cases Review Commission ( CCRC ) refer the case back to the Court of Appeal . The defence team made a fresh submission in January 2009 . 
 = = = Defence arguments = = = 
 = = = = Crime scene = = = = 
 The defence argues that the first officers to enter the farmhouse inadvertently disturbed the crime scene , then reconstructed it . Crime @-@ scene photographs not made available to the original defence show Sheila 's right arm and hand in slightly different positions in relation to the gun , which is lying across her body . The gun itself also appears to have moved . 
 Former Lancashire Detective Chief Superintendent Mick <unk> , shown the photographs by the Guardian and Observer , said in January 2011 : " The evidence shows , or portrays , Essex police having damaged the scene , and then having staged it again to make it look like it was originally . And if that has happened , and that hasn 't been disclosed , that is really , really serious . " 
 = = = = Sheila 's body , time of death = = = = 
 The defence disputes the location of Sheila 's body . The police said they had found her upstairs with her mother , but PC Collins reported seeing through a window what he thought was the body of a woman just inside the kitchen door . Later police reports said that only Nevill had been found in the kitchen . A retired police officer who worked on the case said in 2011 that the first police logs were simply mistaken in reporting that a woman 's body had been found downstairs . 
 Bamber 's lawyers argue that images of Sheila taken by a police photographer at around 9 am on 7 August 1985 show her blood was still wet , and that , had she been killed before 3 : 30 am as the prosecution said , it would have congealed by 9 am . 
 = = = = Scratch marks on mantelpiece = = = = 
 The defence commissioned a report from Peter Sutherst , a British forensic photographic expert , who was asked in 2008 to examine negatives of the kitchen taken on the day of the murders and later . In his report , dated 17 January 2010 , Sutherst argued that scratch marks in paintwork on the kitchen mantelpiece had been created after the crime @-@ scene photographs had been taken . The prosecution alleged that the marks had been made during the struggle in the kitchen between Bamber and his father , as the silencer , attached to the rifle , had scratched against the mantelpiece . The prosecution said that paint chips identical to the paint on the mantelpiece were found on or inside the silencer . 
 Sutherst said the scratch marks appeared in photographs taken on 10 September 1985 , 34 days after the murders , but were not visible in the original crime @-@ scene photographs . He also said he had failed to find in the photographs any chipped paint on the carpet below the mantelpiece , where it might have been expected to fall had the mantelpiece been scratched during a struggle . He was asked by the CCRC to examine a red spot on the carpet visible in photographs underneath the scratches on the mantelpiece . He said the red spot matched a piece of nail varnish missing from one of Sheila 's toes . He concluded that the scratch marks on the mantel had been created after the day of the murders . 
 = = = = Police telephone , radio logs = = = = 
 Police telephone logs had been entered as evidence during the trial , but had not been noticed by Bamber 's lawyers . Bamber 's new defence team said the logs showed that someone calling himself Mr. Bamber had telephoned police on the night of the attack to say his daughter had " gone berserk " with one of his guns . Stan Jones , a former detective sergeant who worked on the case , told the Essex Chronicle in 2010 : " The only person who telephoned the police was Jeremy Bamber . There is no way his father phoned . To suggest it is farcical . " 
 A separate log of a police radio message shows there was an attempt to speak to someone inside the farmhouse that night , as police waited outside to enter , but there was no response . Police say the officers had simply made a mistake . 
 = = = = Silencer = = = = 
 Gun experts commissioned by the defence argued that the injuries were consistent with the silencer not having been used , and that its absence would explain burn marks on Nevill 's body . That the gun had a silencer on it during the murders was central to the prosecution 's case . The experts involved in compiling the report were David Fowler , chief medical examiner for the state of Maryland in the United States ; <unk> Dragovic , chief medical examiner of Oakland county in Michigan ; Marcella Fierro , former chief medical examiner for the state of Virginia ; Daniel Caruso , chief of burn services at the Arizona Burn Center ; and Dr. John <unk> , a British forensic scientist . 
 = = = = Letter regarding Mugford = = = = 
 Bamber 's lawyers told the press in March 2012 that they had found a letter , dated 26 September 1985 , from John Walker , assistant director of public prosecutions , to the Chief Constable of Essex Police , discussing the prosecution of Bamber . Walker had written that he was suggesting , " with considerable <unk> , " that Mugford be told she would not be prosecuted for drugs offences , burglary and cheque fraud , offences she had confessed to during her police interviews regarding Bamber . Bamber 's lawyers said this raised the possibility that she had been persuaded to testify in the hope that charges would not be pursued . According to the Guardian , the trial judge told the jury that they could convict Bamber based on Mugford 's testimony alone . 
 = = = CCRC response , 2012 = = = 
 The CCRC provisionally rejected Bamber 's 2009 submission in February 2011 in an 89 @-@ page document . It invited his lawyers to respond within three months , extended the deadline to allow them to study all 406 crime @-@ scene photographs , then in September 2011 granted them an indefinite period in which to pursue an additional line of inquiry . The CCRC finally rejected the application in April 2012 in a 109 @-@ page report , which said the submission had not identified any new evidence or legal argument that would raise the real possibility of the Court of Appeal overturning the conviction . As of May 2013 , according to his website , Bamber 's defence team was preparing a fresh submission . 
 = Sephiroth ( Final Fantasy ) = 
 Sephiroth ( Japanese : セフィロス , Hepburn : <unk> ) is a fictional character in the role @-@ playing video game Final Fantasy VII developed by Square ( now Square Enix ) , where he is the main villain . Character designer Tetsuya Nomura conceived and designed Sephiroth as an antagonist to and direct physical opposite of the game 's main character , Cloud Strife . The character was portrayed in Japanese by voice actor Toshiyuki Morikawa and in English by both Lance Bass in Kingdom Hearts and George Newbern in all his subsequent appearances . 
 Sephiroth is revealed in Final Fantasy VII to be the result of an experiment by the megacorporation Shinra , in which they injected him with cells from the extraterrestrial lifeform Jenova when he was still a fetus . Upon discovering this , Sephiroth decides to follow what he believes to be his destiny and take control of the Planet , whilst Cloud and the game 's other protagonists attempt to stop him . Sephiroth 's role in the story , as well as his background , are expanded in the Compilation of Final Fantasy VII . Additionally , he appears as a boss character in the Kingdom Hearts series , and other video games developed by Square . Sephiroth has been well @-@ received within the video game community , and is highly ranked on many lists of the best video game villains and Final Fantasy characters . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 Sephiroth is the main villain in Final Fantasy VII , who first appears after assassinating President Shinra . As revealed over the course of the game , Sephiroth was once the most powerful member of SOLDIER , Shinra 's elite military division , who was celebrated as a heroic veteran of the Shinra @-@ Wutai war . After the war , however , Sephiroth was sent on a mission to the village of Nibelheim , where he discovered that he was the product of a biological experiment that combined a human fetus with tissue from the extraterrestrial lifeform Jenova . Learning that Jenova , who he comes to consider his " mother , " attempted to take control of the Planet 2000 years previously , Sephiroth decides to follow in her footsteps and become a god who would rule over the Planet . He burns down the entire village and kills many , but is assumed dead after a confrontation with Cloud inside a nearby Mako reactor . However , a few years later , Sephiroth appears once again , determined to continue with his mission . 
 His plan to become a god is based upon his belief that he can merge with the Planet 's Lifestream , taking control of it , and thus the Planet itself . In order to do so , he must summon Meteor , a destructive meteorite entity from outer space that can catastrophically damage the Planet . At this point , the Lifestream will flow to attempt to heal the injury , thus allowing Sephiroth to merge with the exposed Lifestream . Despite appearing multiple times throughout the game , it is revealed that Sephiroth 's physical body is actually sealed in the Northern Crater , and that the manifestations seen by Cloud and his allies were people imbued with Jenova cells taking his form , controlled by the wounded Sephiroth in the Planet core . In the game 's last battle , Sephiroth takes two forms ; Bizarro Sephiroth ( リバース ・ セフィロス , Rebirth Sephiroth ) and Safer Sephiroth ( <unk> ・ セフィロス , Sepher Sephiroth ) . After his defeat , Sephiroth reappears in Cloud 's mind , but is once again defeated . 
 = = = In Compilation of Final Fantasy VII = = = 
 He makes several cameo appearances in the Final Fantasy VII prequel , Before Crisis : Final Fantasy VII , in which he supports Shinra in their battle against the eco @-@ terrorist organization AVALANCHE . The incident at Nibelheim is also featured in the game . The OVA Last Order : Final Fantasy VII also depicts the Nibelheim incident . Sephiroth also appears in Advent Children , a CGI film set two years after Final Fantasy VII . In the film , Kadaj , Loz , and Yazoo , the " Remnants " of Sephiroth , try to reincarnate him . Although Kadaj eventually succeeds , Cloud once again defeats Sephiroth , whose body changes back to Kadaj 's upon his defeat . Sephiroth is also the focus of the On the Way to a Smile novella " Case of the Lifestream — Black and White " . Set after the end of Final Fantasy VII but prior to the events of Advent Children , the story deals with Aerith and Sephiroth 's journeys through the Lifestream , and Sephiroth 's creation of Geostigma , a disease that infects anyone who came into contact with the tainted Lifestream . He makes a very brief appearance in Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , a game set one year after Advent Children , in which his biological mother , Lucrecia Crescent discusses the experiments which gave birth to him . 
 He is one of the main characters in the Final Fantasy VII prequel game Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , in which he and the protagonist Zack Fair go in the search of two missing SOLDIERs , Genesis Rhapsodos and Angeal Hewley , This game also depicts the Nibelheim incident , where Sephiroth appears as a boss . Executive producer Yoshinori Kitase was pleased with Sephiroth 's role in Crisis Core , feeling that he was given a " much more human side . " 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 His first appearance outside Final Fantasy VII was as a selectable character in the fighting game Ehrgeiz . A redesigned Sephiroth also appears in the North American and European versions of Kingdom Hearts as an optional boss character in Olympus Coliseum . Lance Bass voiced Sephiroth in this game , while in subsequent titles he was replaced by George Newbern . In the Japanese re @-@ release of the game , Final Mix , an additional scene was added in which Sephiroth fights Cloud , although the result of the fight is not revealed . Sephiroth was not included in the sequel Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , as director Tetsuya Nomura could not give him a storyline related to Cloud , and he feared negative fan response if Sephiroth did not have a notable role in the story . His third appearance outside Final Fantasy VII is as another optional boss in Kingdom Hearts II , where he is first encountered by the series ' protagonist , Sora , and then Cloud , who is pursuing him . When Sephiroth battles Cloud , both of them disappear , with Sora believing that they went somewhere else to continue their fight . Nomura said that in this game , Sephiroth represents Cloud 's dark side , in contrast to Tifa Lockhart , who represents his light side . Although Sephiroth does not appear in the prequel Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep , he is mentioned as a hero that Zack Fair aspires to be . The staff , however , did not know if they would portray him as a being of darkness as shown in other titles . Sephiroth 's fourth outside appearance is in the Itadaki Street games Special and Portable , where he appears as an unlockable playable character . 
 Sephiroth was also the representative villain of Final Fantasy VII in Dissidia Final Fantasy . He is featured in his Final Fantasy VII guise , while an alternative outfit features the " Safer Sephiroth " form . His fight against Cloud in the game was based on their fights from Final Fantasy VII and Advent Children . Along with the rest of the Final Fantasy VII figures in Dissidia , Sephiroth appears in the sequel Dissidia 012 Final Fantasy . This game also includes a sightly altered Final Fantasy VII form for Sephiroth , as well as his Kingdom Hearts form . He is featured in the rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy as an unlockable character , representing Final Fantasy VII . He also appears in the puzzle platformer video game LittleBigPlanet , and its sequel LittleBigPlanet 2 as a character model ; Media Molecule 's Alex Evans felt " honored " that Sephiroth was allowed to appear in the games . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Sephiroth was designed by Final Fantasy VII 's character designer Tetsuya Nomura . His name came from the Kabbalah , in which the ten <unk> on the Tree of life represent the ten attributes through which God reveal himself . His character existed from the earliest stages of development , as originally , Nomura thought that the game 's plot would deal exclusively with Cloud Strife pursuing Sephiroth , who was always the game 's main antagonist . Nomura wanted Sephiroth to appear early in the game , and then have the plot dealing with the protagonists following him , so that gamers would not meet the final boss until extremely late in the game . Sephiroth was initially going to be Aeris Gainsborough 's sibling , as indicated by their similar hairstyles . Later , however , he was changed to Aeris 's past love , whom she would remember upon meeting Cloud . This character was then changed to Zack Fair , however , and Sephiroth ’ s prior relationship with Aeris was dropped . In early drafts of the game , Sephiroth 's personality was already brutal and cruel , with a strong willed and calm ego . He was to suffer from Mako addiction , resulting in a semi @-@ conscious state as a result of high level exposure to Mako energy . Sephiroth was also intended to manipulate Cloud into believing that he was a creation of Sephiroth 's will , but this aspect of the story was later abandoned . In another excised scene , when Sephiroth 's physical body is first seen in the Northern Crater , it was to be female . 
 Sephiroth has long platinum hair and bright cyan eyes with cat @-@ like pupils , and is depicted in a black coat decorated with metallic <unk> . Since appearing as Safer Sephiroth in the final battle of the game , Sephiroth has had a single black wing on his back , referencing his theme music " One Winged Angel " . When Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII was released , the staff stated that the reason the wing was black was to suggest evil . Nomura has stated that Sephiroth was made to be a complete contrast to the game 's main protagonist , Cloud , who was originally designed to have slicked @-@ back , black hair with no spikes . His weapon , the " Masamune " , which has been featured in numerous Final Fantasy titles , is an elongated <unk> that he learned to use during his days in SOLDIER . The Masamune is named after the famous Japanese swordsmith Goro <unk> Masamune , whose blades are considered national treasures in Japan today . 
 Director Yoshinori Kitase believes Sephiroth 's role in Final Fantasy VII to be one of the main reasons why the game became so popular . Nomura has called Sephiroth " the ultimate antagonist in the Final Fantasy VII saga . There can 't be anyone else , " and regards him as an enemy from a previous generation , in contrast to his " Remnants " who appear in Final Fantasy VII : Advent Children . 
 For Advent Children , the film sequel to Final Fantasy VII , script writer Kazushige Nojima thought that the film 's plot would be less entertaining without Sephiroth . His revival in the film was introduced in the early stages of development , but the official decision as to how to bring him back was not reached until later . Nomura originally planned to have him appear from the start , but as it took the staff two years to develop his design , the idea of his presence throughout the film was scrapped , and it was decided instead to have him only appear on screen for a short time . Sephiroth was designed for the film in such a way so as to emphasize his other @-@ worldliness , such as the fact that he never blinks or is seen breathing , and his voice remains always monotone and calm . In the film , the staff stated that his strength had considerably increased , to the point that he had " ascended to a new level of existence . " Despite initially encountering problems as to who would voice him , Nomura said that once Toshiyuki Morikawa auditioned for the role , they knew they had their actor . Morikawa was instructed by the staff to speak all of Sephiroth 's dialogue as if he felt superior to every other character in the film . The voice director and Morikawa agreed to make Sephiroth 's voice sound calm to the point that he believes he cannot lose to Cloud , suggesting to Morikawa that he may reappear at some point in the future . 
 = = Musical themes = = 
 In Final Fantasy VII , Sephiroth is the focus of three pieces of music written by series composer Nobuo Uematsu . His primary theme is " Those Chosen by the Planet " ( <unk> , Hoshi ni <unk> Mono ) , a piece utilizing bells , low drums , and a deep chorus , which accompanies Sephiroth 's appearances throughout the game . In the final battle , " Birth of a God " ( <unk> , Kami no Tanjō ) plays while the player combats Sephiroth 's first form , " Bizarro Sephiroth " ( also known as " Reverse Sephiroth " ) . The most well @-@ known piece is " One @-@ Winged Angel " ( <unk> , <unk> no Tenshi , lit . " An Angel With a Wing on One Side " ) which is played during the final confrontation with Sephiroth . It contains Latin lyrics taken from sections of the Carmina Burana . In an interview featured on G4 's Game Makers ( formerly Icons ) , Uematsu revealed that this piece was designed to be a fusion of the musical styles of Russian composer Igor Stravinsky and rock musician Jimi Hendrix . The song revolves around his character , as this was what Uematsu was thinking about when writing it . Two official covers have been done of this song . The first is a different orchestration found in Kingdom Hearts , the second is found in Advent Children , which plays throughout the battle between Cloud and Sephiroth , and features the progressive metal stylings of Nobuo Uematsu 's former band The Black Mages , as well as orchestral elements and new lyrics . There is also a fourth version titled " Vengeance on the World " that plays in Crisis Core . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Sephiroth has served as basis for several types of merchandise . These include the " Extra Knights " action figures first published by Bandai in Japan in 1997 . A different model was released as part of the Play Arts collection , following the release of Advent Children . At the 2008 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , Kanji Tashiro , Square Enix 's manager of merchandise , said that this figure was one of their best @-@ selling items . With the release of the movie Sephiroth was also included in a series of promotional material , primarily consisting of posters . Kotobukiya has included the character in numerous merchandise , including a series of cold casts based on his appearance in both the original game and the film sequel . As a result of promotional campaigns organized in Japan by Square Enix and Coca @-@ Cola , a version of Sephiroth drawn in a super deformed style was featured in the first two volumes of a promotional collection . 
 Products not connected to the release of the games or film have also been produced . These include a <unk> as part of the Final Fantasy Trading Arts Vol . 1 series , a set as part of the Square Minimum Collection alongside Cloud , and a rare figure of " Safer Sephiroth " as part of the Final Fantasy Creatures series ( Chromium ) . " Reverse Sephiroth " was also released as a normal figure in volume 2 . A figure based on his appearances in the Kingdom Hearts games was released in the second series of the Play Arts Kingdom Hearts sub @-@ line . Some replica weapon companies have produced replicas of Sephiroth 's sword , the Masamune , as a 6 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) katana with a stainless steel <unk> blade . Other types of merchandise includes collectible cards , keychains , lighters , phonecards and plush toys . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 On multiple occasions , numerous gaming magazines have chosen Sephiroth as one of the best villains from both the Final Fantasy series in specific and in all of video games in general . GameSpy placed him eighth in their 2014 list of top villains in games , commenting on how difficult it is to defeat him in Final Fantasy VII . In 2005 , Sephiroth was the winner in a GameFAQs character battle involving only villains . IGN listed him at number two in its 2006 list of most memorable villains , as well as the fourth top video game villain . He has been named the number one villain in an episode of G4 's Filter . PC World placed him second in their 2008 list of most diabolical video game villains of all time . That same year , Sephiroth was listed at the top of IGN 's list of Final Fantasy VII top characters , with Dave Smith calling him the " heavyweight champion of Final Fantasy villains , " and praising his appearance and backstory . He would take the same spot in the list of top 25 Final Fantasy characters by the same site . In IGN 's Final Fantasy reader 's choice , also written by Smith , Sephiroth was placed fourth , with commentary focusing on his activities in the game 's plot . In a retrospective on Final Fantasy antagonists , GamesRadar listed Sephiroth as their top pick , citing his developed motives and acts of evil . GamesRadar also put Sephiroth in their 2013 list of the best villains in video game history at number six . 
 In 2007 , Sephiroth was named the 14th best character of all time in Dengeki PlayStation 's retrospective awards feature about the original PlayStation . UGO.com placed Sephiroth 25th on their 2009 list of top Japanese RPG characters , calling him " one of the most visually striking villains of all time " while praising how different he is from previous Final Fantasy villains . In 2010 , Famitsu readers voted Sephiroth as the 21st most popular video game character . Sephiroth was also featured alongside Cloud in ScrewAttack 's list of top " coolest " characters , although they preferred Cloud . In the Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition from 2011 , he was voted as the 32nd best video game character of all time . In 2011 , Empire ranked him as the 13th greatest video game character , calling him " just insanely cool " and adding " Cloud may be the hero but the real star of FFVII was undoubtedly its dashing villain , Sephiroth " . Complex had him ranked as the 35th " coolest " video game villain ever in 2012 , as well as the seventh " most badass " video game character and the third greatest Final Fantasy character of all time in 2013 . 
 A reader 's choice poll organized by GameSpot placed Sephiroth as the best boss of all time , as he received five times more votes than Bowser , who finished in second place ; most of the comments noted the difficulty of the final fight against Sephiroth , as well as its distinctive elements when compared to other games . In 2005 , Electronic Gaming Monthly listed him as number one in their list of top video game bosses . Game Informer ranked the " top @-@ notch " fight against Sephiroth in Final Fantasy VII at third place on their 2008 list of top boss battles . PlayStation Official Magazine included him on their 2012 list of ten best boss fights ever , commenting that " after potentially 100 hours of chasing the murdering swine , you finally catch up with Cloud ’ s nemesis Sephiroth , and it ’ s one of the most epic battles in PlayStation history . " 
 The scene in which Sephiroth kills Aerith during Final Fantasy VII has also prompted much commentary . For example , when comparing him with Cloud , ScrewAttack noted that with this scene , Sephiroth was established as " the biggest bastard . " GamesRadar simply called him " the biggest cock blocker in the gaming world , " as writer Shane Patterson found Aerith 's character to be appealing , and due to the fact Sephiroth killed her , players were unable to use her anymore . Also referring to the scene as a shocking moment , GameSpot suggested that the FMV sequence of Sephiroth appearing in front of the Nibelheim fire " might be one of the most recognizable cutscenes ever to grace video games . " GamesRadar 's article " Non @-@ playable characters we wish were playable " featured Sephiroth as a character that they wished would have been playable in Final Fantasy VII so they " could relive skewering Aerith like an annoyingly dainty , needlessly chaste salmon over and over . " IGN put Sephiroth in the 2009 articles " Big Boss of the Day " and " <unk> Brawl " , with the latter comparing him with Liquid Snake from Metal Gear Solid . Lisa Foiles of The Escapist included Sephiroth on her 2014 list of top five katana wielders . 
 However , some game editors have criticized Sephiroth 's character . For example , IGN 's Smith has stated that " Sephiroth was certainly a good @-@ looking fellow , but his motivations were about as clear as mud . " When comparing Sephiroth with the Final Fantasy VI villain , Kefka Palazzo , GamesRadar commented that he " seems as interesting as a dead accountant painted brown . " 1UP.com took a humorous approach to Sephiroth 's several appearances after apparent deaths and in other games , ranking him third in their " They Is Risen " feature , which covered the ten most notorious video game resurrections . The publication noted that if the character continued to be used , Square Enix would eventually " run out of ways to remix One @-@ Winged Angel . " GameSpy editor Ryan Scott called Sephiroth the " King of Overrated Characters " during GameSpy 's villain feature for Dissidia Final Fantasy , arguing that gamers were impressed by him only because of his design and by how he killed Aerith during Final Fantasy VII . On the other hand , AnimeFringe called him " the most notorious villain in the entire Final Fantasy series " and " quintessential bishōnen in the eyes of many fans -- male and female , " comparing him with Kefka and praising his complexity . 
 Critics have also commented on Sephiroth 's role in other games . In relation to Crisis Core , IGN AU stated that " even Sephiroth gets his moments in the sun , " praising the depth in his backstory , which would later make his boss battle more entertaining . IGN UK agreed , stating that his character was granted " a more human dimension " and enjoying some of the events from before his transformation into a villain . His boss battle was also shown in 1UP.com 's " 25 More of the Most Badass Boss Fights Ever " in which the staff praised how the original battle from Final Fantasy VII was expanded in the title . A feature published by <unk> included Sephiroth 's Kingdom Hearts 's fight in a feature titled " The Hardest Bosses of All Time " , noting that regardless of the player 's skill " walking away from this match unscathed " is not possible , to the point of saying that the fight was more difficult than the entirety of Final Fantasy VII . AnimeFringe stated that only advanced gamers would be able to defeat Kingdom Hearts 's Sephiroth because the player has no backup and that his " devastating attacks can kill in seconds . " In 2013 , Complex ranked Sephiroth in Kingdom Hearts and Kingdom Hearts II as respectively the seventh and fifth hardest boss fights in video games ; in addition , Safer Sephiroth from Final Fantasy VII placed 12th . 
 = Restless ( Buffy the Vampire Slayer ) = 
 " Restless " is the 22nd episode and season finale of season four of the supernatural drama television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( 1997 – 2003 ) , and the 78th episode of the series overall . The episode was written and directed by the show 's creator Joss Whedon and originally aired on The WB in the United States on May 23 , 2000 . 
 The premise of Buffy the Vampire Slayer is that an adolescent girl , Buffy Summers , is chosen by mystical forces and given superhuman powers to kill vampires , demons , and other evil creatures in the fictional town of Sunnydale . She is supported by a close circle of family and friends , nicknamed the Scooby Gang . " Restless " centers on the dreams of the four main characters after enduring an exhausting fight in the previous episode . The dreams are used to comment on the characters — their fears , their past and their possible future . Consistent with each dream is the presence of the First Slayer who hunts and kills them one by one until , in the final sequence , she is confronted and disempowered by Buffy . 
 The episode serves as a coda to the fourth season instead of a climax , as Whedon wanted to achieve something different for a season finale . Whedon experimented with several filming techniques to make the episode as dreamlike as possible . The episode also foreshadows upcoming events , most notably the first appearance of Buffy 's sister Dawn . Buffy scholar Nikki Stafford calls the surrealistic episode " unprecedented in television " , saying it is " so jam @-@ packed with information that we 'll probably be seeing allusions to it for the rest of the series " , and referring to it as a " mysterious lead @-@ in to the emotionally turbulent season five " . " Restless " received high praise from critics upon airing , particularly for its character development , visual direction , and wit . It is frequently noted as one of the best episodes of the series . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the series , Buffy Summers is a teenager who , at the age of fifteen , was chosen by mystical forces to be the latest Slayer , a girl endowed with superhuman powers to fight and defeat vampires , demons , and other evil forces . After moving with her mother , Joyce ( Kristine Sutherland ) , to the fictional town of Sunnydale , she befriends Willow Rosenberg ( Alyson Hannigan ) and Xander Harris ( Nicholas Brendon ) , who join her in the struggle against evil . They are guided by Buffy 's " Watcher " , Rupert Giles ( Anthony Stewart Head ) , who is well @-@ versed in demonology and is responsible for Buffy 's training as a Slayer . The group collectively refer to themselves as the Scooby Gang . During season two , Willow begins to experiment with magic , eventually becoming a formidable witch . 
 Each season of Buffy the Vampire Slayer ( often simplified as Buffy ) presents an overall story arc which episodes tie into , as well as a specific manifestation of evil known as the Big Bad . As noted by Buffy scholar Roz Kaveney , episodes in the fourth season address authority , order , and the estrangement from the self and others as Buffy and her friends take on new roles after high school . An ongoing theme in the series is Buffy 's complex relationship to her destiny as the current Slayer and how she uniquely expresses this role , and this plot element is further explored in season four in general , and in the episode " Restless " in particular . 
 Season four begins with Buffy and Willow starting college , attending U.C. Sunnydale , while Xander works at a series of odd jobs and begins dating Anya Jenkins ( Emma Caulfield ) , who lived for 1 @,@ 100 years as a vengeance demon before losing her powers and getting stuck in the body of a teenager . In the fourth season , Willow becomes romantically involved with fellow @-@ student Tara Maclay ( Amber Benson ) , an experienced witch . The Big Bad in season four is the result of the work of a covert military force called " The Initiative " who are capturing and performing experiments on vampires and demons in Sunnydale . Buffy and her friends discover that chief amongst these experiments is the creation of a human @-@ cyber @-@ demonoid hybrid known as Adam ( George Hertzberg ) , whose programming has gone terribly wrong , leading him to wreak havoc on the town . Buffy 's challenge is to find a way to disempower him , something she and the Scoobies achieve in the penultimate episode of season four , " Primeval " . In order to do this , the four magically join their essences together to create a single " super Slayer " ; while the others perform a ritual , Buffy confronts and defeats Adam while mystically empowered with Giles ' mind , Xander 's heart , and Willow 's spirit aiding her . The ritual employs four tarot @-@ like cards : Manus ( meaning hands or strength ) represents Buffy , Sophus ( meaning teacher or wise ) represents Giles , <unk> ( meaning courage , or heart ) represents Xander , and Spiritus ( meaning spirit and magical power ) represents Willow . These symbols will become relevant to the central motif in each of the episode 's four dream sequences . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following their victory over Adam , Buffy , Xander , Willow , and Giles meet at Buffy 's to relax with movies , including Apocalypse Now . They quickly fall asleep and are each confronted by the First Slayer in their dreams . 
 Willow 's dream opens with Willow painting Sappho 's love poem , Hymn to Aphrodite , in Greek onto Tara 's back . She then finds herself on the Sunnydale High school stage , about to perform in a radically changed Death of a Salesman , with Riley playing a cowboy , Buffy as a flapper and Harmony <unk> trying to bite Giles ' neck . Willow realizes with increasing uneasiness that she knows neither her lines nor her role . Buffy then takes Willow to stand in front of a classroom in the same nerdy clothes she wore in " Welcome to the Hellmouth " and " The Harvest " at the beginning of the series . Xander mocks her as she nervously begins to read her book report . Oz and Tara — Willow 's ex @-@ boyfriend and current girlfriend — flirt with each other while watching Willow recite . Suddenly , Willow is attacked and has the life sucked out of her by the First Slayer . 
 Xander 's dream begins when he wakes on Buffy 's couch . After excusing himself to use the restroom , he finds himself the object of an attempted seduction by Joyce . In the restroom , he starts to unzip , then realizes that the bathroom is attached to a large white room with many men in white coats ready to observe and take notes on his performance . He then meets Buffy , Giles , and Spike in a playground ; Spike – unaffected by daylight – tells him that Giles is going to teach him to be a Watcher , as Buffy plays in a sandbox . Xander then finds himself in an ice cream truck with Anya ; Willow and Tara ( wearing skimpy clothing and garish make @-@ up ) are in the back , and invite him to join them . He goes back , only to end up in his basement . He goes to the university and comes across Giles , who starts revealing the reason for the dream , but suddenly switches to speaking in French . Xander next finds himself in a reenactment of the Apocalypse Now scene between a captive Captain Benjamin Willard and Colonel Walter Kurtz , with Principal Snyder as Kurtz . Throughout the sequence Xander finds himself in his basement again and again , chased by an unseen pursuer , who is revealed as the First Slayer when she tears his heart out . 
 Giles ' dream begins with Giles swinging a watch in front of Buffy . They are in Giles ' apartment , which has been stripped of furniture but for a chair and a bed . She laughs , and Giles ' dream cuts to a family scene with Buffy and his girlfriend Olivia at a fairground . Quicker than the others to understand that something is wrong , he confronts Spike , who is posing for a photo @-@ shoot in his crypt . In The Bronze , he meets Anya failing as a stand @-@ up comic , and Willow and Xander ( with a bloody chest wound ) , who warn him of their attacker . He breaks into song , giving suggestions on how to deal with what hunts them , but when the sound system breaks down , he crawls backstage to trace a wiring fault . He begins to realize his pursuer is the First Slayer , just as she scalps him . 
 In the final dream sequence , Buffy is woken by Anya in her dorm room . She then finds herself in her room at home , where Tara speaks cryptically about the future . At the university , Buffy talks to her mother , who lives in the walls , then meets Riley at the Initiative . He has been promoted to Surgeon General and is drawing up plans with Adam ( now in ordinary human form ) for world domination . The three of them are interrupted by a demon attack , and Riley and Adam start to make a pillow fort . When Buffy finds her weapons bag , the only thing in it is mud , which she smears on her face . She is then transported to the desert and finally confronts the pre @-@ verbal First Slayer ; Tara is present to speak for her . Through Tara the First Slayer tells Buffy that she cannot have friends and must work alone , which Buffy rejects . The Slayers fight in the desert and then in Buffy 's living room next to her dying friends until Buffy realizes that she can stop the fight mentally by simply ignoring the First Slayer . She refuses to fight and walks away from the First Slayer ; the First Slayer vanishes , and everybody wakes up . 
 After they wake up , the four of them then discuss the significance of having tapped into the power of the First Slayer , and Buffy privately recalls Tara 's words from her dream as she looks into her bedroom . 
 = = Production and writing = = 
 Previous seasons of Buffy the Vampire Slayer had ended with an action episode which tied up all the threads of the season 's main plot line , but series creator Joss Whedon wanted to end season four differently . The penultimate episode , " Primeval " , had concluded the Initiative storyline , but Whedon felt the season 's overall story arc had not been as cohesive as it could have been , and therefore chose to create an episode to act as a " grace note " to the season , an episode which would comment on each of the four main characters and what they had just been through . While talking about the writing of the episode , Whedon said it had been like writing poetry , a process he found " liberating and strange " . Like the earlier " Hush " — an episode with almost no dialogue — he viewed the episode as an exercise in form and writing , and what it means to write . The episode has no real structure , which was a departure for Whedon , as everything he had written before was constructed before even starting the script . Yet despite its fragmented style , the episode unfolds coherently in four discrete acts , each act comprising one character 's dream . 
 = = = Filming techniques = = = 
 Whedon used a variety of cinematographic techniques to achieve the dreamlike quality of " Restless " . He used tracking shots with a Steadicam to follow the characters from place to place , creating a flow in the way of real dreams , where there are no logical connections between places and things . In Giles ' dream , he walks from a carnival grounds into Spike 's crypt , then through a corridor and straight into The Bronze , three locations not related to one another . Whedon was able to do this by simply having actor Anthony Stewart Head walk through the sets as they were built ; this effortlessly created a sense of dreamlike dislocation . Another example of this occurs when , in Xander 's dream , he walks from the front of the moving ice cream van towards the back , crawls up and over some boxes , through a window , and drops into his basement . In the theater scene during Willow 's dream , a Frazier lens was used to provide a large depth of field , allowing both the foreground and background to be in focus at the same time , while in Xander 's dream , as he moves from room to room in Buffy 's house to the university dorm rooms , Whedon used a 17 mm lens to give a sense of motion as the camera passes by walls . Whedon also used unusual framing for shots , often leaving much of the frame empty , with a character being placed near the bottom or off to the side . The scenes in Spike 's crypt , part of Giles ' dream , were shot in black @-@ and @-@ white to emphasize that Spike is seen as " an old 30s movie villain " . 
 The outdoor scene in which Xander sees Buffy in the sandbox was intentionally overexposed , intensifying the foreground and blowing out the background , making the sky look white ; flash frames were also used in the shot of Buffy in the desert . Whedon allowed some shots to last far longer than is common in a television episode ; this cinematic technique allowed the images to take on meaning . Highly stylized lighting is used throughout Xander 's dream . In the university hallway the scene is lit with green and orange gels , while the almost shot @-@ for @-@ shot re @-@ creation of the Apocalypse Now section is lit with carefully controlled spotlights which allow the background to fall out to black . Whedon cites The Limey as an inspiration for the unnaturally colored university sequence , and had the scene from Apocalypse Now playing on tape during filming to ensure as close a match as possible for that sequence . When Xander is driving the ice cream truck with Anya , the backgrounds outside the car intentionally look fake , to give a sense of stillness where there should be motion . Whedon originally wanted to use rear @-@ screen projection for the driving scene , but had to utilize greenscreen instead , as rear @-@ screen projection would be difficult to set up on their stages . Some special effects shots came about by accident ; in his commentary Whedon explains that when Buffy smeared the mud all over her face , it looked as though she was giving herself a facial . He therefore dissolved the shot into a negative image , creating intense colors that made the shot more interesting . 
 Dynamic editing contributed to the surrealistic nature of the episode . Abrupt cuts from close @-@ up to extreme wide angles and sudden shifts from normal speed to super slow @-@ motion are used in Buffy 's dream : several sequences become slow @-@ motion partway through them , then revert to normal speed as they continue . Xander 's dream features mismatches between sound and image : characters are sometimes shown not speaking even as their voices are heard . Additionally , silence is used frequently , to both reflect the characters ' disorientation and to unsettle the audience . Whedon cited films by Steven Soderbergh as his main inspirations for the odd editing , especially The Limey and The Underneath . He also listed Orson Welles ' version of The Trial and Stanley Kubrick 's Eyes Wide Shut as inspirations for many of his shooting and editing decisions . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Besides the main cast , the episode features several appearances by returning and currently recurring characters , mostly within the dream sequences . 
 Seth Green , who left the series earlier in the season , makes a brief appearance as Oz in Willow 's dream . 
 Armin Shimerman , whose character Principal Snyder was killed off in the season three finale , appears as Kurtz in the Apocalypse Now scene . 
 Amber Benson appears as Tara in the dream sequences , as both Willow 's girlfriend and a spirit guide to Buffy . Whedon commented on her appearances in Buffy 's dream : " The idea that Tara would be her spirit guide made sense because she didn 't have that particular relationship with Tara , and Tara has a kind of good Wiccan mystical energy . " 
 George Hertzberg appears as Adam , although in human form rather than in the demon / cyborg makeup he had appeared in throughout the season . 
 Mercedes McNab appears as Harmony Kendall is present during Willow 's dream as both an ordinary classmate and an inept vampire . 
 <unk> <unk> appears as Olivia in Giles 's dream heavily pregnant and pushing a baby stroller . 
 Kristine Sutherland appears as Joyce Summers , Buffy 's mother . Whedon enjoyed that she got " to play just completely sexy [ in Xander 's dream ] , because when you play the mom on a show you 're sort of relegated to <unk> , so it was nice to see that side of her . " 
 It was during the filming of this episode that Michelle Trachtenberg , who would go on to play Buffy 's sister Dawn in season five , first visited the set . Sarah Michelle Gellar had worked with her previously and suggested to Joss Whedon that she read for the part of Dawn . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In Giles ' dream , actor Anthony Stewart Head sings " The Exposition Song " ; this was the third time he sang during the season . The song was written by Joss Whedon , arranged by composer Christophe Beck , and performed by Four Star Mary . Beck appears in the scene playing the piano , while members of Four Star Mary play the other instruments . From seasons two to four of the series , Four Star Mary were the real band behind character Oz 's fictional band , Dingoes Ate My Baby . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Each dream acts as a character study , exploring the fears and future of the dreamer . Willow , Xander , and Giles are stalked by a shadowy figure , then killed within their dreams . The way in which each is killed is directly related to the role they had assumed when melding with Buffy in the previous episode — that role is indicated by the Tarot @-@ like card used to symbolize the character 's essence . Willow 's card had been Spiritus , representing her magical powers ; she is killed by having her spirit sucked out of her . Xander 's card had been <unk> , representing his heart ; he is killed by having his heart ripped out . Giles had been represented by the card Sophus , a symbol of his intellect and role as teacher ; he is killed by being scalped . Buffy 's card , Manus , was representative of her physical strength . In her dream the stalker is revealed as the primitive , first slayer , who confronts her aggressively . The two fight , but the First Slayer is defeated when Buffy realizes a key difference between them : the First Slayer was alone and isolated , while Buffy is unique among Slayers in that she has friends and a life beyond slaying , factors which make her the greatest Slayer ever . 
 In Willow 's dream she struggles to find her place in the school theater production of Death of a Salesman , while her friends and classmates are apparently fully costumed , prepared , and ready to go on stage . Her confusion represents her lack of self @-@ confidence , her fear that she still does not fit in or have a place in the world , unlike those around her , who are competent and know what is going on . She wears ordinary clothes , but the others repeatedly comment on the excellence of her " costume " , a reference to her fear that her friends do not see what she has grown into , but rather what she was when younger : nerdy and awkward . This fear is confirmed when Buffy strips off her shirt and jeans , revealing the same unfashionable turtleneck and corduroy jumper she wore in episode one of the series , four years earlier , before her demon @-@ fighting experiences and study of magic increased her confidence and competence . Willow stands anxiously at the front of the class , trying to read a paper , while her classmates express their boredom with listening to her and Oz whispers into Tara 's ear , until she is attacked by the First Slayer and her breath is sucked out of her body . 
 Whedon stated that the maze of red curtains on the stage in Willow 's dream are not a direct homage to Twin Peaks , as some have posited , but rather represent the safety and comfort of being with her girlfriend Tara , and are a sexual metaphor as well . 
 The main theme of Xander 's dream is his sense of failure and of being left behind as his friends move ahead in life . His fear that he is stuck is reiterated throughout his dream by his inability to escape his basement bedroom in his parents ' home . No matter where his dream takes him , he ends up back in the basement . As the only one of the Scoobies not in college , he feels anxiety about his ability to understand and keep up with ideas and conversations , a fear which is realized when he goes to the university , a place he already feels excluded from , and finds that he cannot understand what people say to him . Aware that he is being chased and is in danger , he asks Giles what is happening but cannot understand his answer , nor what Anya says to him , as they are both inexplicably speaking French . He exclaims , " I don 't understand ! " During his dream both Buffy and Willow tell him , " I 'm way ahead of you , " and Giles tells him " the others have gone on ahead , " underscoring his fear that this is really the case . 
 Giles ' dream presents a choice : either to remain a father figure and Watcher to Buffy , or to begin his own life , represented by the presence of his girlfriend Olivia , who pushes an empty baby stroller . During this part of his dream , Buffy is dressed as a child , with pigtails , and is unable to throw a ball straight without his help and instruction , an indication of his fear that she will be unable to do her job without his guidance . Later , Olivia is seen weeping , while the baby stroller has been overturned and abandoned , signifying elements of his unfulfilled life , such as marriage and children . Later , in The Bronze , he is explaining the reason they are all being stalked and attacked , performing his job as Watcher , but his singing this information represents his unfulfilled longing to be a musician , something he 's been exploring privately throughout the season . 
 The major theme of Buffy 's dream is her fear of the personal cost of her life as a Slayer , the isolation and loneliness she is forced to endure . This theme of aloneness is reiterated by several shots in which she is alone in the frame , most notably the wide shot of her in the vast and empty desert . Another source of anxiety is her relationship with her current boyfriend , Riley , whom she finds plotting world domination with Adam in his original , human , form . She fears what Riley could turn into as a result of his alliance with the military . She also fears the destabilizing effect of this alliance on their relationship , and the destabilizing effect of this relationship on her life as the slayer . She is shown putting mud on her face , mimicking the mud mask of the primal , First Slayer . By the end of her encounter in the desert with the First Slayer , Buffy realizes that she does not have to be entirely alone , that it is her closeness to friends and family that makes her a great Slayer , and once she experiences this revelation , the efforts of the First Slayer to continue to engage her in battle become fruitless and increasingly comical . The dream finally ends in a mundane way , as Buffy refuses to accept a tragic climax and instead insists on normality in her life . 
 All of the many elements in the dream sequences have meaning , with the exception of the Cheese Man . Whedon explains : " ... the Cheese Man — meaningless . Why ? Because I needed something in the show that was meaningless , because there is always something in the dream that doesn 't make any sense at all . In this case it was the Cheese Man . He confounds everybody because of that , and people ascribe him meaning . This to me means that we 're being successful , because this means they 're not worried about everything else , which means they sort of did understand most other things . " 
 = = = Foreshadowing = = = 
 Although Whedon does not often foreshadow events , Buffy 's dream includes several references to past and future episodes . In a dream sequence in the season three finale , Faith says " Little Miss Muffet counting down from 7 @-@ 3 @-@ 0 " ; foreshadowing Dawn 's arrival two years later in season five . This number appears ( as 7 : 30 ) on a clock in Buffy 's dream in " Restless " . Buffy says , " It 's so late . " Tara replies , " Oh ... that clock 's completely wrong . " A year has now passed , making the previous number of days to her arrival incorrect . When Buffy leaves the room , Tara tells her , " Be back before Dawn . " The character Dawn appears in the next episode . Tara 's words to Buffy , " You think you know what 's to come , what you are . You haven 't even begun . " are repeated by Dracula to Buffy in the following episode ( " Buffy vs. Dracula " ) . In Xander 's dream , Giles and Spike swing together on a swing set , with Spike wearing a tweed jacket . Giles comments , " Spike 's like a son to me . " In " Tabula Rasa " ( season six ) , when the characters lose their memories , Spike wears the same tweed jacket and believes Giles is his father . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode received critical praise and is often included on lists of the best episodes of Buffy the Vampire Slayer . In Entertainment Weekly 's list of the 25 best <unk> episodes — including episodes from Buffy , as well as Angel , Firefly and Dollhouse — " Restless " placed at # 20 , where they called it " Visually lush and trippy , " and said , " ... it reestablished that this genre show was really and truly a deeply affecting character drama with a delightfully bent sense of humor . " At <unk> , the episode was listed as the seventh best episode in their list of the top 10 Buffy episodes , saying " This surreal episode marks the show 's turning point , as it moved from a very well @-@ executed urban fantasy drama series to something more creative , more thoughtful , and more surprising than pretty much anything else on television . " In The Futon Critic 's list of the 20 best episodes of 2000 , the episode was placed at # 1 , with the author calling it an even more daring episode than " Hush " , another acclaimed episode from the fourth season . 
 At <unk> , the Online Journal of Buffy Studies , author Daniel <unk> placed the episode as the second best of the series ; stating that the episode " lends itself to infinite interpretations . No one watches it the same way . That 's the mark of a true masterpiece . " When Noel Murray of The A.V. Club reviewed " Restless " in 2009 , after beginning his first look at the series in 2008 , he praised Joss Whedon 's ability to represent what dreams are actually like . The A.V. Club also included " Restless " as an " essential episode " of the series in their list of the best TV series of the 2000s , in which Buffy the Vampire Slayer placed at # 25 . " Restless " was listed at # 10 in The A.V. Club 's list of " 21 TV episodes that do dream sequences right " , commenting , " This device allows for a lot of surreal images and moments of weird comedy " and that " there are also some striking , unsettling touches that have the indefinable power and strangeness of a real dream . " The episode was listed as # 1 in Daily Kos ' list of the top 10 episodes of the series , and the episode was listed as the second best episode featuring dream sequences by USA Today . In series creator Joss Whedon 's own list of his favorite episodes , he includes " Restless " , saying " Most people sort of shake their heads at it . It was different , but not pointless . " 
 In 2001 , the episode received two nominations for the Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hair Stylist Guild Awards , for Best Contemporary Makeup in a Series and Best Contemporary Hair Styling in a Series . 
 = Catalogue of Women = 
 The Catalogue of Women ( Ancient Greek : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) — also known as the Ehoiai ( Ἠοῖαι , Ancient : [ <unk> ] ) — is a fragmentary Greek epic poem that was attributed to Hesiod during antiquity . The " women " of the title were in fact heroines , many of whom lay with gods , bearing the heroes of Greek mythology to both divine and mortal paramours . In contrast with the focus upon narrative in the Homeric Iliad and Odyssey , the Catalogue was structured around a vast system of genealogies stemming from these unions and , in M.L. West 's appraisal , covered " the whole of the heroic age . " Through the course of the poem 's five books , these family trees were embellished with stories involving many of their members , and so the poem amounted to a compendium of heroic mythology in much the same way that the Hesiodic Theogony presents a systematic account of the Greek pantheon built upon divine genealogies . 
 Most scholars do not currently believe that the Catalogue should be considered the work of Hesiod , but questions about the poem 's authenticity have not lessened its interest for the study of literary , social and historical topics . As a Hesiodic work that treats in depth the Homeric world of the heroes , the Catalogue offers a transition between the divine sphere of the Theogony and the terrestrial focus of the Works and Days by virtue of its subjects ' status as demigods . Given the poem 's concentration upon heroines in addition to heroes , it provides evidence for the roles and perceptions of women in Greek literature and society during the period of its composition and popularity . Greek aristocratic communities , the ruling elite , traced their lineages back to the heroes of epic poetry ; thus the Catalogue , a veritable " map of the Hellenic world in genealogical terms , " preserves much information about a complex system of kinship associations and hierarchies that continued to have political importance long after the Archaic period . Many of the myths in the Catalogue are otherwise unattested , either entirely so or in the form narrated therein , and held a special fascination for poets and scholars from the late Archaic period through the Hellenistic and Roman eras . 
 Despite its popularity among the Hellenistic literati and reading public of Roman Egypt , the poem went out of circulation before it could pass into a medieval manuscript tradition and is preserved today by papyrus fragments and quotations in ancient authors . Still , the Catalogue is much better attested than most " lost " works , with some 1 @,@ 300 whole or partial lines surviving : " between a third and a quarter of the original poem " , by one estimate . The evidence for the poem 's reconstruction — not only elements of its content , but the distribution of that content within the Catalogue — is indeed extensive , but the fragmentary nature of this evidence leaves many unresolved complexities and has over the course of the past century led to several scholarly missteps . 
 = = Title and the ē ' hoiē @-@ formula = = 
 Ancient authors most commonly referred to the poem as the Catalogue of Women , or simply the Catalogue , but several alternate titles were also employed . The tenth @-@ century encyclopedia known as the Suda gives an expanded version , the Catalogue of Heroic Women ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , and another late source , the twelfth @-@ century Byzantine poet and grammarian Tzetzes , prefers to call the poem the Heroic Genealogy ( <unk> <unk> ) . But the earliest and most popular alternate title was Ehoiai ( Ἠοῖαι ) , after the feminine formula ē ' hoiē ( <unk> ' <unk> , Ancient : [ ɛː <unk> ́ <unk> ] ) , " or such as " , which introduces new sections within the poem via the introduction of a heroine or heroines . This nickname also provided the standard title for a similar Hesiodic work , the Megalai Ehoiai or Great Ehoiai ( <unk> Ἠοῖαι ) . 
 As is reflected by its use as an alternate title , the ē ' hoiē @-@ formula was one of the poem 's most recognizable features . It may have belonged originally to a genre of poetry that simply listed notable heroines , but in the Catalogue the formula is used as a structuring tool that allows the poet to resume a broken branch of a family tree , or to jump horizontally across genealogies to a new figure and line of descent . A characteristic example is found in the introduction of the daughters of Porthaon at Cat. fr . 26 @.@ 5 – 9 : 
 The preceding section of the poem had dealt at some length with the extended family of Porthaon 's sister Demodice , tracing her line down to the generation following the Trojan War . Here ē ' <unk> ( plural ) is used to jump backwards in order to complete the account of the descendants of Porthaon and Demodice 's father Agenor by covering the son 's family . Elsewhere the formula is used in transitions to more distant branches . The Ehoie of Mestra , for example , ultimately serves to reintroduce the family of Sisyphus , Mestra 's great @-@ granduncle who hoped to win her as bride for his son Glaucus . Although that marriage does not take place , the descendants of Sisyphus are soon presented . 
 = = Content = = 
 According to the Suda , the Catalogue was five books long . The length of each is unknown , but it is likely that the entire poem consisted of anywhere from 4000 to over 5000 lines . The majority of the content was structured around major genealogical units : the descendants of Aeolus were found in book 1 and at least part of book 2 , followed by those of <unk> , Pelasgus , Atlas and Pelops in the later books . It is believed that a rough guide to this structure can be found in the Bibliotheca , a Roman @-@ era mythological handbook transmitted under the name of Apollodorus of Athens which used the Catalogue as a primary source for many genealogical details and appears to have followed reflect the poem 's overall arrangement . 
 = = = Book 1 = = = 
 The first is by far the best @-@ attested book of the poem , with several extensive papyri overlapping ancient quotations or coinciding with paraphrases : at least 420 verses of dactylic hexameter survive in part or entire . One papyrus includes line numbers which , taken together with the system of overlaps among the other sources , allows much of the book 's content to be assigned approximate line numbers . Perhaps the most significant of these overlaps is between the papyrus containing the opening lines of the poem and the Theogony : the Catalogue was styled as a continuation of the " canonical " Hesiodic poem , with the final two verses of the Theogony standing as Catalogue of Women book 1 , lines 1 – 2 . Toward the end of the Theogony as transmitted by the manuscript tradition , following Zeus 's final ordering of Olympus and his siring several key deities , the poet invokes the Muses to sing of the " tribe of goddesses ... immortals who slept with mortal men , bearing children like gods . " After some 150 verses on this topic , the proem to the Catalogue comes in the form of another re @-@ invocation of the Muses to introduce a new , only slightly more terrestrial topic ( Cat. fr . 1 @.@ 1 – 5 ) : 
 The immediately subsequent lines describe significant characteristics of the heroic age . The first allowed for the liaisons that are the poem 's ostensible subject : gods and mortals freely interacted in those days . A further significant detail about the heroic condition is offered next in one of the most puzzling passages of the Catalogue . Men and women are said to have been not " equally long @-@ lived " ( <unk> , <unk> , a hapax <unk> ) , but it is unclear whether this refers to different lifespans among the heroes themselves , a difference between the lives of the heroes and " today 's " man , or between the lifespans of the heroes and the gods . The differing fates of the heroes are then described : some appear to have lived a long life characterized by perpetual youth , while others were apparently condemned to an early death by the gods . The papyrus is damaged at this point , and the full implications of these comparisons are unknown . The Muses are next addressed again , asked to sing of " however many [ Zeus ] lay with , siring the race of glorious kings ... and Poseidon [ lay with ] ... Ares ... Hermes ... [ <unk> ] <unk> ... Heracles " ; here the papyrus ends . 
 = = = = First families = = = = 
 The repeated use of the introductory phrase " or such as ... " implies an initial " such as ... " , and it is likely that this first woman treated was Pyrrha , wife of Deucalion . There is some debate about whether the Catalogue included an account of the Flood myth , but the creation of a race of humans born from stones cast by Deucalion and Pyrrha does appear to have figured in the poem . Zeus unsurprisingly had first pick from the catalogue of women , and sired Hellen by Pyrrha . Pyrrha also had three daughters by Deucalion : <unk> , <unk> and Pandora , who was named for her maternal grandmother , the famous Pandora . Like their mother , these three lay with Zeus , bearing sons from whom several early Greek tribes were said to descend . <unk> bore Magnes and Macedon ; <unk> bore <unk> , the grandfather of <unk> ; and Pandora 's son was Graecus . 
 But it was the family of Hellen , who would himself ultimately be the eponym for the entire Greek world , that had the greatest mythological significance . He sired Dorus , Xuthus and Aeolus , apparently by <unk> , the nymph of Mount Othrys . Dorus was the eponym of the Dorians , and his son <unk> ' sons , <unk> and Pamphylus , gave their names to two of the three Dorian tribes , the <unk> and <unk> . The third division was called the <unk> , after Heracles ' son Hyllus , with whom Pamphylus and <unk> migrated to the Peloponnese . Xuthus married Erechtheus ' daughter <unk> and was the father of Ion and Achaeus , along with a daughter named Diomede . The relation between the progenitors of Greek tribes among the descendents of Deucalion is outlined in the following table : 
 = = = = Aeolids = = = = 
 What was likely the largest unified stemma to be treated , the account of the descendents of Aeolus and <unk> 's five daughters and seven sons , stretched from before the 200th line of book 1 well into the second book . The sons who were certainly found in the Catalogue are Cretheus , Athamas , Sisyphus , Salmoneus , Deion ( or <unk> ) and Perieres . A seventh son 's name is obscured in lacuna : he has been identified tentatively as <unk> , <unk> or a second Magnes , not the eponym of the <unk> , but the father of Dictys and Polydectes of the Danaë @-@ Perseus myth . No similar doubt attends the identities of Aeolus ' daughters : they were Peisidice , Alcyone , Calyce , <unk> and Perimede . The families of the daughters were treated first , and much of the middle of book 1 — over 400 lines — was devoted to recounting their descendents . Aeolus ' extended family , via both sons and daughters , is notable for a concentration of fantastical narratives and folk elements of a sort largely absent from the Homeric poems , beginning with the doomed , <unk> love of <unk> and Alcyone , who called one another " Zeus " and " Hera " and were turned into the kingfisher and halcyon as punishment ( <unk> . <unk> – 98 , 10d OCT , 15 ) . 
 After treating the Thessalian families of Peisidice and <unk> , the poet turned to the intermingled Aetolian @-@ Elian lines of Calyce and Perimede . Perimede had earlier in the book borne two sons to the river Achelous , one of whom was the grandfather of Oeneus , <unk> . To <unk> Calyce bore Endymion , whose son <unk> was the eponym of Aetolia and the great @-@ grandfather of Demodice and Porthaon , through whom the later Aetolian and Elian genealogies were traced . Somewhere within these families , <unk> and <unk> were found in a form more fearsome than they were in the Iliad : in the Catalogue they were fierce conjoined twins with two heads , four arms and an equal number of legs . Most significant for the epic tradition , however , was the marriage of Demodice 's son <unk> and Porthaon 's daughter <unk> which produced the daughters Leda , Althaea and <unk> , who are introduced in a group Ehoiai at fr . <unk> – 5 . 
 Leda 's marriage to Tyndareus is followed by the births of Clytemnestra , Timandra and <unk> , the last of whom Artemis made immortal . Clytemnestra and Agamemnon had two daughters , Electra and Iphimede , the name used in the poem for the woman later and more famously known as Iphigenia . It had been prophesied that she must be sacrificed to Artemis before the Greek fleet could sail for Troy , but in the Catalogue version of events the goddess replaced her with an eidolon and immortalized Iphimede as " Artemis <unk> " , or Hecate . Next Orestes ' birth and matricide are reported , the earliest extant account of his killing Clytemnestra , as the planned sacrifice of Iphimede / Iphigenia is first found in the Catalogue . Timandra 's marriage to <unk> follows , followed in turn by Leda 's bearing the <unk> to Zeus in several damaged lines . It is unknown if Helen 's birth was reported here , for the <unk> leave her parentage uncertain . Althaea lies with Ares and bears Meleager , whose heroic qualities are described along with his death at the hands of Apollo during the conflict with the <unk> that was the sequel to the Hunt for the <unk> Boar . Among Althaea 's children by Oeneus , Deianeira is singled out for her role in the death and apotheosis of Heracles . The poet next turns his attention to the <unk> ( see above ) and closes out his account of the female Aeolids with the Sirens , daughters of Sterope and Achelous . 
 The Ehoie of Salmoneus ' daughter Tyro provides the transition to the families of the male Aeolids . As king of Elis , Salmoneus forced his subjects to worship him as Zeus and simulated the god 's thunder and lighting by dragging bronze cauldrons from his chariot and throwing torches through the air . The real Zeus destroyed king and subjects alike , but spared Tyro and conducted her to the house of her uncle Cretheus in Thessaly because she wrangled with her impious father . There she became enamoured of the river <unk> , but Poseidon had his own designs upon Tyro and in the guise of the river lay with her , siring Neleus and Pelias . The brothers did not get along , and Zeus gave them different realms to rule : Pelias received as his lot Iolcos ; to Neleus fell Pylos in the western Peloponnese . The house of Neleus now takes center @-@ stage . Heracles sacked Pylos , killing all the male <unk> , save Nestor who was off in <unk> , another Messenian city . <unk> , a son of Neleus to whom Poseidon had granted the ability to change shape , was Pylos ' only bulwark against the onslaught of Heracles , and the Catalogue @-@ poet granted him a brief <unk> which ended when Athena pointed out that the bee on Heracles ' chariot was actually the <unk> defender . Following the account of Nestor 's marriage and family , the contest for Neleus ' daughter Pero was narrated . The father would give her hand to whoever could rustle the cattle of <unk> from <unk> , a feat accomplished by Bias with the help of his brother Melampus . The poet then turned to the family of Pelias as the last assignable papyrus fragment from book 1 breaks off . It is likely that Tyro 's children by Cretheus — <unk> , <unk> and <unk> — followed , and there might have been room in the book to at least start the family of Cretheus ' brother Athamas . 
 Athamas ruled in Boeotia and had a complicated family life , several details of which are known to have played part in the Catalogue . His first children were <unk> and Helle , whose mother was Nephele . In what was the first episode of the <unk> saga , she gave her children a ram with a golden fleece upon which they fled the intrigues of their stepmother Ino according to other sources . Athamas was driven mad by the gods , perhaps because he took the young Dionysus into his household , and slaughtered his and Ino 's son <unk> ; Ino herself jumped into the sea with their son <unk> and became the sea @-@ goddess Leucothea . At some point before his marriage to Ino , Athamas had sired <unk> and <unk> by Themisto , and <unk> 's daughters Peisidice , <unk> and <unk> were given extended group treatment in the Catalogue . 
 = = = Book 2 = = = 
 It is uncertain at what point among the extant fragments the division between books 1 and 2 fell , but at least some of the <unk> families were covered in the second book . The families of Perieres , Deion and Sisyphus ( in that order ) were most likely found in the 2nd book because there does not appear to be enough room left in book 1 to accommodate them as a group after the children of Neleus and Pelias . It was once thought that the Ehoie of Atalanta opened the book , but recently published evidence casts doubt upon this view ( see Book 3 , below ) . 
 Perieres ' family was centered around Messene . His son Leucippus had several daughters , but Arsinoe was singled out for extensive treatment . To Apollo she bore Asclepius , whom Zeus killed . In a rage Apollo killed the Cyclopes , after which Zeus was about to hurl him into Tartarus when Leto interceded and arranged for Apollo to serve as a laborer for Admetus instead . Directly following the Asclepius affair comes the Ehoie of <unk> , the daughter of Deion . She bore <unk> and Panopeus to <unk> ; the brothers did not get along , quarreling while still in the womb . Another daughter of Deion , <unk> , bore <unk> to Apollo and Autolycus to Hermes . <unk> sired <unk> ; Autolycus , the grandfather of Odysseus , was a master thief who could change the appearance of his booty to avoid detection . Autolycus ' daughter <unk> , the mother of Jason , is apparently born directly preceding the Ehoie of Mestra , the daughter of Erysichthon . 
 Mestra 's story is one of the best preserved and most studied sections of the Catalogue . She had the ability to change her shape at will , a skill which her father Erysichthon exploited in service of a ravening hunger with which he had been cursed and for which reason the people had nicknamed him <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> , " Blazing " ) . He would marry off Mestra for the bride prices she garnered , only to have the girl return home in some different form . The most notable victim of this plot was Sisyphus , who , despite his characteristic cunning , could never retain custody of his would @-@ be daughter @-@ in @-@ law . Strife arose between Sisyphus and Erysichthon which no mortal could resolve , and the case was handed over to another authority . The text is damaged at this point , and identity of the mediator is a matter of dispute , as is the nature of the verdict rendered . Exactly how this judgement resolves the quarrel over Mestra is obscure , but Sisyphus ultimately comes out on the losing end , for Mestra does not bear children to Glaucus . Instead Poseidon whisks her off to Kos , where she bears <unk> to the god . <unk> ' descendents rule the island , which is sacked by Heracles in a brief allusion to the great hero 's adventures . On his way home from attacking Troy for the horses of <unk> , he assaulted Kos before going on to participate in the <unk> . 
 The Ehoie of Mestra closes with her returning to Athens to care for her father , but the poet 's attention stays with Sisyphus , as he and his son are the male subjects of the Ehoie of <unk> which immediately follows . She was wise and beautiful , having been taught womanly arts by Athena . Sisyphus attempted to cheat her of her cattle , but Zeus intervened . Although he did not get what he was after , Sisyphus did accomplish with <unk> what he could not with Mestra : a marriage for Glaucus . The gods again got in the way , though , and she bore Bellerophontes to Poseidon , who gave his son the winged horse Pegasus with which Bellerophontes slew the Chimera . In the Iliad this task was presented as the order of Proetus ' father @-@ in @-@ law <unk> , and in the Catalogue it appears to be followed immediately by the marriage of Bellerophontes and a daughter of the Lycian king . 
 = = = = Inachids = = = = 
 In the Bibliotheca the descendants of <unk> followed Deucalion 's , and the Catalogue appears to have followed the same order , likely introducing the Inachids via the Ehoie of Niobe , the river god 's granddaughter . To Zeus she bore Argus , the eponym of Argos , who in turn sired <unk> , the father of Io . Zeus 's affair with Io had a place in the Catalogue , for ancient authors cite the poem 's version of this myth when quoting an <unk> for the fact that " all 's far in love ... " , at least : 
 Zeus and Io 's " clandestine deeds " produced a son , <unk> , who was the father of Libya . The families of her two sons Agenor and Belus were covered in depth : the former 's line in book 3 , the latter 's following his birth . Belus had a daughter , <unk> , who bore <unk> ( the eponym of Arabia ) to Hermes ; Belus ' sons were Aegyptus and Danaus . 
 The myth of the mass @-@ wedding of Aegyptus ' fifty sons and Danaus ' fifty daughters came at this point , but little survives of the narrative in the Catalogue . Danaus and his daughters fled to Argos and introduced the practice of digging wells , " making waterless Argos well @-@ watered Argos " ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . Aegyptus ' sons followed the <unk> to Greece in order to compel them to marry , and , as in the predominant version of the myth , <unk> alone consummated her union with <unk> and bore Abas , whose sons were <unk> and Proetus . The daughters of Proetus offended Hera or Dionysus or both in some way , and were cursed with leprosy or madness which could only be cured by <unk> , a service which Abas rewarded by granting the seer and his brother Bias shares of Argos to rule . <unk> ' daughter was Danaë . Her golden liaison with Zeus , the birth of Perseus , and mother and son 's involuntary exile in the <unk> are quickly recounted , and Perseus ' siring of Alcaeus , Sthenelus and <unk> by Andromeda also comes in quick succession . 
 = = = Book 3 = = = 
 The division between books 2 and 3 presents a special problem for the reconstruction of the Catalogue . A scholion to Theocritus , Idyll 3 @.@ 40 appears to attribute the story of Atalanta to " Hesiod in book 3 " , a method of citation that almost certainly refers to the present poem . One papyrus concludes with what appears to be the beginning of the first line of Atalanta 's Ehoie followed by a forked <unk> and blank space , suggesting that it is a <unk> ; another papyrus ( pictured ) clearly transmits the ends of the first few lines of her section preceded by blank space , giving the possibility that it was the beginning of a book . These two fragments would combine to give : 
 The account that follows is one of the most extensive and exciting episodes of the Catalogue to survive from antiquity . Atalanta wished to avoid marriage , but a throng of suitors gathered because of her beauty . Her father <unk> promised her hand to the one who could beat his swift daughter in a footrace , with one further condition : any who accepted the challenge and lost would be put to death . Aphrodite had given one of the contestants , Hippomenes , three golden apples with which to temp the girl off course ; these he threw as he ran and begged Atalanta to have pity upon him . The toss of the third apple finally accomplished its aim , but the couple did not live happily after : through the will of Zeus Atalanta was transformed into lion because she had seen " what it is not lawful to see , " which presumably means that she had unlawfully entered a holy precinct . This is where the evidence for Atalanta leaves off , and it remains unknown just where and how the passage fit in the Catalogue . It is possible that the attribution to book three was simply incorrect , and Atalante 's Ehoie came within the family of Athamas in books one or two . Another possibility is that she was introduced in the context of her mother 's family . Her identity in the Catalogue is unknown , but this hypothesis could allow for Atalanta to appear within the <unk> stemma , following the Danae @-@ Ehoie within the extended family of Belus . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In the Catalogue and later <unk> tradition , the family of Belus ' brother Agenor was something " like a repository for aliens and displaced persons . " His son Phoenix was the eponym of Phoenicia , and if Cepheus and Cadmus were also his sons , the <unk> would have been present in <unk> and Thebes as well . By one <unk> Phoenix sired Adonis . <unk> bore to him Phineus ; she was perhaps also the mother of Phoenix 's daughter Europa , but the girl 's mother might have been <unk> , as in Moschus ' Europa . 
 Europa 's tale , well known in later classical literature and beyond , appears in a largely familiar form in the Catalogue . She caught Zeus 's eye while she and some friends were gathering flowers in a meadow . The god transformed into a bull with breath smelling of saffron , in the guise of which he abducted Europa , carrying her upon his back to Crete . There she bore Minos , <unk> and Sarpedon to Zeus , and he gave her a necklace made by Hephaestus that would figure in Theban saga as the Necklace of Harmonia . Sarpedon ruled Lycia , and was apparently granted a lifespan equal to three generations of men by Zeus . His death at Troy and the rain of blood it inspired Zeus to send is briefly described . Minos ruled Crete , succeeding his stepfather <unk> . Poseidon sent up from the sea a bull which had sex with Minos ' wife <unk> , siring the Minotaur . To Minos she also bore Deucalion , <unk> , Androgeos and <unk> , though it is equally possible that these last two names referred to a single son . At least one daughter , Ariadne , was surely present , for the myth of Androgeos – <unk> ' death in Athens and the subsequent sacrifice of Athenian youths to the Minotaur will presuppose Theseus ' expedition to Crete and Ariadne 's complicity in slaying the beast . 
 Phineus was even better @-@ traveled than his sister Europa , and his biography in the Catalogue was apparently a " pièce de résistance " meant to conclude the geographically diverse <unk> stemma with an appropriate flourish . He ruled in Thrace , but was kidnapped by the Harpies . <unk> and Calais , the <unk> , pursued the tormentors and tormented to the ends of the earth . The poet catalogued many far @-@ flung and remarkable races encountered during the chase , including : the <unk> ( " Subterranean Men " ) , Pygmies , <unk> ( " Black Men " ) , <unk> , Libyans , " horse @-@ milking " Scythians , <unk> ( " Half @-@ Dogs " ) and the <unk> , as well as griffins . Ephorus called the episode the <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> , " Journey Around the World " ) , and it was once thought that this title referred to an independent work , one erroneously attributed to Hesiod . This view was disproved conclusively in 1911 with the publication of an extensive papyrus fragment ( pictured ) of the episode which derived from the same <unk> that contained the myth of Europa described above . 
 = = = = Arcadia = = = = 
 It is likely that the section describing the Arcadian descendants of Pelasgus and Arcas followed that of the Inachids . Pelasgus was autochthonous ; he sired Lycaon either by the Oceanid <unk> or by Cyllene , the <unk> of an Arcadian mountain which still bears her name . Lycaon 's fifty <unk> sons drew the ire of Zeus and were all destroyed , save <unk> . The majority of the subsequently covered Arcadian figures descend from Arcas , who was the son of Zeus and Callisto , a local nymph . A familiar version of her <unk> is attributed to " Hesiod " by Pseudo @-@ Eratosthenes , but the Hesiodic work intended in this citation might have been the Astronomia . Arcas had at least two sons : <unk> and <unk> . <unk> sired <unk> , the father of <unk> and <unk> ; <unk> was the father of <unk> , the wife of Proetus , and <unk> . <unk> ' daughter Auge was for some reason entrusted to the care of <unk> in Mysia , where she lay with Heracles and bore Telephus . Telephus was on the <unk> throne when the Greek expedition to Troy accidentally landed there and found themselves fighting fellow " Achaeans . " 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In the Bibliotheca , the Arcadian genealogies are immediately followed by the <unk> , and this progression is known to mirror the structure of the Catalogue because other fragments of the papyrus roll that transmits the Telephus myth cover families of Atlas ' daughters : <unk> , Electra , Alcyone , Sterope , Celaeno , Maia and Merope . Maia bore Hermes to Zeus on Mount Cyllene . <unk> also slept with Zeus , becoming the mother of Lacedaemon , through whom much of the Spartan line was traced , including <unk> , the father of Helen , and Penelope , the wife of Odysseus . To Zeus yet again Electra bore Dardanus , the progenitor of the Trojan line , and <unk> , who was killed for sleeping with Demeter . Dardanus ' sons were Erichthonius and <unk> . Hyrieus and <unk> were Poseidon 's children by Alcyone . Her section included the Ehoie of Hyrieus ' daughter Antiope , who bore Amphion and Zethus to Zeus . <unk> ' daughter Arethusa slept with Poseidon and was changed to a spring in Euboea , but not before bearing Abas , the eponym of the <unk> . His line is traced down to <unk> , leader of the <unk> in the Trojan War . Sterope lay with Ares and bore Oenomaus , but it is possible that this union was delayed to book four as part of the section treating the family of Pelops and Oenomaus ' daughter <unk> . 
 = = = Book 4 = = = 
 Before the papyri began to accrue , the longest extant passage of the Catalogue was known from the Shield of Heracles , the first 56 lines of which were borrowed from book 4 according to an ancient hypothesis to the Shield . This passage , the Ehoie of Alcmene , recounts how she went to Thebes with her husband Amphitryon , who could not consummate the marriage until he had avenged the deaths of her brothers at the hands of the <unk> and <unk> . As Amphitryon returned having accomplished this feat , Zeus lay with Alcmene ; upon his return that very night , so too did Amphitryon . To the god Alcmene bore Heracles and to the hero she bore <unk> . 
 Alcmene belongs to the <unk> line — her mother <unk> was a daughter of Pelops and <unk> — , and the passages preceding her Ehoie also concern <unk> . Three of Pelops ' daughters married sons of Perseus : <unk> married <unk> , <unk> wed Sthenelus , and <unk> wed Alcaeus . <unk> and Sthenelus ' daughter <unk> married Oedipus , and at the funeral games in his honor his son Polynices caught the eye of his future wife <unk> , the daughter of <unk> . Pelops ' son Atreus was the father of <unk> who , contrary to the better known genealogy , was the father of Agamemnon and Menelaus . Their mother was <unk> , the daughter of <unk> , and their births were reported in the verses directly preceding the Ehoie of Alcmene . 
 Besides the <unk> line , and whatever remained of the <unk> stemmata among which it ultimately belongs , little is known for certain about the further content of book 4 . It is possible that an Athenian section including the various autochthonous kings of Athens and the daughters of <unk> was found here . A family springing from the river Asopus has also been proposed for this region based on the presence of " several persons or families that other sources represent as descended from daughters of <unk> . " The most notable family that would belong to this section is that of Asopus ' daughter Aegina , the nymph of the island that bears her name who slept with Zeus and bore Aeacus . Fearing that Aeacus would be lonely on his island , Zeus changed all of Aegina 's ants into men , spawning the tribe of Myrmidons , a play upon their name and the Greek word for " ant " , μύρμηξ , <unk> . This is the family to which Achilles belongs , the most notable hero in the Trojan saga , as well as his father Peleus and uncles Telamon and <unk> . 
 = = = Book 5 = = = 
 The final book was different in that it apparently left behind the genealogical structure of the first four books . Book five opened with a nearly 200 @-@ line catalogue of the suitors of Helen , similar in style to the Catalogue of Ships in Iliad book 2 . Although it is likely that the entire catalogue included twenty @-@ five to thirty suitors , only twelve are attested by name . From Argos <unk> and <unk> , the sons of <unk> , attempted to win Helen , but were perhaps never able to join in the contest because of their punishment for the matricide of <unk> . Ever shrewd , Odysseus did not give gifts but simply sent envoys to Castor and <unk> , because he knew that Menelaus would ultimately prevail . <unk> was not so wise and gave many sheep and cows in the hope of winning Helen . From <unk> , many gifts were given by <unk> and <unk> , who were cousins in the Catalogue , not brothers as in the Catalogue of Ships . Athenian <unk> gave many gold cauldrons and tripods , confident that he was the wealthiest of all the heroes . Ajax wooed Helen from Salamis , promising to pillage the surrounding lands and give their possession as part of his gift . <unk> made the long journey from Crete himself , aware of Helen 's beauty only from secondhand accounts . 
 Before giving his decision , Tyndareus bound all the suitors to his fateful oath : should anyone ever take his daughter by force , all those who had wooed her must exact vengeance upon her abductor . To this all the suitors readily agreed , each believing that he would be given Helen 's hand . At this point the Catalogue of Suitors has come to a close , but even as Menelaus ' success is reported , the poet introduces Achilles because of his status as the greatest hero of the Trojan saga and his central role in Zeus 's plan to bring the Heroic Age to a close . With the aid of Agamemnon , Menelaus had given the most bride prices , but were Achilles already of age , he would surely have won Helen 's hand , " for neither warlike Menelaus nor any other human on earth would have defeated him " . But Achilles was not present , and Menelaus won Helen , who bore Hermione to him . 
 = = = = The end of the Heroic Age = = = = 
 The marriage of Helen and Menelaus precipitates the Trojan War , the event that ultimately brings the heroic age to an end , but the circumstances surrounding this transition in the Catalogue are unclear . Directly following the birth of Hermione strife arises among the gods , and Zeus hatches a plan to stir up trouble among mankind . The exact meaning of this plan is obscure because of deficiencies in the text , and several interpretations have been proposed , the most commonly accepted being that Zeus plans to destroy a great number of men by causing the war , ultimately removing the heroes to a life lived in conditions resembling the Golden Age . Another possibility is that Zeus intends to destroy the race of heroes and return the world to its former order , when gods slept with each other , not mortals . In any event , a great change is coming , and as the final placed fragment of the Catalogue breaks off , several enigmatic scenes are sketched . A great storm arises which dwindles the strength of mankind : 
 These lines , described by West as " the finest passage of poetry yet known from the Catalogue " , might parallel Calchas ' prophecy in Iliad 2 , which presages the first nine fruitless years of the Trojan War via the image of a snake devouring nine sparrows . Here the " hairless one , " a kenning for a snake , gives birth to what appears to be the first of three sets of triplets , and as the remains of the papyrus become more meager , the snake sloughs its skin , representing the regeneration that will come once the heroic age comes to an end and the world is given over to mortals . 
 = = = Notable unplaced and disputed fragments = = = 
 Many fragments that are securely attributed to the Catalogue , some of which are relatively substantial , cannot be placed within the poem because their content is either too obscure or could be assigned to different individuals or genealogies which are themselves difficult to locate within the five books . 
 = = = = Cyrene = = = = 
 The place of Cyrene within the poem has implications beyond the level of content , for if her narrative is to be connected to the city of Cyrene in Libya , the terminus post quem for the composition of the Catalogue would be 631 BC , the approximate year of that city 's foundation . Pindar , Pythian 9 tells how Apollo saw Cyrene hunting in her native Thessaly and was immediately enamoured of the tomboy . The god goes to the cave of the wise centaur Chiron and asks who she is and whether it would be wise to consort with her . Chiron then prophesies that it is fated for Cyrene and Apollo to mate , and that he will bring her across the sea to Libya , where she will be queen of a portion of the land and bear to him a son , <unk> . A <unk> on the ode states that " Pindar took the story from an Ehoie of Hesiod 's " ( <unk> δὲ <unk> <unk> τὴν <unk> <unk> ὁ <unk> ) and relates the opening lines of the section ( Cat. fr . 215 ) : 
 Richard Janko , who believes that the Catalogue was composed c . 690 , argues that the extent to which Pindar relied upon the Hesiodic text is unknown and that , even if Apollo did carry Cyrene to Libya , this does not presuppose an aetiology of the city . Others have argued that the citation is also vague regarding just which Hesiodic poem included the Cyrene @-@ Ehoie , the Catalogue or the Megalai Ehoiai : the latter might have included a narrative similar to Pindar 's , with the former presenting a different version of the myth , if indeed the Catalogue treated Cyrene at all . The complete removal of Cyrene would not , however , be easily accommodated by related evidence — it would presumably also involve transferring two fragments concerning <unk> which have traditionally been attributed to the Catalogue , and his son Actaeon certainly appeared in the poem . 
 = = = = Actaeon = = = = 
 The myth of Actaeon is known to have been narrated in the Catalogue by virtue of a paraphrase found in a fragmentary dictionary of metamorphoses . According to the dictionary , the Catalogue included a variant of the myth in which Actaeon was changed into a stag by Artemis and then killed by his own hounds because he attempted to take Semele as his wife , thus angering Zeus , who had designs upon the woman . Before this <unk> appeared , another papyrus containing 21 <unk> related to the Actaeon myth was published by Edgar Lobel , who tentatively attributed the text to the Catalogue . As the fragment opens , Actaeon has already been torn apart by his dogs , and a goddess — Athena or , less likely , Artemis — arrives at Chiron 's cave . She prophesies to the centaur that Dionysus will be born to Semele and that Actaeon 's dogs will roam the hills with him until his apotheosis , after which they will return to stay with Chiron . At this point the papyrus is damaged , but it is clear that the dogs are delivered from a " madness " ( <unk> , <unk> , line 15 ) and begin to mourn their master as the goddess returns to Olympus . Merkelbach and West did not include this papyrus in their edition of the fragment , the latter calling it an " incoherent epic pastiche " which would cause the author of the Catalogue to " turn in his grave if he knew that it had been attributed to him . " According to Glenn Most , some scholars believe that the text is Hellenistic , but it is demonstrably archaic , and at least a few classicists today consider it to be part of the Catalogue . 
 = = Date , composition and authorship = = 
 During antiquity the Catalogue was almost universally considered the work of Hesiod . Pausanias reports , however , that the Boeotians living around Mount Helicon during his day believed that the only genuine Hesiodic poem was the Works and Days and that even the first 10 lines of that poem ( the so @-@ called " hymn to Zeus " ) were spurious . The only other surviving expression of doubt is found in Aelian , who cites " Hesiod " for the number of Niobe 's children , but qualifies his citation with " unless these verses are not by Hesiod , but have been passed off falsely as his , like many other passages . " But Aelian 's skepticism could have stemmed from the belief , still common today , that Hesiodic poetry was especially susceptible to interpolation , and it is impossible to tell whether he regarded the entire Catalogue as spurious or not . These two passages are , in any event , isolated , and more discerning critics like Apollonius of Rhodes , Aristophanes of Byzantium and Crates of <unk> apparently found no reason to doubt the attribution to Hesiod , going so far as to cite the Catalogue in arguments concerning the content and authenticity of other Hesiodic poems . 
 Modern scholars have not shared the confidence of their Hellenistic counterparts , and today the Catalogue is generally considered to be a post @-@ Hesiodic composition . Since Hesiod is supposed to have lived around the turn of the seventh century , the Cyrene @-@ Ehoie alone could guarantee that the poem was not his . Richard Janko 's survey of epic language , on the other hand , suggests that the Catalogue is very early , nearly contemporary with Hesiod 's Theogony , and Janko sees no reason why the Catalogue " should not be by the same poet as the Theogony , " who " calls himself Hesiod . " But a different critical strain , one which views the transmitted Homeric and Hesiodic poems as ultimate products of rhapsodic recomposition within an oral tradition , would hold that from an initial Hesiodic nucleus the Catalogue arrived at its final form well after period to which Hesiod has been assigned . Such a scenario could account for perceived anachronisms in the mythological content and in the linguistic character of the poem , but would sidestep the issue of the relation between the Catalogue as it has been transmitted and the broader corpus of early Greek epic . 
 Martin West argues on poetic , linguistic , cultural and political grounds that an Athenian poet " compiled the Catalogue of Women and attached it to Hesiod 's Theogony , as if it were all Hesiodic , " sometime between 580 and 520 , and thinks it possible that this range might be narrowed to the period following 540 . He sees , for example , the marriage of Xuthus to a daughter of Erechtheus as a means of subordinating all of Ionia to Athens , since their union produced the eponym Ion . Similarly , Sicyon is made a son of Erechtheus ( fr . 224 ) , which West takes as a reflection of the tyrant Cleisthenes of Sicyon 's attempts to promote Ionian – Athenian interests in the polis , which had traditionally been more closely connected to Dorian Argos . These and other considerations would , in West 's view , establish a terminus post quem of c . 575 , but he prefers a later dating on the assumption that Theogony 965 – 1020 , which he assigns to the latter portion of the sixth century , was contemporaneous with the composition of the Catalogue . 
 West 's arguments have been highly influential , but other scholars have arrived at different conclusions using the same evidence . Fowler thinks that the Sicyon genealogy would more likely reflect a composition before Cleisthenes ' death ( c . 575 ) and dates the poem to the period closely following the First Sacred War , connecting its content to the growing influence of the Amphictyonic League and placing its author in Aeolian Thessaly because of the <unk> family @-@ trees centered around that region which dominate the earlier portions of the poem . <unk> , on the other hand , takes this focus upon the Aeolids and the Catalogue poet 's perceived interest in eastern peoples to be indicative of a poet from Aeolis in Asia Minor ; she proposes that the Catalogue was composed there between 630 and 590 , viewing the composition of the Shield of Heracles and an apparent allusion to the poem by <unk> ( died c . 555 ) as providing the ultimate terminus ante quem . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Catalogue 's greatest influence was felt during the Hellenistic period , when the poem was used as an extra @-@ Homeric touchstone for the poets of the era who favored recondite and antiquarian references over direct engagement with the more prominent members of the canon . The most famous Hellenistic allusion to the Catalogue is found in Hermesianax 's <unk> , which included a catalogue of great literary figures and their loves , beginning with Orpheus and <unk> ( more commonly known as Eurydice ) and proceeding down to the poet 's contemporaries , including his teacher Philitas of Cos . Many of the entries engage playfully with their subjects ' work : Homer , for example , is portrayed as pining for Penelope . Directly preceding that lovestruck bard comes Hesiod 's blurb : 
 Here the ē ' hoiē @-@ formula is styled as the name of a woman , cleverly rendered " Anne Other " by Helen Asquith , and the grumpy Hesiod who reviled his home in <unk> at Works and Days 639 – 40 becomes a discomfited lover @-@ boy in the village . <unk> , a near contemporary of Hermesianax , composed an elegiac catalogue of mythological pederastic relationships entitled the Loves or Beautiful Boys in which each story was introduced by the formula ē ' <unk> ( <unk> ' ὡς ) , " or like " . <unk> of Samos , a later Hellenistic poet , wrote his own Catalogue of Women and the otherwise unknown <unk> ( or Sostratus ) of <unk> was said to have written an <unk> ( <unk> ) , the masculine equivalent of " Ehoiai " . While allusions to the <unk> @-@ formula and catalogue structure of the poem are most easily recognized , interaction with the Catalogue in Hellenistic poetry was not limited to plays upon these aspects : direct engagement with the myths found in the Catalogue were a popular way for the Alexandrians to show their Hesiodic affiliations . 
 At Rome the poets of the Late Republic and Augustan age continued the Hellenistic period 's allusive engagement with the Catalogue . Catullus , a poet who made plain his <unk> affiliations , is the earliest Roman author who can be seen to engage with the Catalogue . In his <unk> on the wedding of Peleus and Thetis , Catullus alludes to the <unk> that the proem to the Catalogue presented as a defining characteristic of the heroic age and to the epithalamium of the couple that was sung in a later book . In the Aeneid Vergil closes his catalogue of combatants with the swift female warrior Camilla , alluding to the Hesiodic account of <unk> ' speed in " a remarkably subtle nod to tradition in the best Alexandrian style . " Ovid picked up on Vergil 's allusion in the Metamorphoses with his treatment of Atalanta , which recast 's his Roman <unk> 's allusion to <unk> in such a way that it highlights the Hesiodic character of his own poem in contrast with the Homeric character of the Aeneid . 
 = = Transmission and reconstruction = = 
 It is impossible to tell exactly when the last complete copy of the Catalogue was lost . Fragments of over fifty ancient copies have been found , dating from the Hellenistic period through early Byzantine times . A book label from the century or so after the latest Catalogue papyrus lists the contents of a fifth- or sixth @-@ century Hesiodic codex as " Hesiod 's Theogony , Works and Days and Shield " , and it appears that by this time the Byzantine triad of Hesiod 's works had become the notional corpus , to the detriment of the other poems which had traveled under the poet 's name . Knowledge of the Catalogue did not cease altogether with the loss of the final complete copy , however , and well into medieval times authors such as Eustathius and Tzetzes could cite the poem via fragments contained in other ancient authors . Other vestiges of the poem 's influence are less clear : the Pseudo @-@ <unk> Bibliotheca , an early Roman @-@ era handbook of Greek mythology , for example , is widely believed to have taken the Catalogue as its primary structural model , although this is not stated explicitly within that text . 
 The collection and interpretation of the Hesiodic fragments in the modern era began during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries , primarily with the editions of Heinsius ( 1603 ) and <unk> ( 1667 ) . The earliest collections simply presented ancient quotations organized by the quoting author , and it was not until the work of Lehmann ( 1828 ) , Goettling ( 1831 ) and Marckscheffel ( 1840 ) that attempts at a proper reconstruction began . Marckscheffel was the first to recognize that the early portions of the poem treated the descendants of Deucalion in a systematic fashion , but he regarded what were called the " Catalogue of Women " and " Ehoiai " as two initially separate works that had been joined : the former was <unk> structured , while the latter , in Marckscheffel 's view , simply recounted myths involving notable Thessalian and Boeotian heroines , with each introduced by the ē ' hoiē @-@ formula . Since the Ehoie of Alcmene was attested for book 4 , Marckscheffel proposed that books 1 – 3 were the " Catalogue " , and books 4 and 5 were the " Ehoiai " . 
 As the nineteenth century progressed , there were several other important observations about the genealogical structure of the Catalogue . In 1860 Adolf Kirchhoff noted the mass of information connected to the family of Io , a stemma which could be assigned to the third book because of an ancient citation placing Phineus , one of her descendents , there . The picture of the Catalogue that was emerging began to resemble the Bibliotheca in structure , but Theodor <unk> was the first to suggest explicitly ( though in passing ) that the poem might be reconstructed with the help of the <unk> work . <unk> and his contemporaries still largely followed Marckscheffel 's conclusion that the Catalogue and Ehoiai were semi @-@ distinct texts , and it was not until 1894 that Friedrich Leo finally demonstrated that these were in fact alternate titles for a single poem . 
 A few years before Leo 's paper , the first small papyrus fragment was found , and the first half of the twentieth century would see the publication of several other pieces which added significantly to the modern text of the Catalogue . Among these finds were important passages , the Catalogue of Suitors and Epithalamium of Peleus and Thetis for example , but few advanced the modern understanding of the work 's overall structure . The appearance of the proem in 1956 actually led to a major misapprehension , for the list of gods found therein , beginning with Zeus and proceeding through the divine Heracles , led some to believe that the Catalogue was not organized in a strictly genealogical manner , but presented the unions of gods and heroines organized to some extent by amorous deity . Six years later , with the publication of the 28th part of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri , the corpus of papyrus witnesses to the fragmentary Hesiodic poems was nearly doubled , with the lion 's share of these new texts belonging to the Catalogue . The new papyri proved once and for all that the poem was organized by genealogies of the great families in a way similar to the Bibliotheca , and that the poet 's use of the ē ' hoiē @-@ formula was not a random method of introduction but an organizing tool within an overall structure . 
 = = Editions and translations = = 
 = = = Critical editions = = = 
 Heinsius , D. ( 1603 ) , Hesiodi Ascraei quae extant , Leiden . 
 <unk> , J.G. ( 1667 ) , Hesiodi Ascraei quae extant , Amsterdam . 
 Robinson , T. ( 1737 ) , Hesiodi Ascraei quae <unk> cum notis variorum , Oxford . 
 <unk> , T. ( 1823 ) , <unk> <unk> <unk> , vol . 1 , Leipzig . 
 <unk> , L.A. ( 1825 ) , <unk> , Leipzig . 
 Lehmann , C. ( 1828 ) , De Hesiodi carminibus <unk> <unk> <unk> , Berlin . 
 Goettling , C.W. ( 1831 ) , Hesiodi carmina , Gotha . 
 Marckscheffel , G. ( 1840 ) , Hesiodi , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> et <unk> <unk> fragmenta , Leipzig . 
 Goettling , C.W. ( 1843 ) , Hesiodi carmina ( 2nd rev. ed . ) , Gotha . 
 <unk> , F.S. ( 1840 ) , Hesiodi carmina , Paris . 
 Kinkel , G. ( 1877 ) , <unk> Graecorum fragmenta , vol . 1 , Leipzig . 
 <unk> , K. ( 1889 ) , <unk> τὰ <unk> , Athens . 
 Rzach , A. ( 1902 ) , Hesiodi Carmina , Leipzig . 
 Rzach , A. ( 1908 ) , Hesiodi Carmina ( 2nd rev. ed . ) , Leipzig . 
 Rzach , A. ( 1913 ) , Hesiodi Carmina ( 3rd rev. ed . ) , Leipzig , ISBN 3 @-@ 598 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , A. ( 1951 ) , <unk> sive <unk> fragmenta , Naples . 
 Merkelbach , R. ( 1957 ) , Die <unk> auf Papyrus , Leipzig . 
 Merkelbach , R. ; West , M.L. ( 1967 ) , Fragmenta <unk> , Oxford , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Merkelbach , R. ; West , M.L. ( 1990 ) , " Fragmenta <unk> " , in F. <unk> , Hesiodi <unk> , Opera et Dies , Scutum ( 3rd rev. ed . ) , Oxford , ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 <unk> , M. ( 2004 ) , <unk> <unk> und Megalai <unk> : Ein <unk> zu den <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , Munich & Leipzig , ISBN 3 @-@ 598 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Translations = = = 
 Mair , A.W. ( 1908 ) , Hesiod : the Poems and Fragments , Done into English Prose , Oxford . ( To be consulted with caution : out of date even for 1908 . ) 
 Evelyn @-@ White , H.G. ( 1936 ) , Hesiod , the Homeric Hymns , and <unk> , Loeb Classical Library , no . 57 ( 3rd rev. ed . ) , Cambridge , MA , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . ( The link is to the 1st edition of 1914 . ) English translation with facing Greek text ; now obsolete except for its translations of the ancient quotations . 
 Marg , W. ( 1970 ) , Hesiod : Sämtliche Gedichte , Stuttgart . German translation . 
 <unk> , G. ( 1998 ) , <unk> . Opere , Torino , ISBN 978 @-@ 88 @-@ 446 @-@ 0053 @-@ 2 . Italian translation with facing Greek text ; faithfully based upon the editions of Merkelbach and West . 
 Most , G.W. ( 2006 ) , Hesiod : Theogony , Works and Days , <unk> , Loeb Classical Library , no . 57 , Cambridge , MA , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . Includes ancient assessments of the Catalogue . 
 Most , G.W. ( 2007 ) , Hesiod : The Shield , Catalogue , Other Fragments , Loeb Classical Library , no . 503 , Cambridge , MA , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 674 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . English translation with facing Greek text ; takes much recent scholarship into consideration . 
 = HMS Hunter ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Hunter was a H @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy in the mid @-@ 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 the ship enforced the arms blockade imposed on both sides by Britain and France , until she struck a mine in May 1937 . She was under repair for the next year and a half , after which she rejoined the Mediterranean Fleet . During the first few months of World War II , Hunter searched for German commerce raiders in the Atlantic Ocean until she was transferred back to Britain in February 1940 . Returning to action in the Norwegian Campaign , she was sunk by German destroyers during the First Battle of Narvik in April 1940 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Hunter displaced 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 883 long tons ( 1 @,@ 913 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 5 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Hunter carried a maximum of 470 long tons ( 480 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 5 @,@ 530 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 240 km ; 6 @,@ 360 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 137 officers and men in peacetime , but this was increased to 146 in wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) Mark IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Hunter had two quadruple Mark I mounts for the 0 @.@ 5 inch Vickers Mark III machine gun . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 Ordered on 13 December 1934 , Hunter was laid down by Swan Hunter & Wigham Richardson at Wallsend @-@ on @-@ Tyne , England , on 27 March 1935 . She was launched on 25 February 1936 and completed on 30 September . Excluding government @-@ furnished equipment such as armament , the ship cost £ 253 @,@ 167 . Hunter was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning . 
 = = = Spanish Civil War = = = 
 The destroyer patrolled Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War , enforcing the edicts of the Non @-@ Intervention Committee . Hunter struck a mine south of Almeria , Spain on the afternoon of 13 May 1937 . She suffered severe damage , with a heavy list , her radio wrecked and the bow flooded . Eight of her complement were killed and 24 wounded . The ship was towed clear of the minefield by the Spanish Republican destroyer <unk> . The mine had been laid several weeks earlier by two ex @-@ German Spanish Nationalist E @-@ boats , the Falange and the <unk> . Hunter was towed to Almeria by Hyperion , where she arrived in the early hours of 14 May . The light cruiser Arethusa towed her to Gibraltar , where she was temporarily repaired from 15 May to 18 August . Hunter was towed to Malta for permanent repairs in August 1937 , but they were not completed until 10 November 1938 . The ship was assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla once her repairs were finished and she was given a brief overhaul in Malta between 24 June and 4 July 1939 . Hunter was sent to Plymouth for a more thorough refit in mid @-@ August 1939 that lasted through 27 August . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 When World War II began on 3 September , Hunter was en route to Freetown , Sierra Leone to search for German commerce raiders , before being transferred to the North America and West Indies Station in late October . Hunter remained on that station until she was transferred to the British Isles in February 1940 and began a refit at Falmouth that lasted until 9 March . The ship rejoined the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow on 17 March . On 6 April Hunter and the rest of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla escorted the four destroyer minelayers of the 20th Destroyer Flotilla as they sailed to implement Operation Wilfred , an operation to lay mines in the Vestfjord to prevent the transport of Swedish iron ore from Narvik to Germany . The mines were laid on the early morning of 8 April , before the Germans began their invasion , and the destroyers joined the battlecruiser Renown and her escorts . 
 During the First Battle of Narvik on 10 April 1940 , Hunter and four other H @-@ class ships of the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla attacked the German destroyers that had transported German troops to occupy Narvik in northern Norway the previous day . The flotilla leader Hardy led four of her half @-@ sisters down Ofotfjord in a surprise dawn attack on Narvik harbour during a blinding snowstorm . Hotspur and Hostile were initially left at the entrance , but Hunter followed Hardy into the harbour and fired all eight of her torpedoes into the mass of shipping . One torpedo hit the German destroyer Z22 Anton Schmitt in the forward engine room , followed by one of Hunter 's 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch shells . As the British ships were withdrawing , they encountered five German destroyers at close range . Two of the German ships crossed the T of the British ships and quickly set Hardy on fire and forced her to run aground . Hunter eventually took the lead , but was severely damaged by the Germans , probably including one torpedo hit , and her speed dropped rapidly . Hotspur , immediately behind her , was temporarily out of control due to two hits , and rammed her from behind . When the ships managed to disengage , Hunter capsized . 107 men of the crew were killed and another five died of their wounds . The German destroyers rescued 46 men , who were released into Sweden on 13 April . 
 = = Rediscovery = = 
 The wreck was discovered on 5 March 2008 by the Royal Norwegian Navy mine control vessel HNoMS Tyr , after being unknown for nearly 70 years , and will be marked as a war grave to commemorate the lost members of her crew . A series of coordinated memorial ceremonies were held on board British and Norwegian warships on Saturday 8 March 2008 , honouring all those who died during the battles of Narvik . Over a thousand NATO personnel took part , including British and Norwegian sailors , Royal Marines and soldiers . Led by HMS Albion , the UK 's Fleet Amphibious Flagship , five warships steamed in line past the spot where the ship lies , marked for the occasion by Tyr . Hunter 's final resting place was marked with wreaths cast into the sea . 
 = SECR N class = 
 The SECR N class was a type of 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 ( " mogul " ) steam locomotive designed in 1914 by Richard Maunsell for mixed @-@ traffic duties on the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) . Built between 1917 and 1934 , it was the first non @-@ Great Western Railway ( GWR ) type to use and improve upon the basic design principles established by GWR Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) George Jackson Churchward . The N class was based on the GWR 4300 Class design , improved with Midland Railway concepts . 
 The N class was mechanically similar to the SECR K class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 passenger tank engine , also by Maunsell . It influenced future 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 development in Britain and provided the basis for the 3 @-@ cylinder N1 class of 1922 . Production was delayed by the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , and the first N class rolled out of Ashford Works in 1917 , three years after design work was completed . The class replaced obsolete 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s as part of the SECR 's fleet standardisation , as they used parts interchangeable with those of other classes . 
 Eighty N class locomotives were built in three batches between the First and Second World Wars . Fifty were assembled from kits of parts made at the Royal Arsenal , Woolwich , giving rise to the nickname of " Woolworths " . They worked over most of the Southern Railway ( SR ) network , and were used by the Southern Region of British Railways ( BR ) until the last was withdrawn in 1966 . One N class locomotive is preserved on the Swanage Railway in Dorset , undergoing overhaul . 
 = = Background = = 
 Three factors dictated the type of locomotive that could run on the South Eastern and Chatham Railway ( SECR ) : increased freight and passenger train loadings , poor track quality , and weak , lightly built bridges . An increasing number of passengers used the SECR to reach the cross @-@ Channel ferries at Dover and Folkestone between 1910 and 1913 , and heavy goods trains between Tonbridge and Hither Green marshalling yard stretched the capabilities of existing locomotives and infrastructure . On the lines of the former London , Chatham and Dover Railway ( LCDR ) , flint beach pebbles on a bed of ash had been used for ballast . Conventional track ballast has irregular shapes that " lock " together to keep the track in place , whereas the smooth pebbles used by the LCDR failed to prevent track movement under strain . The economies in construction meant that only locomotives with low axle loadings could run safely on the track . These restrictions meant that the SECR was unable to follow a coherent locomotive strategy that reduced costs and increased serviceability . The railway 's Operating Department had to use mismatched classes of underpowered and obsolete 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 and 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives because they could run within the restrictions imposed by the infrastructure . This meant frequent double @-@ heading that increased operational costs . 
 Richard Maunsell was appointed CME of the SECR in 1913 , following the retirement of Harry Wainwright due to ill health . Wainwright left a legacy of competent but unspectacular locomotives that struggled to cope with the increased train lengths and loadings . Maunsell took control of the short @-@ term situation by improving existing designs , and he introduced new engines to progressively replace obsolete classes . New designs could also cut costs on the SECR , as one capable mixed @-@ traffic locomotive could undertake the work of two separate passenger or freight types . The first new design was to become Maunsell 's N class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 For detailed information on numbering variations , see : Livery and numbering 
 The N class was designed by Maunsell in 1914 to provide a sturdy mixed @-@ traffic locomotive with high route availability . Intended to replace several obsolete 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 types , the N class was the first step in the SECR 's fleet standardisation programme , which also included the K class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4T passenger tank locomotive . Maunsell enlisted the help of former GWR engineer Harold Holcroft , who suggested that a 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement would allow the class to run on the poor @-@ quality track in north Kent . This arrangement allowed for a longer wheelbase with leading axle to permit greater stability at speed on tight track curves , which had constrained the size of locomotives operating on the SECR . A longer locomotive could also accommodate a larger boiler than an 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , giving the N class sufficient power to avoid double @-@ heading of locomotives on heavier trains . 
 The N class incorporated the principles of power and reliability established by George Churchward , using a Belpaire firebox that sloped downwards towards the cab instead of a round @-@ topped version , a regulator located in the smokebox , long @-@ travel valves for free running up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) , a sharply tapered and <unk> boiler , and a right @-@ hand driving position . These features are attributed to Holcroft , who worked on the GWR 4300 class before joining the SECR . The boiler was intended to become a standard component for use on future SECR locomotive designs , thereby reducing building times and improving organisation at the works . The size was constrained by the heavier axle @-@ loading of Maunsell ’ s proposed 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotive variant of the N class , the K class , and was consequently smaller than was otherwise possible on the 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 chassis . The need to reduce overall weight also meant that the latter would feature lightly braced frames . 
 Maunsell 's Chief Locomotive Draughtsman , James Clayton , brought functional Midland Railway influences to the design , such as the shape of the cab and the drumhead @-@ type smokebox , which sat on a saddle that was of wider diameter than the fully lagged and clad boiler . Clayton was also responsible for the tender and chimney designs . <unk> valves were provided to prevent vacuum formation in the cylinders when the locomotive was stationary , and the outside Walschaerts valve gear incorporated single slide @-@ bars and piston tail rods . Innovations added by Maunsell 's team included steam @-@ powered locomotive brakes , locating the boiler water top feed inside a dome @-@ like cover with external <unk> and water feed pipes mounted on either side , and a new type of superheater that segregated saturated and superheated steam . Maunsell also incorporated a screw reverser to control valve events , which was easier to maintain than the complex steam reverser configuration of previous SECR designs . All components were standardised for interchange with similar locomotive classes to ease maintenance and reduce production costs . 
 = = = SECR batch = = = 
 For a detailed examination of the modifications made to No. 822 , see : SR N1 class . 
 Production of the first batch was delayed by the outbreak of the First World War . Assembly began towards the end of the war and the first locomotive , No. 810 , emerged from Ashford Works for proving trials in July 1917 , one month after the first K class tank , whose design was derived from the N class . Entering service in August 1917 , No. 810 was trialled for three years before another 15 locomotives ( Nos. 811 – 825 ) were ordered in 1919 . These were built between 1920 and 1923 ; their construction delayed by a backlog of repairs caused by the war . The first left Ashford Works in June 1920 , featuring a greater superheating surface area within the boiler as a result of operational experience with No. 810 . All locomotives were equipped with 3 @,@ 500 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 15 @,@ 911 l ) tenders . 
 In 1922 modifications were made to No. 822 during assembly . This was because production delays at Ashford prevented the building of a proposed 3 @-@ cylinder design drawn @-@ up in 1919 . Maunsell and Holcroft revised No. 822 's cylinder arrangement to accommodate a third inside cylinder fitted between the frames . The outside cylinders were also reduced to 16 in × 26 in ( 406 mm × 660 mm ) diameter to accommodate the inside cylinder and its associated valve linkages . The differences between No. 822 and the rest of the N class meant that this locomotive was re @-@ designated as the 1919 proposal , becoming the prototype of the SR N1 class when completed in March 1923 . 
 = = = " Woolwich " batch = = = 
 The first batch of the N class proved successful in service , and few problems were encountered after settling @-@ in . The Ministry of Supply drew up a contract for a second batch to the same specification – to be built at the Royal Arsenal , Woolwich . The government backing came as part of a proposal to nationalise the railways , which would require a standard fleet of locomotives to promote economies in production and maintenance . The nationalisation proposal was abandoned ; instead , the government passed the 1921 Railways Act , which grouped the railways into the " Big Four " in 1923 . Building of the second batch went ahead to retain skilled labour at Woolwich , but the fabrication of 119 boilers for allocation to the kits of parts was contracted @-@ out because of limited production capacity at Woolwich and Ashford ; the North British Locomotive Company built 85 , Robert Stephenson and Company 20 , and Kitson & Co . 14 . By 1924 , the prefabricated components stored at Woolwich formed 100 complete N class kits for purchase from the government . 
 The newly created Southern Railway , which had absorbed the SECR in the 1923 " Grouping " , undertook trials in the spring of 1924 to compare the performance of its freight locomotives . Because the Ns were designed to haul both freight and passenger traffic , Maunsell , as the newly appointed Chief Mechanical Engineer of the Southern Railway , decided to compare the design with the N1 , LSWR S15 and LB & SCR K classes in trials that involved hauling trains of 65 loaded wagons . Although the S15 was superior in freight haulage capacity and operational economy , the N class ’ good all @-@ round performance on passenger and freight meant that the type was adopted as the company 's standard mixed @-@ traffic design . The Southern Railway subsequently bought fifty " Woolwich " kits for assembly at Ashford between June 1924 and August 1925 . These were identical to the SECR batch and were given numbers in the series <unk> – <unk> . The Midland Great Western Railway of Ireland bought 12 kits prior to absorption by the Great Southern and Western Railway , which bought an extra 15 . The latter 15 locomotives were divided into eight <unk> Class 372 with 5 @-@ foot @-@ 6 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 676 m ) driving wheels and six <unk> Class 393 with 6 @-@ foot @-@ 0 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 829 m ) driving wheels : the final kit was kept for spares . 
 The Metropolitan Railway bought six kits for conversion to the Metropolitan Railway K Class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4T tank engines , which were similar in outline to the SECR K class . The remaining 17 complete kits at Woolwich were bought by the Southern Railway , and formed the basis of later locomotive classes such as the three @-@ cylinder SR W class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 tank locomotive . The prototype W class was produced in 1932 from N class parts with the addition of water tanks , a coal bunker , a rear bogie and a third cylinder between the frames . Woolwich also stocked a surplus of N class bogie components , and these were bought by the Southern for rebuilding the LB & SCR E1 class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tanks into the <unk> class 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 tanks . 
 = = = Southern Railway batch = = = 
 In 1932 , the Southern Railway ordered a final batch of 15 locomotives ( Nos. 1400 – 1414 ) to expand class availability on the Southern Railway 's network . These were built at Ashford works and differed from the previous 65 in a number of ways . The cabs of the final eight locomotives ( Nos. 1407 – 1414 ) were fitted for left @-@ hand driving , which was adopted as standard by the Southern Railway . The original N class chimney was replaced with the lower @-@ profile version used on the U1 class , which increased route availability by allowing the locomotives to pass under lower bridges and tunnels . Maunsell had begun to research smoke deflection techniques to improve driver visibility on the King Arthur class between 1926 and 1927 , which resulted in the adoption of a standard smoke deflector design for the Southern Railway . A smaller version was fitted to Nos. 1400 – 1414 during building . 
 Before entering service , the batch was attached to 4 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 18 @,@ 184 l ) tenders to increase operational range over the Southern Railway 's long Western section routes . Despite this advantage , tenders fitted to the eight left @-@ hand drive examples were intended for use with right @-@ hand drive locomotives . This resulted in the location of the fireman 's fittings on the " wrong " side of the cab . The design also necessitated the addition of a step to the footplate , as the boiler <unk> was lower than the fall @-@ plate that connected the tender and cab floors . The new batch incorporated a new set of footsteps beneath the front buffer beam , modified slide @-@ bars and the dome was redesigned to incorporate the regulator to ease access during routine maintenance . 
 = = = N class construction history = = = 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The N class was used to haul services over most of the SECR network and became a familiar sight on the difficult cross @-@ country route between Tonbridge and Reading , on which the steep gradients had taxed the company 's 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 and 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 designs . The success of the 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 in traversing this route was due to their higher @-@ capacity tapered boilers that produced an ample supply of steam , and the small 5 ft 6 in ( 1 @.@ 68 m ) driving wheels that delivered considerable tractive effort when climbing gradients such as the 1 in 100 between Gomshall and Shalford . 
 After " The Grouping " in 1923 , the N class remained on the former SECR network , which was incorporated into the Southern Railway 's Eastern section . Typical services included Ramsgate , Ashford and Hither Green freights , and Cannon Street to Dover passenger trains . The spring of 1924 saw Nos. <unk> and <unk> transferred to the former LSWR mainline between Waterloo and Guildford for trials . These proved successful , and paved the way for the allocation of most of the Woolwich batch to the Southern Railway 's Western section . The type regularly replaced Dugald Drummond 's ageing LSWR T9 class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s on portions of the Atlantic Coast Express over the steeply graded mainlines west of Exeter . 
 The N class was also successful on the Central section , where they worked alongside L. B. Billinton 's LB & SCR K class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s . However the large cylinder and cab sizes of the N class prevented use of the type on the Eastern section 's Tonbridge – Hastings line . The route 's narrow bridges and tunnels were unable to accommodate the class , and provided justification for using the narrower 3 @-@ cylinder N1 class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 on the route . Despite these restrictions , the class was capable of hauling heavy loads at moderate speeds , a useful attribute that was exploited throughout the Second World War . The entire class came into British Railways ' ownership in 1948 and could be seen in most areas of the Southern Region . 
 = = = Performance of the class and modifications = = = 
 When introduced in 1917 , the N class proved adept at hauling both passenger and freight services on the SECR . They were well liked by crews who appreciated the general robustness of the design , although the lightly built frames caused excessive vibration and rough riding on the footplate when worked hard . Despite there being little wrong with the original design , the N class ’ full steaming potential was not realised because of the failure to capitalise upon a larger boiler , which was a direct consequence of Maunsell ’ s standardisation policy . Instead , the SECR batch was trial @-@ fitted with " stovepipe " chimneys in an attempt to improve draughting . This was initially applied to No. 812 in 1921 , although two more were fitted to Nos. 817 and 819 during building because of a shortage of chimneys at Ashford Works . The chimney fitted to No. 819 was transferred to No. 818 sometime between 1921 and 1924 , though all " stovepipes " had been replaced with the standard N class type by April 1927 . Another trial saw the addition of a second <unk> to No. 825 , which gave better support to the valve gear and helped protect it from spillage from the driving wheel <unk> fillers . 
 The quality of the original design was such that No . <unk> was put on display at the British Empire Exhibition at Wembley from May to November 1925 , and no class @-@ wide modifications were made until 1934 . This was when the SECR and Woolwich batches began to receive new domes and front footsteps during overhauls and general repairs . These were the same design as those used on Nos. 1400 – 1414 , and were intended to standardise components between the batches . The SECR and Woolwich batches also received smoke deflectors to prevent drifting smoke from obscuring the driver 's vision ahead . The U1 chimneys replaced the standard N class type on the earlier locomotives , which , along with the removal of the piston tail rods on the earlier batches , created a truly standardised appearance . 
 In 1937 , Maunsell 's replacement Oliver Bulleid saw no need to improve draughting of the class , and spared them from trials with Lemaître multiple @-@ jet blastpipes and wide @-@ diameter chimneys . However , he had Maunsell 's smokebox @-@ mounted anti @-@ vacuum snifting valves removed at the end of the Second World War in an effort to reduce maintenance . Bulleid also had eight new 4 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 18 @,@ 184 l ) tenders built specially for the left @-@ hand drive locomotives . In 1947 , No. 1831 was given electric lighting and converted to oil @-@ burning as part of government @-@ backed fuel trials in anticipation of a post @-@ war coal shortage , though it was reverted to coal @-@ firing in December 1948 . 
 The class was heavily used by British Railways : 29 locomotives required replacement cylinders between 1955 and 1961 due to excessive wear . Frames were occasionally replaced due to stress caused by heavy use , and the steam circuit was revised when new cylinders were fitted : the inside steam pipes of Maunsell 's original design were replaced by outside steam pipes emerging from the smokebox , behind the smoke deflectors . From 1957 , some of the locomotives had larger @-@ diameter BR Standard Class 4 chimneys fitted to improve draughting with poor @-@ quality coal , though the decline of steam on the Southern Region precluded use on the entire class . Crew reports maintained that the latter modifications cut fuel and water consumption . The final set of modifications constituted the fitting of new injectors and Automatic Warning System ( AWS ) equipment in 1957 and 1959 respectively . 
 = = = Experiments = = = 
 Although sufficient for the Southern Railway 's needs , the N class was an ideal test @-@ bed for experiments with new steam technology . The first experiment entailed fitting a Worthington feed pump to No . <unk> in 1924 . The trial was moderately successful , and the pump remained in use until removal in 1927 . In June 1930 , No . A816 was withdrawn from service for the application of experimental Anderson steam conservation equipment at Eastleigh Works . This was designed by a Scottish marine draughtsman , Mr. <unk> Anderson , who proposed the use of a fan system to condense spent steam and improve draughting of the fire on long @-@ distance runs in regions with poor access to water . 
 No . A816 emerged from Eastleigh in August 1931 for trials , but was stopped when temperature variations within the condensing equipment caused water leakage . Modifications were made to improve the draughting of the locomotive , incorporating a box @-@ like chimney attached to the condenser array by pipes . No . A816 was released for more trials , and produced performances well @-@ below those displayed by the unmodified members of the class . The experiment was ended when the system 's developers ran out of money , and the locomotive was converted back to standard form between May and August 1935 , re @-@ entering service as No. 1816 . 
 The final experiment with performance enhancement began in October 1933 , when No. 1850 had its Walschaerts valve gear replaced with J.T. Marshall valve gear at Eastleigh Works . The engine was trialled on the Western section , where the gear showed promise at slower speeds , with reduced consumption of coal and water . Problems were encountered at speeds over 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) , at which a severe " knocking " sound was reported by the footplate crew . When trialled on a Basingstoke – Waterloo semi @-@ fast ( a high @-@ speed passenger train that stops at selected intermediate stations ) , the valve gear disintegrated near Woking . After immediate withdrawal from traffic , the locomotive had its Walschaerts valve gear re @-@ fitted and No. 1850 re @-@ entered traffic in April 1934 . 
 = = = Withdrawal = = = 
 Suitable work for the class began to decline after completion of the Kent Coast route electrification in 1959 . The reduction of work precipitated a phased reduction of the class that began with the withdrawal of No. <unk> in November 1962 . The withdrawal programme intensified after boundary changes on the Southern Region placed the lines west of Salisbury under Western Region control in 1963 . Class members based at Exmouth Junction shed were withdrawn in 1964 , whilst the Southern Region 's allocation was gradually replaced by Bulleid 's Light Pacifics . The last operational members of the class were Nos. <unk> and <unk> ; both were withdrawn in June 1966 . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 4 April 1958 , locomotive No. <unk> was hauling a parcels train that overran signals and collided with an electric multiple unit at Gloucester Road Junction , Croydon , Surrey . Nine people were injured . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = SECR and Southern Railway = = = 
 N class locomotives were initially painted in an unlined dark grey livery with white lettering and numbering . This Maunsell grey livery was introduced by the SECR as a wartime economy measure . After Grouping in 1923 , the Southern Railway replaced the different liveries of the constituent companies with a standard sage green livery ( the colour was that previously used by Robert Urie on the LSWR ) with black and white lining , primrose yellow numbering and " Southern " on the tender . This livery was first applied to No. 825 . 
 From 1925 , the class was repainted in a darker olive green livery , introduced by Maunsell , with plain white lining , black borders and primrose yellow markings . In 1939 , shortly after the start of the Second World War , locomotives Nos. 1413 and 1850 were painted in unlined olive green because of labour shortages . In 1941 , Nos. 1821 , 1825 , 1847 , 1878 and 1403 were run in unlined olive green with Bulleid 's gilt block lettering . Labour and paint shortages during the Second World War meant that all N class locomotives were painted in plain black by 1945 . In 1946 , two locomotives , Nos. 1817 and 1854 , were repainted in Bulleid 's malachite green livery , with yellow and black lining and " Sunshine " yellow lettering . 
 The 15 locomotives built by Ashford Works for the SECR between August 1917 and December 1923 were numbered 810 – 824 . The Royal Arsenal batch of 50 locomotives purchased by the newly formed Southern Railway from 1923 were numbered <unk> – <unk> ; the numbers followed consecutively from the Ashford batch but with a prefix " A " to denote a locomotive allocated for overhaul at Ashford Works . The prefix was gradually applied to the SECR batch . From 1928 , a new system was adopted where all Southern Railway locomotives were renumbered into one sequence . The SECR and Woolwich N class batches became Nos. 1810 – 1875 . The final batch of 15 locomotives , built between 1932 and 1934 , were numbered 1400 – 1414 from new . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 The class was absorbed by British Railways in 1948 , and initially given the power classification 4MT in 1949 . Under British Railways ownership , the class was reclassified from 4MT to <unk> in 1953 ; the " B " denoting the brake power rating when used on unfitted ( non @-@ vacuum braked ) goods trains . The locomotives at first retained their Southern Railway livery , but with " British Railways " painted on the tender in Bulleid block lettering . Eight locomotives had light repairs prior to 1950 and were given an " S " prefix to the Southern number ( e.g. <unk> ) . From 1949 to 1950 N class locomotives were repainted in the British Railways mixed @-@ traffic lined black livery with red , cream and grey lining and the British Railways crest on the tender . Numbering was changed to the British Railways standard numbering system : the series <unk> – <unk> was allocated to the earlier locomotives , and <unk> – <unk> to the final 15 . 
 = = Operational assessment and preservation = = 
 The N class was the first to combine Churchward design principles with the best practices of other railways ; it was an important step in the development of the British 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , providing inspiration for the LMS Hughes Crab of 1926 and subsequent Maunsell designs . The locomotives were well received by crews , who nicknamed them " Woolworths " , because the majority were fabricated from cheaply produced parts from Woolwich . The robustness and reliability of the design ensured that their sphere of operation was expanded to cover most of the Southern Railway network . The utility of the N class as capable mixed @-@ traffic locomotives ensured their continued use until withdrawal in 1966 . 
 One member of the class is preserved , No . ( 3 ) 1874 , which was rescued in March 1974 from the Woodham Brothers scrapyard in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan , South Wales . One of the " Woolwich " batch , this locomotive was bought and restored for use on the Mid @-@ Hants Railway ; it was steamed for the first time in preservation in 1977 , and was operational at the railway 's re @-@ opening as a heritage attraction in April 1977 . The locomotive was withdrawn in 1998 due to problems that require firebox reconstruction . In 2012 the locomotive was repainted into its SR Wartime Black guise of 1874 for the first time in decades . The locomotive was moved from the Mid @-@ Hants Railway to the Swanage Railway in 2014 along with U Classes 31806 and <unk> . In August 2014 the overhaul to return <unk> to operational condition began . 
 = = Models = = 
 Bachmann <unk> make a model of the N class in OO gauge . [ Graham Farish ] make a model of the N class in [ N gauge ] 
 = Unforgiven ( 2008 ) = 
 Unforgiven ( 2008 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on September 7 , 2008 , at the Quicken Loans Arena in Cleveland , Ohio . It was the eleventh and final annual Unforgiven event , starring wrestlers from the Raw , SmackDown , and ECW brands . 
 Seven professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card , which featured a supercard , a scheduling of more than one main event . The three brands , Raw , SmackDown , and ECW , were all represented by their respective Championship Scramble match – a 20 minute time limit bout , during which participants can become the temporary champion via pinfall or submission . The main event of the pay @-@ per @-@ view was the Championship Scramble from the Raw brand . It was originally scheduled to feature World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk defending his title ; he was replaced by Chris Jericho after Randy Orton attacked CM Punk . Jericho won the match and became World Heavyweight Champion . The Championship Scramble from the ECW brand featured ECW Champion Mark Henry defending , losing the match and title to Matt Hardy . The SmackDown brand 's Championship Scramble saw WWE Champion Triple H defeat the other competitors to retain his championship . Another featured match on the undercard was an unsanctioned match , or hardcore match , in which Shawn Michaels defeated Chris Jericho . 
 The event marked the first time the Championship Scramble format was used by WWE . The event had an attendance of 8 @,@ 707 . The event received 211 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , more than the previous year 's event . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of second on Billboard 's DVD sales chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured seven professional wrestling matches with outcomes predetermined by WWE script writers . The matches featured wrestlers portraying their characters in planned storylines that took place before , during and after the event . All wrestlers were from one of the WWE 's brands – SmackDown , Raw , or ECW – the three storyline divisions in which WWE assigned its employees . The event also marked the first time that the Championship Scramble format was used by the WWE . 
 Wrestlers from the Raw brand were featured in the main event at Unforgiven : a Championship Scramble match , a 20 minute time limit bout , during which participants enter at five @-@ minute intervals and can become the temporary champion via pinfall or submission . The match was contested for the World Heavyweight Championship , and was originally scheduled to be CM Punk defending the title against John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , Batista , Rey Mysterio , and Kane . During the event , however , Randy Orton attacked CM Punk and he was replaced in the match by Chris Jericho . The build up to the match began on the August 18 episode of Raw , when Raw General Manager Mike Adamle , who portrays an on screen authority figure , announced the match and its rules , stating that JBL , Batista , John Cena , Kane , and World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk would participate . The following week on Raw , Adamle announced that John Cena had been injured after his match against Batista at SummerSlam , and would be unable to compete in the Championship Scramble . Adamle then announced Rey Mysterio as Cena 's replacement . On the September 1 episode of Raw , a preview of the Championship Scramble match was featured , in which the five men fighting in the Championship Scramble competed in a traditional battle royal , which Kane won . 
 The other predominant match from the Raw brand was an unsanctioned match between Shawn Michaels and Chris Jericho . The build up to the match began at SummerSlam , when Michaels came to the ring to announce his storyline retirement . Jericho , however , interrupted the announcement and , in an attempt to punch Michaels , accidentally struck Michaels ' wife Rebecca . On the August 18 episode of Raw , Jericho stated that he had no remorse for what he did to Michaels wife , claiming that Michaels " had it coming " . The following week on Raw , Michaels announced he was not going to retire and asked Jericho for an unsanctioned match . Jericho agreed to the match , and the following week on Raw there was a contract signing for the match . The signing ended with Jericho and Michaels attacking each other . 
 The predominant match from the SmackDown brand was a Championship Scramble for the WWE Championship , in which title holder Triple H faced Jeff Hardy , The Brian Kendrick , Shelton Benjamin , and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) . The build up to the match began on the August 22 episode of SmackDown ! , when General Manager Vickie Guerrero announced that SmackDown would have a Championship Scramble match and that the competitors would include WWE Champion Triple H and four men to be decided later in the night through a series of qualifying matches . The first qualifying match was a ten man battle royal , which saw The Big Show disrupt the match and throw all the competitors over the top rope . The Brian Kendrick , however , was saved by his bodyguard , Ezekiel Jackson , who caught Kendrick and put him back in the ring after the Big Show had eliminated all other competitors . Thus , Kendrick qualified for the Championship Scramble . The second qualifying match saw MVP defeat Festus by count out , qualifying for the match . The third qualifying match was Shelton Benjamin versus Finlay , which Benjamin won . The final qualifying match was Jeff Hardy versus The Great Khali , which Hardy won . 
 The predominant match from the ECW brand was a third Championship Scramble , in which Mark Henry defended against Matt Hardy , The Miz , Chavo Guerrero , and Finlay . The build up to the match began on the August 26 episode of ECW , when General Manager Theodore Long announced that the ECW Championship would be defended in a Championship Scramble and that there would be qualifying matches that night to determine who would participate . The first qualifying match saw Matt Hardy defeat John Morrison to qualify . The second match was The Miz versus Evan Bourne , which The Miz won . The third qualifying match saw Chavo Guerrero defeat Tommy Dreamer to qualify , and the fourth match was Finlay versus Mike Knox , which Finlay won . On the September 1 episode of Raw , there was a preview of the Championship Scramble , in which the five participants took part in a traditional battle royal . The winner was ECW Champion Mark Henry . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event began and aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , a dark match was featured in which Evan Bourne defeated John Morrison with a shooting star press . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 Following the dark match , the pay @-@ per @-@ view event began with a Championship Scramble for the ECW Championship in which the champion , Mark Henry , defended against Matt Hardy , The Miz , Chavo Guerrero , and Finlay . In this type of match , competitors fight in a 20 minute time limit bout , during which participants can become the temporary champion by a pinfall or submission on any opponent . The match began with The Miz and Matt Hardy , who performed a variety of wrestling maneuvers including The Miz performing his signature move , a running knee lift and jumping neckbreaker , a combination called the " Reality Check " . After the first five minutes had passed , Chavo Guerrero came to the ring and quickly performed a body splash on Hardy and covered him for a pinfall , making him the interim champion . Guerrero continued with a variety of offensive maneuvers until Matt Hardy performed a wrist @-@ lock seated side slam , or " Side Effect " , on Guerrero and covered him for a pinfall , making him the temporary champion . After the next five minutes had passed , Mark Henry entered the ring . All three other men attacked him , but Henry overpowered them and performed a falling powerslam on Chavo Guerrero , covering him and scoring a pinfall to become the interim champion . After the next series of five minutes had passed , Finlay entered the ring . He attacked Henry and his storyline son Hornswoggle distracted Henry , allowing Finlay to strike him with a shillelagh , followed by a running over the shoulder back to belly piledriver , or " Celtic Cross " , on Hardy to become temporary champion . The match continued until Matt Hardy performed a front facelock cutter , or " Twist of Fate " , on The Miz . He covered The Miz and became the interim champion . Hardy continued to break up pinfall attempts until the end of the 20 minute time limit , at which time Matt Hardy , being the interim champion , won the ECW Championship . 
 The following bout was a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship , where the champions , Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase , defended their titles against Cryme Tyme , a tag team composed of Shad Gaspard and JTG . The match began with Cryme Tyme in control , and Shad threw JTG over the top rope onto Rhodes and DiBiase . Rhodes and DiBiase , however , isolated JTG in their corner and performed a number of offensive maneuvers on him . Rhodes attempted a moonsault onto JTG , but missed , allowing JTG to tag in Shad at the same time Rhodes tagged in DiBiase . Shad performed a back body drop on DiBiase , but while the referee was distracted , Rhodes performed a DDT on Shad . DiBiase attempted to cover Shad , but was forced to break the cover as Shad placed his foot on the bottom rope . JTG attempted an inside cradle pin on Rhodes , but Shad accidentally pushed DiBiase on Rhodes , reversing the pinfall attempt so that Rhodes scored the pin over JTG , retaining his and DiBiase 's title in the process . 
 The third contest was an unsanctioned match between Shawn Michaels and Chris Jericho . The match was contested under no disqualification and no count @-@ out rules , so both men utilized a number of weapons in their offense . Jericho and Michaels used weapons and objects such as folding tables , steel chairs , and fire extinguishers . The match also saw Lance Cade interfere on behalf of Jericho , but Michaels ultimately gained the advantage over both men , leading to him placing both men on an announcer 's table and diving onto them with his elbow cocked , sending them through the table . After returning Jericho to the ring , Michaels continued to attack Jericho . The referee ended the match when he determined that Jericho could no longer defend himself against Michaels , making Michaels the victor by referee stoppage . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The main event for the SmackDown brand was a Championship Scramble for the WWE Championship in which the champion , Triple H , defended against Jeff Hardy , The Brian Kendrick , Shelton Benjamin , and Montel Vontavious Porter . The match began with Jeff Hardy and Shelton Benjamin , with both men wrestling inconclusively until the first five @-@ minute interval had passed , and The Brian Kendrick entered the match . Soon after Kendrick 's entrance , Hardy performed a reverse powerbomb on him and covered him , scoring a pinfall and becoming the interim WWE Champion . Later , Kendrick performed The Kendrick on Hardy and covered him for a pinfall , becoming the temporary WWE Champion . Shortly after , the second five @-@ minute interval expired and MVP entered the match . All four men in the match continued to fight , with no pinfalls being scored until the third five @-@ minute interval expired , at which point Triple H entered the match . Soon after his entrance , performed a spinebuster , followed by a Pedigree on Kendrick , covering him to become the interim champion . Hardy returned to the ring and performed a Twist of Fate on MVP , covering him for a pinfall and becoming temporary champion . After disrupting Hardy 's attempt to perform a maneuver off the top turnbuckle , Triple H performed another Pedigree on Kendrick to become interim champion again . Shortly after , however , Hardy performed a Swanton Bomb on Kendrick and again became temporary champion after a cover . The match ended with Triple H performing a Pedigree on MVP and Hardy performing a Swanton Bomb on Benjamin ; however , Triple H covered MVP faster and scored the pinfall with one second remaining on the clock . The time limit expired and Triple H retained the WWE Championship . 
 Following this , a backstage segment took place in which CM Punk was being interviewed regarding his title defense in the Championship Scramble later in the evening . The interview was interrupted by Randy Orton , and as he spoke with Punk , Cody Rhodes , Ted DiBiase , and Manu attacked CM Punk , as well as Kofi Kingston who tried to help Punk . After they had attacked both Punk and Kingston , Orton made use of this opportunity to perform a running punt on Punk . 
 The fifth contest was a standard match in which WWE Divas Champion Michelle McCool defended her title against Maryse . Maryse began the match attacking McCool 's knee , but McCool soon countered by grabbing Maryse 's foot and twisting it , a submission hold called a heel hook . Maryse , however , reached the ropes and caused McCool to break the hold . Later in the match , McCool performed a lifting double underhook facebuster , a move called the " Wings of Love " , and covered Maryse to retain her championship . 
 Following the match , an in ring segment took place in which The Big Show , entered the ring and asked the crowd whether they thought he should have been in the Championship Scramble for the WWE Championship . SmackDown General Manager Vickie Guerrero , who portrays an on @-@ screen authority figure for the SmackDown brand , then came to the ring and proceeded to insult the Big Show , and demanded that he leave the ring . Druids then came to the ring bringing a casket , and The Undertaker appeared on the TitanTron , telling Guerrero to either get in the casket herself or he would put her in it . Guerrero refused to enter the casket voluntarily , so The Undertaker began to come to ringside . The Big Show held back Guerrero as The Undertaker came to the ring . Once he was in the ring , The Undertaker began to choke Guerrero , but the Big Show turned heel , becoming a villainous character , by striking The Undertaker and freeing Guerrero . He proceeded to attack The Undertaker , and restrained him to allow Guerrero to slap him and spit in his face . 
 The main event from the Raw brand was a Championship Scramble for the World Heavyweight Championship . The event was originally scheduled to be World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk defending against John " Bradshaw " Layfield , Batista , Rey Mysterio , and Kane . However , due to the attack on CM Punk earlier in the night , CM Punk was unable to compete and was replaced by Chris Jericho ( this information was not revealed until the final five minutes of the match , at which point Chris Jericho entered in place of CM Punk ) . Batista and JBL began the match , performing a variety of offensive maneuvers until the first five @-@ minute interval had passed , and Kane entered the match . Later , JBL attempted to strike Kane with his forearm , a move JBL calls a " Clothesline from Hell " , but was caught by Kane . Kane then lifted JBL by the throat and slammed him to the mat , called a chokeslam , and covered him for a pinfall , becoming the interim champion . Soon after , the second five @-@ minute interval expired and Rey Mysterio entered the match . The match continued for several minutes , until the final five @-@ minute interval expired and Jericho entered the match as a replacement for CM Punk , shocking everyone . Soon after Jericho 's entrance , Batista performed a spinebuster on Kane , covering him for a pinfall and becoming temporary champion . Batista was left as the only man standing until Jericho returned to the ring and covered the already downed Kane , scoring a pinfall and becoming interim champion . The time limit expired soon after , and Jericho won the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On the September 8 episode of Raw , it was announced that CM Punk would challenge Chris Jericho in an attempt to win back the World Heavyweight Championship , with the two fighting in a steel cage match the following week . On the following week 's Raw , Chris Jericho escaped the cage before Punk , and thus retained his championship . Later that night , General Manager Mike Adamle announced that Batista would face JBL in a number one contender 's match at No Mercy . Following this announcement , Shawn Michaels announced that he would be facing Chris Jericho in a ladder match at No Mercy . Two weeks later on the September 29 episode of Raw , Chris Jericho and Lance Cade faced a reunited D @-@ Generation X ( Shawn Michaels and Triple H ) in a tag team match , which D @-@ Generation X won via disqualification . At No Mercy , Batista defeated JBL to become number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship , and Chris Jericho defeated Shawn Michaels to retain the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 On the September 12 episode of SmackDown , a standard wrestling match involving four wrestlers was held between Jeff Hardy , The Brian Kendrick , Shelton Benjamin , and MVP , with the stipulation that the winner would go on to face Triple H at No Mercy for the WWE Championship . Jeff Hardy won the match and earned a title match at No Mercy . At No Mercy , Triple H defeated Hardy to retain his championship . 
