 On the September 16 episode of ECW , it was announced that Matt Hardy would defend the ECW Championship against Mark Henry at No Mercy . At No Mercy , Hardy defeated Henry to retain his championship . 
 Almost two and a half years later at Royal Rumble 2011 CM Punk prevented Randy Orton from winning the WWE Championship from The Miz . Eventually Punk revealed that he did this to get revenge on Orton for costing him the championship at Unforgiven in 2008 . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Despite the event 's promotional build @-@ up , only a reported 6 @,@ 000 tickets were initially sold for an arena that holds 20 @,@ 000 people . To fill the arena , local radio stations gave away tickets to the show . The event had a final attendance of 8 @,@ 707 . Canadian Online Explorer 's professional wrestling section rated the entire event a 7 out of 10 stars . The rating was higher than the Unforgiven event in 2007 , which was rated a 5 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars . The Championship Scramble main event match from the Raw brand was rated a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars , while the SmackDown brand 's main event , a Championship Scramble for the WWE Championship , was rated an 8 out of 10 stars . The Sun gave a positive review of the event , praising the Jericho / HBK Match and Jericho 's World Championship victory . Furthermore , the continuation of the Hardy / Triple H feud was similarly praised . The event was released on DVD on October 7 , 2008 by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached second on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of November 1 , 2008 , although it fell off the chart thereafter . 
 = = Results = = 
 ECW Championship Scramble Interim Champions 
 WWE Championship Scramble Interim Champions 
 World Heavyweight Championship Scramble Interim Champions 
 = Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music = 
 Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music is a studio album by American recording artist Ray Charles , released in April 1962 on ABC @-@ Paramount Records . Recording sessions for the album took place in early to mid @-@ February 1962 at Capitol Studios in New York City and at United Recording Studios in Hollywood . Production was handled entirely by Charles and conductor Sid Feller . A departure from Charles 's previous work , the album features country , folk , and Western music standards covered and redone by Charles in popular song forms of the time , including rhythm and blues , pop , and jazz . 
 As his fifth LP release for ABC @-@ Paramount , Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music became a rapid critical and commercial success as it brought Ray Charles further mainstream notice , following his tenure for Atlantic Records . With the help of the album 's four charting singles , Charles earned recognition in the pop market , as well as airplay on both R & B and country radio stations . Modern Sounds and its lead single , " I Can 't Stop Loving You " , were both certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America in 1962 , as each record had shipped 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 Regarded by many critics as Charles 's best studio album , Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music has been considered by several music writers to be a landmark album in American music . The album 's integration of soul and country music bent racial barriers in popular music , amid the height of the African @-@ American civil rights struggle . In the process of recording the album , Charles became one of the first African @-@ American musicians to exercise complete artistic control over his own recording career . The album has been called one of the greatest albums of all time by publications such as Rolling Stone and Time . 
 = = Background = = 
 After his Atlantic Records contract ended , Ray Charles signed with ABC @-@ Paramount Records in November 1959 , obtaining a much more generous contract than other artists had at the time . Following his commercial and pop crossover breakthrough with the hit single " What 'd I Say " earlier that year , ABC offered Charles a $ 50 @,@ 000 annual advance , higher royalties than previously offered and eventual ownership of his masters — a very valuable and lucrative deal at the time . Composed by Charles himself , the single furthered Charles 's mainstream appeal , while becoming a Top 10 pop hit and selling a million copies in the United States , despite the ban placed on the record by some radio stations , in response to the song 's sexually @-@ suggestive lyrics . However , by the time of the release of the instrumental jazz LP Genius + Soul = Jazz ( 1960 ) for ABC 's subsidiary label Impulse ! , Charles had virtually given up on writing original material and had begun to follow his eclectic impulses as an interpreter . 
 Charles ' first hit single for ABC @-@ Paramount was " Georgia on My Mind " . Originally written by Stuart <unk> and Hoagy Carmichael , Charles ' version was produced by Sid Feller and released in 1960 , earning Charles national acclaim and a Grammy Award . The song was Charles 's first collaboration with Feller , who also arranged and conducted the recording . Charles earned another Grammy for the follow @-@ up " Hit the Road Jack " , written by R & B singer Percy Mayfield . By late 1961 , Charles had expanded his small road ensemble to a full @-@ scale big band , partly as a response to increasing royalties and touring fees , becoming one of the few black artists to crossover into mainstream pop with such a level of creative control . This success , however , came to a momentary halt in November 1961 , as a police search of Charles 's hotel room in Indianapolis , Indiana , during a concert tour led to the discovery of heroin in his medicine cabinet . The case was eventually dropped , as the search had been undertaken without a proper warrant , and Charles soon returned his focus on music and recording . 
 = = Conception = = 
 Following his blues fusion with gospel and jazz influences on his earlier Atlantic material , which had brought him much fame and controversy , Charles sought to experiment with country music . As noted by himself in the liner notes for What 'd I Say ( 1959 ) , Charles was influenced by the genre in his youth , stating that he " used to play piano in a hillbilly band " and that he believed that he " could do a good job with the right hillbilly song today . " At Atlantic , he attempted to incorporate this style and influence with his cover of country singer Hank Snow 's " I 'm Movin ' On " . Charles later said about the song , " When I heard Hank Snow sing ' Moving On ' , I loved it . And the lyrics . Keep in mind , I ’ m a singer , so I like lyrics . Those lyrics are great , so that ’ s what made me want to do it . " The " I 'm Movin ' On " sessions were his last for Atlantic . 
 Charles 's recording of his acclaimed studio effort The Genius of Ray Charles ( 1959 ) brought him closer to expressing his jazz and pop crossover ambitions . Described by one music critic as " the most important of his albums for Atlantic " , the record was the first to introduce Charles 's musical approach of blending his brassy R & B sound with the more middle of the road , pop @-@ oriented style , while performing in the presence of a big band ensemble . Recording of the album , as well his ABC @-@ Paramount debut , The Genius Hits the Road ( 1960 ) , a collection of place @-@ name songs devoted to parts of the United States , expanded on Charles 's thematic and conceptually @-@ organized approach to albums rather than commercially successful singles production . Inspired by this approach and his recording of " I 'm Movin ' On " , Charles originally made plans for a single @-@ less concept album . 
 When Charles had announced that he wanted to work on an album of country music in 1961 , during a period of racial segregation and tension in the United States , he received generally negative commentary and feedback from his peers , including fellow R & B musicians and ABC @-@ Paramount executives . The country album concept , however , meant more to Charles as a test of his record label 's faith in him and respect for his artistic freedom than as a test of social tolerance among listeners amid racial distinctions of country and R & B. Fueled by his esteem for creative control , Charles pitched the idea of a country album to ABC representatives . Following the successful lobby of the concept and a contract renewal in early 1962 , which was linked to the launching of his own Tangerine label , Charles prepared his band for the recording sessions that produced Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music was the 18th overall LP Charles had recorded . According to him , the title of the album was conceived by producer Sid Feller and ABC @-@ Paramount 's executives and management people . The recording sessions for the album took place at three sessions in mid @-@ February 1962 . The first two sessions were set on February 5 and 7 at Capitol Studios in New York , New York , at which one half of the album was recorded and produced . The other half was recorded on February 15 of that same year at United Recording Studios in Hollywood , California . Instead of drawing what he should record from memory and his knowledge of country music , Charles asked Feller , his newly appointed A & R ( Artists and Repertoire ) man , to research top country standards through major country music publishers . 
 By canvassing premier country publishing companies , such as Acuff @-@ Rose Publishing ( which featured the Hank Williams catalog ) and Hill & Range Songs ( most of which were located in Nashville , Tennessee ) , Feller amassed around 250 songs on tape for Charles to consider recording for Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music . From New York City , Feller sent the recordings to Charles , who was living in California at the time , for him to choose . According to music essayist Daniel Cooper : 
 While his selections provided the album 's country and western foundation , the musical arrangements represented its contemporary influence . Eager to display his big band ensemble in studio , Charles enlisted premier jazz arrangers Gerald Wilson and Gil Fuller , while Marty Paich , who was active in the West Coast jazz scene , was hired to arrange the lush strings and chorus numbers . Despite enlisting a roster of professional arrangers and musicians , Charles intended to control the artistic direction of the recordings . To indicate specific licks he wanted emphasized for certain songs , Charles would put together voice @-@ and @-@ piano demos and pass them along to the arrangers , informing them of what he wanted to do with specific sounds . According to Feller , at one point during recording , Charles rewrote an entire botched arrangement and dictated the parts to each of the 18 backing musicians . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album 's themes are about heartbreak and love , while most of the material chosen by Charles were ballads as well . The concept which had originally attracted the interest of Charles to this style of music was the strength he admired in writing such a ballad 's somber or melancholy lyrics and then performing the ballad beautifully and with emotional stability ; an element he had found to be common in even the most diverse musical genres . Writer Daniel Cooper said of Charles 's adaptation of country elements , " His country forays play like a series of intricate variations or like one long meditation on the expansive qualities of music commonly described as the white man 's blues . " Allmusic 's Stephen Cook writes that " Charles intones the sleepy @-@ blue nuances of country crooners while still giving the songs a needed kick with his gospel outbursts . " 
 Despite the racial and social implications of R & B and country at the time , Charles did not agree with contemporary views of race records and other genres , including pop and country , as essentially different . In an interview with Ben Fong @-@ Torres of Rolling Stone , Charles said of the similarities between the blues and country music , " [ T ] he words to country songs are very earthy like the blues , see , very down . They 're not as dressed up , and the people are very honest and say , ' Look , I miss you , <unk> ' , so I went out and I got drunk in this bar . ' That 's the way you say it . Where in Tin Pan Alley will say , ' Oh , I missed you darling , so I went to this restaurant and I sat down and I had dinner for one . ' That 's cleaned up now , you see ? But country songs and the blues is like it is . " 
 In an interview with music historian Peter Guralnick , Charles further elaborated on his understanding , stating " You take country music , you take black music , you got the same goddamn thing exactly . " While Modern Sounds features mostly covers of country and western music standards , its sound and musical style are marked by the heavy rhythm and blues influence of Charles 's playing . A considerable amount of the material 's melancholy lyrics and words are backed by piano and orchestral arrangements that are rooted in jazz , as well as West Coast and Charles 's style of piano blues . Charles has said that the country album was " completely different from rhythm and blues " . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " You Don 't Know Me " has a string and vocal ensemble production and themes of desirous unrequited love . The song 's narrator longs for a woman that views him as " just a friend / That 's all I 've ever been / For you don 't know me . " Allmusic editor Bill Janovitz writes of the song 's affecting narrative , stating " The genius , the pathos , and the soul that is Charles oozes into this recording [ ... ] No matter how many times one hears the song , it still induces chills down the spine after the narrator blows any chance he might have had and is left alone at the end . " 
 Both composed by Hank Williams , " You Win Again " and " Hey , Good Lookin ' " are derived from Williams 's different emotional perspectives . The difference is further accentuated by Charles 's interpretations of the songs . " I Can 't Stop Loving You " , a <unk> ballad with lush , cushioned arrangements , was placed at the 11th spot in the track listing , assumed by Sid Feller to be the album 's weakest song , after which becoming the album 's top @-@ selling single . Charles was disappointed with him , as Feller was in charge of sequencing for the album . 
 A component of Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music is Charles 's creative reliance on honky tonk musician Floyd Tillman 's songwriting , covering the heartbreak ballads " It Makes No Difference Now " and " I Love You So Much It Hurts " . The Ted <unk> @-@ penned " Worried Mind " and " Born to Lose " expand his take on country balladry and feature a blend of piano blues with string arrangements . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music became one of the best @-@ selling albums recorded by a black musician of the time , as well as one of the best @-@ selling country albums , shipping at least 500 @,@ 000 copies in its first three months of release . This achievement was due in part to the mainstream promotional efforts Modern Sounds had received from ABC prior to and following release . The album proved to be a crossover hit as well , as distributors claimed the record had been selling in pop , R & B and country music markets ; at the time , often referred to as white and black markets during the period . 
 Upon the album 's release in early April 1962 in both mono and stereo format , a reviewer for Billboard magazine claimed that " In addition to being powerful dealer material , this package will fracture knowledgeable jockeys who will find in it a wealth of material to talk about as well as play . " By mid @-@ April , reports of the album 's sales and radio airplay had started coming in from cities such as Dallas and Philadelphia . On June 23 , 1962 , the mono issue of Modern Sounds replaced the West Side Story soundtrack album as the number one album in the United States , knocking it off the top of the Billboard Pop Albums chart . The album spawned four charting singles , " Born to Lose " , " Careless Love " , " I Can 't Stop Loving You " and " You Don 't Know Me " , the latter two of which went number one on the Adult Contemporary chart . The hit singles quickly gained a significant amount of radio airplay on both country and R & B stations . By mid @-@ May , the album 's lead single , " I Can 't Stop Loving You " , had sold 700 @,@ 000 copies within its first four weeks of release . Record dealers began describing the album as " equal in sales action to some of the early Presley disks " and , after moving 400 @,@ 000 copies of the single , influential Atlanta record distributor Gwen <unk> told Billboard magazine that " the record is so hot in her district that people who don 't even own record players are buying it . " " I Can 't Stop Loving You " hit number one on the Billboard Pop Singles chart on June 2 , spending five consecutive weeks at the top of the chart . By the time it fell off the top , the single was reported to have reached nearly a million and a half in sales , moving over 100 @,@ 000 copies per week . In July the record spent two weeks at number one in Great Britain . 
 As Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music and its singles were performing well in the United States , Charles toured Europe with his big band and the Raelettes . He performed both his signature R & B and jazz material at such venues as Paris Olympia and the Hot Club de France , where he was hailed as " a true jazz artist in the tradition of Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington . " Upon his return to the United States at the end of the summer , ABC @-@ Paramount had officially recognized his achievements , presenting Charles with two gold records — one for " I Can 't Stop Loving You " , the other for his Modern Sounds album — during a live concert performance at the Convention Hall in Asbury Park , New Jersey . Through his ventures into country music and the European jazz scene , Charles 's white audience grew significantly at concerts . The album was quickly followed by another recording of country , western and pop standards covered by Charles , and recorded in September 1962 . Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music , Vol . 2 was released six months after the first volume and proved to be equally successful , while also earning a gold certification by the following year . Following his tenure with ABC @-@ Paramount , Charles later went on to achieve more commercial success recording country music under Warner Bros. Records throughout most of the 1970s and 1980s . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music received positive reviews from music critics of both rhythm and blues and country music . Billboard called it " one of the most intriguing albums in a long time " and found its concept " wonderful " . " I Can 't Stop Loving You " subsequently earned Charles a Grammy Award for Best Rhythm & Blues Recording at the 1963 Grammy Awards , while the album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year . 
 Since its initial reception , the album has been praised by critics for Charles 's style and manner of interpreting country music into his R & B musical language . Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the " masterful interpretation of several country standards ... opened a lot of pop ears to country music and showed Nashville much about the proper use of orchestration . " Allmusic editor Stephen Cook called the album a " fine store of inimitable interpretations " , and stated , " Less modern for its country @-@ R & B blend and lushly produced C & W tone than for its place as a high @-@ profile crossover hit , Modern Sounds in Country and Western fit right in with Ray Charles 's expansive musical ways while on the Atlantic label in the ' 50s " . Chris Neal of Country Weekly commented that Charles " recast 12 country favorites in big @-@ band and orchestrated settings with a visionary ’ s easy grace " , adding that he " gets to the heart of each [ song ] in a way that remains thoroughly modern . " John <unk> of the Oxford American called it a " landmark LP of transcendent vocals set against kitschy orchestrations that ( along with early rock ' n ' roll ) illuminated black @-@ white roots connections for a popular audience . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In 1999 , the album was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , as was " I Can 't Stop Loving You " in 2001 . Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music was cited by The Recording Academy as a recording of " historical significance " . " I Can 't Stop Loving You " was ranked number 49 on Country Music Television 's list of the 100 Greatest Songs of Country Music . In November 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 104 on its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , one of Charles 's two entries and his highest ranking on the list ; it is accompanied only by his The Genius of Ray Charles at number 263 . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 = = = Country music = = = 
 In the wake of Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music and its success , country music experienced an immediate increase in popularity . According to music writer Daniel Cooper , " the album raised the genre 's profile " , specifically Nashville sound , which Charles had covered . Benefiting from this were songwriters , music publishers , and country singers who covered the subgenre 's material . As noted by Cooper , by the end of 1962 , Nashville country publishers were being held as " the hottest source of music material in the record business these days . " Charles 's success with the stylistic fusion of country and soul on Modern Sounds led to similar efforts from artists such as Candi Staton and Solomon Burke , who were greatly influenced by the album . Many country music artists such as Willie Nelson and Buck Owens have cited Charles 's take on the genre with the album as a major influence . In an interview for Country Music Television , Nelson said that the album " did more for country music than any one artist has ever done . " Doug Freeman of the Austin Chronicle wrote of Charles 's influence through the album , stating : 
 Summing up on the impact Modern Sounds had on country music and listeners , writer Daniel Cooper states , " There is no telling how many people , who perhaps never paid much attention to country music or even had professed to dislike it , listened anew based on the impact of having heard what Ray Charles was capable of doing with that music . " Charles eventually earned a country music repertoire and reputation following the success of the Modern Sounds records , later country hit singles for Warner Bros. Records , and various appearances at country music events , including The Johnny Cash Show in 1970 and the Grand Ole Opry 's 58th anniversary in 1983 , the program to which he listened to as a youth . 
 = = = Social impact = = = 
 Following the album 's release , Charles quickly earned an influx of white listeners and audiences at concert venues , without experiencing any fall @-@ out from his predominantly black audience . Writer Daniel Cooper later said of the album 's effect , " It 's an idea as corny as any country song you can think of , and one that Charles knew to be true ; music unites people . It just really does . " Throughout the years following its initial reception , Modern Sounds gained further acknowledgment of its impact on the music industry and society . Through conceiving and recording the album , Charles became one of the first African @-@ American musicians to receive and practice artistic control bestowed upon by a mainstream record company . In a 1998 interview , country musician Raul Malo acknowledged the album 's influence , calling it " one of the most important records of our time , not only because of its content , but also due to its social and political ramifications . " In a July 8 , 2004 article for Rolling Stone magazine , music journalist Robert Christgau praised the impact and influence that the Modern Sounds recordings had on music , stating " In the world it created , not only could a black person sing the American songbook Ella Fitzgerald owned by then , but a country black person could take it over . Soon Charles 's down @-@ home diction , cotton @-@ field grit , corn @-@ <unk> humor and overstated shows of emotion were standard operating procedure in American music , black and white . " 
 In addition to its social implications , the musical integration of soul and country into popular format by Charles changed and revolutionized racial boundaries and restraints in music , and contributed to the historical Civil Rights Movement . Robert Fontenot of About.com was one of several writers to praise the album 's musical and social implications , stating " Arguably one of the most brilliant interpretive albums ever released , it did more to integrate modern American music than almost any other LP in history . " In paying tribute to the magazine 's selection of the 100 Greatest Singers of All Time , which had selected Charles at # 2 , singer @-@ songwriter Billy Joel noted the album 's racial and social impact in an article for Rolling Stone , stating " here is a black man giving you the whitest possible music in the blackest possible way , while all hell is breaking loose with the civil rights movement . " Another article for Rolling Stone , written in honor of Charles and his achievements , later stated that through his Modern Sounds recordings , Ray Charles " made it acceptable for black people to sing country & western music , in the process doing almost as much to break down racial barriers as did the civil @-@ rights movement . " 
 = = = Subsequent work by Charles = = = 
 In addition to the album 's legacy as one of the most influential recordings of all time , Modern Sounds also had an effect on Charles 's later work . According to writer Nate Guidry , the recording marked the zenith of Charles 's popularity and success . By the mid @-@ 1960s and continuing into the 1970s and 1980s , the majority of his musical output was focused onto more middle of the road and pop releases , featuring less of his recognizable , trademark soul and R & B , and more of the crossover and fusion tendencies of Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music . On the album 's influence , columnist Spencer Leigh of The Independent stated that " Numerous artists followed Charles 's lead , but it must be said that Charles himself repeated the trick much too often . " The period of releases following Modern Sounds , which includes the musician 's later recording years as well , has been recognized by music writers and critics as a " critical slide " and the weakest in his recording career . Several of the LP albums from this period have yet to be reissued and have remained rare among record collectors , if not out of print . Charles 's final studio album Genius Loves Company ( 2004 ) would later be released shortly after his death , and proved to be a comeback success , in terms of sales and critical response , as it quickly became Charles 's first top @-@ 10 album in forty years and the best @-@ selling record of his career . 
 On October 27 , 1998 , Rhino Entertainment issued a four @-@ disc box set entitled The Complete Country & Western Recordings : 1959 – 1986 , which chronicles Charles 's country and western recordings . The collection features the two volumes of Modern Sounds , as well as his later country singles for Warner Bros. Included in the set is a hardcover booklet of essays by producer Sid Feller , writer Daniel Cooper , and Ray Charles , along with liner photography by Howard Morehead and Les Leverett . On June 2 , 2009 , both volumes of Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music were reissued as a single package by Concord Music . The reissue was also included as a download in the iTunes Store . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were produced by Ray Charles and Sid Feller . 
 Reissue bonus tracks 
 The album was later reissued on compact disc by the specialty record label Rhino Entertainment in October 1988 with three bonus tracks . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Ray Charles – piano , vocals , producer 
 Additional musicians 
 Hank Crawford – alto saxophone 
 Gil Fuller , Gerald Wilson – arrangements ( big band ) 
 Marty Paich – arrangements ( strings ) 
 Technical personnel 
 Frank Abbey – engineering ( tracks 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 10 , 12 ) 
 Joe Adams – production ( track 14 ) 
 Bob Arnold – engineering ( track 15 ) 
 Hugh Bell – photography 
 Johnny Cue – engineering ( track 13 ) 
 Todd Everett – liner notes 
 Sid Feller – production 
 Bill Inglot – remastering 
 Michael Ochs Archives – photography 
 Ken Perry – remastering 
 Bill Putnam – engineering ( tracks 2 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 15 ) 
 Gene Thompson – engineering ( tracks 1 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 10 , 12 ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 Albums 
 Singles 
 = Temperatures Rising = 
 Temperatures Rising is an American television sitcom that aired on the ABC network from September 12 , 1972 to August 29 , 1974 . During its 46 @-@ episode run , it was presented in three different formats and cast line @-@ ups . The series was developed for the network by William Asher and Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems . Set in a fictional Washington , D.C. hospital , the series featured James Whitmore as the no @-@ nonsense chief @-@ of @-@ staff who is forced to deal with the outlandish antics of a young intern played by Cleavon Little , and three nurses ( Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox ) . 
 For the first season , 26 episodes were produced and broadcast . Whitmore was replaced in the lead role by comedian Paul Lynde and Asher was replaced as producer by Duke Vincent and Bruce Johnson in the second season . The series was re @-@ titled The New Temperatures Rising Show , and featured a new supporting cast consisting of : Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner . Cleavon Little was the only returning member of the original cast . In this season , Lynde was presented as the penny @-@ pinching chief @-@ of @-@ staff , with Bond as his nagging mother and owner of the hospital . 
 The New Temperatures Rising Show ran for 13 episodes before being placed on hiatus in January 1974 due to poor ratings . It returned in July in yet another incarnation . Asher returned as producer and restored the series to its original format — albeit with Paul Lynde continuing in the lead . Reverting to the original title of Temperatures Rising , Little remained in the show 's cast and a new line @-@ up of supporting players consisting of Alice Ghostley , Barbara Rucker and , returning from the first season 's cast , Nancy Fox . Offered as a summer replacement on Thursday nights , the third version of the sitcom ran for seven episodes after which it was cancelled permanently . 
 = = First season = = 
 = = = Concept and development = = = 
 Temperatures Rising was one of two sitcoms that the ABC network premiered in its 1972 – 73 prime time schedule , the other being The Paul Lynde Show . Both series were produced and developed by William Asher and his partner Harry Ackerman for Ashmont Productions and Screen Gems , which had scored a major success for the network with Bewitched , a fantasy sitcom that first aired in 1964 starring Asher 's wife , Elizabeth Montgomery . Asher and Screen Gems made a deal with ABC to cancel Bewitched a year earlier than contracts stipulated , thereby allowing them the opportunity to develop the two new sitcoms . Ackerman served as executive producer and Asher as producer . 
 Asher and Ackerman derived the format of the series from an unsold pilot they had produced for ABC in 1965 . Entitled This is a Hospital ? , and written by Sheldon Keller , it starred comedian Shecky Greene as a mischievous intern who Asher referred to as " Sgt. Bilko in a hospital " . Asher also drew on the British Carry On franchise as his inspiration for Temperatures Rising . 
 = = = Original cast = = = 
 Set in Capitol General , a fictional Washington , D.C. , hospital , the series centered on five characters . Cleavon Little starred as Dr. Jerry Noland , a ghetto @-@ raised intern who works on the side as the hospital bookie and finds humor in anything from an operation to a con job . Joan Van Ark played Annie Carlisle , the hospital 's beautiful , young , sexy , head nurse , who is " always covering up for the inept crew " . Reva Rose played Nurse Mildred " Millie " MacInerny , who offers satirical comments on the shenanigans going on in the hospital . Nancy Fox was cast as Ellen Turner , a shy student nurse who becomes Noland 's most faithful follower . James Whitmore starred as Dr. Vincent Campanelli , the hospital 's chief of surgery . Campanelli is presented as an Italian @-@ American , former combat surgeon , who looks upon Noland with both pride and shock , and refers to the young intern and nurses Carlisle , MacInerny , and Turner as the " Four Horsemen of <unk> " . 
 Cleavon Little 's guest appearance on All in the Family led to his casting in Temperatures Rising , which in turn led to the leading role in the Mel Brooks comedy film Blazing Saddles ( 1974 ) . Little 's casting reflected " pressure from the government and Negro organizations and concerned whites who believe that black representation on television was long overdue " . William Asher later stated that Temperatures Rising gave him a chance to work with a black actor . Nancy Fox was cast in Temperatures Rising after Elizabeth Montgomery spotted her in a commercial for Close @-@ Up toothpaste . Asher had considered her for a part in The Paul Lynde Show . During the time that Temperatures Rising was in production Fox declined an offer to leave the series and star in another , Needles and Pins . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 In a 2000 interview , William Asher described Temperatures Rising as being about : " a young black surgeon who was always into mischief and things , but he was a very competent surgeon . James Whitmore was the head surgeon and he used to drive Whitmore crazy " . The pilot episode of Temperatures Rising was written by Sheldon Keller , who turned to his This is a Hospital ? script for inspiration . It features Noland broadcasting a bingo game in code over the hospital 's public @-@ address system . Jack Albertson guest starred as a United States Senator . Subsequent episodes feature Noland performing a secret operation on a young baseball player while Campanelli deals with a hospital inspector ( Ed Platt ) and John Astin as a gangster wanting Noland to be his personal physician . In another episode , Noland hypnotizes a patient ( Alice Ghostley ) and , accidentally , Nurse Turner as well . This nearly costs the hospital a large donation from a potential benefactor ( Charles Lane ) . In later episodes , Campanelli is seen having a brief romance with Nurse Turner 's aunt ( Beverly Garland ) , Noland helping out a new intern ( Bernie Kopell ) who has a reputation for being a jinx , and performing a witchcraft ritual on a patient ( Alan Oppenheimer ) who thinks he has been cursed . 
 Jack Albertson returned in a later episode that features Dr. Campanelli participating in a documentary film about hospital surgery . Unfortunately , Campanelli develops stage fright during filming . Noland then takes over the operation and receives all the acclaim . Bernie Kopell returned to his role as a hospital orderly in two episodes , one in which he causes a furor with a hospital scandal sheet , the other when Noland has to save him from being fleeced by a patient who is also a card sharp . 
 There was some racially tinged comic bantering in the series , such as scenes with Noland giving cotton to a nurse and stating , " Honey , picking cotton is part of my heritage , " or observing some adhesive strips labeled " flesh colored " and remarking , " Maybe this is your idea of flesh colored , but it wouldn 't make it in my neighborhood . " Aside from these , racial issues were avoided , as Asher and Ackerman felt that ABC was not interested in having them mixed into the comedy . 
 In discussing the series William Asher noted : 
 We too often forget the humanity of doctors and nurses . They become godlike to most of us and yet it is their humanity that makes them so interesting and enjoyable . We are not doing a drama and have no intention of doing anything like dealing with life and death issues . We want to make people laugh so we de @-@ emphasize the more serious elements of hospital life . It isn 't that he [ Noland ] just sees things differently , he also deals with them differently . That is why Noland will dream up a baby derby , a gambling night at the hospital , a variety show at Christmas and off @-@ truck betting when patients get bored with the hospital routine . 
 Production of Temperatures Rising was underway by August 1972 with filming done at the Burbank Studios in Burbank , California . 
 = = = Original reviews = = = 
 In his review of the premiere episode of Temperatures Rising for the Los Angeles Times , critic Don Page felt that James Whitmore was " totally wasted in this silly exercise " and that " guest Jack Albertson almost saves it with his portrayal of an annoyed senator . Otherwise , the diagnosis is terminal comedy " . Likewise , Cecil Smith , another writer for the Times , claimed it was the " worst show of the season . Avoid it like the plague " . 
 Other reviews were more favorable . Columnist Joan Crosby noted that " This is the kind of show you don 't think you 'll laugh at , but you do , mostly because the cast is so good . " She noted that Cleavon Little , Joan Van Ark , and Reva Rose were , respectively , " marvelous " , " pretty " , and " funny " , and that Nancy Fox " wins this year 's cute @-@ as @-@ a @-@ kitten award " . Barbara <unk> , TV and radio editor for the Pittsburgh Press , noted that " ABC did a gutsy turnabout in taking the heavy drama out of a hospital and replacing it with comedy . The venture worked well , thanks to excellent performances from the Temperatures Rising cast " . She praised Jack Albertson , noted that Whitmore " was little seen " , and that the series : " is the kind of tidy little show that brings chuckles " . Win Fanning , a syndicated columnist , stated that : " the comedy writing and performances by a beautifully integrated cast give Temperatures a bright , light quality so seldom achieved in a situation comedy " , and that it was : " loaded with one @-@ liners and sight gags , which , if kept on the level of the opener , promise many hours of hilarity " . Fanning praised Cleavon Little as " one of the comedy finds of any TV season " , and Nancy Fox as " a fresh new face and talent giving promise of a long , successful career ahead " . More praise for the series came after the broadcast of its fourth episode . An unidentified reviewer , writing for the Armored Sentinel ( of Temple , Texas ) , stated " If you 're suffering from the case of the ' downs , ' this series is a sure pick up ! " The reviewer went on to note that " the brightest spot of the series is wacky Nancy Fox . Her role applies the wackiness of Goldie Hawn , but in situation comedy form . I 'd watch the show just for her ! The whole series is wacky and funny ; it 's downright good . I highly recommend it . " 
 = = = First season ratings = = = 
 ABC placed Temperatures Rising in its 8 : 00 PM Tuesday night time @-@ slot , where it debuted on September 12 , 1972 . Because one of the stars was black , some of ABC 's affiliated stations in the southern and mid @-@ western parts of the United States refused to air the series or broadcast it in a different time slot . Airing opposite it were Bonanza on NBC , and the new sitcom Maude on CBS . Bonanza was entering its fourteenth year and offered up an ambitious two @-@ hour season premiere dealing with the marriage of Little Joe Cartwright ( Michael Landon ) . Maude , starring Beatrice Arthur in the title role , was a spin @-@ off of All in the Family . Both shows presented Temperatures Rising with stiff opposition in the " ratings game " . This turned out to be partly true , as the two @-@ hour season premiere of Bonanza performed exceptionally well in the ratings . Maude did much better than Temperatures Rising in the New York City area , while Temperatures Rising fared better than Maude in the Los Angeles area . In subsequent weeks , Bonanza 's ratings dropped sharply and NBC cancelled the series in November 1972 . According to Asher : " Temperatures Rising put Bonanza out of business and was beating Maude in the Los Angeles area until mid @-@ season , when NBC switched to some heavy movies which hurt us " . Despite this the series finished its first year with a consistent 29 share of the ratings at a time when a 30 share was enough to assure renewal for another season . ABC , however , wanted to improve the ratings and decided to make significant changes to Temperatures Rising for its second season . 
 = = Second season = = 
 = = = New premise and producers = = = 
 As early as November 1972 , James Whitmore expressed a desire to leave Temperatures Rising , claiming that " the show [ was ] basically a broad farce and I didn 't feel it was right for me " . Screen Gems head John Mitchell , and ABC chief programmer Barry Diller , decided to replace Whitmore with comedian Paul Lynde , whose sitcom , The Paul Lynde Show , was airing on Wednesday nights . At the time , Lynde was scoring second only to Peter Falk in TV popularity polls even though his sitcom , which aired opposite The Sonny & Cher Comedy Hour on CBS , was floundering in the ratings . Asher was against making this change but was overruled as his contractual commitments to ABC had been used up . 
 Of the change Asher stated : 
 The network – ugh – they 're so stupid sometimes . The shows ( Temperatures Rising and The Paul Lynde Show ) were doing good , they weren 't big hits , but they were doing good . They felt that if they could put Paul [ Lynde ] and Cleavon Little together that they would have a big hit . I didn 't want to do that . I said I won 't do it , not at the sacrifice of the show . It 's wrong . I don 't think it 's a good idea . But they wanted to bring in somebody else as the head of the hospital . They wanted his [ Lynde 's ] mother to be head of the hospital and his conflicts would be with her and I just didn 't think it was right . I didn 't want to write it . I just didn 't want to do it [ and ] I didn 't . Someone else came in . It was a big thing with the network . They cancelled The Paul Lynde Show and put Paul in Temperatures Rising . " 
 Asher was replaced as producer by Bruce Johnson and Duke Vincent , whose previous credits included : Gomer Pyle – USMC , The Jim Nabors Hour , Arnie , and The Little People . They changed the title of the series to The New Temperatures Rising Show , and the tone went from lighthearted wackiness to a form of black comedy similar to The Hospital , a 1971 film written by Paddy Chayefsky , starring George C. Scott . The sitcom became : " a savage satire of the medical profession " with $ 185 @-@ a @-@ day hospital rooms , incompetent , fee @-@ splitting doctors , operations on the wrong patients , misread X @-@ rays , and rampant malpractice . Commenting on the series Vincent noted : 
 We 're not doing stories about a fouled @-@ up hospital . These things really happen . Every story we 've told is true . They 're the results of untrained people , inadequate staff , horrendous costs , worn @-@ out equipment , the demands of doctors . The doctors , not the patients , are the customers ; they 're the ones the hospitals have to please ... 
 = = = Revised cast = = = 
 For this new season , Johnson and Vincent dropped Joan Van Ark , Reva Rose , and Nancy Fox from the series , leaving Cleavon Little as the only returning cast member . His character , Dr. Jerry Noland , was now being presented as the hospital 's only sane figure . Paul Lynde played Dr. Paul Mercy , the sneering , unscrupulous , hospital administrator while Sudie Bond was cast as Martha Mercy , his obnoxious , overbearing mother and the owner , and permanent resident , of the hospital . She constantly calls him with her pager to complain about everything . Also in the new cast were Barbara Cason as Miss Tillis , the head of administrative and accounting : " ... who would let you bleed to death filling out forms " , Jennifer Darling as the romantically inclined nurse " Windy " Winchester , Jeff Morrow as Dr. Lloyd Axton , a fraudulent surgeon who has published two books , Profit in Healing and Malpractice and Its Defense , and John Dehner as " society " Dr. Charles Claver . 
 = = = Revised concept = = = 
 For the 1973 – 74 television season ABC continued to air the revamped Temperatures Rising on Tuesday nights at 8 : 00 PM . CBS continued to air Maude , and NBC introduced Chase , an hour @-@ long crime drama starring Mitchell Ryan , in the same time slot . Although the season premiere of Maude and Chase ' s debut aired on September 11 , 1973 , ABC delayed the premiere of The New Temperatures Rising Show until September 25 . 
 The episodes produced by Johnson and Vincent included Dr. Mercy exploiting a 125 @-@ year @-@ old American Civil War veteran and dealing with a strike by the doctors and nurses . Another episode saw Noland create a mythical patient and then claim that the patient died , the cause of death being the result of a lack of cardiac crash carts on each floor of the hospital . Johnson and Vincent 's favorite episode was one where the X @-@ rays of a professional footballer are misread , resulting in him being placed by mistake in " Crutchfield 's Traction " , in which holes are drilled in his head and tongs inserted in them . 
 = = = Second season reviews = = = 
 In reviewing The New Temperatures Rising Show , Associated Press television writer Jay <unk> noted : 
 First the hopeful note : There are faint signs the tinkering with Temperatures format could make the series funny later on , but only if the writing improves . The show now leaves most of the mugging to Lynde and no longer insists that each regular is wacky . It 's all feeble stuff but the cast is vastly improved and the new approach portends to better things ahead . 
 Likewise , Los Angeles Times critic Cecil Smith , who considered the original format " maybe the three worse shows on television rolled into one " now remarked : " Paul Lynde for the first time that I can recall has a part worthy of his mettle . The people surrounding him are first rate . " 
 = = = Sinking ratings = = = 
 Despite some heavy promotion the black comedy approach was not what audiences wanted to see , especially with Paul Lynde . As a result , the ratings for the series fell well below the levels of the previous season . The last of The New Temperatures Rising Show 's thirteen episodes aired on January 8 , 1974 . The following Tuesday , January 15 , ABC premiered Happy Days in its place . According to co @-@ producer Mitchell , " ... the audience didn 't buy that at all . They just didn 't get it . It was funny if you like black comedy , but if you don 't it would disturb you . So the show failed miserably and we lost the job and the show . " 
 = = Summer replacement = = 
 = = = Third concept = = = 
 When John Mitchell and Barry Diller noticed that The New Temperatures Rising Show was failing they contacted William Asher and asked him to salvage the series . According to Asher : 
 They asked if I 'd go back to the old Temperatures , only this time with Paul [ Lynde ] . At this point we were still hoping to make it for the midseason . After a couple of weeks we agreed that the show should go off the air in January , but continue production so that we would have 11 shows ready for airing any time they wanted them . Some of the nonsense and hijinks of the first season are gone and we have managed to keep a touch of reality of the second version . 
 As to why the series was not cancelled , Asher remarked , " I can answer that in two words : Paul Lynde . " 
 = = = Final cast = = = 
 For the third format , the show reverted to its original title Temperatures Rising and the proposed number of episodes was reduced from eleven to seven . The series ' production resumed on November 17 , 1973 , after a three week shutdown . Sudie Bond , Barbara Cason , Jennifer Darling , Jeff Morrow , and John Dehner were dropped from the cast and a new line @-@ up was assembled . Paul Lynde continued as Dr. Paul Mercy while Alice Ghostley played Edwina Moffitt , the admissions nurse and Dr. Mercy 's sister . She had appeared as a guest star in an episode in the first season of Temperatures Rising . Nancy Fox returned as student nurse Ellen Turner , and Barbara Rucker was introduced as Nurse Amanda Kelly . Cleavon Little returned for a third time as Dr. Jerry Nolan , whose character was now being presented as somewhere between the jive @-@ talking surgeon of the first season and the serious one of the second . 
 = = = Last format and cancellation = = = 
 Temperatures Rising returned to the ABC network on July 18 , 1974 after a six @-@ month hiatus . Its new time slot , Thursday nights at 8 : 00 PM , had previously been occupied by Chopper One , an adventure series . The situations presented this time around included Dr. Mercy saving the life of a popular country music singer ( Dick Gautier ) , and setting up a surveillance system so that staff would be kept on their toes . 
 The final episode of Temperatures Rising aired on August 29 , 1974 . The attempt to resurrect the series was unsuccessful and ABC finally cancelled it permanently . Andy Siegel , a comedy development executive for ABC at the time , felt the series failed because audiences did not want to watch a show displaying inadequate medical care , even though it was done in a humorous fashion . In reminiscing about the series he stated : " When people see doctors on television they really want to feel that they 're in good hands . That no matter what happens it is a reassuring experience . " William Asher , in a 2000 interview , summed up the demise of the series by saying : " It didn 't get on . It 's too late . You can 't do that to an audience . They won 't accept it . " 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = Irenaean theodicy = 
 The Irenaean theodicy is a Christian theodicy designed to respond to the problem of evil . As such , it defends the probability of an omnipotent and omnibenevolent ( all @-@ powerful and perfectly loving ) God in the face of evidence of evil in the world . Numerous variations of theodicy have been proposed which all maintain that , while evil exists , God is either not responsible for creating evil , or he is not guilty for creating evil . Typically , the Irenaean theodicy asserts that the world is the best of all possible worlds because it allows humans to fully develop . Most versions of the Irenaean theodicy propose that creation is incomplete , as humans are not yet fully developed , and experiencing evil and suffering is necessary for such development . 
 Second @-@ century philosopher and theologian Irenaeus , after whom the theodicy is named , proposed a two @-@ stage creation process in which humans require free will and the experience of evil to develop . Another early Christian theologian , Origen , presented a response to the problem of evil which cast the world as a schoolroom or hospital for the soul ; theologian Mark Scott has argued that Origen , rather than Irenaeus , ought to be considered the father of this kind of theodicy . Friedrich Schleiermacher argued in the nineteenth century that God must necessarily create flawlessly , so this world must be the best possible world because it allows God 's purposes to be naturally fulfilled . In 1966 , philosopher John Hick discussed the similarities of the preceding theodicies , calling them all " Irenaean " . He supported the view that creation is incomplete and argued that the world is best placed for the full moral development of humans , as it presents genuine moral choices . British philosopher Richard Swinburne proposed that , to make a free moral choice , humans must have experience of the consequences of their own actions and that natural evil must exist to provide such choices . 
 The development of process theology has challenged the Irenaean tradition by teaching that God 's power is limited and that he cannot be responsible for evil . Twentieth century philosopher Alvin Plantinga supported the idea that this world is the best possible world , arguing that the good in the world ( including God 's infinite goodness ) outweighs the evil and proposing that the ultimate good of God 's sacrifice when Jesus was crucified necessitated the existence of evil . His free will defence was not a theodicy because he was trying to show the logical compatibility of evil and the existence of God , rather than the probability of God . D. Z. Phillips and Fyodor Dostoyevsky challenged the instrumental use of suffering , suggesting that love cannot be expressed through suffering . However , Dostoyevsky also states that the beauty of love is evident , in that love can continue to grow , withstand and overcome even the most evil acts . Michael Tooley argued that the magnitude of suffering is excessive and that , in some cases , cannot lead to moral development . French theologian Henri Blocher criticised Hick 's universalism , arguing that such a view negates free will , which was similarly important to the theodicy . 
 = = Outline = = 
 The Irenaean theodicy was first identified as a form of theodicy by John Hick in Evil and the God of Love , written in 1966 . Hick distinguished between the Augustinian theodicy , which is based on free will , and the Irenaean theodicy , which casts God as responsible for evil but justified in it . The Irenaean theodicy is distinguished by its acceptance that God is responsible for evil , but that he is not at fault . 
 = = = Evidential problem of evil = = = 
 The Irenaean theodicy is a response to the evidential problem of evil which raises the problem that , if an omnipotent and omnibenevolent ( all @-@ powerful and perfectly loving ) God exists , there should be no evil in the world . Evidence of evil in the world would make the existence of God improbable . The theodicy attempts to demonstrate that the existence of God remains probable , despite the occurrence of evil . 
 = = = Creation and development of humans = = = 
 According to the Irenaean tradition , humans are not created perfectly , but in a state of imperfection . The theodicy teaches that creation has two stages : humans were first created in the image of God , and will then be created in the likeness of God . Humans are imperfect because the second stage is incomplete , entailing the potential , not yet actualised , for humans to reach perfection . To achieve this likeness of God , humans must be refined and developed . The theodicy proposes that evil and suffering exists in the world because this is the best way for humans to develop . As such , the Irenaean theodicy is sometimes referred to as the " soul @-@ making theodicy " , a phrase taken from the poet John Keats . 
 = = = Greatest possible world = = = 
 Typical to variations of the Irenaean theodicy is the notion that the present world is the greatest possible world , or the best of all possible worlds . This is based on the Irenaean idea of human development , suggesting that the best possible world would be best suited to human development : a world containing evil and suffering would allow development better than one which does not , so the world is considered the best possible world . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Irenaeus = = = 
 Second @-@ century philosopher Irenaeus developed a theodicy based on the idea that the creation of humans is still in progress . He proposed that creation consists of two distinct parts : first in the image of God , then in the likeness of God . Irenaeus believed the first stage is complete , but the second stage requires humans to develop and grow into the likeness of God , a stage which Irenaeus believed is still in progress . He believed that , in order to achieve moral perfection , humans must be given free choice , with the actual possibility of choosing to do evil . Irenaeus argued that for humans to have free will , God must be at an epistemic distance ( or intellectual distance ) from humans , far enough that belief in God remains a free choice . 
 Because Irenaeus saw the purpose of the world to be the development of the moral character of humans , he believed that a good world would be best suited to that purpose . <unk> believed that this world would include some suffering and evil to help people draw closer to God . He perceived God 's declaration in the book of Genesis that his creation was good to mean that the world is fit for purpose , rather than being free from suffering . To illustrate the benefits of suffering , Irenaeus cited the Biblical example of Jonah , from the book of Jonah . His suffering , being swallowed by a whale , both enabled God 's plan to be fulfilled and also brought Jonah closer to God : Jonah ended up repenting for his sin and the people of Nineveh turn to God . 
 Irenaeus ' eschatology was based on a literal interpretation of the Bible , especially the book of Revelation . He believed that there would be 6000 years of suffering before the world ends in a fiery purge . This fire would purify believers ahead of a new human community existing in the New Jerusalem . The afterlife , Irenaeus proposed , focuses more on time than space ; he looked forward to a time in which humans are fully developed and live the life of God . 
 = = = Origen = = = 
 Early Christian theologian Origen also presented suffering as necessary for the development of human beings . Theologian Mark Scott has argued that John Hick 's theodicy is more closely aligned with Origen 's beliefs than Irenaeus ' and ought to be called an " <unk> theodicy " . Origen used two metaphors for the world : it is a school and a hospital for souls , with God as Teacher and Physician , in which suffering plays both an educative and healing role . Through an allegorical reading of Exodus and the books of Solomon , Origen casts human development as a progression though a series of stages which take place in this life and after death . Origen believed that all humans will eventually reach heaven as the logical conclusion of God being ' all in all ' . Hell is a metaphor for the purification of our souls : our sinful nature goes to ' Hell ' and our original nature , created by God , goes to heaven . Scott argues that significant aspects of Origen 's theology mean that there is a stronger continuation between it and Hick 's theodicy . These aspects are Origen 's allegorical treatment of Adam and Eve , the presentation of the world as a hospital or schoolroom , the progression he advocates of the human soul , and his universalism . 
 = = = Friedrich Schleiermacher = = = 
 In the early 19th century , Friedrich Schleiermacher wrote Speeches and The Christian Faith , proposing a theodicy which John Hick later identified as Irenaean in nature . Schleiermacher began his theodicy by asserting that God is omnipotent and benevolent and concluded that , because of this , " God would create flawlessly " . He proposed that it would be illogical for a perfect creation to go wrong ( as Augustine had suggested ) and that evil must have been created by God for a good reason . Schleiermacher conceived a perfect world to be one in which God 's purposes can naturally be achieved , and will ultimately lead to dependence on God . He conceived sin as being an obstruction to humanity 's dependence on God , arguing that it is almost inevitable , but citing Jesus as an example of a sinless man , whose consciousness of God was unobstructed . This theology led Schleiermacher to universalism , arguing that it is God 's will for everyone to be saved and that no person could alter this . 
 If we proceed on this definite assumption that all belonging to the human race are eventually taken up into loving fellowship with Christ , there is nothing for it but this single divine fore @-@ ordination . 
 = = = John Hick = = = 
 John Hick published Evil and the God of Love in 1966 , in which he developed a theodicy based on the work of Irenaeus . Hick distinguished between the Augustinian theodicy , based on free will , and the Irenaean theodicy , based on human development . Hick framed his theodicy as an attempt to respond to the problem of evil in light of scientific development , such as Darwin 's theory of evolution , and as an alternative to the traditionally accepted Augustinian theodicy . Rejecting the idea that humans were created perfectly and then fell away from perfection , Hick instead argued that humans are still in the process of creation . He interpreted the fall of man , described in the book of Genesis , as a mythological description of the current state of humans . 
 Hick used Irenaeus ' notion of two @-@ stage creation and supported the belief that the second stage , being created into the likeness of God , is still in progress . He argued that to be created in the image of God means to have the potential for knowledge of and a relationship with God ; this is fulfilled when creation in the likeness of God is complete . Humanity currently exists in the image of God and is being developed into spiritual maturity . Hick proposed that human morality is developed through the experience of evil and argued that it is possible for humans to know God , but only if they choose to out of their own free will . Hick acknowledges that some suffering seems to serve no constructive purpose and instead just damages the individual . Hick justifies this by appealing to the concept of mystery . He argues that , if suffering was always beneficial to humans , it would be impossible for humans to develop compassion or sympathy because we would know that someone who is suffering will certainly benefit from it . However , if there is an element of mystery to suffering , to the effect that some people suffer without benefit , it allows feelings of compassion and sympathy to emerge . 
 The value Hick placed on free will was the result of his belief that it is necessary for genuine love : he believed that love which is not freely chosen is valueless . A genuinely loving God , he argued , would have created humans with free will . Hick held that it would be possible for God to create beings that would always freely choose to do good , but argued that a genuine relationship requires the possibility of rejection . Irenaeus ' notion of humans existing at an " epistemic distance " from God also influenced Hick , as it would ensure a free choice in belief in God . Hick argued that a world without pain or suffering would prevent moral development ; such a world would have no fixed structure , or have a structure subject to divine intervention , preventing humans from coming to any harm . Hick argued that this would leave humans unable to help or harm one another , allowing them no moral choices and so preventing moral development . 
 The nature of his theodicy required Hick to propose an eschatology in which humans are fully morally developed . He proposed a universalist theory , arguing that all humans would eventually reach heaven . Hick believed that there would be no benefit or purpose to an eternal Hell , as it would render any moral development inconsequential . The eternal suffering of Hell could not be explained in terms of human development , so Hick rejected it . Despite this , he did not reject the existence of Hell outright , as to do so could make living morally in this life irrelevant . Rather , he argued that Hell exists as a mythological concept and as a warning of the importance of this life . 
 = = = Richard Swinburne = = = 
 British philosopher Richard Swinburne proposed a version of the Irenaean theodicy based on his libertarian view of free will , a view that one 's free actions are not caused by any outside agent . He argued that , in order for people to make free moral decisions , they must be aware of the consequences of such decisions . Knowledge of these consequences must be based on experience — Swinburne rejected the idea that God could implant such knowledge , arguing that humans would question its reliability . Swinburne argued that humans must have first hand experience of natural evil in order to understand the consequences of moral evil and that for God to give humans moral free will , he must allow human suffering . Swinburne conceived Hell as being a separation from God , rejecting the notion of eternal physical punishment , and argued that people who had chosen to reject God throughout their lives would continue to do so after death . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Process theology = = = 
 The development of process theology has presented a challenge to the Irenaean theodicy . The doctrine proposes that God is benevolent but suggests that his power is restricted to persuasion , rather than coercion and so is unable to prevent certain evil events from occurring . Process theology accepts God 's indirect responsibility for evil , but maintains that he is blameless , and does everything in his power to bring about good . In his introduction to process theology , C. Robert <unk> argued that , although suffering does sometimes bring about good , not all suffering is valuable and that most does more harm than good . Process theologian David Griffin contested " the utility of soul making " . He argued that the Irenaean theodicy supposes that God inflicts pain for his own ends , which Griffin regarded as immoral . 
 = = = D. Z. Phillips = = = 
 Philosopher Dewi Zephaniah Phillips published The Problem of Evil and the Problem of God in 2004 , presenting a challenge to the Irenaean theodicy . Phillips maintained throughout his work that humans are incapable of fully understanding God , and presented an understanding of the moral diversity of human existence . With reference to the suffering of the Holocaust , he rejected any theodicy which presents suffering as instrumental , arguing that such suffering cannot be justified , regardless of any good that comes of it . 
 = = = Fyodor Dostoyevsky = = = 
 Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky presented a similar argument in his novel , The Brothers Karamazov . This is however not a final argument , given the nature of Dostoyevsky 's work as polyphonic . In the novel , the character Ivan Karamazov presents an account of incredible cruelty to innocent people and children to his theist brother , Alyosha . Following this , Ivan asks his brother if he would , hypothetically , choose to be the architect of the eternal happiness of mankind , which would come into existence , if , and only if he would torture an innocent child , a necessary evil , after which this eternal happiness would come into existence . 
 " Would you consent to be the architect under those conditions ? Tell me honestly ! " 
 " No , I wouldn 't agree , " said Alyosha quietly . 
 But Dostoyevsky 's work , polyphonic in nature , also states that the love Christ showed to all people and for all people , which is Alyosha 's final stance in the novel , is the only good , and in the face of evil , the beauty that will save the world . 
 = = = Michael Tooley = = = 
 Writing in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Michael Tooley rejected the Irenaean theodicy as unsatisfactory . He argued that the magnitude of suffering experienced by some people is excessive , supporting Eleanor Stump 's view that the suffering endured by those with terminal illnesses cannot be for moral development , and that such illnesses do not fall more often upon those seemingly immoral or in need of development . He also challenged the suffering both of animals and of young children . Neither of these instances of suffering serve any useful purpose , as they cannot lead to moral development . Finally , he questioned whether the current universe is the best possible world for the moral development of humans . Citing the examples of those who die young and those who experience too great a pain to learn from it , as well as people who suffer too little to learn anything , he suggested that this world is not ideally suited to human development . 
 = = = Henri Blocher = = = 
 French theologian Henri Blocher criticised the universalism of John Hick 's theory . Blocher argued that universalism contradicts free will , which is vital to the Irenaean theodicy , because , if everyone will receive salvation , humans cannot choose to reject God . Hick did attempt to address this issue : he argued that a free action is one which reflects that character of a person , and that humans were created with a " <unk> bias " , so would choose salvation . Blocher proposed that Hick must then accept a level of determinism , though not going all the way . 
 = Imogen Holst = 
 Imogen Clare Holst CBE ( 12 April 1907 – 9 March 1984 ) was an English composer , arranger , conductor , teacher and festival administrator . The only child of the composer Gustav Holst , she is particularly known for her educational work at Dartington Hall in the 1940s , and for her 20 years as joint artistic director of the Aldeburgh Festival . In addition to composing music , she wrote composer biographies , much educational material , and several books on the life and works of her father . 
 From a young age , Imogen Holst showed precocious talent in composing and performance . After attending Eothen School and St Paul 's Girls ' School , she entered the Royal College of Music , where she developed her skills as a conductor and won several prizes for composing . Unable for health reasons to follow her initial ambitions to be a pianist or a dancer , Imogen spent most of the 1930s teaching , and as a full @-@ time organiser for the English Folk Dance and Song Society . These duties reduced her compositional activities , although she made many arrangements of folksongs . After serving as an organiser for the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts at the start of the Second World War , in 1942 she began working at Dartington . In her nine years there she established Dartington as a major centre of music education and activity . 
 In the early 1950s Imogen became Benjamin Britten 's musical assistant , moved to Aldeburgh , and began helping with the organisation of the annual Aldeburgh Festival . In 1956 she became joint artistic director of the festival , and during the following 20 years helped it to a position of pre @-@ eminence in British musical life . In 1964 she gave up her work as Britten 's assistant , to resume her own compositional career and to concentrate on the preservation of her father 's musical legacy . Imogen 's own music is not widely known and has received little critical attention ; much of it is unpublished and unperformed . The first recordings dedicated to her works , issued in 2009 and 2012 , were warmly received by critics . She was appointed CBE in 1975 and received numerous academic honours . She died at Aldeburgh and is buried in the churchyard there . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Early life and family = = = 
 Imogen Holst was born on 12 April 1907 at 31 <unk> Road , Richmond , a riverside town to the west of London . Her parents were Gustav Theodore Holst , an aspiring composer then working as a music teacher , and Isobel , née Harrison . The Holst family , of mixed Swedish , German and Latvian ancestry , had been in England since 1802 and had been musicians for several generations . Gustav followed this family tradition ; while studying at the Royal College of Music ( RCM ) , he met Isobel Harrison , who sang in one of the amateur choirs that he conducted . He was immediately attracted to her , and they were married on 22 July 1901 . 
 While attempting to establish himself as a composer , Gustav Holst worked first as an orchestral trombonist , and later as a teacher . In 1907 he held teaching posts at James Allen 's Girls ' School in Dulwich , and St Paul 's Girls ' School ( SPGS ) in Hammersmith , where he was director of music . He also taught evening classes at Morley College , an adult education centre in the Waterloo district of London . Shortly after Imogen 's birth the family moved from Richmond to a small house by the river in nearby Barnes , which they rented from a relative . Imogen 's main memories of this house were of her father working in his composing room on the top floor , which she was forbidden to visit , and of his efforts to teach her folk @-@ songs . 
 = = = Schooling = = = 
 Descriptions of Imogen as a small child indicate that she had blue eyes , fair hair , an oval face reminiscent of her father 's , and a rather prominent nose inherited from her mother . In 1912 , at the age of five , she joined the kindergarten class at the Froebel Institute , and remained at the school for five years . Holidays were often spent at the <unk> ' rented country cottage at Thaxted in Essex , where Gustav Holst began an annual Whitsun Festival in 1916 . 
 In 1917 Imogen began boarding at Eothen , a small , private school for girls in Caterham , where Jane Joseph , Holst 's star pupil from SPGS , taught music . A letter home , dated 17 July 1917 , tells of " <unk> [ sic ] , and ripping prizes , and strawberries and cream for tea " . At the school , Imogen studied piano with Eleanor Shuttleworth , violin with André Mangeot ( described as " topping " ) and theory with Jane Joseph ( " ripping " ) . Under Joseph 's tuition Imogen produced her first compositions — three instrumental pieces and some Christmas carol tunes — which she numbered as Ops . 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 . In the summer term of 1920 , she composed and choreographed a " Dance of the Nymphs and Shepherds " , which was performed at the school under her direction on 9 July . 
 Imogen left Eothen in December 1920 hoping to study under Ruby Ginner at the Ginner @-@ Mawer School of Dance and Drama , but was rejected as probably lacking the stamina for a dancing career . While studying at home under a governess for six months , at Whitsun 1921 she took part as a dancer in a production of Purcell 's semi @-@ opera from 1690 , Dioclesian , a version largely devised by Joseph . 
 In September 1921 Imogen became a boarder at St Paul 's Girls School . In July 1922 she performed a Bach Prelude and Fugue on the piano , for which Joseph praised her warmly , writing : " I think everyone enjoyed the Bach from beginning to end , they all made nice contented noises at the end of it " . Imogen 's SPGS years were generally happy and successful . In July 1923 she won the junior Alice Lupton piano prize , but her chances of distinction as a pianist were marred when she began to develop phlebitis in her left arm . Among other activities she became interested in folk music and dance , and in 1923 became a member of the English Folk Dance Society ( EFDS ) . In 1924 – 25 , her final year at SPGS , Imogen founded a folk dance society in the school . At an end @-@ of @-@ term school concert late in July 1925 , she played Chopin 's étude in E major and gave the first performance of Gustav Holst 's Toccata . 
 = = = = Royal College of Music = = = = 
 Although destined like her father for the RCM , Imogen first spent a year studying composition with Herbert Howells and piano with <unk> O 'Neill , while otherwise occupying herself with EFDS activities . She began at the RCM in September 1926 , studying piano with Kathleen Long , composition with George Dyson , and conducting under W. H. Reed . Her aptitude as a conductor was evident in December 1926 , when she led the college 's Third Orchestra in the opening movement of Mozart 's " Prague " Symphony . This and other performances on the podium led The Daily Telegraph to speculate that Imogen might eventually become the first woman to " establish a secure tenure of the conductor 's platform " . 
 In her second RCM year Imogen concentrated on composition , producing several chamber works including a violin sonata , an oboe quintet , and a suite for woodwind . She took her first steps towards personal independence when she moved from the family home to a bedsit near Kensington Gardens . In 1928 she went to Belgium with the EFDS , took an Italian holiday , and made an extended trip to Germany with a group known as " The Travelling Morrice " which promoted international understanding through music and dance . In October 1928 she won the RCM 's Cobbett prize for an original chamber composition , her Phantasy String Quartet , and shortly afterwards was awarded the Morley Scholarship for the " best all @-@ round student " . The quartet was broadcast by the BBC on 20 March 1929 , but for her , the achievement was overshadowed by the news that month of the premature death of her early mentor Jane Joseph . 
 In the winter of 1929 Imogen made her first visit to Canada and the United States , as part of an EFDS party . Back home , she worked on her RCM finals composition , a suite for brass band entitled The Unfortunate Traveller . Despite some apprehension on her part , the piece passed the examiners ' scrutiny and was played at the college 's end @-@ of @-@ year concert in July . Imogen gained her <unk> diploma , and learned also that she had been awarded an Octavia Travelling Scholarship which would enable her to study composition abroad . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = European travels , 1930 – 31 = = = 
 Imogen spent much of period between September 1930 and May 1931 travelling . A brief visit to Liège in September was followed immediately by a three @-@ month round trip , to Scandinavia , Germany , Austria and Hungary , returning to England via Prague , Dresden , Leipzig , Berlin and Amsterdam . Her " orgy of musical experiences " included a Mozart pilgrimage in Salzburg , performances of Der Rosenkavalier and Die Entführung aus dem Serail at the Vienna State Opera , Bach in Berlin and Mahler 's Seventh Symphony in Amsterdam . On 1 February 1932 she departed again , this time for Italy . After a two @-@ month tour Imogen came home with mixed views on Italian music @-@ making . She concluded that " the Italians are a nation of singers ... But music is a different language in that part of the world " . Back in London , she decided that despite her experiences , " if it is music one is wanting , there is no place like London . " 
 = = = Mainly teaching , 1931 – 38 = = = 
 With her scholarship funds exhausted , Imogen needed a job , and in June 1931 took charge of music at the Citizen House arts and education centre in Bath . She disliked the disciplines imposed by an unsympathetic and unyielding superior , and she stayed only a few months . She then worked as a freelance conductor and accompanist before joining the staff of the EFDS early in 1932 . The organisation had by now expanded to become the " English Folk Dance and Song Society " ( EFDSS ) and was based in new headquarters at Cecil Sharp House . The duties , mainly teaching , were not full @-@ time , and she was able to take up part @-@ time teaching posts at her old school , Eothen , and at Roedean School . Although she composed little original music during these years , she made many instrumental and vocal arrangements of traditional folk melodies . 
 Gustav Holst 's health had been poor for years ; in the winter of 1933 – 34 it deteriorated , and he died on 25 May 1934 . Imogen privately determined that she would protect her father 's musical legacy , and began working on his biography . Meanwhile her own music began to attract attention . Her carol arrangement " Nowell and Nowell " was performed in a 1934 Christmas concert in Chichester Cathedral , and the following year saw the premiere of her Concerto for Violin and Strings , with Elsie Avril as the soloist and Imogen conducting the London Philharmonic Orchestra . In 1936 she paid a visit to Hollywood , where she stayed with her uncle ( Gustav 's brother ) , the actor Ernest Cossart . A highlight of this visit was a Wagner concert at the Hollywood Bowl , conducted by Otto Klemperer . Back in England , Imogen worked on recorder arrangements of music by the neglected 16th @-@ century composer Pelham Humphrey . These were published in 1936 to an enthusiastic critical reception . Her biography of her father was published in 1938 ; among several tributes , the composer Edmund Rubbra praised her for producing a book that was not " clouded by sentiment ... her biography is at once intimate and objective " . 
 = = = War : travelling for CEMA = = = 
 In 1938 Imogen decided to abandon amateur music @-@ making and teaching to concentrate on her own professional development . She resigned her EFDSS post while continuing to honour existing commitments to the organisation . She had given up her work at Roedean in 1936 ; at Easter 1939 she resigned from Eothen . In June 1939 she began a tour of Switzerland which included the Lucerne Festival . Towards the end of August , as war became increasingly likely , she broke off the trip and returned home . 
 After the outbreak of war on 3 September 1939 , Imogen worked for the Bloomsbury House Refugee Committee , which supported German and Austrian refugee musicians interned under emergency regulations . In January 1940 she accepted a position under a scheme organised by the Pilgrim Trust , to act as one of six " music travellers " , whose brief was to boost morale by encouraging musical activities in rural communities . Imogen was assigned to cover the west of England , a huge area stretching from Oxfordshire to Cornwall . When the government set up the Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts ( CEMA ) , responsibility for the music travellers passed to that body . 
 With little practical support from CEMA , Imogen 's organisational talents , according to her friend Ursula Vaughan Williams , " developed brilliantly " . According to Imogen 's account , her duties included conducting local brass bands , leading hymn @-@ singing practice ( " fourteen very old women in hats sitting round the edge of a dark , empty hideous tin hut " ) , and organising sing @-@ songs for evacuee children . She arranged performances by professional groups , and what she termed " drop @-@ in @-@ and @-@ sing " festivals in which anyone could join . Imogen also writes of " idyllic days " spent over cups of tea , discussing the hopes and dreams of would @-@ be music makers . Her compositional activity in these years was limited by time and pressures of work , but she produced two recorder trios — the Offley and Deddington suites — and made numerous arrangements for female voices of carols and traditional songs . By the summer of 1942 the workload and concomitant bureaucracy was such that she was exhausted , and in need of a lengthy rest . 
 = = = Dartington = = = 
 In 1938 , Imogen had visited Dartington Hall , a progressive school and crafts community near Totnes in Devon , which had been founded in 1925 by Leonard and Dorothy Elmhirst . In 1941 – 42 , while travelling for CEMA in Devon and Cornwall , she was invited by the <unk> to make her base at Dartington . In the summer of 1942 , while recuperating there , she was persuaded by Christopher Martin , the centre 's administrator , to resign her CEMA role and work at Dartington . He had in mind a music course , " the sort of thing that your father did in the old days at Morley College " . Beginning in 1943 , Imogen established a one @-@ year course , initially designed to train young women to organise amateur orchestras and musical events in rural communities . Gradually it developed into a more general musical education for a broader student intake . Under Imogen 's leadership the course quickly became the hub of a range of musical activities , including the foundation of an amateur orchestra : " Hardly any of us could play ... However bad we were , we went on " . Imogen 's teaching methods , heavily based on " learning by doing " and without formal examinations , at first disconcerted her students and puzzled the school inspectors , but eventually gained acceptance and respect . Rosamond Strode , a pupil at Dartington who later worked with Imogen at Aldeburgh , said of her approach : " She knew exactly how , and when , to push her victims in at the deep end , and she knew , also , that although they would flounder and splash about at first , it wouldn 't be long before ... they would be swimming easily while she beamed approval from the bank " . 
 In the conducive atmosphere of Dartington Imogen resumed serious composition , largely abandoned during the hectic CEMA years . In 1943 she completed a Serenade for flute , viola and bassoon , a Suite for String Orchestra , and a choral work , Three Psalms . All these works were performed at a Wigmore Hall concert on 14 June 1943 devoted to her music . Other compositions from the Dartington years included Theme and Variations for solo violin , String Trio No. 1 ( premiered by the Dartington Hall String Trio at the National Gallery on 17 July 1944 ) , songs from the 16th @-@ century anthology <unk> 's Miscellany , an oboe concerto , and a string quartet . In October 1943 the composer Benjamin Britten and the tenor Peter Pears gave the first of several recitals at Dartington . A mutual respect and friendship developed between Britten and Imogen , strengthened by their shared love of neglected music from the Renaissance and Baroque eras . 
 From 1945 , while maintaining her commitment to Dartington , Imogen began to widen her musical activities . As well as editing and preparing scores for Britten , she promoted Dartington as the base for Britten 's new English Opera Group , although eventually Glyndebourne was preferred . In 1947 she encouraged the refugee violinist Norbert Brainin to form his own string quartet , and arranged its debut at Dartington , as the " Brainin Quartet " , on 13 July 1947 . Six months later , renamed the Amadeus Quartet , the group appeared at the Wigmore Hall , and went on to worldwide recognition . In 1948 she began work on a critical study of her father 's music , a companion volume to her 1938 Holst biography . When this was published in 1951 , most critics praised its objectivity , one critic venturing that she had been " unnecessarily harsh " in her judgements . 
 Rising standards of achievement at Dartington enabled Imogen to organise performances of more demanding works , such as Bach 's Mass in B minor in July 1950 to honour the 200th anniversary of Bach 's death . Three years in preparation , this endeavour brought a tribute from one of the audience : " I don 't know , and can 't imagine what the music of heaven is like . But when we all get there , please God , if any conducting is still necessary I hope your services will be required and that I will be in the chorus " . By the middle of 1950 Imogen 's professional focus was changing . She had attended the first two Aldeburgh Festivals in 1948 and 1949 , and in 1950 accepted a commission to provide a choral work for performance at the 1951 festival . Sensing that it was time to leave Dartington , she gave a year 's notice , part of which was spent on sabbatical , studying Indian music at Rabindranath Tagore 's university in West Bengal . A fruit of this visit was her Ten Indian Folk Tunes for recorder . On 21 July 1951 her one @-@ act opera , Benedick and Beatrice , was performed at Dartington , to mark her departure . 
 = = = Aldeburgh = = = 
 Without definite plans for her future after Dartington , Imogen toured Europe , collecting music that she would later edit for performance , including madrigals by Carlo Gesualdo which she found " very exciting " . At home , although not formally employed by Britten , she worked with him on several projects , including a new performing version of Purcell 's Dido and Aeneas and the preparation of the vocal and full scores for Britten 's opera Billy Budd . Pears , who had observed Imogen 's overall contributions to musical life at Dartington , believed she could help Britten and the Aldeburgh Festival on a more formal basis , and shortly after the 1952 festival Britten invited her to come and work with him . She agreed , and in September 1952 moved to lodgings in Aldeburgh . 
 = = = = Assistant to Britten = = = = 
 When Imogen joined Britten , the financial arrangement was vague ; Britten paid her on a piecemeal basis rather than a regular salary , unaware that she had made over her rights to her father 's estate to her mother and had little money of her own . As a result , she lived very frugally in Aldeburgh , but her commitment to Britten overrode her own physical comfort . For the next dozen years her life was organised around the joint objectives of assisting Britten and developing the Aldeburgh Festival . Although she temporarily put her own compositional ambitions aside , she did not abandon all other activities . She made many choral and vocal arrangements , promoted her father 's music , and wrote books , articles and programme notes . 
 For the first 18 months of her association with Britten , Imogen kept a diary which , Grogan says , forms a record of her " unconditional belief in Britten 's achievement and status , and her absolute devotion to his work " . The first of Britten 's works to which she made a significant contribution was the opera Gloriana , scheduled to form part of the 1953 Coronation celebrations . The short timescale for the writing of the opera placed considerable pressure on the composer and his new assistant , strains that were dramatised 60 years later in a radio play , Imo and Ben . Imogen 's main task with Gloriana was to copy Britten 's pencil sketches and prepare the vocal and piano scores which the singers needed for rehearsals by February 1953 . Later she assisted him with the writing of the full orchestral score , and performed similar services with his next opera , The Turn of the Screw ( 1954 ) . When Britten was under pressure during the composition of his ballet The Prince of the Pagodas ( 1956 ) , Imogen accompanied him to Switzerland , to remain by his side as he completed the work . Imogen took great pleasure in her association with Britten 's opera for children , Noye 's Fludde ( 1957 ) , for which she showed Britten how to achieve a unique raindrop effect by hitting a row of china mugs with a wooden spoon . She and Britten combined to collect and publish music for the recorder , in a series published by Boosey and Hawkes ( 1954 – 59 ) , and jointly wrote a popular introductory book , The Story of Music ( 1958 ) . 
 Imogen assisted Britten with all his major compositions until 1964 . At that point , conscious of time passing , she determined to give priority to the final securing of her father 's musical legacy , and to re @-@ establish her credentials as a composer . She relinquished her post as Britten 's assistant to Rosamund Strode , although she did not leave Aldeburgh or break with Britten , continuing her work with the Aldeburgh Festival for a further 13 years . 
 = = = = Artistic director = = = = 
 From the time of her arrival in Aldeburgh Imogen gave considerable support and assistance to the Aldeburgh Festival , as a conductor and , from 1953 , increasingly as a planner and organiser . In 1956 her position was formalised , and she joined Britten and Pears as one of the festival 's artistic directors , taking responsibility for programmes and performers . At the 1956 festival she fulfilled a long @-@ held ambition by arranging a performance of Gustav Holst 's opera Savitri , the first of several Holst works that she introduced to the festival . Savitri was offered as part of a double bill that included Imogen 's arrangement of John Blow 's 17th century opera Venus and Adonis . In 1957 she instituted late @-@ night concerts devoted to early music , and in 1962 she organised a series of evening concerts of Flemish music , in which she had more recently become interested . She also devised frequent programmes devoted to church music , for performance at Aldeburgh parish church . Since moving to Aldeburgh in 1952 , Imogen had lived in a series of lodgings and rented flats . In 1962 she moved to a small contemporary bungalow built for her in Church Walk , where she lived for the rest of her life . 
 In 1964 , after giving up her role as Britten 's assistant , Imogen began composing again , and in 1965 accepted commissions for two large @-@ scale works : The Sun 's Journey , a cantata for female voices , and the Trianon Suite , composed for the Trianon Youth Orchestra of Ipswich . In 1965 and 1966 she published two books , studies of Bach and Britten . The latter work caused ill feelings among several key figures in Britten 's earlier career with whom he had subsequently fallen out , such as his former librettists Eric Crozier and Ronald Duncan , whose contributions to Britten 's success were ignored in the book . Between 1966 and 1970 Imogen recorded a number of her father 's works with the Purcell Singers and the English Chamber Orchestra , under the Argo and Lyrita labels . Among these recordings was the Double Violin Concerto for which , forty years earlier , she had acted as the rehearsal pianist before the first performance . 
 Imogen had formed the Purcell Singers , a small semi @-@ professional choir , in October 1952 , largely at the instigation of Pears . From 1954 the choir became regular performers at the Aldeburgh Festival , with programmes ranging from rarely heard medieval music to 20th @-@ century works . Among choir members who later achieved individual distinction were the bass @-@ baritone John Shirley @-@ Quirk , the tenors Robert Tear and Philip Langridge , and the founder and conductor of the Heinrich Schütz Choir , Roger Norrington . Langridge remembered with particular pleasure a performance in Orford church of Thomas Tallis 's forty @-@ part motet <unk> in <unk> , on 2 July 1963 . When she gave up the conductorship of the choir in 1967 , much of its musical mission , in particular its commitment to early music , was assumed by other groups , such as Norrington 's Schütz Choir and the Purcell Consort formed by the ex @-@ Purcell Singers chorister <unk> Burgess . 
 On 2 June 1967 Imogen shared the podium with Britten in the concert inaugurating the Aldeburgh Festival 's new home at the Snape Maltings . From 1972 Imogen was involved with the development of educational classes at the Maltings , which began with weekend singing classes and developed into the Britten @-@ Pears School for Advanced Musical Studies , with its own training orchestra . By this time Imogen 's performances at the festival had become increasingly rare , but in 1975 she conducted a concert of Gustav Holst 's brass band music , held outdoors at Framlingham Castle . A report of the event described an evening of " persistent drizzle ... until a diminutive figure in a special scarlet dress took the conductor 's baton . The band was transformed , and played Holst 's Suite as it has never been played before " . 
 Britten had been in poor health since undergoing heart surgery in 1973 , and on 4 December 1976 he died . Imogen was unsure that she could maintain a working relationship with Pears alone , and on reaching the age of 70 decided she would retire as artistic director after the 1977 festival . That year she made her final festival appearance as a performer when she stood in for the indisposed conductor André Previn at the Snape Maltings Training Orchestra 's inaugural festival concert . On retirement , she accepted the honorary title of Artistic Director Emeritus . 
 = = Later career = = 
 Gustav Holst 's centenary was celebrated in 1974 , when Imogen published a revised biography in Faber 's " Great Composers " series and a Thematic Catalogue of Gustav Holst 's Music . The centenary was the occasion for the publication of the first volume of a facsimile edition of her father 's manuscripts , on which Imogen worked with the help of the composer Colin Matthews . Three more facsimile volumes followed in the years up to 1983 , at which point Imogen 's own failing health led to the abandonment of the project . As part of the 1974 centenary , Imogen negotiated performances of Savitri and The Wandering Scholar at Aldeburgh and Sadler 's Wells , and helped to arrange exhibitions of Holst 's life and works at Aldeburgh and the Royal Festival Hall . 
 Apart from her books concerned with her father 's life and works , Imogen continued to write on other aspects of music . In addition to numerous articles she published a short study of the Renaissance composer William Byrd ( 1972 ) and a handbook for conductors of amateur choirs ( 1973 ) . She continued to compose , usually short pieces but with occasional larger @-@ scale orchestral works such as the Woodbridge Suite ( 1970 ) and the Deben Calendar ( 1977 ) , the latter a series of twelve sketches depicting the River Deben in Suffolk at different phases of the year . Her last major composition was a String Quintet , written in 1982 and performed in October of that year by the <unk> Quartet , augmented by the cellist Steven Isserlis . 
 In April 1979 Imogen was present when the Queen Mother opened the new Britten – Pears School building in Snape . The building included a new library — the Gustav Holst Library — to which Imogen had donated a large amount of material , including books which her father had used in his own teaching career . She had intended that , after 1977 , her retirement from the Aldeburgh Festival would be total , but she made an exception in 1980 when she organised a 70th birthday celebration concert for Pears . 
 = = Death = = 
 Shortly after the 1977 Aldeburgh Festival , Imogen became seriously ill with what she described as " a coronary angina " . Thereafter , angina was a recurrent problem , although she continued to work and fulfil engagements . By early 1984 the deterioration in her health was noticeable to her friends . She died at home of heart failure on 9 March 1984 and was buried in Aldeburgh churchyard five days later in a plot next to Britten 's . An obituary tribute in the magazine Early Music emphasised her long association with music in the Aldeburgh church , where she " [ brought ] <unk> to life facets of that tradition to which her own life had been dedicated and which she presented as a continuing source of strength and wonder " . Ursula Vaughan Williams wrote : " Imogen had something of the medieval scholar about her ... content with few creature comforts if there was enough music , enough work , enough books to fill her days . Indeed , she always filled her days , making twenty @-@ four hours contain what most of us need twice that time to do " . 
 In 2007 , Imogen 's centenary was recognised at Aldeburgh by several special events , including a recital in the parish church by the Navarra Quartet in which works by Purcell and Schubert were mixed with Imogen 's own The Fall of the Leaf for solo cello , and the String Quintet . The latter work was described by Andrew Clements in The Guardian as " genuinely memorable ... The set of variations with which the quintet ends dissolves into a series of bare solo lines , linking Holst 's music to her father 's " . 
 Imogen never married , though she enjoyed a number of romantic friendships , notably with the future poet Miles Tomalin , whom she met when she was a pupil at St Pauls . The two were close until 1929 , and exchanged poetry ; Tomalin married in 1931 . Many years after the relationship ended , Imogen admitted to Britten that she would have married Tomalin . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Imogen was made a Fellow of the Royal College of Music in 1966 . She was awarded honorary doctorates from the universities of Essex ( 1968 ) , Exeter ( 1969 ) , and Leeds ( 1983 ) . She was given honorary membership of the Royal Academy of Music in 1970 . In 1975 she was appointed a Companion of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 Imogen Holst was a part @-@ time composer , intermittently productive within her extensive portfolio of musical activities . In her earlier years she was among a group of young British women composers — Elizabeth <unk> and Elisabeth Lutyens were others — whose music was regularly performed and broadcast . According to a later critic , her Mass in A of 1927 showed " confident and imaginative layering of voices , building to a satisfying Agnus Dei " . However , for long periods in her subsequent career Imogen barely composed at all . After the RCM , her most active years as a composer were at Dartington in the 1940s and the " post @-@ Britten " period after 1964 . Her output of compositions , arrangements and edited music is extensive but has received only limited critical attention . Much of it is unpublished and has usually been neglected after its initial performance . 
 The oeuvre comprises instrumental , vocal , orchestral and choral music . Early in her compositional career Imogen was primarily influenced , as Gustav Holst 's daughter , by what the analyst Christopher Tinker terms " her natural and inescapable relationship with the English musical establishment " , and by her close personal relationship with her father . Some of her first compositions reflect the pastoralism of Ralph Vaughan Williams , who taught her at the RCM . In her teaching and EFDSS years during the 1930s she became known for her folksong arrangements but composed little music herself . The personal style that emerged in the 1940s incorporated her affinity with folksong and dance , her intense interest in English music of the 16th and 17th centuries , and her taste for innovation . In her 1930 suite for solo viola , she had begun experimenting with scale patterns ; by the 1940s she was incorporating her own six- and eight @-@ note scales into her chamber music and occasionally into choral works such as the Five Songs ( 1944 ) . This experimentation reappears in later works ; in <unk> My Fancy ( 1972 ) a new scale is introduced for each verse , while the choir provides free harmonisation to a solo voice . In Homage to William Morris ( 1984 ) , among her final works , Tinker notes her use of dissonance " to add strength to the musical articulation of the text " . By contrast , the String Quintet of 1982 , the work which Imogen herself thought made her " a real composer " , is characterised by the warmth of its harmonies . 
 Much of Imogen 's choral music was written for amateur performance . Critics have observed a clear distinction in quality between these pieces and the choral works written for professional choirs , particularly those for women 's voices . These latter pieces , says Tinker , incorporate her best work as an original composer . Record companies were slow in recognising Imogen 's commercial potential , and not until 2009 was a CD issued devoted entirely to her music — a selection of her works for strings . The Guardian 's reviewer welcomed the recording : " [ T ] here is a great deal of English music of far less worth that is frequently praised to the skies " . In 2012 a selection of her choral music , sung by the Clare College Choir , was recorded by Harmonia Mundi . One review of this recording picks out Welcome Joy and Welcome Sorrow , written for female voices with harp accompaniment , as " [ giving ] an insight into her own , softly nuanced , pioneering voice " . Another mentions the " Three Psalms " setting , where " inner rhythms are underscored by the subtle string ostinatos pulsing beneath " . 
 = = Published texts = = 
 Publication details refer to the book 's first UK publication . 
 Gustav Holst : A biography . London : Oxford University Press . 1938 . OCLC <unk> . ( revised edition 1969 ) 
 The Music of Gustav Holst . London : Oxford University Press . 1951 . OCLC <unk> . ( revised editions 1968 and 1985 , the latter with Holst 's Music Reconsidered added ) 
 The Book of the <unk> <unk> Recorder . London : Boosey & Hawkes . 1957 . OCLC <unk> . 
 The Story of Music ( " The Wonderful World " series ) . London : Rathbone . OCLC <unk> . ( co @-@ author with Benjamin Britten ) 
 Heirs and Rebels : Letters Written to Each Other , and Occasional Writings on Music , by Ralph Vaughan Williams and Gustav Holst . London : Oxford University Press . 1959 . OCLC <unk> . ( co @-@ editor with Ursula Vaughan Williams ) : 
 Henry Purcell , 1659 – 1695 : Essays on his Music . London : Oxford University Press . 1959 . OCLC <unk> . ( editor ) 
 Henry Purcell : the Story of his Life and Work . London : Boosey & Hawkes . 1961 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Tune . London : Faber & Faber . 1962 . OCLC <unk> . 
 An ABC of Music : a Short Practical Guide to the Basic Essentials of Rudiments , Harmony , and Form . Oxford : Oxford University Press . 1963 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Your Book of Music . London : Faber & Faber . 1964 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Bach ( " Great Composers " series ) . London : Faber & Faber . 1965 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Britten ( " Great Composers " series ) . London : Faber & Faber . 1966 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Byrd ( " Great Composers " series ) . London : Faber & Faber . 1972 . ISBN 0 @-@ 571 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Conducting a Choir : a Guide for Amateurs . London : Oxford University Press . 1973 . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Holst ( " Great Composers " series ) . London : Faber & Faber . 1974 . ISBN 0 @-@ 571 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. ( second edition 1981 ) 
 A Thematic Catalogue of Gustav Holst 's Music . London : Faber Music , in conjunction with G & I Holst Ltd . 1974 . ISBN 0 @-@ 571 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Imogen Holst also wrote numerous articles , pamphlets , essays , introductions and programme notes during the period 1935 – 1984 . 
 = Tellurium = 
 Tellurium is a chemical element with symbol Te and atomic number 52 . It is a brittle , mildly toxic , rare , silver @-@ white metalloid . Tellurium is chemically related to selenium and sulfur . It is occasionally found in native form , as elemental crystals . Tellurium is far more common in the universe as a whole than it is on Earth . Its extreme rarity in the Earth 's crust , comparable to that of platinum , is partly due to its high atomic number , but also due to its formation of a volatile hydride which caused the element to be lost to space as a gas during the hot nebular formation of the planet . 
 Tellurium was discovered in the Habsburg Empire , in 1782 by Franz @-@ Joseph Müller von Reichenstein in a mineral containing tellurium and gold . Martin Heinrich Klaproth named the new element in 1798 after the Latin word for " earth " , <unk> . Gold telluride minerals are the most notable natural gold compounds . However , they are not a commercially significant source of tellurium itself , which is normally extracted as a by @-@ product of copper and lead production . 
 Commercially , the primary use of tellurium is in alloys , foremost in steel and copper to improve machinability . Applications in CdTe solar panels and as a semiconductor material also consume a considerable fraction of tellurium production . 
 Tellurium has no biological function , although fungi can incorporate it in place of sulfur and selenium into amino acids such as <unk> and <unk> . In humans , tellurium is partly metabolized into dimethyl telluride , ( CH3 ) 2Te , a gas with a garlic @-@ like odor which is exhaled in the breath of victims of tellurium toxicity or exposure . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Tellurium has two allotropes , crystalline and amorphous . When crystalline , tellurium is silvery @-@ white and when it is in pure state it has a metallic luster . It is a brittle and easily pulverized metalloid . Amorphous tellurium is a black @-@ brown powder prepared by precipitating it from a solution of tellurous acid or telluric acid ( Te ( OH ) 6 ) . Tellurium is a semiconductor that shows a greater electrical conductivity in certain directions which depends on atomic alignment ; the conductivity increases slightly when exposed to light ( <unk> ) . When in its molten state , tellurium is corrosive to copper , iron and stainless steel . Of the chalcogens , tellurium has the highest melting and boiling points , at 722 @.@ 66 K ( 841 @.@ 12 ° F ) and 1 @,@ 261 K ( 1 @,@ 810 ° F ) , respectively . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Tellurium adopts a polymeric structure , consisting of zig @-@ zag chains of Te atoms . This gray material resists oxidation by air and is nonvolatile . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Naturally occurring tellurium has eight isotopes . Five of those isotopes , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , are stable . The other three , <unk> , 128Te and <unk> , have been observed to be radioactive . The stable isotopes make up only 33 @.@ 2 % of the naturally occurring tellurium ; this is possibly due to the long half @-@ lives of the unstable isotopes . They are in the range from 1013 to 2 @.@ 2 × 1024 years ( for 128Te ) . This makes 128Te the isotope with the longest half life among all radionuclides , which is approximately 160 trillion ( 1012 ) times the age of the known universe . 
 There are 38 known nuclear isomers of tellurium with atomic masses that range from 105 to 142 . Tellurium is among the lightest elements known to undergo alpha decay , with isotopes <unk> to <unk> being able to undergo this mode of decay . The atomic mass of tellurium ( 127 @.@ 60 g · mol − 1 ) exceeds that of the following element iodine ( 126 @.@ 90 g · mol − 1 ) . 
 = = = Occurrence = = = 
 With an abundance in the Earth 's crust comparable to that of platinum , tellurium is one of the rarest stable solid elements in the Earth 's crust . Its abundance is about 1 µg / kg . In comparison , even the rarest of the lanthanides have crustal abundances of 500 µg / kg ( see Abundance of the chemical elements ) . 
 The extreme rarity of tellurium in the Earth 's crust is not a reflection of its cosmic abundance , which is in fact greater than that of rubidium , even though rubidium is ten thousand times more abundant in the Earth 's crust . The extraordinarily low abundance of tellurium on Earth is rather thought to be due to conditions in the Earth 's formation , when the stable form of certain elements , in the absence of oxygen and water , was controlled by the reductive power of free hydrogen . Under this scenario , certain elements such as tellurium which form volatile hydrides were severely depleted during the formation of the Earth 's crust , through evaporation of these hydrides . Tellurium and selenium are the heavy elements most depleted in the Earth 's crust by this process . 
 Tellurium is sometimes found in its native ( i.e. , elemental ) form , but is more often found as the tellurides of gold such as calaverite and <unk> ( two different polymorphs of <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , <unk> . The city of Telluride , Colorado was named in hope of a strike of gold telluride ( which never materialized , though gold metal ore was found ) . Gold itself is usually found uncombined , but when found naturally as a chemical compound , it is most often combined with tellurium . 
 Although tellurium is found with gold more often than in uncombined form , it is found even more often combined with elements other than gold , as tellurides of more common metals ( e.g. <unk> , <unk> ) . Natural tellurite and tellurate minerals also occur , formed by oxidation of tellurides near the Earth 's surface . In contrast to selenium , tellurium is not in general able to replace sulfur in its minerals , due to the large difference in ion radius of sulfur and tellurium . In consequence , many common sulfide minerals contain considerable amounts of selenium , but only traces of tellurium . 
 In the gold rush of 1893 , diggers in Kalgoorlie discarded a pyritic material which got in their way as they searched for pure gold . The Kalgoorlie waste was thus used to fill in potholes or as part of sidewalks . Three years passed before it was realized that this waste was calaverite , a telluride of gold that had not been recognized . This led to a second gold rush in 1896 which included mining the streets . 
 = = History = = 
 Tellurium ( Latin <unk> meaning " earth " ) was discovered in the 18th century in a gold ore from the mines in Zlatna , near today 's city of Alba Iulia , Romania . This ore was known as " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( white leafy gold ore from <unk> , German name of <unk> , now <unk> <unk> in Alba County ) or <unk> <unk> ( <unk> gold pyrite ) , and , according to Anton von Rupprecht , was <unk> ( argent <unk> ) , containing native antimony . In 1782 Franz @-@ Joseph Müller von Reichenstein , who was then serving as the Austrian chief inspector of mines in Transylvania , concluded that the ore did not contain antimony , but that it was bismuth sulfide . The following year , he reported that this was erroneous and that the ore contained mostly gold and an unknown metal very similar to antimony . After a thorough investigation which lasted for three years and consisted of more than fifty tests , Müller determined the specific gravity of the mineral and noted the radish @-@ like odor of the white smoke which passed off when the new metal was heated , the red color which the metal imparts to sulfuric acid , and the black precipitate which this solution gives when diluted with water . Nevertheless , he was not able to identify this metal and gave it the names <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> , as it did not show the properties predicted for the expected antimony . 
 In 1789 , a Hungarian scientist , Pál <unk> , also discovered the element independently in an ore from Deutsch @-@ Pilsen which had been regarded as <unk> molybdenite , but later he gave the credit to Müller . In 1798 , it was named by Martin Heinrich Klaproth who had earlier isolated it from the mineral calaverite . 
 The 1960s brought growth in thermoelectric applications for tellurium ( as bismuth telluride ) , as well as its use in free @-@ machining steel , which became the dominant use . 
 = = Production = = 
 The principal source of tellurium is from anode sludges produced during the electrolytic refining of blister copper . It is a component of dusts from blast furnace refining of lead . Treatment of 1000 tons of copper ore typically yields one kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 pounds ) of tellurium . Tellurium is produced mainly in the United States , Peru , Japan and Canada . For the year 2009 the British Geological Survey gives the following numbers : United States 50 t , Peru 7 t , Japan 40 t and Canada 16 t . 
 The anode sludges contain the selenides and tellurides of the noble metals in compounds with the formula <unk> or <unk> ( M = Cu , Ag , Au ) . At temperatures of 500 ° C the anode sludges are roasted with sodium carbonate under air . The metal ions are reduced to the metals , while the telluride is converted to sodium tellurite . 
 <unk> + O2 + Na2CO3 → Na2TeO3 + 2 M + CO2 
 <unk> can be leached from the mixture with water and are normally present as <unk> <unk> − in solution . Selenites are also formed during this process , but they can be separated by adding sulfuric acid . The <unk> are converted into the insoluble tellurium dioxide while the selenites stay in solution . 
 <unk> − 
 3 + OH − + H2SO4 → TeO2 + SO2 − 
 4 + 2 H2O 
 The reduction to the metal is done either by electrolysis or by reacting the tellurium dioxide with sulfur dioxide in sulfuric acid . 
 TeO2 + 2 SO2 + 2H2O → Te + 2 SO2 − 
 4 + 4 H + 
 Commercial @-@ grade tellurium is usually marketed as 200 @-@ mesh powder but is also available as slabs , ingots , sticks , or lumps . The year @-@ end price for tellurium in 2000 was US $ 14 per pound . In recent years , the tellurium price was driven up by increased demand and limited supply , reaching as high as US $ 100 per pound in 2006 . Despite an expected doubling in production due to improved extraction methods , the United States Department of Energy ( DoE ) anticipates a supply shortfall of tellurium by 2025 . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 Tellurium belongs to the same chemical family as oxygen , sulfur , selenium and polonium : the chalcogen family . Tellurium and selenium compounds are similar . It exhibits the oxidation states − 2 , + 2 , + 4 and + 6 , with the + 4 state being most common . 
 <unk> 
 Reduction of Te metal produces the tellurides and <unk> , <unk> − . The − 2 oxidation state is exhibited in binary compounds with many metals , such as zinc telluride , ZnTe , formed by heating tellurium with zinc . Decomposition of ZnTe with hydrochloric acid yields hydrogen telluride ( H 
 2Te ) , a highly unstable analogue of the other chalcogen hydrides , H 
 2O , H 
 2S and H 
 <unk> : 
 ZnTe + 2 HCl → <unk> 
 2 + H 
 2Te 
 H 
 2Te is unstable , whereas salts of its conjugate base [ TeH ] − are stable . 
 Halides 
 The + 2 oxidation state is exhibited by the dihalides , <unk> 
 2 , <unk> 
 2 and TeI 
 2 . The dihalides have not been obtained in pure form , although they are known decomposition products of the tetrahalides in organic solvents , and their derived <unk> are well @-@ characterized : 
 Te + X 
 2 + 2 X − → <unk> − 
 4 
 where X is Cl , Br , or I. These anions are square planar in geometry . <unk> anionic species also exist , such as the dark brown Te 
 2I2 − 
 6 , and the black Te 
 <unk> − 
 14 . 
 Fluorine forms two halides with tellurium : the mixed @-@ valence Te 
 2F 
 4 and <unk> 
 6 . In the + 6 oxidation state , the – OTeF 
 5 structural group occurs in a number of compounds such as <unk> 
 5 , B ( OTeF 
 5 ) 
 3 , Xe ( OTeF 
 5 ) 
 2 , Te ( OTeF 
 5 ) 
 4 and Te ( OTeF 
 5 ) 
 6 . The square antiprismatic anion TeF2 − 
 8 is also attested . The other halogens do not form halides with tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but only tetrahalides ( <unk> 
 4 , <unk> 
 4 and TeI 
 4 ) in the + 4 state , and other lower halides ( Te 
 3Cl 
 2 , Te 
 2Cl 
 2 , Te 
 <unk> 
 2 , Te 
 2I and two forms of TeI ) . In the + 4 oxidation state , <unk> anions are known , such as <unk> − 
 6 and Te 
 <unk> − 
 10 . <unk> cations are also attested , including TeI + 
 3 , found in TeI 
 <unk> 
 6 . 
 <unk> 
 Tellurium monoxide was first reported in 1883 as a black amorphous solid formed by the heat decomposition of <unk> 
 3 in vacuum , <unk> into tellurium dioxide , <unk> 
 2 and elemental tellurium upon heating . Since then , however , some doubt has been cast on its existence in the solid phase , although it is known as a vapor phase fragment ; the black solid may be merely an equimolar mixture of elemental tellurium and tellurium dioxide . 
 Tellurium dioxide is formed by heating tellurium in air , causing it to burn with a blue flame . Tellurium trioxide , β @-@ <unk> 
 3 , is obtained by thermal decomposition of Te ( OH ) 
 6 . The other two forms of trioxide reported in the literature , the α- and γ- forms , were found not to be true oxides of tellurium in the + 6 oxidation state , but a mixture of Te4 + , OH − and O − 
 2 . Tellurium also exhibits mixed @-@ valence oxides , Te 
 2O 
 5 and Te 
 4O 
 9 . 
 The tellurium oxides and hydrated oxides form a series of acids , including tellurous acid ( H 
 <unk> 
 3 ) , <unk> acid ( Te ( OH ) 
 6 ) and <unk> acid ( ( H 
 <unk> 
 4 ) n ) . The two forms of telluric acid form tellurate salts containing the TeO2 – 
 4 and <unk> − 
 6 anions , respectively . <unk> acid forms tellurite salts containing the anion TeO2 − 
 3 . Other tellurium cations include TeF2 + 
 8 , which consists of two fused tellurium rings and the polymeric TeF2 + 
 7 . 
 Zintl cations 
 When tellurium is treated with concentrated sulfuric acid , it forms red solutions containing the Zintl ion , Te2 + 
 4 . The oxidation of tellurium by AsF 
 5 in liquid SO 
 2 also produces this square planar cation , as well as with the trigonal prismatic , yellow @-@ orange Te4 + 
 6 : 
 4 Te + 3 AsF 
 5 → Te2 + 
 4 ( AsF − 
 6 ) 
 2 + AsF 
 3 
 6 Te + 6 AsF 
 5 → Te4 + 
 6 ( AsF − 
 6 ) 
 4 + 2 AsF 
 3 
 Other tellurium Zintl cations include the polymeric Te2 + 
 7 and the blue @-@ black Te2 + 
 8 , which consists of two fused 5 @-@ membered tellurium rings . The latter cation is formed by the reaction of tellurium with tungsten hexachloride : 
 8 Te + 2 <unk> 
 6 → Te2 + 
 8 ( <unk> − 
 6 ) 
 2 
 <unk> cations also exist , such as Te 
 <unk> + 
 6 ( distorted cubic geometry ) and Te 
 <unk> + 
 8 . These are formed by oxidizing mixtures of tellurium and selenium with AsF 
 5 or SbF 
 5 . 
 <unk> compounds 
 Tellurium does not readily form analogues of alcohols and thiols , with the functional group – TeH and are called tellurols . The – TeH functional group is also attributed to using the prefix <unk> . Like <unk> , these species are unstable with respect to loss of hydrogen . <unk> ( R @-@ Te @-@ R ) are more stable as are <unk> . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Metallurgy = = = 
 The largest consumer of tellurium is metallurgy , where it is used in iron , copper and lead alloys . When added to stainless steel and copper it makes these metals more <unk> . It is alloyed into cast iron for promoting chill for spectroscopic purposes , as the presence of electrically conductive free graphite tends to <unk> affect spark emission testing results . In lead it improves strength and durability and decreases the corrosive action of sulfuric acid . 
 = = = Semiconductor and electronic industry uses = = = 
 Tellurium is used in cadmium telluride ( CdTe ) solar panels . National Renewable Energy Laboratory lab tests using this material achieved some of the highest efficiencies for solar cell electric power generation . Massive commercial production of CdTe solar panels by First Solar in recent years has significantly increased tellurium demand . If some of the cadmium in CdTe is replaced by zinc then ( Cd , Zn ) Te is formed which is used in solid @-@ state X @-@ ray detectors . 
 <unk> with both cadmium and mercury , to form mercury cadmium telluride , an infrared sensitive semiconductor material is formed . <unk> compounds such as dimethyl telluride , diethyl telluride , diisopropyl telluride , <unk> telluride and methyl allyl telluride are used as precursors for <unk> vapor phase epitaxy growth of II @-@ VI compound semiconductors . <unk> telluride ( <unk> ) is employed as the preferred precursor for achieving the low @-@ temperature growth of <unk> by <unk> . For these processes highest purity <unk> of both selenium and tellurium are used . The compounds for semiconductor industry and are prepared by adduct purification . 
 Tellurium as a tellurium suboxide is used in the media layer of several types of rewritable optical discs , including ReWritable Compact Discs ( CD @-@ RW ) , ReWritable Digital Video Discs ( DVD @-@ RW ) and ReWritable Blu @-@ ray Discs . 
 Tellurium dioxide is used to create <unk> @-@ optic modulators ( <unk> and <unk> ) for <unk> <unk> . 
 Tellurium is used in the new phase change memory chips developed by Intel . Bismuth telluride ( Bi2Te3 ) and lead telluride are working elements of thermoelectric devices . Lead telluride is used in far @-@ infrared detectors . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Used to color ceramics . 
 The strong increase in optical refraction upon the addition of selenides and tellurides into glass is used in the production of glass fibers for telecommunications . These chalcogenide glasses are widely used . 
 Mixtures of selenium and tellurium are used with barium peroxide as oxidizer in the delay powder of electric blasting caps . 
 Organic tellurides have been employed as initiators for living radical polymerization and electron @-@ rich mono- and di @-@ tellurides possess antioxidant activity . 
 Rubber can be vulcanized with tellurium instead of sulfur or selenium . The rubber produced in this way shows improved heat resistance . 
 <unk> agar is used to identify members of the <unk> genus , most typically Corynebacterium <unk> , the pathogen responsible for diphtheria . 
 The tellurium is a key constituent of high performing mixed oxide catalysts for the heterogeneous catalytic selective oxidation of propane to acrylic acid . The surface elemental composition changes dynamically and reversibly with the reaction conditions . In the presence of steam the surface of the catalyst is enriched in tellurium and vanadium which translates into the enhancement of the acrylic acid production . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 Tellurium has no known biological function , although fungi can incorporate it in place of sulfur and selenium into amino acids such as <unk> @-@ cysteine and <unk> @-@ methionine . Organisms have shown a highly variable tolerance to tellurium compounds . Many cells , such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa take up tellurite and reduce it to elemental tellurium , which accumulates and causes a characteristic and often dramatic darkening of cells . In yeast , this reduction is mediated by the sulfate assimilation pathway . Tellurium accumulation seems to account for a major part of the toxicity effects . Many organisms also metabolize tellurium partly to form dimethyl telluride , although dimethyl <unk> is also formed by some species . Dimethyl telluride has been observed in hot springs at very low concentrations . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Tellurium and tellurium compounds are considered to be mildly toxic and need to be handled with care , although acute poisoning is rare . Tellurium poisoning is particularly difficult to treat as many chelation agents used in the treatment of metal toxicities will increase the toxicity of tellurium . Tellurium is not reported to be carcinogenic . 
 Humans exposed to as little as 0 @.@ 01 mg / m3 or less in air exude a foul garlic @-@ like odor known as " tellurium breath . " This is caused from the tellurium being metabolized by the body , converting it from any oxidation state to dimethyl telluride , ( CH3 ) 2Te . This is a volatile compound with a highly pungent garlic @-@ like smell . Even though the metabolic pathways of tellurium are not known , it is generally assumed that they resemble those of the more extensively studied selenium , because the final methylated metabolic products of the two elements are similar . 
 People can be exposed to tellurium in the workplace by breathing it in , swallowing it , skin contact , and eye contact . The Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( Permissible exposure limit ) for tellurium exposure in the workplace as 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 0 @.@ 1 mg / m3 over an 8 @-@ hour workday . At levels of 25 mg / m3 , tellurium is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
 = Nenjil Or Aalayam = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam ( English : A Temple in the Heart ) is a 1962 Indian Tamil @-@ language romantic @-@ drama film , written and directed by C. V. Sridhar , who produced it under the banner of Chitralaya Pictures . The film features Kalyan Kumar , Devika and R. Muthuraman in the lead roles . Nagesh , Manorama and Kutty Padmini also play supporting roles . The original soundtrack album and background score were composed by Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy , while the lyrics for the songs were written by Kannadasan . 
 The film revolves around a young woman named Seetha , her husband Venu and Dr. Murali , who was Seetha 's lover . Due to his tenure overseas , Seetha 's parents force her to marry another person . A few years later , Venu contracts cancer and Seetha brings him to Chennai to meet a cancer specialist who , to her dismay , is revealed to be Murali . Realising that something is worrying Seetha , Venu gives her the freedom to marry Murali after his death . The remainder of the film shows how Murali sacrifices his love for the sake of the couple 's happiness and cures Venu . 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam was released on 26 January 1962 , coinciding with Republic Day in India . The film received positive critical feedback and went on to become a commercial success . The songs " Sonnathu Neethaana " and " <unk> Vaazhga " remain popular today among the Tamil diaspora . The film won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil and the President 's Award for Sridhar at the 10th National Film Awards . It also won the Cinema Express Award for Best Film . 
 The film became a trendsetter for both fast @-@ paced filmmaking and triangular love stories with sacrifice as the theme . Sridhar remade the film in Hindi as Dil Ek Mandir ( 1963 ) and in Telugu as Manase Mandiram ( 1966 ) . It was also remade in Malayalam as <unk> Oru <unk> ( 1976 ) , and in Kannada as <unk> <unk> ( 1977 ) . The former was directed by P. Subramaniam while the latter was by S. K. A. Chari . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Murali ( Kalyan Kumar ) goes abroad to pursue higher studies in medicine . During his tenure overseas , his girlfriend Seetha ( Devika ) is forced by her parents to marry another person . Devastated upon hearing the news , Murali swears a vow of lifelong celibacy and devotes himself to saving people suffering from cancer . A few years later , Venu ( R. Muthuraman ) happens to be critically ill with cancer and has to be operated upon . The treatment for Venu progresses well until Murali meets Venu 's wife , who is revealed to be Seetha . When Seetha learns that the doctor treating Venu is Murali , whom she had left , she becomes upset . 
 Though Murali does his best to cure Venu , Seetha is worried that Murali might take revenge on her by not providing proper treatment to Venu , who in the meantime , <unk> of Murali and Seetha 's love . Venu requests Murali to marry Seetha in case the operation is unsuccessful as he does not wish for his wife to become a widow . Seetha becomes infuriated when she discovers Venu 's request and tells Murali that if Venu dies , she would die as well . Murali promises Seetha that he will save Venu even if he has to risk his own life on the line . 
 Murali works hard to save Venu so as not to create a misconception that he killed Venu to be with Seetha . With great difficulty , Murali manages to successfully cure Venu 's cancer . However , when Murali reads the results of the operation , he becomes so overjoyed at its success that he unexpectedly dies of high blood pressure due to his over @-@ excitement . Venu and Seetha realise that Murali had sacrificed his life for their happiness and remains in their hearts . 
 Woven into the story is a sub @-@ plot following a girl ( Kutty Padmini ) , who is in the same hospital Murali works in , and undergoes treatment for the same disease that Venu contracted . However , her fate is contrary . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Lead actors 
 Kalyan Kumar as Dr. Murali 
 Devika as Seetha 
 R. Muthuraman as Venu 
 Male supporting actors 
 Nagesh as Peter 
 V. S. Raghavan as Seetha 's father 
 Female supporting actors 
 Manorama as <unk> 
 Kutty Padmini as the dying child 
 Santha Kumari ( guest appearance ) 
 = = Production = = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam was the third film to be directed by C. V. Sridhar after Kalyana <unk> ( 1958 ) and Then Nilavu ( 1961 ) . Sridhar , who produced the film under the banner of Chitralaya Pictures in addition to writing the screenplay and dialogues , had originally planned to cast Gemini Ganesan and Savitri in the lead roles ; due to their unavailability , he instead cast R. Muthuraman and Devika . Sridhar was impressed with Muthuraman 's performance in the stage play <unk> <unk> in which he played an antagonistic role , and subsequently selected him for the role of Venu . Nenjil Or Aalayam was Muthuraman 's first film as a lead actor as he had performed mainly supporting roles prior to Nenjil Or Aalayam . The film marked the debut of Kannada actor Kalyan Kumar and Kutty Padmini , who played the roles of Murali and the dying child respectively . Manorama , V. S. Raghavan , and Santha Kumari were cast in supporting roles . 
 Nagesh stayed with actor K. Balaji during his early days as an upcoming comedian for three years . Balaji introduced Nagesh to Sridhar , who offered him a role on Balaji 's recommendation . In a 2006 interview , Nagesh revealed that he was initially to play the role of a country bumpkin , but was chosen by Sridhar to play Peter , the hospital attendant . He was paid an advance of ₹ 501 ( equivalent to ₹ 30 @,@ 000 or US $ 440 in 2016 ) . S. Rama Rao was originally supposed to play that role . The screenplay and dialogues for Nagesh 's portions were written by Chitralaya Gopu . 
 Principal photography was conducted on the ninth floor of Chennai 's Vijaya Vauhini Studios , where the hospital set was erected by the film 's art director , Ganga . For the song " Sonnathu Neethaana " , the shot where the camera pans beneath Muthuraman 's bed and rising out was captured using a camera dolly . The song was filmed with 60 different angles being used by the film 's cinematographer A. Vincent . Nenjil Or Aalayam was the first Tamil film to be shot entirely on a single set . Filming was completed in less than 30 days . The final length of the film 's prints were 14 @,@ 810 metres ( 48 @,@ 590 ft ) long . 
 = = Music = = 
 The original soundtrack album and background score for Nenjil Or Aalayam were composed by Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy ( a duo consisting of M. S. Viswanathan and T. K. Ramamoorthy ) , while the lyrics were written by Kannadasan . The soundtrack album was released under the label of Saregama . Initially Sridhar decided not to have any songs in the film but later changed his decision . 
 The inspiration for the opening line of the song " <unk> Vaazhga " came to Kannadasan when he happened to hear the then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu , C. N. Annadurai 's speech on actor Sivaji Ganesan at a film function . When Annadurai heard of Ganesan joining the Indian National Congress , he wished the latter success by saying , " Sivaji ... nee <unk> <unk> ... " The idea for the tune of the song " <unk> <unk> " came to Viswanathan during a car journey with Kannadasan , who wrote the lyrics for the song within three minutes . " <unk> <unk> " was recorded in 20 minutes . The lyrics for the song " Sonnathu Neethaana " , which is based on the <unk> raga , was coined by Kannadasan when he came to know that Viswanathan commented negatively on his drinking habit . Portions of the song " Ninaipadhellam " are based on the Keeravani raga . 
 The album received positive reviews from critics and contributed to the film 's success . Film producer and writer G. Dhananjayan mentions in his book The Best of Tamil Cinema that the songs were " evergreen " . Film historian and columnist Randor Guy approved of the music , considering " Ninaipadhellam " to have " excellent background orchestration " . Film critic Baradwaj Rangan , writing for The New Indian Express , opined that " <unk> Vaazhga " had set " the precedent for several generations of jilted lovers " . On " Sonnathu Neethaana " , singer Charulatha Mani wrote , " The subtle pathos that P. Susheela imparts when she sings ' sol sol .. en <unk> ' is notable . " P. K. Ajith Kumar of The Hindu stated , " Just as [ Susheela ] does not need to know the language to sing a song perfectly , we need not know Tamil to enjoy her songs like ... Sonnathu <unk> ... ( Nenjil Oru Aalayam ) " . Following Viswanathan 's death in July 2015 , the news agency , Press Trust of India wrote that " Ninaipadhellam " was " memorable for the deep sense of solace it offered to wounded hearts . " Anand Venkateswaran of The Wire noted , " MSV ’ s style is less about making words sit in a meter than about a musical empathy with the meaning . Could anyone else have set to tune the first line of ‘ <unk> nee <unk> ‘ , of Nenjil Or <unk> ( Muthuraman , 1962 ) ? " A critic from Dina Thanthi noted Kannadasan had an uncanny ability to deliver perfect situational songs and cited " Sonnathu Neethaana " as an example . 
 Tracklist 
 = = Release = = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam was released on 26 January 1962 , coinciding with the Republic Day of India . Sridhar had to release the film on his own since no distributors were willing to buy it . The film received critical acclaim and was also commercially successful upon release ; it ran for 175 days in theatres . The film is hailed as a landmark for portraying a triangular love story in an innovative manner . To celebrate the film 's successful outing at the box office , the film 's crew members created an advertisement thanking the people who came to watch the film and appreciated it ; the advertisement was issued in Nadigar Sangam 's official magazine , <unk> Kural , on 9 February 1962 . 
 Sridhar remade the film in Hindi as Dil Ek Mandir ( 1963 ) and in Telugu as Manase Mandiram ( 1966 ) . It was also remade in Malayalam as <unk> Oru <unk> and in Kannada as <unk> <unk> ( 1977 ) . California @-@ based Indian filmmaker Jag Mundhra was keen on remaking Dil Ek Mandir in English and Hindi , effecting some marginal changes in the film treatment . Mundhra met Sridhar to ask for the rights to the film 's script only to learn that Sridhar had assigned it to a film financier for a paltry sum , for eternity . The financier demanded an exorbitant fee for giving up the rights . The fee amounted to 75 % of Mundhra 's budget . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam received positive feedback from critics . Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan appreciated the film and mentioned , " It is an innovative film made like Hollywood films and a sincere attempt to improve the taste of filmgoers for quality films " . Link commented , " The film is , however , refreshingly different . What makes it better is , what it does not have . It has , for instance , no " star value . " " Randor Guy wrote , " Sridhar proved that movies could be made with new faces , limited sets and low budgets if one had an interesting , emotionally rich story , tautly narrated on screen with pleasing music " . Guy concluded his review by stating that the film would be " remembered for its excellent music and impressive performances by Muthuraman , Devika , <unk> [ sic ] , Nagesh , Manorama and child artiste Padmini . " Dinamalar praised the film for showing love as a divine thing . 
 Following Devika 's demise in 2002 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu wrote , " If the song " Sonnathu <unk> " [ sic ] attained immortality , thanks to the lyrical richness Kannadasan bestowed on it , the credit for making it visually poignant goes to Devika , who rendered it in the film . " Another journalist from The Hindu , T. Ramakrishnan noted , " Caught between her former lover and her husband who was battling for life , Devika strongly displayed the plight that any woman in such situations could face . " Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu said , " Decades may pass but the comedy element even in a serious story remains unforgettable . Nagesh 's fun fare in the film with Manorama , juxtaposed with the staid and sedate performances of Devika , Muthuraman and Kalyan Kumar , weren 't just a comic relief but an evergreen treat " . 
 K. S. Sivakumaran of Daily News Sri Lanka described the film 's plot as a " hackneyed theme " and compared it to a soap opera , but appreciated Muthuraman 's performance , Kannadasan 's lyrics and Vincent 's cinematography . Writing for The Times of India , <unk> Murugesan said , " There is no clear choice between options and while the audience is entirely aware of the right moral decision even our minds are clouded by our affections for both Dr Murali and Venu . " K. Hariharan , director of the L. V. Prasad Film and Television Academy in Chennai , noted , " The only film that could stake claim [ in the 1960s ] to an individual ' love story ' was probably Sridhar 's powerful Nenjil [ Or ] Aalayam ! And even here ' sacrifice ' takes the upper hand ! " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Tamil and the President 's Award for Sridhar at the 10th National Film Awards . It also won the Cinema Express Award for Best Film . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nenjil Or Aalayam attained cult status in Tamil cinema , and became a trendsetter for both fast @-@ paced filmmaking and triangular love stories with sacrifice as the theme . Films that followed the trend of having these traits include Annakili ( 1976 ) , <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 1981 ) and Kadhal Virus ( 2002 ) . The film became a major breakthrough in Nagesh 's career , and the film critic S. Theodore Baskaran believed that his role as a ward boy " established his position " . 
 In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight acclaimed directors were asked to list ten films they liked most . Directors J. Mahendran , Balu Mahendra and K. S. Ravikumar listed the film among their favourite films . Ravikumar was quoted saying , " Sridhar 's Nenjil Or Aalayam depicts the supremacy of love . " Encouraged by the film 's success , Sridhar wished to screen the film at the Cannes Film Festival , thus the screenplay was translated into French in time for the festival . Sridhar sent Sarma , one of his administrative managers , to France to attend the screening of the film on his behalf . It was one of the films featured in artist V. Jeevananthan 's book <unk> , a compilation of articles on cinema which won a Special Mention certificate award at the 58th National Film Awards . 
 = The Boat Race 1871 = 
 The 28th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on the 1 April 1871 . The race , umpired by Joseph William Chitty , was won by Cambridge by one length in a time of 23 minutes 10 seconds for their second consecutive victory . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Oxford by three lengths in the previous year 's race , while Oxford led overall with sixteen wins to Cambridge 's eleven . 
 Oxford were coached by W. D. Benson ( their non @-@ rowing president , who had rowed three times for the Dark Blues in the 1868 , 1869 and 1870 races ) . Cambridge 's coach was John Graham Chambers ( who rowed in the 1862 and 1863 race , and was a non @-@ rowing president for the 1865 race ) and John Hilton Ridley ( who rowed in the 1869 and 1870 races ) . 
 The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 4 @.@ 125 lb ( 76 @.@ 1 kg ) , 2 @.@ 75 pounds ( 1 @.@ 2 kg ) more than their opponents . The Cambridge crew saw only three new rowers , with five returning from the 1870 race , including the Cambridge University Boat Club president John Goldie and William Henry Lowe in their third appearance in the event , along with the cox Henry Erskine Gordon . Similarly , Oxford saw five of their crew return , including S. H. Woodhouse at bow and Thomas Southey Baker who were participating in their third Boat Races . 
 = = Race = = 
 There was " little or no tide and head wind over part of the course " according to Drinkwater . Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex station to Oxford . The umpire , Chitty , got the race underway at <unk> , with Cambridge taking an early lead . The Light Blues had a clear water advantage by the Point and held a two @-@ length lead by the time the crews shot Hammersmith Bridge . Despite a spurt instigated by Oxford stroke Robert Lesley at Barnes Bridge , Goldie remained steady until , before the final twenty strokes , he increased the stroke rate and saw Cambridge home by one length in a time of 23 minutes 10 seconds for their second consecutive victory and took the overall record to 16 – 12 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Getting It : The Psychology of est = 
 Getting It : The Psychology of est is a non @-@ fiction book by American psychologist Sheridan Fenwick , first published in 1976 , analyzing Werner Erhard 's Erhard Seminars Training or est . It is based on Fenwick 's own experience of attending a four @-@ day session of the est training , an intensive 60 @-@ hour personal development course in the self @-@ help genre . Large groups of up to 250 people took the est training at one time . 
 In the first section of Fenwick 's book , she recounts the est training process and the methods used during the course . Fenwick details the rules or " agreements " laid out by the trainers to the attendees , which include not talking to others or leaving the session to go to the bathroom unless during an announced break period . The second section is analytic : Fenwick analyzes the methods used by the est trainers , evaluates the course 's potential effects , and discusses Erhard 's background . Fenwick concludes that the program 's long @-@ term effects are unknown , the est training may not be appropriate for certain groups of people , and that the large proportion of participants experience positive effects . 
 Writing in Library Journal , psychiatrist James Charney describes the book as " the only useful critical look " at the training . Zane Berzins of The New York Times Book Review characterizes the book as a " calm and professionally informed view " . Hearings held in 1979 before the United States House of Representatives on a juvenile delinquents program depicted in Scared Straight ! cited the book for background on the est training , as did psychologist Gidi Rubinstein in a 2005 study of the Landmark Forum published in the academic journal Psychology and Psychotherapy : Theory , Research and Practice . 
 = = Background = = 
 Werner Erhard ( born John Paul Rosenberg ) , was originally from Pennsylvania and migrated to California . A former salesman , training manager and executive in the encyclopedia business , Erhard created the Erhard Seminars Training ( est ) course in 1971 @.@ est was a form of Large Group Awareness Training , and was part of the Human Potential Movement. est was a four @-@ day , 60 @-@ hour self @-@ help program given to groups of 250 people at a time . The program was very intensive : each day would contain 15 – 20 hours of instruction . During the training , est personnel utilized jargon to convey key concepts , and participants had to agree to certain rules which remained in effect for the duration of the course . Participants were taught that they were responsible for their life outcomes . 
 Est was controversial . It had its critics and proponents . A year after Getting It was published , over 100 @,@ 000 people completed the est training , including public figures and mental health professionals . In 1985 , Werner Erhard and Associates repackaged the course as " The Forum " , a seminar focused on " goal @-@ oriented breakthroughs " . By 1988 , approximately one million people had taken some form of the trainings . In the early 1990s Erhard faced family problems , as well as tax problems that were eventually resolved in his favor . A group of his associates formed the company Landmark Education in 1991 . 
 = = Author = = 
 Sheridan Fenwick , in her early thirties when Getting It was published , had graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from Goucher College and received a doctorate in psychopathology and social psychology from Cornell University . Her Ph.D. dissertation was published in 1975 . Fenwick served as the director of social policy in the Department of City Planning of Chicago , Illinois , as assistant attending psychologist at Montefiore Medical Center , and as a faculty member of Columbia University 's department of psychology . 
 Fenwick writes that although she had been trained as a clinical psychologist , she avoided " consciousness " movements and never participated in transactional analysis or similar therapies , including Transcendental Meditation , Esalen , Arica , Gestalt therapy and Mind Dynamics . When she met with graduates of the est training and heard their testimonials and observed their level of self @-@ confidence , she considered taking the training . 
 After some preliminary research , Fenwick decided to take the training as a participant rather than as a professional observer . She paid the $ 250 @.@ 00 course fee and enrolled in a four @-@ day est program to examine its methods and its appeal . She reports that the training was an " extraordinary experience " , but that she had " serious concerns about the implications of the est phenomenon " , and that people should know more about it . The book was first published September 16 , 1976 , by J. B. Lippincott Company . A second edition was published by Penguin Books in 1977 . Fenwick went on to work as director of the Behavioral Medicine Clinic at Abbott Northwestern Hospital in Minneapolis , before retiring in 1993 to set up <unk> , an online service to provide psychological experts for court cases . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The book is divided into two sections . The first section describes Fenwick 's own experiences of the training ; the second analyzes the est program 's methodology and effects . In her analysis of the course , she states , " While the consensus of informed opinion , based on summaries of research findings , is that interventions similar to the est training have only modestly positive effects , I think that the existing research provides us with an underestimate of the effect of the est training . This training represents a distillation of some of the most powerful techniques and central precepts for attitude and behavior change … I would guess that the effects of the est training are substantial for a large proportion of people . ” 
 In the latter portion of the book Fenwick discusses comparisons of the est training to brainwashing and psychotherapy , potential harmful effects of the course , and the extent that positive benefit from the course may be attributed to a self @-@ fulfilling prophecy . Fenwick sees est as a form of psychotherapy that utilizes " in " therapies , and questions its suitability for certain individuals . Fenwick writes that the est training draws influences from Synanon , Gestalt therapy , encounter groups , and Scientology . She discusses the potential positive and negative psychological effects that can occur subsequent to taking the est training . She analyzes the rules of the training , and the behavioral tools used by the trainers , and points out that the est personnel are not qualified to assess psychopathology . Fenwick asserts that tactics including sensory deprivation and the large group setting of 250 people at a time help to make the training " work " . She describes this as a " compression chamber effect " , and asserts that it leads to the " hysterical confessions and the euphoric testimonials " she observed in the course . 
 Fenwick cites the secrecy of the est organization as an impediment to meaningful study , and states that the studies cited by est itself are inadequate and inconclusive . Fenwick writes that a lack of " sophisticated research designs " limits the ability to properly determine long @-@ term benefits or harm caused by the course and notes : " est uses techniques indiscriminately which , in a certain proportion of the population , are known to be harmful and potentially quite dangerous " . She concludes that it is difficult to determine whether est " produces any more than a superficial catharsis , or whether it might be harmful to certain people , " and states that the long @-@ range effects of the training are unknown . 
 Fenwick also asks rhetorically , " Should we completely discount the testimonials of est graduates , knowing that they are not sufficiently rigorous measures to qualify as scientific evidence ? I don ’ t think so . The fact that positive testimonials are so readily obtained from est graduates , in combination with the observation that a majority of people who take the est training , continue to participate and have found the est experience to be rewarding . Even if ' objective ' changes are not documented in people 's lives , it is noteworthy that people feel happier , more satisfied , more relaxed , and more ' alive . ' If you ' feel ' happier , then you ' are ' happier – objective circumstances notwithstanding . Subjective states are clearly an important component of our lives . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Getting It received mixed , but generally positive , reviews . One positive evaluation came from psychiatrist James Charney , in a 1976 review for Library Journal . Charney calls the book " the only useful critical look at this essential issue " , referring to the est training . He notes in particular that Fenwick 's " analysis of the function of the group , the restrictive rules , and the enforced discomfort is convincing " . In a 1977 review in Library Journal Edith Crockett and Ellis Mount highly recommended the book , commenting that " A plethora of newspaper and magazine reports , along with books written by graduates ... have attempted to explain the phenomenon of this self @-@ help program , but none has done it as well or as objectively as this writer . " Kirkus Reviews noted the precedent set by the analytical nature of the book , writing " Finally . Here 's someone who is willing to disclose the details of Erhard Seminars Training , and then go on to analyze them from a psychological point of view . " Zane Berzins , writing for The New York Times Book Review in 1977 , describes Fenwick 's work as a " calm and professionally informed view " . Berzins describes the book as a " brave attempt " at an analysis of est 's appeal , and concludes that " It 's hardly an incendiary exposé , but Fenwick 's open @-@ minded scrutiny should <unk> the est movement . " 
 William McGurk reviewed the book in Contemporary Psychology . Although McGurk praises the book 's description of the est seminars , noting that it " present [ s ] a clear picture of the process " , he also criticizes Fenwick 's subsequent analysis , saying she " sounds like a different person " than in the first section . McGurk writes that " It 's as though she put on her <unk> oriented , professional hat and ran a tape that was far from being effective . " A review in Publishers Weekly states that Fenwick 's " inbred detachment may have kept her from the full impact of the ' experience ' the training was meant to be ( and is for many ) " . Even so , the review notes that Fenwick " scores heavily " in the section where she questions the nature of the est training and Erhard 's background ; it recommends that Getting It be read alongside Luke Rhinehart 's The Book of est . 
 The book is recommended by James R. Lewis and J. Gordon Melton 's 1992 book Perspectives on the New Age , where they describe it as " a thorough discussion of est training methods and the psychology behind them " . Other works that cite the book for background on est include <unk> : America 's Epidemic of Sudden Personality Change , by Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman ; and Evaluating a Large Group Awareness Training , a study commissioned by Erhard 's successor company to est , Werner Erhard and Associates . 
 Fenwick 's work was cited in 1979 hearings before the United States House of Representatives on a controversial program for juvenile delinquents , which was depicted in the Academy Award @-@ winning documentary film Scared Straight ! . Getting It is cited in background discussion of the est training : " Fenwick has pointed out that sophisticated assessment of individual psychopathology is beyond the competence and training of the est personnel ; it is also outside the est value system , since the training is held to be almost universally beneficial . " Psychologist Gidi Rubinstein cites the book as a reference in a 2005 study of the Landmark Forum , a course descended from the est training , which he presented in the academic journal Psychology and Psychotherapy : Theory , Research and Practice . 
 = Pierre Monteux = 
 Pierre Benjamin Monteux ( pronounced : [ <unk> mɔ ̃ <unk> ] ; 4 April 1875 – 1 July 1964 ) was a French ( later American ) conductor . After violin and viola studies , and a decade as an orchestral player and occasional conductor , he began to receive regular conducting engagements in 1907 . He came to prominence when , for Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes company between 1911 and 1914 , he conducted the world premieres of Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring and other prominent works including Petrushka , Ravel 's Daphnis et Chloé , and Debussy 's Jeux . Thereafter he directed orchestras around the world for more than half a century . 
 From 1917 to 1919 Monteux was the principal conductor of the French repertoire at the Metropolitan Opera in New York . He led the Boston Symphony Orchestra ( 1919 – 24 ) , Amsterdam Concertgebouw Orchestra ( 1924 – 34 ) , Orchestre Symphonique de Paris ( 1929 – 38 ) and San Francisco Symphony ( 1936 – 52 ) . In 1961 , aged eighty @-@ six , he accepted the chief conductorship of the London Symphony Orchestra , a post which he held until his death three years later . Although known for his performances of the French repertoire , his chief love was the music of German composers , above all Brahms . He disliked recording , finding it incompatible with spontaneity , but he nevertheless made a substantial number of records . 
 Monteux was well known as a teacher . In 1932 he began a conducting class in Paris , which he developed into a summer school that was later moved to his summer home in Les Baux in the south of France . After moving permanently to the US in 1942 , and taking American citizenship , he founded a school for conductors and orchestral musicians in Hancock , Maine . Among his students in France and America who went on to international fame were Igor <unk> , Neville Marriner , André Previn , Lorin Maazel , Seiji Ozawa and David Zinman . The school in Hancock has continued since Monteux 's death . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Pierre Monteux was born in Paris , the third son and the fifth of six children of Gustave Élie Monteux , a shoe salesman , and his wife , Clémence Rebecca née <unk> . The Monteux family was descended from Sephardic Jews who settled in the south of France . The Monteux ancestors included at least one rabbi , but Gustave Monteux and his family were not religious . Among Monteux 's brothers were Henri , who became an actor , and Paul , who became a conductor of light music under the name Paul Monteux @-@ <unk> . Gustave Monteux was not musical , but his wife was a graduate of the Conservatoire de Musique de Marseille and gave piano lessons . Pierre took violin lessons from the age of six . 
 When he was nine years old Monteux was admitted to the Conservatoire de Paris . He studied the violin with Jules <unk> and Henri Berthelier , composition with Charles <unk> , and harmony and theory with Albert <unk> . His fellow violin students included George Enescu , Carl Flesch , Fritz Kreisler and Jacques Thibaud . Among the piano students at the Conservatoire was Alfred Cortot , with whom he developed a lifelong friendship . At the age of twelve , Monteux organised and conducted a small orchestra of Conservatoire students to accompany Cortot in performances of concertos in and around Paris . He attended the world premiere of César Franck 's Symphony in February 1889 . From 1889 to 1892 , while still a student , he played in the orchestra of the Folies Bergère ; he later said to George Gershwin that his rhythmic sense was formed during the experience of playing popular dance music there . 
 At the age of fifteen , while continuing his violin studies , Monteux took up the viola . He studied privately with Benjamin Godard , with whom he performed in the premiere of Saint @-@ Saëns 's Septet , with the composer at the keyboard . Monteux joined the Geloso Quartet as violist ; he played many concerts with them , including a performance of Fauré 's Second Piano Quartet with the composer at the piano . On another occasion he was the violist in a private performance of a Brahms quartet given before the composer in Vienna . Monteux recalled Brahms 's remark , " It takes the French to play my music properly . The Germans all play it much too heavily . " Monteux remained a member of the Geloso Quartet until 1911 . With Johannes Wolff and Joseph Hollman he also played chamber music for Grieg . Years later , in his seventies , Monteux deputised with the Budapest Quartet without rehearsal or score ; asked by Erik Smith if he could write out the parts of the seventeen Beethoven quartets , he replied , " You know , I cannot forget them . " 
 In 1893 , when he was eighteen , Monteux married a fellow student , the pianist Victoria <unk> . With her he played the complete Beethoven violin sonatas in public . Neither family approved of the marriage ; although the Monteux family were not religious , both they and the Roman Catholic <unk> were doubtful about an inter @-@ religious marriage ; furthermore , both families thought the couple too young to marry . There were a son and a daughter from the union . 
 During his formative years Monteux belonged to a group which toured with the Casadesus family of musicians and the pianist Alfredo Casella . The combination played supposed " ancient pieces " , allegedly discovered in libraries by one or other of the Casadesus family ; Marius Casadesus later revealed that he or his brother Henri had written the music . While still a student , in 1893 Monteux was successful in the competition for the chair of first viola of the Concerts Colonne , of which he became assistant conductor and choirmaster the following year . This gave him a link via the orchestra 's founder , Édouard Colonne , to Berlioz . Colonne had known Berlioz , and through the older conductor Monteux was able to mark his scores with notes based on the composer 's intentions . He was also employed on a freelance basis at the Opéra @-@ Comique , where he continued to play from time to time for several years ; he led the viola section at the 1902 premiere of Pelléas et Mélisande under the baton of André Messager . In 1896 he graduated from the Conservatoire , sharing first prize for violin with Thibaud . 
 = = = First conducting posts = = = 
 Monteux 's first high profile conducting experience came in 1895 , when he was barely 20 years old . He was a member of the orchestra engaged for a performance of Saint @-@ Saëns 's oratorio La lyre et la <unk> , to be conducted by the composer . At the last minute Saint @-@ Saëns judged the player engaged for the important and difficult organ part to be inadequate and , as a celebrated virtuoso organist , decided to play it himself . He asked the orchestra if any of them could take over as conductor ; there was a chorus of " Oui – Monteux ! " . With great trepidation , Monteux conducted the orchestra and soloists including the composer , sight @-@ reading the score , and was judged a success . 
 Monteux 's musical career was interrupted in 1896 , when he was called up for military service . As a graduate of the Conservatoire , one of France 's grandes <unk> , he was required to serve only ten months rather than the three years generally required . He later described himself as " the most pitifully inadequate soldier that the 132nd Infantry had ever seen " . He had inherited from his mother not only her musical talent but her short and portly build and was physically unsuited to soldiering . 
 Returning to Paris after discharge , Monteux resumed his career as a violist . Hans Richter invited him to lead the violas in the Bayreuth Festival orchestra , but Monteux could not afford to leave his regular work in Paris . In December 1900 Monteux played the solo viola part in Berlioz 's Harold in Italy , rarely heard in Paris at the time , with the Colonne Orchestra conducted by Felix Mottl . In 1902 he secured a junior conducting post at the Dieppe casino , a seasonal appointment for the summer months which brought him into contact with leading musicians from the Paris orchestras and well @-@ known soloists on vacation . By 1907 he was the principal conductor at Dieppe , in charge of operas and orchestral concerts . As an orchestral conductor he modelled his technique on that of Arthur Nikisch , under whose baton he had played , and who was his ideal conductor . 
 = = = Ballets Russes = = = 
 For some time , Monteux 's marriage had been under strain , exacerbated by his wife 's frequent absences on concert tours . The couple were divorced in 1909 ; Monteux married one of her former pupils , Germaine Benedictus , the following year . 
 Monteux continued to play in the Concerts Colonne through the first decade of the century . In 1910 Colonne died and was succeeded as principal conductor by Gabriel Pierné . As well as leading the violas , Monteux was assistant conductor , taking charge of early rehearsals and acting as chorus master for choral works . In 1910 the orchestra was engaged to play for a Paris season given by Sergei Diaghilev 's ballet company , the Ballets Russes . Monteux played under Pierné in the world premiere of Stravinsky 's The Firebird . In 1911 Diaghilev engaged Nikolai Tcherepnin to conduct the premiere of Stravinsky 's Petrushka . Monteux conducted the preliminary rehearsals before Tcherepnin arrived ; Stravinsky was so impressed that he insisted that Monteux conduct the premiere . 
 Petrushka was part of a triple bill , all conducted by Monteux . The other two pieces were Le Spectre de la Rose and Scheherazade , a balletic adaptation of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's symphonic suite of the same name . The three works were choreographed by Fokine . In later years Monteux disapproved of the appropriation of symphonic music for ballets , but he made an exception for Scheherazade , and , as his biographer John Canarina observes , at that stage in his career his views on the matter carried little weight . Petrushka was a success with the public and with all but the most diehard conservative critics . 
 Following the Paris season Diaghilev appointed Monteux principal conductor for a tour of Europe in late 1911 and early 1912 . It began with a five @-@ week season at the Royal Opera House in London . The press notices concentrated on the dancers , who included Anna Pavlova as well as the regular stars of the Ballets Russes , but Monteux received some words of praise . The Times commented on the excellent unanimity he secured from the players , apart from " occasional uncertainty in the changes of tempo . " 
 After its season in London the company performed in Vienna , Budapest , Prague and Berlin . The tour was successful , artistically and financially , but was not without untoward incident . A planned visit to St Petersburg had to be cancelled because the <unk> Dom theatre burned down , and in Vienna the Philharmonic was unequal to the difficulties of the score of Petrushka . The illustrious orchestra revolted at the rehearsal for the first performance , refusing to play for Monteux ; only an intervention by Diaghilev restored the rehearsal , by the end of which Monteux was applauded and Stravinsky given an ovation . In the middle of the tour Monteux was briefly summoned back to Paris by the Concerts Colonne , which had the contractual right to recall him , to deputise for Pierné ; his own deputy , Désiré @-@ Émile <unk> , took temporary musical charge of the Ballets Russes . 
 In May 1912 Diaghilev 's company returned to Paris . Monteux was the conductor for the two outstanding works of the season , Vaslav Nijinsky 's ballet version of Debussy 's Prélude à l 'après @-@ midi d 'un faune , made with the composer 's approval , and Fokine 's Daphnis et Chloé to a score commissioned from Ravel . Monteux later recalled " Debussy was behind me when we played L 'après midi d 'un faune because he did not want anything in his score to be changed on account of the dancing . And when we came to a forte , he said ' Monteux , that is a forte , play forte ' . He did not want anything shimmering . And he wanted everything exactly in time " . 
 In February and March 1913 the Ballets Russes presented another London season . As in 1911 , the local orchestra engaged was the Beecham Symphony Orchestra . The orchestra 's founder , Thomas Beecham , shared the conducting with Monteux . At the end of February Beecham had to take over Petrushka when Monteux suddenly hastened to Paris for four days to be with his wife on the birth of their daughter , Denise . 
 = = = The Rite of Spring = = = 
 During the 1913 Ballets Russes season in Paris , Monteux conducted two more premieres . The first was Jeux , with music by Debussy and choreography by Nijinsky . The choreography was not liked ; Monteux thought it " asinine " , while Debussy felt that " Nijinsky 's cruel and barbarous choreography ... trampled over my poor rhythms like so many weeds " . The second new work was Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring given under the French title , Le <unk> du printemps . Monteux had been appalled when Stravinsky first played the score at the piano : 
 I decided then and there that the symphonies of Beethoven and Brahms were the only music for me , not the music of this crazy Russian . ... My one desire was to flee that room and find a quiet corner in which to rest my aching head . Then [ Diaghilev ] turned to me and with a smile said , " This is a masterpiece , Monteux , which will completely revolutionize music and make you famous , because you are going to conduct it . " And , of course , I did . 
 Despite his initial reaction , Monteux worked with Stravinsky , giving practical advice to help the composer to achieve the orchestral balance and effects he sought . Together they worked on the score from March to May 1913 , and to get the orchestra of the Théâtre des Champs @-@ Élysées to cope with the unfamiliar and difficult music Monteux held seventeen rehearsals , an unusually large number . Monteux 's real attitude to the score is unclear . In his old age he told a biographer , " I did not like Le Sacre then . I have conducted it fifty times since . I do not like it now . " However , he told his wife in 1963 that the Rite was " now fifty years old , and I do not think it has aged at all . I had pleasure in conducting the fiftieth anniversary of Le Sacre this spring " . 
 The dress rehearsal , with Debussy , Ravel , other musicians and critics among those present , passed without incident . However , the following evening the premiere provoked something approaching a riot , with loud verbal abuse of the work , counter @-@ shouts from supporters , and fisticuffs breaking out . Monteux pressed on , continuing to conduct the orchestra regardless of the turmoil behind him . Stravinsky wrote " The image of Monteux 's back is more vivid in my mind today than the picture of the stage . He stood there apparently impervious and as nerveless as a crocodile . It is still incredible to me that he actually brought the orchestra through to the end . " The extensive press coverage of the incident made Monteux " at age thirty @-@ eight , truly a famous conductor " . The company presented the Rite during its London season a few weeks later . The Times reported that although there was " something like a hostile reception " at the first London performance , the final performance in the season " was received with scarcely a sign of opposition " . Before the 1913 London performances , Monteux challenged Diaghilev 's authority by declaring that he , not the impresario , was the composer 's representative in matters related to The Rite of Spring . 
 Monteux believed that most of the anger aroused by the work was due not to the music but to Nijinsky 's choreography , described by Stravinsky as " knock @-@ kneed and long @-@ haired <unk> jumping up and down " . With the composer 's agreement Monteux presented a concert performance in Paris in April 1914 . Saint @-@ Saëns , who was present , declared Stravinsky mad and left in a rage , but he was almost alone in his dislike . At the end Stravinsky was carried shoulder @-@ high from the theatre after what he described as " the most beautiful performance that I have had of the Sacre du printemps " . That performance was part of a series of " Concerts Monteux " , presented between February and April 1914 , in which Monteux conducted the orchestra of the Théâtre des Champs @-@ Élysées in a wide range of symphonic and concertante works , including the concert premiere of the orchestral version of Ravel 's Valses nobles et sentimentales . His last notable engagement before the outbreak of war was as conductor of the premiere of Stravinsky 's opera The Nightingale at the Palais Garnier . 
 = = = The Met and Boston = = = 
 After the outbreak of the First World War Monteux was again conscripted into the army , serving as a private in the 35th Territorial Regiment , with which he saw action in the trenches at Verdun , Soissons and the Argonne . He later described much of this period as one of " filth and boredom " , although he formed a scratch band to divert his fellow soldiers . After just over two years on active service he was released from military duties after Diaghilev prevailed on the French government to second Monteux to conduct the Ballets Russes on a North American tour . The tour took in fifty @-@ four cities in the US and Canada . In New York in 1916 Monteux refused to conduct Nijinsky 's new ballet Till Eulenspiegel as the music was by a German – Richard Strauss – so a conductor had to be engaged for those performances . At the end of the tour Monteux was offered a three @-@ year contract to conduct the French repertoire at the Metropolitan Opera in New York , and received the permission of the French government to remain in the US . 
 At the Met ( as the Metropolitan Opera is generally called ) , Monteux conducted familiar French works such as Faust , Carmen and Samson and Delilah , with singers including Enrico Caruso , Geraldine Farrar , Louise Homer and Giovanni Martinelli . Of his first appearance , The New York Times said , " Mr. Monteux conducted with skill and authority . He made it evident that he had ample knowledge of the score and control of the orchestra – an unmistakably rhythmic beat , a sense of dramatic values . " Monteux conducted the American premieres of Rimsky @-@ Korsakov 's The Golden Cockerel , and Henri Rabaud 's <unk> , <unk> du <unk> . The American premiere of Petrushka , in a new production by , and starring , Adolph Bolm , was in an unusual opera @-@ ballet double bill with La traviata . Monteux 's performances were well received , but , though he later returned to the Met as a guest , opera did not loom large in his career . He said , " I love conducting opera . The only trouble is that I hate the atmosphere of the opera house , where only too often music is the least of many considerations , from staging to the temperaments of the principal singers . " Nor was he drawn to further engagements as a ballet conductor : " it offers special problems of fitting in with the dances and the dancers , most of whom , I 'm sorry to say , seem to have musical appreciation confined to an ability to count beats . " Nonetheless he occasionally conducted ballet performances , and even in his concert performances of the ballet scores he had conducted for Diaghilev he said he always had the dancers in his mind 's eye . 
 In 1919 Monteux was appointed chief conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra . The orchestra was going through difficult times ; its conductor , Karl Muck , had been forced by anti @-@ German agitation to step down in 1917 . Sir Henry Wood turned down the post , and despite press speculation neither Sergei Rachmaninoff nor Arturo Toscanini was appointed . At least twenty @-@ four players of German heritage had been forced out with Muck , and orchestral morale was low . Shortly before Monteux took up the conductorship the autocratic founder and proprietor of the orchestra , Henry Lee Higginson , died . He had steadfastly resisted unionisation , and after his death a substantial minority of the players resumed the struggle for union recognition . More than thirty players , including two important principals , resigned over the matter . Monteux set about rebuilding the orchestra , auditioning players from all kinds of musical background , some of whom had not played symphonic music before . By the end of his first season he had restored the orchestra to something approaching its normal complement . He trained the orchestra to a high standard ; according to the critic Neville Cardus , Monteux 's musicianship " made the Boston Symphony Orchestra the most refined and musical in the world . " 
 Monteux regularly introduced new compositions in Boston , often works by American , English and French composers . He was proud of the number of novelties presented in his years at Boston , and expressed pleasure that his successors continued the practice . He was dismayed when it was announced that his contract would not be renewed after 1924 . The official explanation was that the orchestra 's policy had always been to appoint conductors for no more than five years . It is unclear whether that was genuinely the reason . One suggested possibility is that the conductor chosen to replace him , Serge Koussevitzky , was thought more charismatic , with greater box @-@ office appeal . Another is that the <unk> members of Boston society disapproved of Monteux 's morals : he and his second wife had gradually drifted apart and by 1924 he was living with Doris Hodgkins , an American divorcée , and her two children . They were unable to marry until 1928 , when Germaine Monteux finally agreed to a divorce . 
 = = = Amsterdam and Paris = = = 
 In 1924 , Monteux began a ten @-@ year association with the Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam , serving as " first conductor " ( " <unk> <unk> " ) alongside Willem Mengelberg , its long @-@ serving chief conductor . The two musicians liked and respected one another , despite the difference in their approach to music @-@ making : Monteux was scrupulous in his adherence to a composer 's score and straightforward in his performances , while Mengelberg was well known for his virtuoso , sometimes wilful , interpretations and his cavalier attitude to the score ( " Ve vill make some <unk> " , as an English player quoted him ) . Their preferred repertoire overlapped in some of the classics , but Mengelberg had his own favourites from Bach 's St. Matthew Passion to Mahler symphonies , and was happy to leave Debussy and Stravinsky to Monteux . Where their choices coincided , as in Beethoven , Brahms and Richard Strauss , Mengelberg was generous in giving Monteux at least his fair share of them . 
 While in Amsterdam Monteux conducted a number of operas , including Pelléas et Mélisande ( its Dutch premiere ) , Carmen , Les Contes d 'Hoffmann , a Lully and Ravel double bill of Acis et <unk> and L <unk> espagnole , Gluck 's Iphigénie en Tauride ( also brought to the Paris Opéra ) and Verdi 's Falstaff . Toscanini had been invited to conduct the last of these , but he told the promoters that Monteux was his dearest colleague and the best conductor for Falstaff . 
 During the first eight years of his association with the Concertgebouw , Monteux conducted between fifty and sixty concerts each season . In his final two years with the orchestra other conductors , notably the rising young Dutchman Eduard van Beinum , were allocated concerts that would previously have been given to Monteux , who amicably withdrew from his position in Amsterdam in 1934 . He returned many times as a guest conductor . 
 In addition to his work with the Concertgebouw Orchestra , from 1929 Monteux conducted the Orchestre Symphonique de Paris ( OSP ) , founded the previous year . The orchestral scene in Paris in the 1920s had been adversely affected by the " deputy " system , whereby any contracted orchestral player was at liberty , if a better engagement became available , to send a deputy to a rehearsal or even to a concert . In most other major cities in Europe and America this practice either had never existed or had been eradicated . Alongside the opera orchestras , four other Paris orchestras were competing for players . In 1928 the arts patron the Princesse de Polignac combined with the fashion designer Coco Chanel to propose a new orchestra , well enough paid to keep its players from taking conflicting engagements . With financial backing assured , they appointed a triumvirate of musicians – Cortot , Ernest Ansermet and Louis <unk> – to assemble the OSP . The following year Cortot invited Monteux to become the orchestra 's artistic director and principal conductor . Ansermet , its initial musical director , was not pleased at being supplanted by a conductor of whom he was reportedly " <unk> jealous " , but the composer Darius Milhaud commented on how much better the orchestra played for Monteux " since Ansermet has been sent back to his Swiss pastures " . 
 Monteux considered the OSP one of the finest with which he worked . He conducted it until 1938 , premiering many pieces , including Prokofiev 's Third Symphony in 1929 . The orchestra 's generous funding in the first years allowed for ample rehearsals and adventurous programming , presenting contemporary music and the lesser @-@ known works of earlier composers as well as the classic repertoire . In his first season Monteux conducted an all @-@ Stravinsky concert , consisting of the suite from The Firebird and complete performances of Petrushka and The Rite of Spring . The orchestra made European tours in 1930 and 1931 , receiving enthusiastic receptions in the Netherlands and Germany . In Berlin the audience could not contain its applause until the end of the Symphonie fantastique , and in Monteux 's words " went wild " after the slow movement , the " Scène aux champs " . He approved of spontaneous applause , unlike Artur Schnabel , Sir Henry Wood and Leopold Stokowski , who did all they could to stamp out the practice of clapping between movements . 
 After 1931 the OSP suffered the effects of the Great Depression ; much of its funding ceased , and the orchestra reformed itself into a co @-@ operative , pooling such meagre profits as it made . To give the players some extra work Monteux started a series of conducting classes in 1932 . From 1936 he held the classes at his summer home in Les Baux in Provence , the forerunner of the school he later set up in the US . 
 = = = San Francisco and the Monteux School = = = 
 Monteux first conducted the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra ( SFSO ) in 1931 , and in 1935 at the age of 60 he was offered the chief conductorship . He was doubtful about accepting , both on personal and on professional grounds . He did not want to leave the OSP , his wife did not want to live on the west coast of America , and the orchestra was so low in funds that it had been forced to cancel an entire season in 1934 . Like most orchestras the SFSO had been badly hit financially by the depression , and it suffered the further difficulty that many of its former players had left for better @-@ paid jobs in Hollywood studios . That problem was exacerbated by the insistence of the Musicians ' Union that only local players could be recruited . Monteux nevertheless accepted the appointment . The SFSO concert season was never longer than five months a year , which enabled him to continue working with the OSP , and allowed him to conduct the inaugural concert of the NBC Symphony Orchestra on 13 November 1937 . In The New York Times Olin Downes wrote that the new orchestra was " of very high rank " and that the broadcast concert had displayed Monteux " at the height of his powers . " 
 The Times said of Monteux 's time in San Francisco that it had " incalculable effect on American musical culture " , and gave him " the opportunity to expand his already substantial repertory , and by gradual , natural processes to deepen his understanding of his art . " Monteux consistently programmed new or recent music . He generally avoided , as he did throughout his career , atonal or serial works , but his choice of modern works nevertheless drew occasional complaints from conservative @-@ minded members of the San Francisco audience . Among guest conductors with the SFSO during Monteux 's years were John Barbirolli , Beecham , Otto Klemperer , Stokowski and Stravinsky . Soloists included the pianists George Gershwin , Rachmaninoff , Arthur Rubinstein and Schnabel , the violinists Jascha Heifetz , Yehudi Menuhin and the young Isaac Stern , and singers such as Kirsten Flagstad and Alexander Kipnis . Almost all his seventeen San Francisco seasons concluded with Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony . Monteux 's SFSO studio recordings were mainly made in the cavernous acoustics of War Memorial Opera House ( without an audience ) with the music transmitted over telephone wires to a Los Angeles studio and recorded on film there . Confined to the USA for the years of the Second World War , in 1942 Monteux took American citizenship . 
 Monteux wished to continue his work in helping young conductors : " Conducting is not enough . I must create something . I am not a composer , so I will create fine young musicians . " In addition to his classes in Paris and Les Baux in the 1930s he had given private lessons to Igor <unk> ; later private students included André Previn , Seiji Ozawa , José <unk> and Robert Shaw . Previn called him " the kindest , wisest man I can remember , and there was nothing about conducting he didn 't know . " After a performance conducted by Previn , Monteux said to him , " Did you think the orchestra was playing well ? ... So did I. Next time don 't interfere with them . " Previn said that he never forgot this advice . Monteux 's best @-@ known undertaking as a teacher was the Pierre Monteux School for conductors and orchestral musicians , held each summer at his home in Hancock , Maine from 1943 onwards . Internationally known alumni of the school include Leon Fleisher , Erich Kunzel , Lorin Maazel , Neville Marriner , Hugh Wolff and David Zinman . Other Monteux students included John Canarina , whose 2003 biography was the first full @-@ length study of the conductor in English , Charles Bruck , one of Monteux 's first pupils in Paris , who became music director of the school in Hancock after Monteux 's death , and Emanuel <unk> . 
 Monteux appeared as guest conductor with many orchestras ; he commented in 1955 , " I regret they don 't have symphony orchestras all over the world so I could see Burma and Samarkand " . His successor with the Boston Symphony Orchestra , Serge Koussevitzky , invited many guest conductors during his twenty @-@ five years in charge ; Monteux was never among them , probably , in Canarina 's view , because of Koussevitzky 's jealousy . In 1949 Koussevitzky was succeeded by Charles Munch , whose early career had been boosted by an invitation from Monteux to conduct the Orchestre Symphonique de Paris in 1933 . Munch invited Monteux to Boston as a guest conductor in the 1951 season . The engagement was greeted with enthusiasm by the critics and the public , and Munch invited Monteux to join him the following year in heading the orchestra 's first European tour . The high point of the tour was a performance under Monteux of The Rite of Spring at the Théâtre des Champs @-@ Elysées , in the presence of the composer . Monteux returned annually to Boston every year until his death . 
 For some time Monteux had felt that he should leave the SFSO . He had two main reasons : he believed that a conductor should not remain in one post for too long , and he wished to be free to accept more invitations to appear with other orchestras . He resigned from the SFSO at the end of the 1952 season . He briefly reappeared on the podium at the War Memorial Opera House within a year , as co @-@ conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra 's coast @-@ to @-@ coast American tour , at Munch 's invitation . Almost all the members of the SFSO were in the audience , and joined in the ovation given to their former chief . 
 After an absence of thirty @-@ four years , Monteux was invited to conduct at the Metropolitan Opera in New York in 1953 . The opera chosen was Faust , which he had conducted at his debut at the house in 1917 . The production had what Canarina calls " a stellar cast " headed by Jussi Björling , Victoria de los Ángeles , Nicola Rossi @-@ <unk> and Robert Merrill , but the critics , including Virgil Thomson and Irving Kolodin , reserved their highest praise for Monteux 's conducting . Between 1953 and 1956 Monteux returned to the Met for Pelléas et Mélisande , Carmen , Manon , Orfeo ed Euridice , The Tales of Hoffmann and Samson et Dalila . The Met at that time typecast conductors according to their nationality , and , as a Frenchman , Monteux was not offered any Italian operas . When his request to be engaged for La traviata in the 1956 – 57 season was refused he severed his ties with the house . 
 = = = London = = = 
 Since his first visit to London with the Ballets Russes in 1911 , Monteux had had a " love affair with London and with British musicians " . He had conducted for the fledgling BBC in an orchestral concert at Covent Garden in 1924 , where he conducted the first public performance of the BBC Wireless Orchestra , and for the Royal Philharmonic Society at the Queen 's Hall in the 1920s and 1930s . In 1932 he was one of four conductors who took charge of the Hallé Orchestra in Manchester in the absence of its principal conductor ; the other three substitutes were Sir Edward Elgar , Beecham and the young Barbirolli . The Hallé players were immensely impressed with Monteux , and said that his orchestral technique and knowledge easily beat those of most other conductors . In 1951 he conducted the BBC Symphony Orchestra in a concert of Mozart , Beethoven and Bartók in the new Royal Festival Hall , and made further appearances with London orchestras during the rest of the 1950s . He would have made more but for Britain 's strict quarantine laws , which prevented the <unk> from bringing their pet French poodle with them ; Doris Monteux would not travel without the poodle , and Monteux would not travel without his wife . 
 In June 1958 Monteux conducted the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) in three concerts , described by the orchestra 's historian Richard Morrison as " a sensation with players , press and public alike . " The first concert included Elgar 's Enigma Variations , in which Cardus judged Monteux to be more faithful to Elgar 's conception than English conductors generally were . Cardus added , " After the performance of the ' Enigma ' Variations , the large audience cheered and clapped Monteux for several minutes . This applause , moreover , broke out just before the interval . English audiences are not as a rule inclined to waste time applauding at or during an interval : they usually have other things to do . " Monteux considered British concertgoers " the most attentive in the world " , and British music critics " the most intelligent " . However , a disadvantage of conducting a London orchestra was having to perform at the Festival Hall , of which he shared with Beecham and other conductors an intense dislike : " from the conductor 's rostrum it is impossible to hear the violins " . 
 Monteux 's later London performances were not only with the LSO . In 1960 he conducted Beecham 's Royal Philharmonic Orchestra performing " feats of wizardry " in works by Beethoven , Debussy and Hindemith . The LSO offered him the post of principal conductor in 1961 , when he was eighty @-@ six ; he accepted , on condition that he had a contract for twenty @-@ five years , with an option of renewal . His large and varied repertoire was displayed in his LSO concerts . In addition to the French repertoire with which , to his occasional irritation , he was generally associated , he programmed Mozart , Beethoven , Brahms and Wagner , as well as later composers including Granados , Schoenberg , Scriabin , Shostakovich , Sibelius , Richard Strauss and Vaughan Williams . With the LSO , Monteux gave a fiftieth anniversary performance of The Rite of Spring at the Royal Albert Hall in the presence of the composer . Although the recording of the occasion reveals some lapses of ensemble and slack rhythms , it was an intense and emotional concert , and Monteux climbed up to Stravinsky 's box to embrace him at the end . Players believed that in his few years in charge he transformed the LSO ; Neville Marriner felt that he " made them feel like an international orchestra ... He gave them extended horizons and some of his achievements with the orchestra , both at home and abroad , gave them quite a different constitution . " 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Although Monteux retained his vitality to the end of his life , in his last years he suffered occasional collapses . In 1962 he fainted during a performance of Beethoven 's Fifth Symphony . In 1963 he collapsed again after being presented with the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society , Britain 's highest musical honour . The presentation was made by Sir Adrian Boult , who recalled that as they left the platform , " Monteux gave two little groans as we walked down the passage , and I suddenly found my arms full of violins and bows . The orchestra had recognized the signs . Their beloved chief was fainting . " Monteux suffered another collapse the following year , and David Zinman and Lorin Maazel deputised for him at the Festival Hall . 
 In April 1964 Monteux conducted his last concert , which was in Milan with the orchestra of Radiotelevisione italiana . The programme consisted of the overture to The Flying Dutchman , Brahms 's Double Concerto and Berlioz 's Symphonie fantastique . <unk> plans included his debut at The Proms , and his 90th birthday concert , at which he intended to announce his retirement . In June 1964 Monteux suffered three strokes and a cerebral thrombosis at his home in Maine , where he died on 1 July at the age of 89 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Monteux had six children , two of them adopted . From his first marriage there were a son , Jean @-@ Paul , and a daughter , Suzanne . Jean @-@ Paul became a jazz musician , performing with artists such as Josephine Baker and Mistinguett . His second marriage produced a daughter , Denise , later known as a <unk> , and a son , Claude , a flautist . After Monteux married Doris Hodgkins he legally adopted her two children , Donald , later a restaurateur , and Nancie , who after a career as a dancer became administrator of the Pierre Monteux School in Hancock . 
 Among Monteux 's numerous honours , he was a Commandeur of the Légion d 'honneur and a Knight of the Order of Oranje @-@ Nassau . A political and social moderate , in the politics of his adopted homeland he supported the Democratic Party and was a strong opponent of racial discrimination . He ignored taboos on employing black artists ; reportedly , during the days of segregation in the US , when told he could not be served in a restaurant " for colored folk " he insisted that he was coloured – pink . 
 = = Music making = = 
 = = = Reputation and repertoire = = = 
 The record producer John Culshaw described Monteux as " that rarest of beings – a conductor who was loved by his orchestras ... to call him a legend would be to understate the case . " Toscanini observed that Monteux had the best baton technique he had ever seen . Like Toscanini , Monteux insisted on the traditional orchestral layout with first and second violins to the conductor 's left and right , believing that this gave a better representation of string detail than grouping all the violins together on the left . On fidelity to composers ' scores , Monteux 's biographer John Canarina ranks him with Klemperer and above even Toscanini , whose reputation for strict adherence to the score was , in Canarina 's view , less justified than Monteux 's . 
 According to the biographical sketch in Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , Monteux " was never an ostentatious conductor ... [ he prepared ] his orchestra in often arduous rehearsals and then [ used ] small but decisive gestures to obtain playing of fine texture , careful detail and powerful rhythmic energy , retaining to the last his extraordinary grasp of musical structure and a faultless ear for sound quality . " Monteux was extremely economical with words and gestures and expected a response from his smallest movement . The record producer Erik Smith recalled of Monteux 's rehearsals with the Vienna Philharmonic for Beethoven 's Pastoral Symphony and Brahms 's Second , " although he could not speak to the orchestra in German , he transformed their playing from one take to the next " . 
 The importance of rehearsal to Monteux was shown when , in 1923 , Diaghilev asked him to conduct Stravinsky 's new Les noces with no rehearsal , as the composer would already have conducted the first performance , Monteux following on from there . Monteux told the impresario " Stravinsky , ' e can do what ' e like , but I have to do what ze composer ' as written . " Monteux 's self @-@ effacing approach to scores led to occasional adverse comment ; the music critic of The Nation , B. H. Haggin , while admitting that Monteux was generally regarded as one of the giants of conducting , wrote of his " repeatedly demonstrated musical mediocrity " . Other American writers have taken a different view . In 1957 Carleton Smith wrote , " His approach to all music is that of the master @-@ craftsman . ... Seeing him at work , modest and quiet , it is difficult to realize that he is a bigger box office attraction at the Metropolitan Opera House than any prima donna ... that he is the only conductor regularly invited to take charge of America 's ' big three ' – the Boston , Philadelphia and New York Philharmonic orchestras . " In his 1967 book The Great Conductors , Harold C. Schonberg wrote of Monteux , " [ A ] conductor of international stature , a conductor admired and loved all over the world . The word ' loved ' is used <unk> . " Elsewhere , Schonberg wrote of Monteux 's " passion and charisma " . When asked in a radio interview to describe himself ( as a conductor ) in one word , Monteux replied , " Damned professional " . 
 Throughout his career Monteux suffered from being thought of as a specialist in French music . The music that meant most to him was that of German composers , particularly Brahms , but this was often overlooked by concert promoters and recording companies . Of the four Brahms symphonies , he was invited by the recording companies to record only one , the Second . Recordings of his live performances of the First and Third have been released on CD , but the discography in Canarina 's biography lists no recording , live or from the studio , of the Fourth . The critic William Mann , along with many others , regarded him as a " supremely authoritative " conductor of Brahms , though Cardus disagreed : " In German music Monteux , naturally enough , missed harmonic weight and the right heavily lunged tempo . His rhythm , for example , was a little too pointed for , say , Brahms or Schumann . " Gramophone 's reviewer Jonathan Swain contends that no conductor knew more than Monteux about expressive possibilities in the strings , claiming that " the conductor who doesn 't play a stringed instrument simply doesn 't know how to get the different sounds ; and the bow has such importance in string playing that there are maybe 50 different ways of producing the same note " ; In his 2003 biography , John Canarina lists nineteen " significant world premieres " conducted by Monteux . In addition to Petrushka and The Rite of Spring is a further Stravinsky work , The Nightingale . Monteux 's other premieres for Diaghilev included Ravel 's Daphnis et Chloé and Debussy 's Jeux . In the concert hall he premiered works by , among others , Milhaud , Poulenc and Prokofiev . In a letter of April 1914 Stravinsky wrote " everyone can appreciate your zeal and your probity in regard to the contemporary works of various tendencies that you have had occasion to defend . " 
 Monteux 's biographer Jean @-@ Philippe <unk> analysed a representative sample of Monteux 's programmes for more than 300 concerts . The symphonies played most frequently were César Franck 's D minor Symphony , the Symphonie fantastique , Beethoven 's Seventh , Tchaikovsky 's Fifth and Sixth , and the first two symphonies of Brahms . Works by Richard Strauss featured almost as often as those of Debussy , and Wagner 's Prelude and " Liebestod " from Tristan und Isolde as often as The Rite of Spring . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Monteux made a large number of recordings throughout his career . His first recording was as a violist in " Plus blanche que la blanche <unk> " from Les Huguenots by Meyerbeer in 1903 for Pathé with the tenor Albert <unk> . It is possible that Monteux played in the Colonne Orchestra 's 20 early cylinders recorded around 1906 – 07 . His recording debut as a conductor was the first of his five recordings of The Rite of Spring , issued in 1929 . The first of these , with the OSP , is judged by Canarina to be indifferently played ; recordings by Monteux of music by Ravel and Berlioz made in 1930 and 1931 , Canarina believes , were more impressive . Stravinsky , who also recorded The Rite in 1929 , was furious that Monteux had made a rival recording ; he made vitriolic comments privately , and for some time his relations with Monteux remained cool . 
 Monteux 's final studio recordings were with the London Symphony Orchestra in works by Ravel at the end of February 1964 . In the course of his career he recorded works by more than fifty composers . In Monteux 's lifetime it was rare for record companies to issue recordings of live concerts , although he would much have preferred it , he said , " if one could record in one take in normal concert @-@ hall conditions " . Some live performances of Monteux conducting the Metropolitan Opera , and among others the San Francisco Symphony , Boston Symphony , BBC Symphony and London Symphony orchestras survive alongside his studio recordings , and some have been issued on compact disc . It has been argued that these reveal even more than his studio recordings " a conductor at once passionate , disciplined , and tasteful ; one who was sometimes more vibrant than the Monteux captured in the studio , and yet , like that studio conductor , a cultivated musician possessing an extraordinary ear for balance , a keen sense of style and a sure grasp of shape and line . " 
 Many of Monteux 's recordings have remained in the catalogues for decades , notably his RCA Victor recordings with the Boston Symphony and Chicago Symphony orchestras ; Decca recordings with the Vienna Philharmonic ; and Decca and Philips recordings with the LSO . Of Manon , one of his few opera recordings , Alan Blyth in Opera on Record states " Monteux had the music in his blood and here dispenses it with authority and spirit " . He can be heard rehearsing in the original LP issues of Beethoven 's Eroica Symphony with the Concertgebouw Orchestra ( Philips <unk> AY ) and Beethoven 's 9th with the London Symphony ( Westminster , WST 234 ) . 
 Video recordings of Monteux are scarcer . He is seen conducting Berlioz 's Roman Carnival Overture and Beethoven 's 8th symphony with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra , and Dukas ' L <unk> <unk> with the London Symphony Orchestra in an " unshowy , deeply satisfying humane way " . 
 = Chirocephalus diaphanus = 
 Chirocephalus diaphanus is a widely distributed European species of fairy shrimp that lives as far north as Great Britain , where it is the only surviving species of fairy shrimp and is protected under the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 . It is a translucent animal , about 0 @.@ 5 in ( 13 mm ) long , with reddened tips to the abdomen and appendages . The body comprises a head , a thorax bearing 11 pairs of appendages , and a seven @-@ segmented abdomen . In males , the antennae are enlarged to form " frontal appendages " , while females have an egg pouch at the end of the thorax . 
 The life cycle of C. diaphanus is extremely fast , and the species can only persist in pools without predators . The eggs tolerate drying out , and hatch when re @-@ immersed in water . C. diaphanus was first reported in the scientific literature in 1704 , but was only separated from other species and given its scientific name in 1803 . The specific epithet diaphanus refers to the animal 's transparency . 
 = = Description = = 
 Chirocephalus diaphanus is a " beautiful , translucent crustacean " . Its body is subcylindrical , and around 0 @.@ 5 inches ( 13 mm ) long , mostly transparent , but with black eyes , and red tips to the appendages and abdomen . 
 The body becomes wider towards the head , which has a conspicuous mandibular groove . It also bears a pair of stalked compound eyes , as well as a sessile median eye , two pairs of antennae , and the mouthparts . The mouthparts comprise a labrum , directed backwards over the mouth and pairs of mandibles , <unk> , maxillules and vestigial maxillae . 
 The thorax is made up of twelve body segments , the last of which is fused to the first segment of the abdomen . There is no carapace , but each of the eleven free segments bears a pair of <unk> , which have a series of bristles pointing along the animal 's midline . The abdomen consists of seven segments without appendages , and a slender telson which bears a pair of caudal rami . 
 Males and females can be recognised by a suite of sexually dimorphic characters . While the antennae of females are triangular and relatively short , males ' antennae are long and jointed , and each one bears a complex " frontal appendage " , which is used to clasp the female during mating . The last somite of the thorax is fused with the first somite of the abdomen . In males , it bears a pair of processes , the extensions of the vasa deferentia in a protrusible penis . In females , there is a single egg pouch , which is also thought to derive from a pair of appendages . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 Chirocephalus diaphanus is a Mediterranean species , which reaches its north @-@ western limit in Great Britain , and is missing from Fennoscandia . Its distribution in Western Europe extends almost continuously from Great Britain to the Iberian Peninsula , and as far east as the Rhine in Germany . A single occurrence of C. diaphanus is known from the Benelux countries , in pools in South Limburg , Netherlands . Further east , it occurs south of 47 ° N in the Apennine and Balkan peninsulas , reaching the Black Sea in Romania ; an isolated population exists at the mouth of the Vistula river in Poland . In the Mediterranean Sea , populations exist on Sicily and Crete . 
 C. diaphanus is the only species of fairy shrimp to occur naturally in Great Britain ; Tanymastix stagnalis is found in western Ireland , and Artemia salina formerly occurred in England . Within Great Britain , C. diaphanus is restricted to areas with a deficit of precipitation against evapotranspiration between April and September . This means that it is only found frequently in southern England , with scattered records as far north as Yorkshire . 
 = = Ecology and life cycle = = 
 The fairy shrimp is found in temporary pools of water , from seasonal ponds to muddy ruts , preferring sites with regular disturbance , such as passing tractors or livestock . It has a broad range of ecological tolerances , in terms of temperature , dissolved oxygen and pH , but cannot coexist with predatory fish . C. diaphanus swims with its ventral side upwards , and is a filter feeder , collecting zooplankton and detritus with its <unk> . 
 The life cycle of Chirocephalus diaphanus is extremely fast . The typical duration of a full life cycle is not known , but a figure of around 3 months has been suggested . The eggs are tolerant to drying out ; when their habitat fills with water again , some of the eggs will hatch , while others remain dormant . This enables the species to continue to survive in an unpredictable habitat , since some eggs remain in case the habitat does not persist for long enough for the animals to mate and produce offspring . Dispersal between bodies of water can occur through the movements of animals such as cattle , deer and horses . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Chirocephalus diaphanus is subject to protection under environmental law in some parts of its range . In Germany , it is included on the Red List of endangered species . In the United Kingdom , C. diaphanus is protected under Schedule 5 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 , and it is listed as a " Species of Conservation Concern " under the United Kingdom Biodiversity Action Plan . The main threat to its survival are changes in land use : its habitats are often considered unsightly , and the temporary pools it inhabits are frequently filled in or converted into permanent ponds . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 The first mention of any Chirocephalus species in the scientific literature was a sketch by James <unk> in a 1704 volume of his <unk> Naturae , where he named it <unk> <unk> minima , dorso <unk> ( " tiny freshwater <unk> , swimming on its back " ) . There was much confusion between species in the early literature , and it is often unclear what species early authors were referring to . Carl Linnaeus , having described a fairy shrimp as a possible insect larva in Fauna Suecica , described it among the crustaceans in the 10th edition of his Systema Naturae in 1758 , under the name " Cancer stagnalis " ( now Tanymastix stagnalis ) . That name was also used by later authors , but sometimes referring to other species . 
 The situation was clarified by Bénédict Prévost in 1803 , when he published a detailed description of Chirocephalus diaphanus , including mention of the frontal appendages which distinguish it from other fairy shrimp such as Tanymastix stagnalis . Prévost 's work was originally published in the Journal de Physique in 1803 , and was reprinted by Louis <unk> as an appendix to his 1820 Histoire des <unk> , qui se <unk> aux Environs de Genève . 
 The name Chirocephalus derives from the Greek roots <unk> ( <unk> , " hand " ) , and <unk> ( cephalon , " head " ) . The specific epithet diaphanus derives from the Greek <unk> , meaning " diaphanous " or transparent . Prévost later regretted the epithet , arguing that several other species were just as transparent as the one he had described . The common name " fairy shrimp " comes from the animal 's delicate appearance , and the " iridescent gleaming of the bristles on its appendages " . 
 = Survivor Man = 
 " Survivor Man " is the eleventh episode of the fourth season of the American comedy television series The Office — the show 's sixty @-@ fourth episode overall . Written by Steve Carell , who also acts on the show as Regional Manager Michael Scott , and directed by Paul Feig , it originally aired on NBC on November 8 , 2007 . The episode aired during NBC 's week of " green episodes " , which lasted from November 4 through November 10 , 2007 . 
 In the episode , Ryan excludes Michael from a company nature excursion , prompting Michael to try to prove to himself and his peers that he can survive in the wild . Dwight drops Michael off in the middle of a local wooded area and contrary to Michael 's wishes , stays behind to monitor Michael . Meanwhile , Jim spends the day as boss , but his plan to incorporate multiple birthdays into one combined event ends up alienating the entire office against him . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ryan Howard ( B. J. Novak ) invites the regional branch managers and Dunder Mifflin Scranton Human Resources representative Toby Flenderson ( Paul Lieberstein ) to a corporate wilderness retreat , but does not invite Michael Scott ( Carell ) . To show that he is capable of surviving in the wilderness , Michael leaves Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) in charge of the office and instructs Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) to abandon him deep in the forest with merely a knife and a roll of duct tape . Contrary to Michael 's wishes , Dwight stays behind and surreptitiously monitors his condition from a distance . Michael proves to be completely incapable of living out in the wild by himself . Dwight is forced to come out of hiding to save Michael when he tries to eat wild mushrooms . 
 Jim 's plan to consolidate three employee birthdays into a combined birthday party encounters several complications , and his constant adjustments incur the ire of Party Planning Committee chair Angela Martin ( Angela Kinsey ) . Later , Jim discovers that no one likes his idea for a combined party , realizing the depth of his error when Phyllis Vance ( Phyllis Smith ) mistakenly refers to him as Michael , and he returns to the original plan of having separate parties . Michael and Dwight return lightening the mood amongst the employees and for the lighting of Creed Bratton 's ( portrayed by the actor of the same name ) birthday cobbler , with Michael expressing that he no longer has any desire to return to the wilderness and Jim expressing his relief that Michael has returned to run the office . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Survivor Man " is the second episode written by Steve Carell . Carell also wrote the second season finale " Casino Night " . The episode is the fifth episode directed by Paul Feig , and his first since the second season episode " E @-@ mail Surveillance " . " Survivor Man " is the second episode to feature birthdays as a plot line , but the episode includes a continuity error . The episode was the next to last episode to be aired before the effects of the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike halted production . The episode 's title and plot share similarities with <unk> , a television show in which the host is placed in the wilderness with little or no supplies for survival . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Survivor Man " received a 4 @.@ 9 / 7 in the Nielsen ratings , meaning that 4 @.@ 9 percent of households were tuned in at any given moment and seven percent of all televisions in use were tuned in to the program . The episode was watched by 8 @.@ 29 million viewers and achieved a 4 @.@ 3 / 10 in the ages 18 – 49 demographic . Travis Fickett of IGN stated that " Overall , this isn 't a terrific episode , but holds up the show 's usual standard . Steve Carell is hilarious as usual . Watching him attempt to make shelter and clothing out of his suit over the span of only a few hours is great fun . " Fickett also stated that a good portion of the humor in the episode came from in @-@ jokes that required previous knowledge of the series , specifically pointing out the parallel comparison between Michael and Jim 's lives . Like Fickett , Christine Fenno of Entertainment Weekly praised the episode 's comparison between Michael and Jim . Fenno also went on to praise other points of the episode , stating she also enjoyed the overall episode for its " just <unk> with Michael and Dwight , and infighting among the rest of the staff . " Oscar Dahl , a Senior Writer for BuddyTV , stated that " What seems like a one and done episode without much character work at first turns into much more by the end . " Dahl went on to praise the episode , stating that it was " lighter " in comparison to Carell 's previous episode " Casino Night " . 
 = 1988 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1988 Pacific hurricane season was a Pacific hurricane season that saw a below @-@ average amount of tropical cyclones form , the first time since 1981 . It officially began May 15 , 1988 in the eastern Pacific , and June 1 , 1988 in the central Pacific and lasted until November 30 , 1988 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . The first named storm , Tropical Storm Aletta , formed on June 16 , and the last @-@ named storm , Tropical Storm Miriam , was previously named Hurricane Joan in the Atlantic Ocean before crossing Central America and re @-@ emerging in the eastern Pacific ; Miriam continued westward and dissipated on November 2 . 
 The season produced 23 tropical depressions , of which 15 attained tropical storm status . Seven storms reached hurricane status , three of which became major hurricanes . The strongest storm of the season , Hurricane Hector , formed on July 30 to the south of Mexico and reached peak winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) — Category 4 status — before dissipating over open waters on August 9 ; Hector was never a threat to land . Tropical Storm Gilma was the only cyclone in the season to make landfall , crossing the Hawaiian Islands , although there were numerous near @-@ misses . Gilma 's Hawaiian landfall was unusual , but not unprecedented . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 The total tropical activity in the season was below @-@ average . There were 13 cyclones in the Eastern Pacific , as well as two in the Central . Of the 15 cyclones , one crossed from the Atlantic Ocean into the Pacific , and another moved from the Central Pacific to the Western Pacific . In the Eastern Pacific , there were seven cyclones peaking as a tropical storm , and six hurricanes , of which two reached Category 3 intensity or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . A tropical storm and a major hurricane occurred in the Central Pacific . 
 Tropical Storm Gilma made the only landfalls of the season in the Hawaiian Islands , causing some rainfall , but no direct deaths or damage occurred as a result of it . These were the only landfalls in the season that were made , which is unusual as most landfalls in the Eastern Pacific occur on the Mexican coast . This is due to the closeness of the Mexican region to the major source of tropical activity to the west of Central America . Hurricane Uleki , the strongest hurricane in the Central Pacific region during the season , caused two drownings in Oahu and heavy waves hit the coast of the Hawaiian Islands . Tropical Storm Miriam , the last storm of the season , formed as a result of Hurricane Joan from the Atlantic , and flooding resulted in parts of Central America , due to heavy rainfall . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression One @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical disturbance organized into the first eastern Pacific tropical depression of the season on June 15 . A convective band on the north and west sides of the system became well @-@ defined , and anticyclonic outflow allowed for initial organization . After forming , the depression tracked west @-@ southwestward and intensified due to disrupted outflow from a large air stream disturbance . On June 16 , strong convection with spiral banding developed over the depression , although it failed to strengthen further . A low pressure system northwest of the depression in combination with Tropical Storm Aletta to the northeast caused the depression to weaken , and it dissipated on June 18 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Aletta = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa and progressed westward through the Atlantic Ocean and Caribbean Sea , before crossing over Central America on June 13 and emerging into the warm waters of the east Pacific on June 14 . Shortly after , satellite imagery showed good upper @-@ level outflow , although cloud banding remained disorganized . On June 16 , the broad circulation better organized on the northeastern section , with deep convection developing . A tropical depression formed later that day about 200 miles ( 320 km ) to the southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . It developed further as it moved northward toward the southwest coast of Mexico , and had organized sufficiently to be named Tropical Storm Aletta on June 17 . The cyclone drifted north @-@ northwest for the next 36 hours before turning westward , parallel to the Mexican coast . The storm began to lose its convection on June 19 and weakened into a tropical depression later that day . The depression weakened further into a weak low @-@ level circulation before dissipating on June 21 . Although Aletta approached the Acapulco area of the Mexican coast , it did not make landfall . The portion of coast affected by Aletta received heavy rainfall ; unofficial reports state that one person died as a result of the storm , and the storm produced some damage due to rainfall and flooding . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bud = = = 
 Satellite imagery first detected a low @-@ level circulation on June 20 , associated with some heavy convection , 200 miles ( 325 km ) south of the Mexico – Guatemala border , and it intensified into a tropical depression . The cyclone moved northwest then west @-@ northwest over two days . A 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) wind report from a ship on June 21 allowed the depression to be upgraded to Tropical Storm Bud later that day . For the next day , the low @-@ level circulation moved away from its deep convection , dissipating near Acapulco , Mexico . A portion of Bud remaining over land may have been part of the reason for the lack of strengthening of the cyclone . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four @-@ E = = = 
 A system developed in the eastern Pacific , and later strengthened into a tropical depression on July 1 , when it obtained a better defined low @-@ level circulation . The center was exposed , with little convection on the northeast side , due to shear aloft . The system moved to the northwest , while shear continued to move the deep convection of the cyclone to the southwest of its center of circulation . The circulation completely lacked deep convection late on July 2 , although it continued to have a well @-@ defined low @-@ level center . The depression drifted slowly northward , located south of Baja California , before dissipating just south of the peninsula on July 4 , with no circulation or deep convection detected . A small amount of associated rainfall affected Baja California , as the cyclone passed near the peninsula . 
 = = = Hurricane Carlotta = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the western coast of Africa on June 23 , and for the next two weeks , moved through the tropical waters of the Atlantic Ocean and later crossed Central America . It began developing further when it entered the Pacific Ocean and became a dense area of moisture and cloudiness . The wave developed into a disturbance on July 8 , and attained tropical depression status in the afternoon on July 8 , south of Mexico . After entering a favorable area of warm waters , the depression strengthened to Tropical Storm Carlotta on July 9 . Carlotta continued to develop , reached peak strength , and developed into Hurricane Carlotta on July 11 . During the duration of the storm , Carlotta was not considered a hurricane , however after post @-@ season reanalysis Carlotta 's strength was upgraded to minimal hurricane status . As it moved into less favorable conditions it lost strength and weakened to a tropical storm on July 12 . Carlotta began to lose its deep convection , and weakened into a tropical depression on July 13 as it moved into cooler waters . It later moved west @-@ southwest and dissipated on July 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Daniel = = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of northwestern Africa on July 4 , and moved through tropical regions of the northern Atlantic and Caribbean Sea without the indication of development . The tropical disturbance crossed Central America on July 14 , and from then until July 18 , the westward motion decreased , as convection and organization increased over warm waters . It developed into a tropical depression on July 19 , and into Tropical Storm Daniel 600 miles ( 970 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California on July 20 . A high pressure system over the western United States and northern Mexico forced Daniel and an upper @-@ level low on parallel west @-@ northwest paths . Daniel stayed generally the same strength for the next few days , reaching peak strength on July 23 . Daniel declined into a tropical depression on July 25 and dissipated on July 26 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Emilia = = = 
 On July 15 , a tropical wave exited Africa and crossed the Atlantic Ocean . It crossed into the Pacific Ocean on July 24 , developing convection and outflow . On July 27 , it organized into a tropical depression off the southwest coast of Mexico . Continuing generally westward , the thunderstorm activity fluctuated , and slowly developing , it intensified into Tropical Storm Emilia on July 29 . The storm attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on July 30 , although wind shear and interaction with nearby Tropical Storm Fabio prevented further intensification ; the low @-@ level circulation was located along the northwest edge of the deepest convection . It became disorganized and difficult to locate on satellite imagery , and soon the circulation was exposed from the thunderstorms . On August 1 , Emilia weakened to tropical depression status , and late on August 2 , the last advisory was issued as the system had become very disorganized with minimal convection . Its remnants were tracked for the next few days , and although some deep convection returned momentarily , the system 's convection soon disappeared . 
 = = = Hurricane Fabio = = = 
 A well @-@ organized ITCZ disturbance with deep convection organized further over the northeastern Pacific Ocean on July 28 . It developed into a tropical depression later that day , while 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Baja California . The position of Fabio 's formation was much further south and west than where most tropical cyclones form during the same time period . The depression moved westward while gradually strengthening and it developed into Tropical Storm Fabio on July 29 . It intensified further over the next few days and it intensified into a hurricane on July 31 . The system increased its speed as it steadily strengthened further . A trough turned the storm west @-@ northwestward on August 3 . Satellite estimates indicated that Fabio reached its maximum intensity later on August 3 , with a well @-@ defined eye with very deep convection surrounding it . The Central Pacific Hurricane Center issued a tropical storm watch for the Big Island on August 4 , due to the threatening west @-@ northwest turn towards it . However , the retreat of a trough later turned Fabio back to the west and the CPHC discontinued the tropical storm watch on August 5 . Fabio 's good upper @-@ level conditions later weakened and began to lose its convection over cooler waters . Fabio quickly weakened and it weakened into a tropical storm again later on August 5 , and back to a depression on August 6 . The depression turned west @-@ northwestward again on August 8 , but Fabio dissipated on August 9 . As the cyclone moved near the Hawaiian islands , heavy rainfall fell across the chain , peaking at 18 @.@ 75 in ( 476 mm ) near <unk> <unk> on the island of Hawaii . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical depression developed in the eastern Pacific on July 28 , forecast to be absorbed by a very close nearby depression , later Tropical Storm Gilma . The depression moved northward , although in unfavorable conditions . The cyclone weakened as the depression to the southwest strengthened further . Limited deep convection developed with the system , although the cyclone continued in unfavorable conditions with shearing . Visible satellite imagery later showed a very weak system , and the storm dissipated on July 29 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gilma = = = 
 A wave that previously moved through the Atlantic from the northwest coast of Africa , crossed over Central America into the Pacific on July 17 or July 18 . On July 19 , this disturbance was 700 miles ( 1125 km ) to the southeast of the developing Tropical Storm Daniel . The system moved westward for the following week without any signs of intensification . However , on July 26 and 27 , the system appeared to be strengthening due to a banding pattern . By July 28 , the convection underwent further organization with some weak outflow high in the storm . It developed into a tropical depression later on July 28 , much further west then most east Pacific storms develop at . For the next day the cyclone remained fairly stationary , but began to strengthen over warm waters . On July 29 the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Gilma , based on satellite imagery . Limited intensification followed , due to shear high in the storm . It weakened a tropical depression again on July 30 , due to weakness depicted in satellite imagery . Gilma then moved west @-@ northwestward through the northeast Pacific . The depression skirted the Hawaiian Islands , but dissipated near Oahu on August 3 . On the Hawaiian Islands there were no direct damage or deaths , although some rainfall occurred on the islands . 
 = = = Hurricane Hector = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on July 30 , while 400 miles ( 645 km ) south of Acapulco , Mexico . The depression tracked west @-@ northwestward , becoming Tropical Storm Hector on July 31 . Its west @-@ northwest motion continued , due to an area of high pressure to its north , and Hector intensified into a hurricane on August 2 . Based on satellite data , the hurricane is estimated to have reached its peak intensity of 145 mph ( 235 km / h ) on August 3 ; this made Hector a Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , which was the strongest storm of the season . Hector began to move due west on August 5 and it had already begun weakening . The storm continued westward increasing its forward speed . On August 6 it had appeared Hector had strengthened , but steadily weakened afterwards and finally dissipated on August 9 , while 650 miles ( 1 @,@ 045 km ) east of Hilo , Hawaii . Hector never a threat to land . 
 = = = Hurricane Iva = = = 
 A wave that first came off the northwest coast of Africa moved through the Atlantic , before entering the East Pacific on August 4 . The wave developed more organized convection when it entered the region , and it turned into a tropical depression on August 5 , while 165 miles ( 270 km ) south of Oaxaca , Mexico . It developed into Tropical Storm Iva on August 6 . Iva turned on a west @-@ northwestward course and continued strengthening , before it developed into a hurricane on August 7 . The cyclone moved northwestward after becoming a hurricane , and satellites estimate it reached peak intensity on August 8 . On the same day Iva passed within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of Socorro Island . Winds of 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) were reported on the island along with moderate rain . The storm moved through cooler waters for the next day , and began to weaken . Ivo declined into a tropical storm again on August 9 , and by August 10 the cyclone lost its deep convection along with organization . It intensified into a tropical depression again on August 11 , and moved southwest due to a high pressure before dissipating on August 3 . For unknown reasons , Iva was retired from the lists of Eastern Pacific storm names , but it was probably to avoid confusion with Hurricane Iwa of the 1982 Pacific season , which was itself retired due to its damage in Hawaii . The name was replaced with Ileana for 1994 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Thirteen @-@ E = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on August 12 , with movement towards the west @-@ northwest . It continued toward the west @-@ northwest , near the circulation of Tropical Storm Iva . The low @-@ level circulation of the cyclone was displaced to the east of the deep convection , and the system moved to the northwest . The depression lost much of its convection later on August 13 , and it had a less defined center . The cyclone turned to the south , and lost its associated deep convection . Some weak convection redeveloped near the center , but the depression dissipated later on August 14 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm John = = = 
 A disturbance that passed off the northwestern African coast on August 3 crossed the Atlantic Ocean , before entering into the Pacific . A tropical depression formed in the East Pacific on August 16 , 150 miles ( 240 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Mexico , based on satellite estimates . The cyclone progressed slowly northwestward , and intensified Tropical Storm John on August 17 , less than 24 hours after its formation . John continued northwest for a short while , before the low @-@ level center of circulation had been exposed . John degenerated to a tropical depression on August 18 due to a lack of convection , made a loop while less than 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of the southern tip of Baja California . It shortly became a little better organized after completing the loop on August 20 , but John dissipated on August 21 , southwest of Baja California , due to shearing and cold waters . Its remnants continued northwestward parallel to the southwest coast of Baja California . John caused no reported deaths or damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E = = = 
 On August 26 , a disturbance south of Baja California organized into Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E. Initially , the system moved northwest towards cooler waters as the location of the low @-@ level circulation was to the southwest of the deep convection associated with the cyclone . The center drifted to the east of the small area of concentrated convection , and its intensity remained steady . It weakened and became loosely defined due to upper @-@ level wind shear , and the storm lost all of its convection before dissipating and degenerating into a low @-@ level swirl . 
 = = = Hurricane Uleki = = = 
 Towards the end of August , tropical activity in the ITCZ southeast of the Hawaiian Islands began to be monitored . On August 28 , this tropical disturbance organized into a tropical depression , as it was located about 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 285 km ) southeast of the Big Island . It intensified at a fair rate , and intensified Tropical Storm Uleki the next day . It continued to strengthen , and reached hurricane intensity on August 31 . It moved slowly west @-@ northwest until steering currents collapsed on September 1 . Now a Category 3 hurricane , Uleki slowly edged north towards the Hawaiian Islands . After looping , Uleki resumed its westward path on September 4 . Its stalling in the ocean had weakened it , and the hurricane passed midway between Johnston Island and French Frigate Shoals . Uleki crossed the dateline on September 8 . It turned slightly to the north and meandered in the open Pacific days until it dissipated on September 14 . 
 As Uleki drifted towards the Hawaiian Islands , tropical storm watches were issued for Oahu , Kauai , and Niihau on September 3 . In addition , reconnaissance missions were flown into the hurricane . Uleki caused heavy surf on the Hawaiian Islands , that being its only significant effect . This heavy surf flooded the southeastern runway on Midway Island , and produced two drownings on Oahu . Nineteen people were also rescued from rough surf , with five- to six @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 8 meter ) waves , off the coast of beaches in Hawaii . 
 = = = Hurricane Kristy = = = 
 A tropical wave passed off the northwestern coast of Africa on August 6 . It did not develop as it passed through the Atlantic Ocean , until August 19 when convection began to form . On August 20 the disturbance turned into Tropical Depression Six in the Atlantic basin . It passed from the Leeward Islands up to the central Caribbean , until it dissipated on August 23 . As it passed over Central America , the disturbance had little remaining convection . However , the convection associated with the system began to organize when it entered the Pacific , and it strengthened into a tropical depression on August 29 , while located 300 miles ( 485 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . Later that day the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Kristy , based on ship reports of tropical storm force winds . Kristy strengthened into a hurricane on August 31 , based solely on satellite imagery . Hurricane Kristy had short lifespan though , and weakened to a tropical storm on September 2 . The easterly shear associated with an anticyclone south of Baja California , which caused Kristy 's convection to be forced west of the low @-@ level center of the system , and therefore weakened it . Kristy weakened further to a depression on September 3 , and weak steering currents allowed the cyclone to remain stationary on September 4 , loop the following day , and then began to move eastward . The depression dissipated on September 6 , weakening to a low @-@ level swirl . Kristy caused heavy rains and flooding in the Mexican states of Chiapas and Oaxaca . 
 Although the storm passed relatively close to the coast , no tropical cyclone warnings and watches were required as the storm remained offshore . However , Kristy produced heavy rains and widespread flooding in the Mexican states of Chiapas and Oaxaca ; as a result , several rivers overflowed their banks . Thousands of tourists were stranded from the beaches . At least 21 deaths were attributed to Kristy : 16 in Oaxaca and 5 in Chiapas . More than 20 @,@ 000 people in the former were evacuated from their homes ; consequently , a state of emergency was declared . The <unk> rainbands of Kristy delayed the rescue of the victims of a Brazilian @-@ made aircraft that crashed west of the Sierra Madre Occidental mountain range . No official damage figures were reported by the Mexican government . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seventeen @-@ E ( Debby ) = = = 
 The remnants of Hurricane Debby moved over the mountainous areas of Mexico , passing into the Pacific from the Pacific coast of Mexico near Manzanillo . The disturbance moved towards the north @-@ northwest and organized into a tropical depression on September 6 just south of the Gulf of California . The cyclone remained stationary due to weak low @-@ level steering currents , later drifting to the north @-@ northwest with an area of deep convection causing rain on the Mexican coast . It later moved to the northwest , with partial exposure of the center of the system , and with some shear still affecting it . The cyclone continued to have shear over the system , which caused it not to strengthen , and its movement became nearly stationary . After remaining stationary longer , the system dissipated as a low @-@ level swirl . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E = = = 
 A disturbance organized , and based on satellite imagery it strengthened into a tropical depression on September 12 . The center of circulation remained on the eastern fringe of its deep convection and the storm moved west or west @-@ northwestward . On September 13 , the depression underwent shearing , while its low @-@ level circulation center had only a small amount of deep convection associated with it . The cyclone became poorly defined , and its movement turned stationary on September 14 . The low @-@ level circulation of the system remained visible , even though it weakened due to shearing . Little deep convection remained associated with the system , and the cyclone stayed stationary . The depression having no remaining convection and having become just a low @-@ level cloud swirl , dissipated on September 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Wila = = = 
 A tropical depression formed on September 21 as an area of deep convection . The cyclone organized slowly though , drifting slowly , initially west then to the northwest . However , the depression recurved northeast , due to a trough . As the cyclone moved northeast , the system strengthened as indicated by an Air Force reconnaissance plane showing tropical storm force winds . It therefore intensified into Tropical Storm Wila on September 25 . Wila , however , weakened within a day , and therefore became a tropical depression . The remnant low of Wila produced some heavy rain over the Hawaiian Islands on September 26 and 27 . 
 = = = Hurricane Lane = = = 
 A wave moved westward off the coast of Africa , passed through the Caribbean Sea , and into the ITCZ of the eastern Pacific on September 20 . The system developed organized deep convection , and strengthened into a tropical depression on September 21 , while 300 miles ( 485 km ) southeast of Acapulco , Mexico . As the low @-@ level circulation organized further in the depression it intensified into Tropical Storm Lane , later on September 21 . Lane developed further with an upper @-@ level outflow pattern , and the cyclone turned into a hurricane on September 23 . Later on September 23 and on September 24 , an eye appeared on satellite imagery . A trough to the northwest of Lane disturbed its upper @-@ level outflow on September 24 . <unk> convection and loss of its eye caused Lane to weaken to a tropical storm on September 27 , and into a depression on September 28 . Later on September 28 , the cyclone moved into cooler waters and Lane lost nearly all of its deep convection . It weakened into a low @-@ level swirl , and Lane dissipated on September 30 . Lane caused no reported casualties or damage . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E = = = 
 The remnants of Atlantic basin Tropical Storm Isaac moved into the eastern Pacific . These remnants underwent better organization and strengthened into a tropical depression on October 11 south of Baja California . Strong vertical southwesterly wind shear affected the cyclone , with the center of circulation later seen on the west side of the lessening amount of deep convection . The system remained poorly organized and had trouble strengthening to this continual poor organization as it moved westward . The system could not be located on satellite imagery and therefore dissipated on October 12 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Miriam = = = 
 Atlantic hurricane , Hurricane Joan survived the passage over Central America and entered the Pacific , although greatly weakened . Following the policy at the time , Joan was renamed Miriam . 
 Miriam brought heavy rains to parts of Central America . Isolated flooding and mudslides happened , although casualties and damage reports are not available . 10 @.@ 37 in ( 263 mm ) of rain fell in <unk> / Lazaro Cardenas , Mexico as a result of Miriam and the former Joan . Guatemala 's ports along its Pacific coast were closed and people in El Salvador were evacuated from low @-@ lying areas due to the storm . Miriam then turned away from Central America and weakened to a depression . The depression survived for over a week until it dissipated on October 30 . Tropical Depression Miriam 's remnants regenerated the next day , and Miriam finally dissipated on November 2 . 
 = = Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) = = 
 The table on the right shows the Accumulated Cyclone Energy for each storm in the season . ACE is a measure of the power of a tropical cyclones multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong tropical cyclones , have high ACEs . ACE is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 34 knots ( 39 mph , 63 km / h ) or tropical storm strength . 
 The figures in parentheses are for storms in the Central Pacific basin west of 140 ° W ; those not in parenthesis are for the Eastern Pacific basin . 
 The cumulative ACE for the Eastern Pacific this season fell within the official " Near Normal " grading . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This is a table of all of the storms that have formed in the 1988 Pacific hurricane season . It includes their duration , names , landfall ( s ) , denoted in parenthesis , damages , and death totals . Deaths in parentheses are additional and indirect ( an example of an indirect death would be a traffic accident ) , but were still related to that storm . Damage and deaths include totals while the storm was extratropical , a wave , or a low , and all of the damage figures are in 1988 USD . 
 = = 1988 storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1988 . The names not retired from this list were used again in the 1994 season . This is the same list used for the 1982 season . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 Two names from the Central Pacific list were used – Uleki and Wila , both being their first usage . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 The World Meteorological Organization retired one name in the spring of 1989 : Iva . Ileana replaced the name of Iva in the 1994 season . 
 = Unrequited ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Unrequited " is the sixteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was written by Howard Gordon and series creator Chris Carter , and directed by Michael Lange . It originally aired in the United States on February 23 , 1997 on the Fox network . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 9 and was seen by 16 @.@ 56 million viewers upon its initial broadcast . " Unrequited " received mixed to negative reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , the murder of a U.S. Army Lieutenant General has Mulder and Scully struggling to stop a seemingly invisible assassin . The two agents soon learn that they are doomed to failure from the start , as the U.S. government is attempting to cover up the existence of American POWs still being kept in Vietnam . 
 Gordon was inspired to write the episode after viewing an installment of the news series 60 Minutes that dealt with American secret agents the CIA left behind during the Vietnam War . The eventual concept that the assassin could create blind spots came after the writer spoke with his ophthalmologist brother . The entry featured a finished replica of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial , and various Canadian locales substituted for various locations in Washington , D.C. 
