 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Nuclear properties = = = 
 By definition , any two atoms with an identical number of protons in their nuclei belong to the same chemical element . Atoms with equal numbers of protons but a different number of neutrons are different isotopes of the same element . For example , all hydrogen atoms admit exactly one proton , but isotopes exist with no neutrons ( hydrogen @-@ 1 , by far the most common form , also called protium ) , one neutron ( deuterium ) , two neutrons ( tritium ) and more than two neutrons . The known elements form a set of atomic numbers , from the single proton element hydrogen up to the 118 @-@ proton element ununoctium . All known isotopes of elements with atomic numbers greater than 82 are radioactive . 
 About 339 nuclides occur naturally on Earth , of which 254 ( about 75 % ) have not been observed to decay , and are referred to as " stable isotopes " . However , only 90 of these nuclides are stable to all decay , even in theory . Another 164 ( bringing the total to 254 ) have not been observed to decay , even though in theory it is energetically possible . These are also formally classified as " stable " . An additional 34 radioactive nuclides have half @-@ lives longer than 80 million years , and are long @-@ lived enough to be present from the birth of the solar system . This collection of 288 nuclides are known as primordial nuclides . Finally , an additional 51 short @-@ lived nuclides are known to occur naturally , as daughter products of primordial nuclide decay ( such as radium from uranium ) , or else as products of natural energetic processes on Earth , such as cosmic ray bombardment ( for example , carbon @-@ 14 ) . 
 For 80 of the chemical elements , at least one stable isotope exists . As a rule , there is only a handful of stable isotopes for each of these elements , the average being 3 @.@ 2 stable isotopes per element . Twenty @-@ six elements have only a single stable isotope , while the largest number of stable isotopes observed for any element is ten , for the element tin . Elements 43 , 61 , and all elements numbered 83 or higher have no stable isotopes . 
 Stability of isotopes is affected by the ratio of protons to neutrons , and also by the presence of certain " magic numbers " of neutrons or protons that represent closed and filled quantum shells . These quantum shells correspond to a set of energy levels within the shell model of the nucleus ; filled shells , such as the filled shell of 50 protons for tin , confers unusual stability on the nuclide . Of the 254 known stable nuclides , only four have both an odd number of protons and odd number of neutrons : hydrogen @-@ 2 ( deuterium ) , lithium @-@ 6 , boron @-@ 10 and nitrogen @-@ 14 . Also , only four naturally occurring , radioactive odd – odd nuclides have a half @-@ life over a billion years : potassium @-@ 40 , vanadium @-@ 50 , lanthanum @-@ 138 and tantalum @-@ 180m . Most odd – odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay , because the decay products are even – even , and are therefore more strongly bound , due to nuclear pairing effects . 
 = = = Mass = = = 
 The large majority of an atom 's mass comes from the protons and neutrons that make it up . The total number of these particles ( called " nucleons " ) in a given atom is called the mass number . It is a positive integer and dimensionless ( instead of having dimension of mass ) , because it expresses a count . An example of use of a mass number is " carbon @-@ 12 , " which has 12 nucleons ( six protons and six neutrons ) . 
 The actual mass of an atom at rest is often expressed using the unified atomic mass unit ( u ) , also called dalton ( Da ) . This unit is defined as a twelfth of the mass of a free neutral atom of carbon @-@ 12 , which is approximately 1 @.@ 66 × 10 − 27 kg . Hydrogen @-@ 1 ( the lightest isotope of hydrogen which is also the nuclide with the lowest mass ) has an atomic weight of 1 @.@ <unk> u . The value of this number is called the atomic mass . A given atom has an atomic mass approximately equal ( within 1 % ) to its mass number times the atomic mass unit ( for example the mass of a nitrogen @-@ 14 is roughly 14 u ) . However , this number will not be exactly an integer except in the case of carbon @-@ 12 ( see below ) . The heaviest stable atom is lead @-@ 208 , with a mass of 207 @.@ <unk> u . 
 As even the most massive atoms are far too light to work with directly , chemists instead use the unit of moles . One mole of atoms of any element always has the same number of atoms ( about 6 @.@ 022 × 1023 ) . This number was chosen so that if an element has an atomic mass of 1 u , a mole of atoms of that element has a mass close to one gram . Because of the definition of the unified atomic mass unit , each carbon @-@ 12 atom has an atomic mass of exactly 12 u , and so a mole of carbon @-@ 12 atoms weighs exactly 0 @.@ 012 kg . 
 = = = Shape and size = = = 
 Atoms lack a well @-@ defined outer boundary , so their dimensions are usually described in terms of an atomic radius . This is a measure of the distance out to which the electron cloud extends from the nucleus . However , this assumes the atom to exhibit a spherical shape , which is only obeyed for atoms in vacuum or free space . Atomic radii may be derived from the distances between two nuclei when the two atoms are joined in a chemical bond . The radius varies with the location of an atom on the atomic chart , the type of chemical bond , the number of neighboring atoms ( coordination number ) and a quantum mechanical property known as spin . On the periodic table of the elements , atom size tends to increase when moving down columns , but decrease when moving across rows ( left to right ) . Consequently , the smallest atom is helium with a radius of 32 pm , while one of the largest is caesium at 225 pm . 
 When subjected to external forces , like electrical fields , the shape of an atom may deviate from spherical symmetry . The deformation depends on the field magnitude and the orbital type of outer shell electrons , as shown by group @-@ theoretical considerations . <unk> deviations might be elicited for instance in crystals , where large crystal @-@ electrical fields may occur at low @-@ symmetry lattice sites . Significant ellipsoidal deformations have recently been shown to occur for sulfur ions and chalcogen ions in pyrite @-@ type compounds . 
 Atomic dimensions are thousands of times smaller than the wavelengths of light ( 400 – 700 nm ) so they cannot be viewed using an optical microscope . However , individual atoms can be observed using a scanning tunneling microscope . To visualize the <unk> of the atom , consider that a typical human hair is about 1 million carbon atoms in width . A single drop of water contains about 2 sextillion ( 2 × 1021 ) atoms of oxygen , and twice the number of hydrogen atoms . A single carat diamond with a mass of 2 × 10 − 4 kg contains about 10 sextillion ( 1022 ) atoms of carbon . If an apple were magnified to the size of the Earth , then the atoms in the apple would be approximately the size of the original apple . 
 = = = Radioactive decay = = = 
 Every element has one or more isotopes that have unstable nuclei that are subject to radioactive decay , causing the nucleus to emit particles or electromagnetic radiation . Radioactivity can occur when the radius of a nucleus is large compared with the radius of the strong force , which only acts over distances on the order of 1 fm . 
 The most common forms of radioactive decay are : 
 Alpha decay : this process is caused when the nucleus emits an alpha particle , which is a helium nucleus consisting of two protons and two neutrons . The result of the emission is a new element with a lower atomic number . 
 Beta decay ( and electron capture ) : these processes are regulated by the weak force , and result from a transformation of a neutron into a proton , or a proton into a neutron . The neutron to proton transition is accompanied by the emission of an electron and an antineutrino , while proton to neutron transition ( except in electron capture ) causes the emission of a positron and a neutrino . The electron or positron emissions are called beta particles . Beta decay either increases or decreases the atomic number of the nucleus by one . Electron capture is more common than positron emission , because it requires less energy . In this type of decay , an electron is absorbed by the nucleus , rather than a positron emitted from the nucleus . A neutrino is still emitted in this process , and a proton changes to a neutron . 
 Gamma decay : this process results from a change in the energy level of the nucleus to a lower state , resulting in the emission of electromagnetic radiation . The excited state of a nucleus which results in gamma emission usually occurs following the emission of an alpha or a beta particle . Thus , gamma decay usually follows alpha or beta decay . 
 Other more rare types of radioactive decay include ejection of neutrons or protons or clusters of nucleons from a nucleus , or more than one beta particle . An analog of gamma emission which allows excited nuclei to lose energy in a different way , is internal conversion — a process that produces high @-@ speed electrons that are not beta rays , followed by production of high @-@ energy photons that are not gamma rays . A few large nuclei explode into two or more charged fragments of varying masses plus several neutrons , in a decay called spontaneous nuclear fission . 
 Each radioactive isotope has a characteristic decay time period — the half @-@ life — that is determined by the amount of time needed for half of a sample to decay . This is an exponential decay process that steadily decreases the proportion of the remaining isotope by 50 % every half @-@ life . Hence after two half @-@ lives have passed only 25 % of the isotope is present , and so forth . 
 = = = Magnetic moment = = = 
 Elementary particles possess an intrinsic quantum mechanical property known as spin . This is analogous to the angular momentum of an object that is spinning around its center of mass , although strictly speaking these particles are believed to be point @-@ like and cannot be said to be rotating . Spin is measured in units of the reduced Planck constant ( ħ ) , with electrons , protons and neutrons all having spin ½ ħ , or " <unk> ½ " . In an atom , electrons in motion around the nucleus possess orbital angular momentum in addition to their spin , while the nucleus itself possesses angular momentum due to its nuclear spin . 
 The magnetic field produced by an atom — its magnetic moment — is determined by these various forms of angular momentum , just as a rotating charged object classically produces a magnetic field . However , the most dominant contribution comes from electron spin . Due to the nature of electrons to obey the Pauli exclusion principle , in which no two electrons may be found in the same quantum state , bound electrons pair up with each other , with one member of each pair in a spin up state and the other in the opposite , spin down state . Thus these spins cancel each other out , reducing the total magnetic dipole moment to zero in some atoms with even number of electrons . 
 In ferromagnetic elements such as iron , cobalt and nickel , an odd number of electrons leads to an unpaired electron and a net overall magnetic moment . The orbitals of neighboring atoms overlap and a lower energy state is achieved when the spins of unpaired electrons are aligned with each other , a spontaneous process known as an exchange interaction . When the magnetic moments of ferromagnetic atoms are lined up , the material can produce a measurable macroscopic field . <unk> materials have atoms with magnetic moments that line up in random directions when no magnetic field is present , but the magnetic moments of the individual atoms line up in the presence of a field . 
 The nucleus of an atom will have no spin when it has even numbers of both neutrons and protons , but for other cases of odd numbers , the nucleus may have a spin . Normally nuclei with spin are aligned in random directions because of thermal equilibrium . However , for certain elements ( such as xenon @-@ 129 ) it is possible to polarize a significant proportion of the nuclear spin states so that they are aligned in the same direction — a condition called hyperpolarization . This has important applications in magnetic resonance imaging . 
 = = = Energy levels = = = 
 The potential energy of an electron in an atom is negative , its dependence of its position reaches the minimum ( the most absolute value ) inside the nucleus , and vanishes when the distance from the nucleus goes to infinity , roughly in an inverse proportion to the distance . In the quantum @-@ mechanical model , a bound electron can only occupy a set of states centered on the nucleus , and each state corresponds to a specific energy level ; see time @-@ independent Schrödinger equation for theoretical explanation . An energy level can be measured by the amount of energy needed to unbind the electron from the atom , and is usually given in units of electronvolts ( eV ) . The lowest energy state of a bound electron is called the ground state , i.e. stationary state , while an electron transition to a higher level results in an excited state . The electron 's energy raises when n increases because the ( average ) distance to the nucleus increases . Dependence of the energy on ℓ is caused not by electrostatic potential of the nucleus , but by interaction between electrons . 
 For an electron to transition between two different states , e.g. grounded state to first excited level ( ionization ) , it must absorb or emit a photon at an energy matching the difference in the potential energy of those levels , according to Niels Bohr model , what can be precisely calculated by the Schrödinger equation . Electrons jump between orbitals in a particle @-@ like fashion . For example , if a single photon strikes the electrons , only a single electron changes states in response to the photon ; see Electron properties . 
 The energy of an emitted photon is proportional to its frequency , so these specific energy levels appear as distinct bands in the electromagnetic spectrum . Each element has a characteristic spectrum that can depend on the nuclear charge , subshells filled by electrons , the electromagnetic interactions between the electrons and other factors . 
 When a continuous spectrum of energy is passed through a gas or plasma , some of the photons are absorbed by atoms , causing electrons to change their energy level . Those excited electrons that remain bound to their atom spontaneously emit this energy as a photon , traveling in a random direction , and so drop back to lower energy levels . Thus the atoms behave like a filter that forms a series of dark absorption bands in the energy output . ( An observer viewing the atoms from a view that does not include the continuous spectrum in the background , instead sees a series of emission lines from the photons emitted by the atoms . ) Spectroscopic measurements of the strength and width of atomic spectral lines allow the composition and physical properties of a substance to be determined . 
 Close examination of the spectral lines reveals that some display a fine structure splitting . This occurs because of spin – orbit coupling , which is an interaction between the spin and motion of the outermost electron . When an atom is in an external magnetic field , spectral lines become split into three or more components ; a phenomenon called the Zeeman effect . This is caused by the interaction of the magnetic field with the magnetic moment of the atom and its electrons . Some atoms can have multiple electron configurations with the same energy level , which thus appear as a single spectral line . The interaction of the magnetic field with the atom shifts these electron configurations to slightly different energy levels , resulting in multiple spectral lines . The presence of an external electric field can cause a comparable splitting and shifting of spectral lines by modifying the electron energy levels , a phenomenon called the Stark effect . 
 If a bound electron is in an excited state , an interacting photon with the proper energy can cause stimulated emission of a photon with a matching energy level . For this to occur , the electron must drop to a lower energy state that has an energy difference matching the energy of the interacting photon . The emitted photon and the interacting photon then move off in parallel and with matching phases . That is , the wave patterns of the two photons are synchronized . This physical property is used to make lasers , which can emit a coherent beam of light energy in a narrow frequency band . 
 = = = Valence and bonding behavior = = = 
 <unk> is the combining power of an element . It is equal to number of hydrogen atoms that atom can combine or displace in forming compounds . The outermost electron shell of an atom in its uncombined state is known as the valence shell , and the electrons in that shell are called valence electrons . The number of valence electrons determines the bonding behavior with other atoms . Atoms tend to chemically react with each other in a manner that fills ( or empties ) their outer valence shells . For example , a transfer of a single electron between atoms is a useful approximation for bonds that form between atoms with one @-@ electron more than a filled shell , and others that are one @-@ electron short of a full shell , such as occurs in the compound sodium chloride and other chemical ionic salts . However , many elements display multiple valences , or tendencies to share differing numbers of electrons in different compounds . Thus , chemical bonding between these elements takes many forms of electron @-@ sharing that are more than simple electron transfers . Examples include the element carbon and the organic compounds . 
 The chemical elements are often displayed in a periodic table that is laid out to display recurring chemical properties , and elements with the same number of valence electrons form a group that is aligned in the same column of the table . ( The horizontal rows correspond to the filling of a quantum shell of electrons . ) The elements at the far right of the table have their outer shell completely filled with electrons , which results in chemically inert elements known as the noble gases . 
 = = = States = = = 
 Quantities of atoms are found in different states of matter that depend on the physical conditions , such as temperature and pressure . By varying the conditions , materials can transition between solids , liquids , gases and plasmas . Within a state , a material can also exist in different allotropes . An example of this is solid carbon , which can exist as graphite or diamond . Gaseous allotropes exist as well , such as dioxygen and ozone . 
 At temperatures close to absolute zero , atoms can form a Bose – Einstein condensate , at which point quantum mechanical effects , which are normally only observed at the atomic scale , become apparent on a macroscopic scale . This super @-@ cooled collection of atoms then behaves as a single super atom , which may allow fundamental checks of quantum mechanical behavior . 
 = = Identification = = 
 The scanning tunneling microscope is a device for viewing surfaces at the atomic level . It uses the quantum tunneling phenomenon , which allows particles to pass through a barrier that would normally be insurmountable . Electrons tunnel through the vacuum between two planar metal electrodes , on each of which is an adsorbed atom , providing a tunneling @-@ current density that can be measured . Scanning one atom ( taken as the tip ) as it moves past the other ( the sample ) permits plotting of tip displacement versus lateral separation for a constant current . The calculation shows the extent to which scanning @-@ tunneling @-@ microscope images of an individual atom are visible . It confirms that for low bias , the microscope images the space @-@ averaged dimensions of the electron orbitals across closely packed energy levels — the Fermi level local density of states . 
 An atom can be ionized by removing one of its electrons . The electric charge causes the trajectory of an atom to bend when it passes through a magnetic field . The radius by which the trajectory of a moving ion is turned by the magnetic field is determined by the mass of the atom . The mass spectrometer uses this principle to measure the mass @-@ to @-@ charge ratio of ions . If a sample contains multiple isotopes , the mass spectrometer can determine the proportion of each isotope in the sample by measuring the intensity of the different beams of ions . Techniques to vaporize atoms include inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry , both of which use a plasma to vaporize samples for analysis . 
 A more area @-@ selective method is electron energy loss spectroscopy , which measures the energy loss of an electron beam within a transmission electron microscope when it interacts with a portion of a sample . The atom @-@ probe <unk> has sub @-@ nanometer resolution in 3 @-@ D and can chemically identify individual atoms using time @-@ of @-@ flight mass spectrometry . 
 Spectra of excited states can be used to analyze the atomic composition of distant stars . Specific light wavelengths contained in the observed light from stars can be separated out and related to the quantized transitions in free gas atoms . These colors can be replicated using a gas @-@ discharge lamp containing the same element . Helium was discovered in this way in the spectrum of the Sun 23 years before it was found on Earth . 
 = = Origin and current state = = 
 Atoms form about 4 % of the total energy density of the observable Universe , with an average density of about 0 @.@ 25 atoms / m3 . Within a galaxy such as the Milky Way , atoms have a much higher concentration , with the density of matter in the interstellar medium ( ISM ) ranging from 105 to 109 atoms / m3 . The Sun is believed to be inside the Local Bubble , a region of highly ionized gas , so the density in the solar neighborhood is only about 103 atoms / m3 . Stars form from dense clouds in the ISM , and the evolutionary processes of stars result in the steady enrichment of the ISM with elements more massive than hydrogen and helium . Up to 95 % of the Milky Way 's atoms are concentrated inside stars and the total mass of atoms forms about 10 % of the mass of the galaxy . ( The remainder of the mass is an unknown dark matter . ) 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 Electrons are thought to exist in the Universe since early stages of the Big Bang . Atomic nuclei forms in nucleosynthesis reactions . In about three minutes Big Bang nucleosynthesis produced most of the helium , lithium , and deuterium in the Universe , and perhaps some of the beryllium and boron . 
 <unk> and stability of atoms relies on their binding energy , which means that an atom has a lower energy than an unbound system of the nucleus and electrons . Where the temperature is much higher than ionization potential , the matter exists in the form of plasma — a gas of positively charged ions ( possibly , bare nuclei ) and electrons . When the temperature drops below the ionization potential , atoms become statistically favorable . Atoms ( complete with bound electrons ) became to dominate over charged particles 380 @,@ 000 years after the Big Bang — an epoch called recombination , when the expanding Universe cooled enough to allow electrons to become attached to nuclei . 
 Since the Big Bang , which produced no carbon or heavier elements , atomic nuclei have been combined in stars through the process of nuclear fusion to produce more of the element helium , and ( via the triple alpha process ) the sequence of elements from carbon up to iron ; see stellar nucleosynthesis for details . 
 Isotopes such as lithium @-@ 6 , as well as some beryllium and boron are generated in space through cosmic ray spallation . This occurs when a high @-@ energy proton strikes an atomic nucleus , causing large numbers of nucleons to be ejected . 
 Elements heavier than iron were produced in supernovae through the r @-@ process and in AGB stars through the s @-@ process , both of which involve the capture of neutrons by atomic nuclei . Elements such as lead formed largely through the radioactive decay of heavier elements . 
 = = = Earth = = = 
 Most of the atoms that make up the Earth and its inhabitants were present in their current form in the nebula that collapsed out of a molecular cloud to form the Solar System . The rest are the result of radioactive decay , and their relative proportion can be used to determine the age of the Earth through radiometric dating . Most of the helium in the crust of the Earth ( about 99 % of the helium from gas wells , as shown by its lower abundance of helium @-@ 3 ) is a product of alpha decay . 
 There are a few trace atoms on Earth that were not present at the beginning ( i.e. , not " primordial " ) , nor are results of radioactive decay . Carbon @-@ 14 is continuously generated by cosmic rays in the atmosphere . Some atoms on Earth have been artificially generated either deliberately or as by @-@ products of nuclear reactors or explosions . Of the transuranic elements — those with atomic numbers greater than 92 — only plutonium and neptunium occur naturally on Earth . <unk> elements have radioactive lifetimes shorter than the current age of the Earth and thus identifiable quantities of these elements have long since decayed , with the exception of traces of plutonium @-@ 244 possibly deposited by cosmic dust . Natural deposits of plutonium and neptunium are produced by neutron capture in uranium ore . 
 The Earth contains approximately 1 @.@ 33 × 1050 atoms . Although small numbers of independent atoms of noble gases exist , such as argon , neon , and helium , 99 % of the atmosphere is bound in the form of molecules , including carbon dioxide and diatomic oxygen and nitrogen . At the surface of the Earth , an overwhelming majority of atoms combine to form various compounds , including water , salt , silicates and oxides . Atoms can also combine to create materials that do not consist of discrete molecules , including crystals and liquid or solid metals . This atomic matter forms networked arrangements that lack the particular type of small @-@ scale interrupted order associated with molecular matter . 
 = = = Rare and theoretical forms = = = 
 = = = = Superheavy elements = = = = 
 While isotopes with atomic numbers higher than lead ( 82 ) are known to be radioactive , an " island of stability " has been proposed for some elements with atomic numbers above 103 . These superheavy elements may have a nucleus that is relatively stable against radioactive decay . The most likely candidate for a stable superheavy atom , <unk> , has 126 protons and 184 neutrons . 
 = = = = Exotic matter = = = = 
 Each particle of matter has a corresponding antimatter particle with the opposite electrical charge . Thus , the positron is a positively charged <unk> and the antiproton is a negatively charged equivalent of a proton . When a matter and corresponding antimatter particle meet , they annihilate each other . Because of this , along with an imbalance between the number of matter and antimatter particles , the latter are rare in the universe . The first causes of this imbalance are not yet fully understood , although theories of baryogenesis may offer an explanation . As a result , no antimatter atoms have been discovered in nature . However , in 1996 the antimatter counterpart of the hydrogen atom ( <unk> ) was synthesized at the CERN laboratory in Geneva . 
 Other exotic atoms have been created by replacing one of the protons , neutrons or electrons with other particles that have the same charge . For example , an electron can be replaced by a more massive muon , forming a muonic atom . These types of atoms can be used to test the fundamental predictions of physics . 
 = Check on It = 
 " Check on It " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé , featuring American rappers Bun B and Slim Thug . It was composed by Beyoncé , Swizz Beatz , Sean Garrett , Angela Beyincé and Slim Thug . Initially recorded by Beyoncé only , the song was supposed to be featured on the soundtrack album for 2006 film The Pink Panther , in which she co @-@ stars . As it was ultimately not included on its soundtrack album , the song with additional vocals from Slim Thug was placed on the 2005 Destiny 's Child 's greatest hits album # 1 's . Columbia Records released " Check on It " in the United States on December 13 , 2005 . The official single version of the song includes vocals from American rapper Bun B. 
 The song 's development was motivated by the phrase ' Check on It ' which Beyoncé and her management jokingly used before they decided to turn it into a song . " Check on It " is an R & B and hip hop song , which is instrumentally complete with a heavy bassline , strings , and wind instrument . Lyrically , it takes place in a club , where Beyoncé is letting the male patrons know that they are welcome to come and look at her sexually attractive body when she is dancing . The song consists of two verse @-@ raps by Slim Thug . " Check on It " was well received by contemporary music critics , who universally complimented Beyoncé 's vocals , and the assertiveness with which she sings her lines . 
 " Check on It " was not originally lined up for a release as a single from the album # 1 's . However , it received heavy rotation on US radio stations , following the release of the first single , " Stand Up for Love " ( 2005 ) , which performed poorly on the charts . Eventually , " Check on It " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 in November 2005 , before its official release date . The single peaked at number one for five consecutive weeks , becoming one of the two longest @-@ running number @-@ one single in 2006 , and Beyoncé 's third US number @-@ one single as a solo artist . " Check on It " reached number one in New Zealand and the top ten on various singles chart in mainland Europe . 
 The music video for the song was directed by Hype Williams , and premiered on December 16 , 2005 on MTV . The version of " Check on It " used in the clip features a remix of " The Pink Panther Theme " and a verse @-@ rap from American rapper Bun B. Incorporating 1950s influences , the video was shot in pink to brand the relationship with The Pink Panther . It won the Best R & B Video at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards , and was nominated for Video of the Year at the 2006 BET Awards . Although Beyoncé did not perform " Check on It " in any televised appearances , it was a part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) and the I Am ... Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Check on It " was written by Beyoncé , Slim Thug , Angela Beyincé and Sean Garrett . Production was handled by Swiss Beatz , who also co @-@ wrote the song . Matt Hennessy , Dave Pensado , and Dexter Simmons mixed " Check on It " with assistance from Geoffrey Rice , and Matt Serrecchio . Beyoncé said that the song 's title , " Check on It " , was a phrase that she and her management jokingly used several times before they decided to turn it into a song . Originally recorded by Beyoncé only , the song was supposed to be included on the track @-@ listing of the soundtrack album for the remake of The Pink Panther ( 2006 ) , starring Steve Martin , Kevin Kline and Beyoncé . However , it was not used for the soundtrack album at the last minute , and the song with added vocals from Slim Thug , was then added on Beyoncé 's former group Destiny 's Child 's greatest hits , # 1 's ( 2005 ) . " Check on It " was nevertheless played during The Pink Panther 's end credits . 
 " Check on It " was not initially intended for release as a single from the album # 1 's . However , it received heavy rotation from US radio stations after the release of the first single " Stand Up for Love " ( 2005 ) , which recorded by all members of Destiny 's Child was a commercial failure . Meanwhile , " Check on It " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart in November 2005 , that is , before its official release as it had amassed considerable listener impressions . A remix of the song featuring American rapper Bun B was recorded prior to its release . The task of remixing the song was undertaken by Maurice Joshua with further assistance from Junior Vasquez who helped in its production . 
 " Check on It " was first digitally released in the US on December 13 , 2005 . Remixes of the song were later made available on January 31 , 2006 in both the United Kingdom and the US . " Check on It " was also released a CD Single in these two countries on February 28 , 2006 . It was serviced as a CD Single and a digital download on February 6 , 2006 , and February 7 , 2006 respectively in European countries . " Check on It " was never released in Australia . It was included as a bonus track on the deluxe edition of Beyoncé 's second studio album , B 'Day in European territories on April 3 , 2007 . Though the song was a commercial success worldwide , Beyoncé has revealed that she dislikes the song . She has said that she was surprised at the commercial reception of the " Check on It " as according to her , it is too simple , and not catchy like some of her previous singles . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Check on It " is an midtempo R & B and hip hop song , which makes use of a heavy bassline , strings , wind instrument , and frequent " swinging pelvic taunts " . According to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing at Musicnotes.com , the song is written in the key of G major , and is set in common time at 83 beats per minute . Beyoncé 's vocal range spans from the low note A3 to the high note B5 . According to Bill Lamb of About.com , Beyoncé adopts smooth and alluring vocals throughout " Check on It " . Lyrically , the song takes place in a dance club , where the female protagonist is letting the male patrons know that they are welcome to come and look at her sexually attractive body when she is dancing . " Check on It " starts with a verse @-@ rap from Slim Thug : " Good girls gotta get down with them <unk> / Go head girl put some back and some neck up on it ... " . The rapper sounds like a 1975 Mercury Cougar turning over as he growls in his burly purr , as written by Bret McCabe of Baltimore City Paper . 
 In the first verse , Beyoncé sings to the " sexual teasing " lyrics , which are addressed to the men looking at her : " I can be a tease , but I really wanna please you [ ... ] <unk> you watchin [ g ] me shake it , Ya can 't take it , it ’ s <unk> [ g ] ... " . The chorus lines ; " Dip it , pop it , twerk it , stop it , check on me tonight " are sung in a very quick and breathless manner by Beyoncé . Bret McCabe noted that her pace could be compared to that of American singer Donna Summer . Slim Thug appears again after the second verse to perform another different verse rap : " I ’ m checking on you boo , do what ’ chu do / And while you dance I ’ ma glance at this beautiful view / I ’ m keep my hands in my pants , I need to glue ’ em with glue ... " . Before the song ends , Beyoncé repeats the chorus lines four times as additional vocals of hers are played in the background . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Music critics received the song positively , complimenting Beyoncé 's vocal performance , and the easiness as well as the confidence she displays while singing her lyrics . A reviewer from the UK website Contactmusic.com described " Check on It " as a " booty shaking anthem " and complimented Beyoncé for switching to a club song after " Stand Up for Love " . Bret McCabe of Baltimore City Paper noted that the song is " less a DC joint than a Beyoncé sex @-@ kitten solo " . He praised the lyrics of the song and the easiness with which Beyoncé sings , highlighting her " million @-@ selling R & B pipes " . James Blake of BBC Music wrote that the lyrics are pleasantly aggressive and critical of women . 
 Jaime Gill of Yahoo ! Music described " Check on It " as " sinuously brilliant " . James Anthony of the British newspaper The Guardian wrote that the song " espouses a blissful disregard for traditional songwriting conventions . No Hova ( Jay @-@ Z ) this time , but Houston rapper Slim Thug 's lazy southern drawl suits the fractionally slower tempo . " In the July 2006 issued copy of Spin magazine , Nick Duerden ranked the song at the seventh place on his list of The ten Beyoncé tracks you need to download , writing that " Check on It " is Beyoncé 's sexiest song to date . " Check on It " was nominated in for Best Duet / Collaboration at the 2006 BET Awards , and for the Best Rap / Hip Hop Dance Track at the 2007 22nd Annual International Dance Music Awards in 2007 . It also received a Broadcast Music , Inc . ( BMI ) Award for " Award @-@ Winning Song " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Check on It " debuted at number 72 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart issue dated November 19 , 2005 . After twelve weeks on the chart , the song received the airplay gainer title , and reached number one on the Hot 100 chart issue dated February 4 , 2006 , becoming Beyoncé 's third Hot 100 number @-@ one as a solo artist and Slim Thug 's first Hot 100 single . For the same week ending , " Check on It " was also at the top of the US Hot Digital Songs and the US Pop 100 charts . The single remained at number @-@ one for on the Hot 100 chart for five consecutive weeks , tying Beyoncé with Jennifer Lopez for having her first three number @-@ one Hot 100 singles stay on top for five weeks or more . " Check on It " also tied with Canadian singer Daniel Powter 's 2005 single " Bad Day " for the longest @-@ running number @-@ one single in 2006 . " Check on It " spent a total of twenty @-@ eight weeks on the Hot 100 . 
 The song also topped the US Pop Songs , the US Hot Dance Club Play , the US Rhythmic Top 40 , and the Hot 100 Airplay charts . It reached number three on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . According to Mediabase and Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems , " Check on It " passed the 200 million audience impressions mark in on January 31 , 2006 . Another single of Beyoncé , " Irreplaceable " also passed this mark on December 11 , 2006 . Beyoncé thus became the second female singer to achieve this feat in the US after Mariah Carey 's two singles " We Belong Together " and " Shake It Off " both passed the same mark within 2005 . At the end of 2006 , " Check on It " emerged as the tenth best selling , and fourth most played song on radio stations in the US . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . As of October 2012 , it has sold 1 @,@ 438 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the US . 
 " Check on It " debuted at number four on the UK Singles Chart on January 28 , 2006 . The following week , it peaked at number three and charted for twelve weeks in the top 75 positions of the UK Singles Chart . " Check on It " debuted at number 35 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on January 30 , 2006 , and reached number one for two consecutive weeks . In mainland Europe , " Check on It " reached the top five in Norway and the Netherlands , the top 10 in Switzerland , Denmark , and Austria , and the top 20 in Germany and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 When demand was growing for the song , Beyoncé decided to make a music video for it , serving as promotion for both # 1 's and The Pink Panther . It was directed by Hype Williams . The version of " Check on It " used in the clip features a remix of " The Pink Panther Theme " and a verse @-@ rap from Bun B. The video premiered on December 12 , 2005 on MTV , and was included on the DVD of The Pink Panther . The video was shot in 12 hours and features Beyoncé in 12 different set @-@ ups and outfits . It incorporates 1950s influences . Hype Williams told Margeaux Watson of Entertainment Weekly that the concept was to make everything pink to brand the relationship with The Pink Panther . He added that the pink sails reflect the wind instrument sound of the string section . Speaking about the video to MTV , Beyoncé said : 
 [ ' Check on It ' ] is so fun , it makes you feel like a child again and we wanted to put some of that in the choreography and the feel of the video . It 's all about checking on yourself and making sure you 're moving tight and your man admiring how you move . It 's simple . " 
 In the video , Beyoncé is seen mostly in all pink , and the dancers wear PVC jackets and dance around rippling satin sheets . She occasionally bends over and grabs her behind . The video cuts to Beyoncé wearing a polka dot corset against a hot magenta polka @-@ dotted wall , wearing a pink wig and pink lipstick . Where black bars normally appear on a 4 : 3 ( full screen ) television showing a widescreen production , footage is displayed of curtains moving in the background . This was a trend in the videos directed by Williams during that year , with the effect being used in Ne @-@ Yo 's 2006 single " So Sick " and Jamie Foxx 's 2005 single " Unpredictable " . " Check on It " won the Best R & B Video at the 2006 MTV Video Music Awards . It was also nominated for Video of the Year at the 2006 BET Awards . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Although Beyoncé did not perform " Check on It " on televised appearances , it was a part of her set list on The Beyoncé Experience at the Staples Center in Los Angeles and I Am ... Tour during various stops . In Los Angeles , Beyoncé performed segments of the song , dressed in a golden , translucent slip and golden , sparkling panties . It was executed without backup dancers or live instrumentation , only backup singers toward the performance 's conclusion . When Beyoncé performed the song in Sunrise , Florida on June 29 , 2009 , she was wearing a glittery gold leotard . As she sang , animated graphics of turntables , faders and other club equipment were projected behind Beyoncé , her dancers and musicians . " Check on It " was subsequently included as the sixteenth track and the twentieth track on her live albums The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) , and I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) respectively . 
 = = Formats and track listing = = 
 = = Official Versions = = 
 Album version featuring Slim Thug – 3 : 30 
 <unk> version featuring Slim Thug - 3 : 50 
 Single version featuring Slim Thug & Bun B – 3 : 30 ( replaces Slim Thug 's second rap verse with Bun B ) 
 Junior Vasquez Club Mix – 8 : 31 
 Maurice 's Nu Soul Mix – 5 : 59 
 King Klub Mix – 6 : 48 
 Bama Boyz Remix – 3 : 54 
 Bama Boyz Reggaeton Remix featuring Voltio – 3 : 28 
 Bama Boyz Reggaeton Remix Instrumental – 3 : 28 
 No Rap Version – 3 : 08 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for the song , adapted from Allmusic 
 Vocals – Beyoncé Knowles , Slim Thug , Bun B , Kelly Rowland , <unk> 
 Writing – Angela Beyince , Swizz Beatz , Sean Garrett , Kelly Rowland 
 Producing – Beyoncé Knowles , Swiss Beatz , <unk> , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams 
 Engineering – Joe Carrano , Jim Caruana , Nathan Jenkins 
 Mastering – Tom Coyne 
 Mixing – Matt Hennessy , Dave Pensado , Dexter Simmons 
 Artists and repertoire – Huy Nguyen 
 Assistance – Geoffrey Rice , Matt Serrecchio 
 Additionally , the remixes also credit the following people : 
 Remixing – Maurice Joshua 
 Producing – Junior Vasquez 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Official scorer = 
 In the game of baseball , the official scorer is a person appointed by the league to record the events on the field , and to send the official scoring record of the game back to the league offices . In addition to recording the events on the field such as the outcome of each plate appearance and the circumstances of any baserunner 's advance around the bases , the official scorer is also charged with making judgment calls that do not affect the progress or outcome of the game . Judgment calls are primarily made about errors , unearned runs , fielder 's choice , the value of hits in certain situations , and wild pitches , all of which are included in the record compiled . This record is used to compile statistics for each player and team . A box score is a summary of the official scorer 's game record . 
 Newspaper writers initially performed this function in the early days of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) . As the importance of baseball player statistics increased , teams began to pressure writer @-@ scorers for favorable scoring decisions for their players in games played at home stadiums , and a home team scoring bias was perceived by many coaches , players , and writers . Controversies related to perceived bias or errors in scoring have led to questions about important baseball records , including several no @-@ hitters and Joe DiMaggio 's 56 @-@ game hitting streak of 1941 . By 1979 , many major newspapers decided to ban their writers from scoring baseball games due to conflict @-@ of @-@ interest concerns , and in 1980 MLB began to hire independent official scorers . 
 Since 1980 , some reforms have been suggested to improve the performance of official scorers . In 2001 , MLB formed a scoring committee to review their performance , and by 2008 the committee was given the authority to overturn scoring decisions . This authority was used by the scoring committee three times during the 2009 season . In 2006 , an academic study seemed to confirm the historical existence of a home @-@ team bias in scoring decisions , but this measurable bias decreased after 1979 . 
 = = History = = 
 Henry Chadwick is generally credited with the invention of scorekeeping in baseball . Chadwick was also the inventor of the modern box score and the writer of the first rule book for the game of baseball . Since baseball statistics were initially a subject of interest to sportswriters , the role of the official scorer in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) in the early days of the sport was performed by newspaper writers . A judgment call that is required by the official scorer does not alter the outcome of a game , but these judgments impact the statistical records of the game . As the subjective scoring decisions which are used to calculate baseball statistics began to be used to determine the relative value of baseball players , MLB began to require approval from the league before a writer @-@ scorer could be assigned to produce the scoring report for a game . By the 1970s , writers who were willing to score games for MLB were required to have attended 100 or more games per year in the prior three years and to be chosen by the local chapter chairman of the Baseball Writers ' Association of America ( BBWAA ) . Qualified candidates for scoring were submitted to the leagues for approval . 
 = = = Early controversies = = = 
 Baseball writer @-@ scorers usually worked at the games played at the home stadium of the team which they covered for their newspaper . The writer @-@ scorers were tasked with making objective decisions that could impact the statistics of the team they were writing about . Because of this affiliation , the official scorer was often presumed by the baseball players and managers to favor the home team when making the required judgment calls during the course of a game . 
 Criticism of scoring decisions date to the earliest days of the game . Some historians claim that Joe DiMaggio 's record 56 @-@ game hitting streak in 1941 was made possible by several generous rulings at Yankee Stadium . In 1953 , Al Rosen narrowly missed being recognized for achieving a rare " triple crown " in hitting after a questioned error caused him to finish the season one hit short of winning the American League batting title . 
 Although scoring decisions were widely believed to favor the hitter over the defense , many players believed this bias shifts in favor of the pitcher when he carries a no @-@ hitter ( where a pitcher throws a complete game without giving up a hit ) into the late innings . Infielder Dave Johnson said , " I 've been involved in five or six no @-@ hit games , and all of them were suspected of being helped by hometown scoring . " One of the last controversies of the writer @-@ scorer era was seen in a 1978 game at St. Louis . In that game , St. Louis pitcher Bob Forsch was pitching a no @-@ hitter in the 8th inning against Philadelphia when a hard ground ball hit into the hole between shortstop and third was narrowly missed by third baseman Ken Reitz . The official scorer ( who was a writer for the local newspaper ) judged the play to be an error rather than a hit , and Forsch went on to pitch the first no @-@ hitter of the 1978 season . 
 = = = Newspaper reaction = = = 
 A player 's baseball statistics can increase or reduce the leverage which he may have in future contract negotiations . Many players also have monetary incentives written in their contracts which are based on statistical measurements , and official scorers have the option to reverse a scoring decision within 24 hours of the conclusion of a game . Because of this , baseball writer @-@ scorers were often subject to pressure from the players they were covering in their newspaper . After a game in 1962 , infielder Jerry Adair asked for a meeting with local writer Neal Eskridge after learning that he was the scorer for the game . Angry about an error he had received in the game , Jerry " cursed [ Neal ] thoroughly and imaginatively , and told him , ' Never talk to me again . ' " They reportedly did not speak to each other for almost four years . In the early days of baseball , a disagreement over a scoring decision occasionally led to physical altercations between the player and the writer . <unk> incidents decreased after 1974 following a warning from MLB . 
 The pressure and the perceived conflict of interest faced by the baseball writers who scored games for MLB eventually led many major newspapers to end the practice for their employees . In 1958 , The Washington Post prohibited their writers from scoring baseball games . Over the next two decades other major newspapers joined in the writer @-@ scorer ban , including The New York Times , the Los Angeles Times , The Boston Globe , and the major daily newspapers published in Atlanta , Detroit , Milwaukee , Minneapolis , and Philadelphia . In 1980 , MLB resolved the conflict by directly hiring official scorers for each stadium . 
 = = = After 1980 = = = 
 Today , the MLB commissioner 's office directly employs the official scorers who are responsible for producing score reports , but most scorers are hired on the recommendation of the public relations directors of baseball teams . Official scorers are typically retired writers , coaches , and umpires . Unlike umpiring teams , MLB official scorers do not typically travel between stadiums . Each official scorer is assigned to a stadium for the season , with each stadium having one or more scorers . Scorers now have access to replay video from different angles which they can review before making a decision . As of 2012 , MLB official scorers earned $ 150 per game . Official scorers are not required to meet the old BBWAA requirements , and are also no longer required to pass a written test , which was once administered by the National League before it was phased out in the mid @-@ 1990s . Potential scorers are generally required to briefly apprentice under an existing scorer before they are allowed to work alone . 
 Official scorers are only occasionally terminated , but there have been cases when a scorer was replaced after making decisions which displeased the home team . In 1992 the Seattle Mariner players signed a petition to have their official scorer replaced , and in 2001 the management of the Boston Red Sox ordered that a rookie scorer not be allowed to score another game after pitcher Hideo Nomo lost a no @-@ hitter on a close play in right field that was ruled a hit rather than an error . 
 In 2001 , MLB formed a scoring committee to evaluate the performance of official scorers . In 2008 , the scoring committee was given the authority to enforce the portion of rule 10 @.@ 01 ( a ) which allows the league to change a scoring decision that is " clearly erroneous " . The committee has used this authority on only a few occasions , having overturned three scoring decisions in the 2009 season . The scoring committee came under some scrutiny after a game on August 31 , 2008 . Milwaukee pitcher C.C. Sabathia threw a disputed 7 – 0 one @-@ hit shutout at Pittsburgh . Milwaukee manager Ned Yost argued that the hit recorded by Pittsburgh should have been recorded as an error by the pitcher , but Pittsburgh official scorer Bob Webb disagreed . Yost commented , " That 's a joke . That wasn 't even close . Whoever the scorekeeper was absolutely denied major league baseball a nice no @-@ hitter right there . " The official scorer had argued that the batter was too close to first base to be put out by a clean play . Milwaukee appealed the ruling to the scoring committee , but on September 3 the committee reviewed the footage and supported the ruling by Webb , saying the ruling was not " clearly erroneous " as required by rule 10 @.@ 01 ( a ) . 
 = = = Outside MLB = = = 
 Official scorers in the minor leagues are generally hired by the teams to score games at their stadium . Some minor league scorers have a history or connection with the team , including former players , former coaches , and local writers . Official scorers for international baseball competitions are generally selected by the organizer of the competition . 
 = = Analysis and proposed changes = = 
 Baseball players , managers , and writers have speculated about bias by the official scorer for decades , but this subject has been objectively studied only recently . In 2006 , the rate at which errors have been recorded in MLB by the official scorer was investigated under many situations . The rate at which errors are called " is higher when the quality of fielding is suspect " and is " lower when playing conditions are better " , but these factors " do not fully explain variations in error rate " . After other known factors are accounted for , evidence was found that official scorers are biased toward the home team , but that this bias was reduced after the end of the writer @-@ scorer era in 1979 . Further , errors are significantly more likely to be called in the National League than in the American League . 
 Changes have been proposed over the years to reduce possible inconsistencies between scorers and possible mistakes made by the official scorer , especially as the end of the writer @-@ scorer era began to seem likely in the late 1970s . The BBWAA and professional baseball umpires have suggested the creation of a " fifth umpire " . Four @-@ man umpire crews rotate officiating responsibilities after each game , and travel to several stadiums per year . This new fifth umpire would travel with the umpiring crew to score games and take his turn on the bases , but MLB has been reluctant to incur the increased cost . More recently , there have been suggestions to move the official scorer out of the press box and closer to the field behind the plate to get the best view of the game . MLB has conceded that this could be a good idea , but it is not currently feasible because of the design of most stadiums in the league . 
 = = Responsibilities = = 
 The rules which govern the official scorer are spelled out in Rule 10 of the official rules of baseball . The fundamental responsibilities of the official scorer are explained in rule 10 @.@ 01 . 
 = = = Rule 10 @.@ 01 = = = 
 The rules of baseball require that the official scorer view the game only from the press box , for two basic reasons . First , this ensures that every scorer has nearly the same perspective of the game . One of the intentions of this rule is to improve consistency in scorekeeping decisions between different official scorers working on different games at the same stadium , and between scorers in different stadiums . Second , the press box is the most neutral position within the stadium . Seated in the press box , the official scorer is surrounded by writers and broadcasters who are ostensibly neutral , and the scorer is less likely to be unduly influenced by the players , the coaches , and the crowd . 
 Rule 10 @.@ 01 states that the scorer is never allowed to make scorekeeping decisions that conflict with the official rules governing scorekeeping . The official scorer is permitted to view available replays and to solicit the opinions of others , but the official scorer is given the sole authority to make the judgment calls that are required in the score report . When a judgment call is made , the official scorer is obligated to immediately communicate that decision to the media in the press box and to the broadcasters , usually through a microphone . The official scorer has up to 24 hours to reconsider or reverse a judgment call that was made during the game . In rare circumstances , MLB 's scoring committee may reverse a scoring decision that is " clearly erroneous " . 
 Finally , within 36 hours of a game 's conclusion ( including the conclusion of a suspended game ) , the official scorer is required to create a summary of the game using a form established by the league . This task is performed for each game that is scored , including called games which must be completely replayed at a later date , and games that end in forfeit . The information in the score report includes the date , location of the game , the names of the teams , the names of the umpires who officiated the game , the final score , and the data that is required in rule 10 @.@ 02 . 
 = = = Judgment calls = = = 
 Most plays in the game are resolved in such a way that the scorer is not given more than one choice when recording the outcome of the play , but several types of plays are open to the interpretation of the official scorer . In any difficult judgment call where the official scorer is required to decide whether to credit a hit to the batter , the scorer is guided by rule 10 @.@ 05 . This rule directs the official scorer to give the benefit of the doubt to the hitter when the scorer believes that the decision to credit the batter with a hit is equally valid to an alternative scoring decision . In a similarly difficult judgment call where the official scorer believes that an earned run or an unearned run are equally valid scoring decisions , rule 10 @.@ 16 directs the official scorer to give the benefit of the doubt to the pitcher . 
 = = = = Errors = = = = 
 The decision to charge an error to the defense is the most well @-@ known responsibility of the official scorer . Some situations automatically call for an error to be charged to the defense by rule , but most charged errors are the result of a play that requires a judgment call . Broadly speaking , an error is charged to the defense when an " ordinary effort " by the defense would have either recorded an out or prevented a runner from advancing , but the defense fails to do so . When an error is charged , the official scorer must charge the error to one of the fielders who were involved in the play . Errors are primarily discussed in rule 10 @.@ 12 . 
 One exception in this rule occurs when the defense makes at least one out and attempts to complete a double play or triple play . An error is not charged in that situation if a wild throw allows the runner to reach safely . If a wild throw allows the runner to advance an additional base , an error may then be charged for the additional advance . However , if an accurate throw is made in time to complete a double play or triple play , but the fielder on the base fails to make the catch , an error may be charged . 
 Rule 10 @.@ 12 also states that an error should not be charged for a " mental mistake " by the defense . Rather , errors are charged when the defense attempts to make a logical play against the offense , but fails to record an out or prevent an advance due to a mechanical <unk> . There is one rare exception to this rule against charging an error for a " mental mistake " . If a fielder fails to tag the runner , batter , or a base in a force situation in time to record an out when he could have done so , that fielder is charged with an error . 
 The most common judgment call involving an error occurs when the defense fails to put out a batter @-@ runner who puts the ball in play . If the out is not recorded and the official scorer believes that an " ordinary effort " by the defense would have resulted in an out , the defense is charged with an error , and the batter is not credited with a hit . Other common situations requiring a judgment call include unintentionally dropped foul balls that allow the batter to continue his at @-@ bat , and poor throws to the next base when a runner attempts to advance . 
 One of the most controversial and poorly understood situations related to the charging of an error occurs when an outfielder <unk> the flight of a ball and allows the ball to drop out of his reach . This is usually considered to be a " mental mistake " by the outfielder , so the batter is usually credited with a hit . On that topic Bill Shannon , who was an official scorer for the New York Yankees , said " That 's a base hit whether we like it or not . As a practical matter , we don 't charge errors on those plays . No one says that baseball is entirely fair . " <unk> are generally charged with an error on a fly ball when they arrive at the ball 's destination with sufficient time to make a catch with an ordinary effort , but simply miss the catch or drop the ball . 
 = = = = <unk> runs = = = = 
 Earned runs are runs that are directly attributable to a pitcher 's efforts without a lapse by the defense . An unearned run does not adversely impact a pitcher 's earned run average ( ERA ) , and is only possible when an error ( including catcher 's interference ) or a passed ball occurs earlier in the inning . <unk> runs are primarily discussed in rule 10 @.@ 16 and often require a judgment call by the official scorer . 
 At the conclusion of an inning during which runs are scored after an error or passed ball , the official scorer attempts to recreate the events of the inning without the errors or passed balls . If in the official scorer 's opinion a run would not have scored without the defensive lapses , then the run is unearned . If the scorer believes that a run would have scored anyway , the run is earned and charged to the pitcher . In one basic example , if the first batter reaches by an error , the second batter hits a home run , and the next three batters strike out , then one of the two runs which were scored are unearned . There are rules and restrictions which govern this general guideline . 
 When reconstructing an inning without errors or passed balls : 
 Potential outs that were not recorded because of an error are presumed to be an out when the inning is reconstructed by the official scorer . 
 Intentional walks which were issued are still presumed to be walks . 
 Runs that are scored after what should have been the third out are automatically considered to be unearned . 
 When the batter is given first base because of interference , the official scorer must presume that an out would have been recorded on that batter . 
 When a runner is given a base because of obstruction , the official scorer does not presume that an out would have been recorded on that runner , but if that runner later scores the run is unearned . 
 A run scored by a runner who advances due to an error or passed ball is unearned , unless it would not have made a difference in the reconstruction of the inning . 
 Most of the above rules are straightforward , but some judgment is required by the official scorer when a baserunner advances due to a defensive lapse and later scores . In this situation , the official scorer must decide what would have happened if the runner had not advanced . This is often an easy decision , but it can occasionally be difficult . In one difficult example with a runner on first and two outs , the batter hits a single but a defensive error allows an advance by the lead runner from second to third , and a soft run @-@ scoring single is hit followed by an out . In that situation , the offense " should " have had runners on first and second with 2 outs when the run @-@ scoring single was hit . Since the next batter was put out , the official scorer must decide based on the hit , the speed of the baserunner , and the positioning of the defense whether the runner would have been able to score from second in the reconstruction of the inning without the error . 
 = = = = Fielder 's choice = = = = 
 In the rules of baseball , aside from the rare case of interference or obstruction , a batter who puts a ball into play and safely reaches first base is ruled to have reached in one of three possible ways : a hit , an error , or by fielder 's choice . Fielder 's choice is primarily discussed in rules 10 @.@ 05 and 10 @.@ 06 , and it generally occurs when it is judged that a batter @-@ runner would have been put out had the defense chosen to do so . 
 Most judgment calls made by the official scorer under this rule occur in three situations : when an infielder , pitcher , or catcher attempts to put out an unforced preceding runner who is attempting to advance one base , when any fielder attempts and fails to put out a forced preceding runner , and when any fielder attempts and fails to put out an unforced preceding runner who returns to their original base . In these situations , the official scorer is required to determine whether the batter @-@ runner would have safely reached first base if the defense made an ordinary effort to put him out . If the defense could not be reasonably expected to make the play , the batter is credited with a hit , otherwise he is ruled to have reached by fielder 's choice . If an error is made on the attempt to put out a preceding runner , that has no impact on this decision . It is instead noted to have occurred in addition to the hit or fielder 's choice . 
 In some cases the official scorer is not given the discretion to decide between awarding a hit to the batter or ruling that he safely reached first base by fielder 's choice . If a preceding runner is forced out or if an unforced preceding runner is put out while attempting to return to their original base , a hit is automatically not credited and the batter by rule is judged to have reached by a fielder 's choice . In some situations this rule may appear unfair to the batter . For example , if the batter is a fast runner , the ball is slowly hit to the third baseman , and an unforced runner from second realizes ( too late ) that he can not safely advance , the batter @-@ runner will lose the potential hit on a fielder 's choice by the third baseman . This occurs regardless of whether the batter @-@ runner would have reached first base with an ordinary effort to put him out . 
 = = = = Value of hits = = = = 
 In cases where a batter indisputably gets a hit and is able to safely advance past first base on the play , the value of that hit may be adjusted by the official scorer because of an error or a fielder 's choice . 
 If the defense attempts to put out a preceding runner during the play , the official scorer must determine whether the batter would have reached second or third base safely had the defense attempted to limit the batter 's advance . For example , if a runner on second attempts to score after a soft hit to center field and the center fielder chooses to throw to home while the batter advances to second , the official scorer must decide the value of the hit . In this situation , the scorer may either choose to credit the batter with a double , or the scorer may rule that the batter hit a single with an advance to second by fielder 's choice . This is often referred to as " an advance on the throw " . 
 If an error occurs during the play when a batter records a hit , the official scorer must determine whether the batter would have advanced as far as he did had the error not occurred . For example , if a batter hits a ball into an outfield gap , the ball is badly misplayed by an outfielder attempting to retrieve and throw the ball back into the infield , and the batter is able to reach all four bases to score , then the official scorer must decide whether an error should be charged to the outfielder . If no error is charged , then the batter would be credited with an " inside the park " home run . If an error is charged to the outfielder , then the batter would likely be credited with either a double or triple . 
 = = = = Wild pitch = = = = 
 When a baserunner is able to advance after a pitch is not caught or controlled by the catcher , the official scorer must determine whether the advance was due to a wild pitch or a passed ball . The pitch is never considered to be an error . If a pitch is thrown so high , wide , or low in relation to the strike zone that a catcher is not able to catch or control the ball with ordinary effort before a runner can advance , the advance is ruled to have occurred by a wild pitch . Any such pitch which strikes the ground before it reaches home plate is automatically considered to be a wild pitch . However , a pitch is not a wild pitch merely because it is off @-@ target . If the official scorer determines that the catcher should have been able to control the pitch and prevent an advance with ordinary effort , then the catcher is charged with a passed ball on the advance . 
 One exception to this rule occurs when a baserunner attempts to steal a base . If the runner " starts for the next base " before the pitcher delivers the pitch , the runner is credited with a stolen base and a wild pitch or passed ball is not charged . If a wild pitch or passed ball allows a runner to advance beyond the base that is stolen , the scorer may rule that the further advance occurred by a wild pitch or passed ball . 
 = = = = Other judgment calls = = = = 
 Some relatively uncommon situations may also require a judgment call by the official scorer . 
 When a defensive player has the ball and can end the play by preventing further advance , but fails to do so because of a mental mistake ( not an error ) and a runner subsequently scores , the official scorer must decide whether to credit the batter with a run batted in ( RBI ) . If the runner recognized the mistake after slowing or pausing his advance , an RBI is not credited . If the runner was oblivious to the mistake or runs home without slowing , the batter is credited with an RBI . 
 If a runner advances because the defense does nothing to try to stop the advance , the scorer may rule that the advance was due to defensive indifference and no stolen base is credited . However , a throw is not required for a stolen base . If a fielder begins to visibly make an attempt to prevent an advance but then elects not to throw , the advance is not due to defensive indifference . 
 When a batter attempts a sacrifice bunt and the resulting bunt is so well @-@ placed that he safely reaches first base , the official scorer may elect to credit the batter with a hit instead of a sacrifice if there is no error on the play and an ordinary effort by the defense would not have recorded an out . 
 Finally , when the starting pitcher of the winning team does not qualify for the win under rule 10 @.@ 17 , and the relief pitcher who would otherwise qualify for the win pitches " ineffectively " in a " brief appearance " , the official scorer may choose to credit a " succeeding relief pitcher " with the win . 
 = 2009 World Series = 
 The 2009 World Series was the 105th edition of Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) championship series . The best @-@ of @-@ seven playoff was contested between the Philadelphia Phillies , champions of the National League ( NL ) and defending World Series champions , and the New York Yankees , champions of the American League ( AL ) . The Yankees defeated the Phillies with a score of 4 games to 2 , to win their 27th World Series championship . The series was played between October 28 and November 4 , broadcast on Fox , and watched by an average of roughly 19 million viewers . Due to the start of the season being pushed back by the 2009 World Baseball Classic in March , this was the first World Series regularly scheduled to be played into the month of November . 
 Home field advantage for the Series went to the AL for the eighth straight year as a result of its 4 – 3 win in the All @-@ Star Game . The Phillies earned their berth into the playoffs by winning the National League East . The Yankees won the American League East to earn their berth , posting the best record in the Major Leagues . The Phillies reached the World Series by defeating the Colorado Rockies in the best @-@ of @-@ five National League Division Series , and the Los Angeles Dodgers in the best @-@ of @-@ seven NL Championship Series ( NLCS ) . The Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins in the American League Division Series and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in the AL Championship Series ( ALCS ) to advance to their first World Series since 2003 . As a result of their loss , the Phillies became the first team since the 2001 Yankees to lose the World Series after winning it the previous year . 
 Cliff Lee pitched a complete game in the Phillies ' Game 1 victory , allowing only one unearned run , while Chase Utley hit two home runs . In Game 2 , solo home runs by Mark Teixeira and Hideki Matsui helped the Yankees win by a score of 3 – 1 . After a rain delayed start , Game 3 featured more offense , with a combined six home runs and thirteen total runs en route to a Yankee victory . The Yankees won Game 4 by scoring the decisive three runs in the ninth inning after an alert base running play by Johnny Damon . The Phillies avoided elimination with a win in Game 5 , aided by Utley 's second two – home run game of the series . The Yankees secured their World Series championship with a Game 6 victory in which Matsui hit his third home run of the series . He was named Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) of the series , making him the first Japanese @-@ born player and the first full @-@ time designated hitter to win the award ; Matsui was the series ' MVP despite starting only the three games that were played at Yankee Stadium , since the designated hitter position is not used in NL ballparks . 
 Several records were tied , extended , or broken during this World Series , including team championships ( Yankees with 27 ) , career postseason wins ( Andy Pettitte with 18 ) , career World Series saves ( Mariano Rivera with 11 ) , career World Series home runs ( Chase Utley with seven ) , home runs in a postseason series ( Chase Utley with five ) , strikeouts by a hitter in a World Series ( Ryan Howard with 13 ) , and runs batted in in a single World Series game ( Hideki Matsui with six ) . 
 = = Route to the series = = 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies = = = 
 The off @-@ season the Phillies named Rubén Amaro , Jr. general manager , replacing Pat Gillick who retired at the end of a three @-@ year contract . Their most notable offseason player change was in left field , as Pat Burrell departed due to free agency and was replaced by free agent Raúl Ibañez . Another notable acquisition was free agent pitcher Chan Ho Park . Park was originally signed as a backup option for the bullpen , as reliever J. C. Romero was assigned a 50 @-@ game suspension after violating the Major League Baseball drug policy , but Park won the fifth starter 's job in Spring Training . 
 In July 2009 , Phillies scouts evaluated pitcher Pedro Martínez in two simulated games against the Phillies DSL team , leading to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @-@ million contract . Replacing Jamie Moyer as a starter in the Phillies rotation on August 12 , 2009 , Philadelphia won each of Martínez 's first seven starts , the first time in franchise history that this had occurred with any debuting Phillies pitcher . The Phillies made one large acquisition at the trade deadline , trading four minor league players to the Cleveland Indians for pitcher Cliff Lee and outfielder Ben Francisco . Lee won seven of his twelve regular season starts for Philadelphia in 2009 . 
 During the regular season , the Phillies led the National League East for most of the year , taking first place for good on May 30 . Ibáñez had started the year strongly , batting well over .300 with 17 home runs and 46 runs batted in ( RBI ) in the first two months of the season , which led the New York Post to call him an " early MVP candidate " . He was placed on the disabled list in mid @-@ June for a groin injury , however , and though he returned he did not bat above .260 for any other month that season . Although Ibáñez did not receive MVP votes his teammates Ryan Howard and Chase Utley had successful years , finishing 3rd and 8th in the balloting respectively . The Phillies finished the season with a record of 93 – 69 ( <unk> ) , six games above the second @-@ place Florida Marlins in their division . 
 The Phillies defeated the wild card @-@ winning Colorado Rockies in the National League Division Series ( NLDS ) , three games to one , advancing to the National League Championship Series ( NLCS ) . Facing the Los Angeles Dodgers , the Phillies won the NLCS , four games to one , becoming the first team to repeat as National League champions since the 1995 – 96 Atlanta Braves . Ryan Howard won the NLCS MVP for his strong offensive performance during the series . Howard tied Lou Gehrig 's postseason record by having at least one RBI in eight straight games across the NLDS and NLCS . They became the first World Series champion to return to the World Series the following year since the 2000 – 01 New York Yankees . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 Yankees ' offseason began in November 2008 with control over their organization shifting from long @-@ time owner George Steinbrenner to his son Hal Steinbrenner . Notable player departures included Mike Mussina — who announced his retirement on November 20 , 2008 — as well as Bobby Abreu , Jason Giambi , and Carl Pavano , who all left as free agents . Notable free agent acquisitions included starting pitchers CC Sabathia and A. J. Burnett , and first baseman Mark Teixeira . Another major addition was outfielder Nick Swisher , acquired in a trade with the Chicago White Sox . 
 The Yankees played the 2009 season in Yankee Stadium , their first year in that park after playing for 84 years in " Old " Yankee Stadium . They won the American League East with an eight @-@ game lead over their rivals , the Boston Red Sox , compiling a record of 103 – 59 . Sabathia won 19 games and position players Alex Rodriguez and Teixeira both had strong seasons offensively , Rodriguez with 30 home runs and 100 RBI and Teixeira with 39 and 122 respectively . Closing pitcher Mariano Rivera earned his 500th save against the Yankees ' cross @-@ town rival New York Mets , becoming the second pitcher in history to do so . On September 11 , 2009 , shortstop Derek Jeter recorded his <unk> career hit , passing Lou Gehrig to become the all @-@ time leader in career hits recorded as a Yankee . 
 The Yankees defeated the Minnesota Twins in three games in the American League Division Series and the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim in six games in the American League Championship Series ( ALCS ) to win their first American League pennant since 2003 . Sabathia was named MVP of the ALCS with two wins in the series . The Yankees ' victory in the ALCS earned them their 40th World Series appearance in franchise history , and their first since losing to the Florida Marlins in 2003 . 
 = = = Series preview = = = 
 The two teams played a three @-@ game interleague series at Yankee Stadium in May 2009 , with the Phillies winning two of the three games . The series included two blown saves by Phillies ' closer Brad Lidge in games 2 and 3 , although the Phillies came back to win the final game in extra innings . 
 The Yankees had home field advantage for the Series as the American League had won that year 's All @-@ Star Game . The team match @-@ up was heavily discussed and analyzed in the media prior to the beginning of the series . Both teams ' offensive lineups were heavily touted , with the Yankees and Phillies leading their respective leagues in runs scored per game . Yankees third baseman Alex Rodriguez drew particular focus in the media for his success in earlier rounds of the 2009 playoffs in contrast to past postseason performances . The two lineups featured twenty former All @-@ Stars and three former MVP award winners . Only one regular starter between both teams , Phillies catcher Carlos Ruiz , did not have at least ten home runs during the 2009 regular season . The two teams combined for 468 home runs during the season , more than any pair of opponents in World Series history . 
 The pitching staffs were also the subject of significant discussion prior to the series . The starting pitchers for Game 1 , CC Sabathia and Cliff Lee , were regarded as " aces " who " dominated " the 2009 postseason with a 0 @.@ 96 earned run average ( ERA ) between them . This matchup was of particular note , as Sabathia and Lee were former teammates from the Cleveland Indians and each had won a Cy Young Award with that franchise . Yankees manager Joe Girardi had been using a three @-@ man starting rotation during the playoffs , in contrast to the four @-@ pitcher rotation used by the Phillies . This difference led USA Today to give the Phillies ' starting rotation the " edge " in the series , as the World Series had one fewer day off than previous rounds of the playoffs , making the series less conducive to using a three @-@ man rotation . Gene Wojciechowski of ESPN criticized Girardi 's strategy , arguing that Chad Gaudin should have pitched in Game 5 or 6 , instead of A. J. Burnett or Andy Pettitte on reduced , three days rest . Wojciechowski argued that while Sabathia had proven his ability to pitch on shorter rest , Burnett and Pettitte should have been given their regular time between starts . Burnett had drawn some criticism , as he performed poorly in his last appearance before the World Series , a start in Game 5 of the ALCS in which he allowed six runs over six innings . However , Burnett had previously been successful on short rest , going 4 @-@ 0 with a 2 @.@ 33 ERA in four career starts on short rest before this game . Some believed Girardi settled on a three @-@ man rotation because he had limited options for a fourth starting pitcher , either Gaudin or Joba Chamberlain , who had been inconsistent as starters in the regular season and had been shifted into the bullpen for the postseason . 
 The matchup of closers , Mariano Rivera and Brad Lidge , also drew attention . Rivera and Lidge were the only closers who had not blown a save during the 2009 postseason , whereas closers on other postseason teams blew 11 saves in the 24 postseason games before the World Series in 2009 . Both had performed well during the postseason , but Lidge had posted a 7 @.@ 21 ERA during the 2009 regular season , in contrast to Rivera 's 1 @.@ 76 . Lidge 's 2009 numbers were in stark contrast to the previous season ( 41 out of 41 save opportunities , a 1 @.@ 95 ERA , and 92 strikeouts in 62 games ) . As a result , USA Today gave the Yankees the edge , noting that Lidge had blown two saves against the Yankees during their regular season series earlier that year . 
 = = Series summary = = 
 The Series started on October 28 , 2009 , which was the latest start in World Series history . Game 4 was played on Sunday , November 1 and the series @-@ winning Game 6 took place on November 4 . The Series was only the third to end in a month other than October . The first came in 1918 , which was played entirely in September after the regular season was cut short due to World War I. The other such series was in 2001 when the September 11 attacks caused a delay in the baseball season that eventually forced the end of the World Series into November . 
 Earlier in the season Commissioner Bud Selig expressed interest in scheduling a World Series game during daylight hours instead of the evening . The starting times were ultimately moved before 8 p.m. ET for the first time in 30 years , but no day games were played . The Philadelphia Eagles and New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) played across the street from Citizens Bank Park at Lincoln Financial Field on the day of Game 4 . The NFL moved that game 's kickoff time to 1 p.m. to avoid it ending too close to the start of Game 4 . Similarly , Game 5 was played at Citizens Bank Park on the same day as the Philadelphia Flyers hosted the Tampa Bay Lightning of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) at the Wachovia Center . The opening faceoff of the hockey game was scheduled for 7 p.m. but the NHL moved it to 5 p.m. to avoid conflict . 
 The umpires for the series were Joe West , Dana <unk> , Gerry Davis , Brian Gorman , Jeff Nelson , and Mike Everitt . The World Series crew had included at least 1 umpire who had never worked the World Series in 24 of the past 25 series ; however , following several mistakes by umpires in earlier rounds of the playoffs , this crew did not . 
 The Phillies might have won the previous season 's World Series against the Tampa Bay Rays for the franchise 's second championship . The Yankees could have their previous World Series appearance to the Florida Marlins in 2003 and might have not won since 2000 against the New York Mets . This was the fifth Series played between teams from New York and Philadelphia , and possibly was the first Yankees – Phillies matchup since 1950 . The series also might have been the fourth consecutive time that the Phillies would have faced a team from the current AL East in the World Series , while the Yankees could have had faced a NL East opponent in three of their four most recent World Series appearances . 
 This Series had two unofficial nicknames : " Turnpike Series " , for the New Jersey Turnpike , which connects New York to Philadelphia through the state of New Jersey , and " Liberty Series " , based on the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia and the Statue of Liberty in New York . 
 = = = Game 1 = = = 
 Line score for Wednesday , October 28 , 2009 , 7 : 57 p.m. ( ET ) at Yankee Stadium in The Bronx , New York 
 Prior to the game , First Lady Michelle Obama and Second Lady Jill Biden escorted former Yankees catcher and World War II veteran Yogi Berra to the mound , where the ceremonial first pitch was thrown by a veteran of the Iraq War . The Phillies ' Ryan Howard got the first hit of the 2009 World Series by doubling in the first inning . Howard was stranded in the first and the game was scoreless after two innings . The Phillies scored first with a two @-@ out solo home run by Chase Utley in the top of the third inning . Through the first five innings , Philadelphia starting pitcher Cliff Lee allowed no runs and three hits , striking out seven Yankees batters . In the top of the sixth , Utley hit another solo home run to give the Phillies a 2 – 0 lead . The starting pitchers Lee and CC Sabathia continued to pitch until the top of the eighth when Sabathia was replaced by Phil Hughes . Hughes walked the first two batters and was replaced by Dámaso Marte . Marte got two quick outs and was relieved by David Robertson , who walked Jayson Werth and gave up a two @-@ run single to Raúl Ibáñez . The Phillies added two more runs in the ninth with an RBI single by Shane Victorino and an RBI double by Howard . Lee finished with a complete game allowing one unearned run on six hits and striking out ten batters , not walking any of the hitters he faced . 
 Lee 's pitching performance made history in several ways : 
 This was the fourth postseason start of Lee 's career . In all four starts , he went at least seven innings and gave up no more than one earned run . The only other starting pitcher ever to begin his postseason career with four such starts was Christy Mathewson . 
 He was also the first left @-@ handed starter to beat the Yankees in The Bronx to open a World Series since Sandy Koufax in 1963 . 
 He was the first starting pitcher to throw a complete game without giving up an earned run against the Yankees in Game 1 of a postseason series . 
 Lee was the first pitcher ever to strike out at least ten , walk no one , and give up no earned runs in a World Series start . 
 = = = Game 2 = = = 
 Line score for Thursday , October 29 , 2009 , 7 : 57 p.m. ( ET ) at Yankee Stadium in The Bronx , New York 
 Prior to the game , Jay @-@ Z and Alicia Keys performed the song " Empire State of Mind " for the Yankee Stadium crowd . This game marked the first postseason appearance of Pedro Martínez against the Yankees since the 2004 American League Championship Series , when he was with the Boston Red Sox and a part of the two teams ' long standing rivalry ; it was also the second @-@ ever World Series start that Martínez made . There was much media interest in Martínez 's " return to Yankee Stadium " for Game 2 , as he told reporters at a pre @-@ game press conference " When you have 60 @,@ 000 people chanting your name , waiting for you to throw the ball , you have to consider yourself someone special , someone that really has a purpose out there . " 
 The Phillies scored first for the second game in a row , with Raúl Ibáñez hitting a ground rule double and then scoring on a Matt Stairs RBI single off A. J. Burnett in the second inning . 
 Mark Teixeira tied the game with a solo home run in the fourth inning , and Hideki Matsui broke the tie in the sixth with another solo homer . Martínez departed the game after giving up consecutive hits to Jerry Hairston , Jr. and Melky Cabrera to start the seventh inning , and reliever Chan Ho Park gave up an RBI single to Jorge Posada . With Cabrera at second base and Posada at first , Johnny Damon hit a low line drive at Phillies first baseman Ryan Howard . Howard grabbed the ball and threw to second where Posada was tagged and called out while standing on the base . First @-@ base umpire Brian Gorman ruled that Howard had caught the ball in the air and thus the result was an inning @-@ ending double play . This was the first of two calls by Gorman in this game which were later shown to have been wrong by video replays . 
 Burnett left after seven innings and was replaced by Mariano Rivera in the eighth . The Phillies put two runners on with a walk to Jimmy Rollins and a single by Shane Victorino with one out in the eighth . However , Chase Utley grounded into an inning @-@ ending double play ending on a close play at first base , the second close call made by the first base umpire Brian Gorman . Gorman himself later admitted he missed this call , saying " on a freeze frame , it looks like there 's a little bit of a ball outside his glove when he hits the bag . " Ultimately , Rivera threw 39 pitches and got six outs for his 38th postseason save , his tenth in World Series play . 
 = = = Game 3 = = = 
 Saturday , October 31 , 2009 , 9 : 17 p.m. ( ET ) at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 
 The start of the game was postponed 80 minutes due to a rain delay , pushing the start time to 9 : 17 p.m. The cast of the television series Glee ( with Amber Riley singing lead ) performed the national anthem prior to the game as part of a ceremony featuring a large American flag and several members of the armed services . The Phillies scored first with Jayson Werth 's lead @-@ off solo home run , which was followed by a bases @-@ loaded walk and a sacrifice fly to make the score 3 – 0 in the bottom of the second inning . Following Mark Teixeira 's walk in the top of the fourth inning , Alex Rodriguez hit a deep ball down the right field line . It was originally ruled a double and Teixeira held at third base . The play was reviewed using MLB instant replay , which revealed that the ball had struck a camera sticking over the top of the wall , and the ball was ruled a two @-@ run home run , giving Rodriguez his first World Series hit . This was the first home run reviewed by instant replay in postseason play . Specifically , the ball hit a camera owned by Fox and MLB which extended slightly over the right field wall . The camera was moved back for Game 4 such that its lens was in line with the wall . Coincidentally , Alex Rodriguez also had the first regular season home run reviewed by replay . 
 Nick Swisher opened the top of the fifth inning with a double and scored on a single to center field by Andy Pettitte . This was Pettitte 's first career postseason RBI and the first RBI by a Yankees pitcher in a World Series since Jim Bouton in 1964 . Derek Jeter followed Pettitte with another single , and both runners scored on a two @-@ run double by Johnny Damon . Cole Hamels then walked Teixeira and was relieved by J. A. Happ . Happ closed out the fifth without allowing further scoring , but Nick Swisher added to the Yankees lead with a solo home run off of him in the sixth . Werth hit his second solo home run of the game leading off the bottom of the sixth to close the Yankees lead to 6 – 4 , becoming the second Phillies player to hit multiple home runs in this World Series . 
 Chad Durbin relieved Happ in the top of the seventh . He walked Johnny Damon , who then stole second base . Rodriguez was then hit by a pitch , and Damon scored on a single by Jorge Posada . Joba Chamberlain relieved Pettitte in the bottom of the seventh and retired the side in order . Brett Myers retired the first two batters in the top of the eighth , but Hideki Matsui then hit a solo home run pinch hitting for Chamberlain . Phil Hughes pitched a third of an inning in the bottom of the ninth and allowed a solo home run to Carlos Ruiz before being relieved by Mariano Rivera . Rivera closed out the game , throwing just five pitches to record the final two outs . This game was Pettitte 's 17th career postseason win , extending his MLB record . 
 = = = Game 4 = = = 
 Line score for Sunday , November 1 , 2009 , 8 : 20 p.m. ( ET ) at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 
 Prior to the start of the game , Derek Jeter and Albert Pujols were named winners of the Hank Aaron Award for their offensive performances in 2009 . This was the first game to test manager Joe Girardi 's decision to use a three @-@ man starting rotation , as CC Sabathia started the game on three days rest , a shorter period than he normally got during the regular season . Jeter led the game off with a single and advanced to third base on a double by Johnny Damon . Jeter scored via a Mark Teixeira ground out and Alex Rodriguez was hit by a pitch . Rodriguez was hit twice the night before and the umpires issued warnings to both benches . Jorge Posada then added to the Yankees lead that inning with a sacrifice fly . The Phillies answered quickly , scoring a run on successive doubles by Shane Victorino and Chase Utley in the bottom of the first . Sabathia intentionally walked Jayson Werth , but escaped the inning without further scoring . The Phillies tied the game in the bottom of the fourth as Ryan Howard singled , stole second , and scored on a single by Pedro Feliz . Although the run counted , instant replay of Howard 's slide later showed that he did not touch home plate . 
 Nick Swisher walked to lead off the fifth inning and advanced to second on a Melky Cabrera single . Swisher restored the Yankees ' lead , scoring on a single by Jeter , and Cabrera added to it by scoring a run on a Damon single . Brett Gardner replaced Cabrera in center field as a defensive substitution in the bottom of the sixth inning after Cabrera left the game due to a hamstring injury . Chan Ho Park relieved Phillies starter Joe Blanton in the seventh and held the Yankees scoreless in that inning . Chase Utley hit his third solo home run of the series in the bottom of the seventh with two outs , bringing the game to 4 – 3 . Dámaso Marte relieved Sabathia and got the final out of the seventh without further scoring . 
 Ryan Madson relieved Park in the eighth and allowed a walk and a single but held the Yankees scoreless . Joba Chamberlain replaced Marte in the bottom of the inning . He struck out the first two batters he faced but allowed a game @-@ tying home run to Feliz before closing the inning . Brad Lidge came into the game in the ninth and gave up a two @-@ out single to Damon — after a nine @-@ pitch at bat . Then , with Teixeira batting , Damon stole second and , on the same play , advanced to third as the base was uncovered due to a defensive shift against Teixeira . Several news outlets referred to this as a " mad dash " , which Mike Vaccaro of the New York Post compared to Enos Slaughter 's " Mad Dash " in the 1946 World Series . Some believed that Damon 's play caused Lidge to avoid throwing his best pitch — a slider with sharp downward movement — for the rest of the inning , as it risked a wild pitch that would have allowed Damon to score from third base . Teixeira was then hit by a pitch and Rodriguez put the Yankees ahead with a double , scoring Damon . Posada added to that lead with a single that scored Teixeira and Rodriguez , but was thrown out at second to end the inning . Mariano Rivera entered in the bottom of the ninth and saved the game for the Yankees on eight pitches for his second save of the series . 
 = = = Game 5 = = = 
 Line score for Monday , November 2 , 2009 , 7 : 57 p.m. ( ET ) at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 
 The Yankees replaced Melky Cabrera on their postseason roster with Ramiro Peña due to his injury in Game 4 , while Brett Gardner took Cabrera 's place in center field . A. J. Burnett , the Yankees ' Game 2 starter , started Game 5 on three days rest , one less than the Phillies ' Cliff Lee . The Yankees scored first in the first inning , with Johnny Damon reaching base with a single and then scoring on a two @-@ out double by Alex Rodriguez . The Phillies responded in the bottom of the inning with a single by Jimmy Rollins , Shane Victorino reaching after being hit by a pitch , and finally a three @-@ run home run by Chase Utley to take the lead . The Phillies added to their lead in the third inning with Utley and Ryan Howard drawing walks followed by RBI singles by Jayson Werth and Raúl Ibáñez . With no outs in the inning , Burnett was relieved by David Robertson , who allowed another run to score on a Carlos Ruiz ground out . 
 Robertson held the Phillies scoreless for a second inning in the fourth . Jorge Posada entered as a pinch hitter in the fifth inning for José Molina and grounded out . Eric Hinske then pinch hit for Robertson and walked , advanced to third on a Derek Jeter single , and scored on a ground out by Damon . Alfredo Aceves entered as the new Yankee pitcher in the bottom of the fifth . The first batter he faced , Jayson Werth , hit a deep drive to center field but it was caught for an out by Gardner , who collided into the outfield wall to complete the play . Aceves completed the inning without a run scoring , inducing ground outs from Ibáñez and Ruiz . Phil Coke relieved Aceves in the seventh inning and allowed two Phillies players tie World Series records . First , Utley tied Reggie Jackson 's record for most home runs in a World Series with a solo home run , his fifth of the series . Coke then struck out Howard , Howard 's 12th strikeout in the series , tying Willie Wilson 's record for most strikeouts in a World Series . Finally , Coke was driven from the game after allowing another solo home run , this time to Ibáñez , and was relieved by Phil Hughes . 
 Victorino was replaced defensively in the eighth inning by Ben Francisco . Lee was driven from the game after allowing a single to Damon , followed by a double by Mark Teixeira , and then a double by Rodriguez that scored both runners . Chan Ho Park relieved Lee and induced a ground out from Nick Swisher , which advanced Rodriguez to third base . Rodriguez scored on a sacrifice fly by Robinson Canó . Ryan Madson entered in the ninth to close the game , allowing a double to Posada and a single to Hideki Matsui without recording an out . Batting with men on first and third base , Jeter grounded into a double play , allowing Posada to score but emptying the bases . Damon singled to bring Teixeira to bat as the potential tying run , but Madson struck him out to record his first World Series save . Members of the news media , such as Gene Wojciechowski , were critical of the three @-@ man starting rotation strategy following Game 3 , and contended that Burnett 's poor performance was caused by insufficient rest in between starts . However , Burnett had been successful up to this point in such situations , going 4 – 0 with a 2 @.@ 33 ERA in four career starts on short rest ( less than the normal four days between starts ) before this game . 
 = = = Game 6 = = = 
 Line score for Wednesday , November 4 , 2009 , 7 : 57 p.m. ( ET ) at Yankee Stadium in The Bronx , New York 
 This game was the first Game 6 in a World Series since the 2003 World Series six years earlier , the longest such gap in the history of the World Series . Prior to the game , Mary J. Blige , a Bronx native , performed " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . Andy Pettitte started on three days rest , the third straight game in which the Yankees fielded a pitcher on short rest . The Phillies started Pedro Martínez , who called himself and opposing pitcher Andy Pettitte " old goats " and acknowledged that Red Sox fans were rooting for him : " I know that they don 't like the Yankees to win , not even in Nintendo games . " 
 The Yankees scored first with an Alex Rodriguez walk opening the bottom of the second inning followed by a two @-@ run home run by designated hitter Hideki Matsui . The Phillies quickly responded with a triple by Carlos Ruiz who then scored on a sacrifice fly from Jimmy Rollins in the top of the third . Matsui answered back , adding to the Yankees lead again with a single with the bases loaded in the bottom of the third , scoring Derek Jeter and Johnny Damon . Damon , injured running the bases while scoring , was replaced defensively in the top of the fourth by Jerry Hairston , Jr . 
 Phillies starter Pedro Martínez was removed after allowing four runs in four innings , relieved in the fifth by Chad Durbin . Durbin allowed a ground rule double to Jeter , who advanced to third on a sacrifice bunt by Hairston and scored on a single by Mark Teixeira . Durbin then hit Rodriguez with a pitch and was relieved by J. A. Happ after recording just one out . Happ allowed a two @-@ run double to Matsui , his fifth and sixth RBI of the game , which tied a World Series record for most RBI in a single game set by Bobby Richardson in the 1960 World Series . 
 The Phillies made the game closer in the top of the sixth inning , as Chase Utley drew a walk and Ryan Howard followed him with a two @-@ run home run , bringing the score to 7 – 3 . After Raúl Ibáñez hit a double into right field , Joba Chamberlain relieved Andy Pettitte and closed the sixth without scoring . Chan Ho Park came in for Happ , ending any Yankees threat that inning . Chamberlain was relieved by Dámaso Marte in the top of the seventh after allowing two baserunners , but Marte struck out Utley to end the inning scoreless . After Park allowed a single to Rodriguez , Scott Eyre replaced him . Eyre allowed Rodriguez to steal second and intentionally walked Jorge Posada but escaped the inning without allowing a run . 
 Marte recorded one out , a strikeout of Howard , in the top of the eighth inning . With it Howard set a new World Series record for most strikeouts by a hitter in a single series with a total of 13 . After the out , Marte was relieved by the Yankees closer Mariano Rivera in a non @-@ save situation . Rivera allowed a double to Ibáñez , but no runs , in the eighth . After retiring the first two batters in the eighth , Eyre gave way to Ryan Madson , who allowed a single to Jeter before ending the bottom of the eighth inning . Matt Stairs led off the ninth as a pinch hitter , but lined out . Ruiz worked a walk from Rivera , but successive outs by Rollins and Victorino ended the game 7 – 3 to clinch the World Series for the Yankees . Pettitte added to his own record for most playoff wins , bringing his career total to 18 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 AL New York Yankees ( 4 ) vs. NL Philadelphia Phillies ( 2 ) 
 = = = Cumulative line score = = = 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 For the tenth consecutive year in the United States , Fox Sports televised the Series . Joe Buck called play @-@ by @-@ play and Tim McCarver provided analysis . The Series was also broadcast on ESPN Radio , with Jon Miller and Joe Morgan calling the action . Fox Sports en Español also broadcast the Series for the US Spanish @-@ speaking audience . The flagship radio stations of the respective teams broadcast all Series games with their local announcers . In Philadelphia , <unk> carried the Phillies ' English @-@ language broadcasts , with Scott Franzke , Larry Andersen , Tom McCarthy , Gary Matthews , and Chris Wheeler announcing , while <unk> aired the team 's Spanish broadcasts . In New York , WCBS @-@ AM carried the Yankees ' English broadcasts with John Sterling and <unk> Waldman announcing . This broadcast made Waldman the first woman to announce a World Series game on radio . XM Satellite Radio offered multiple feeds of each game to its subscribers . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 Television ratings for the 2009 World Series were excellent . Game 1 attracted 19 @.@ 5 million viewers , second only to the opening of the 2004 World Series for a series opener since 2000 and 29 % higher than 2008 's opening game . Game 4 produced the highest total viewership of the series with 22 @.@ 8 million viewers , the highest for any World Series game since 2004 and the highest for a " non @-@ decisive Game 4 " since 2001 . At 11 @.@ 7 overall , the 2009 World Series remains comfortably the highest rated World Series since 2004 and the only World Series to average double digits since 2007 . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Many players with both teams won awards for their performances during the 2009 season . Teixeira and Jeter each won a Gold Glove and Silver Slugger Award ; Jimmy Rollins and Shane Victorino won Gold Gloves , as well ; and Chase Utley won a Silver Slugger Award . Rivera was named the 2009 DHL Delivery Man of the Year , as well as Sporting News ' Pro Athlete of the Year . Along with the Hank Aaron Award announced before Game 4 , Jeter won the Roberto Clemente Award and was named Sports Illustrated 's Sportsman of the Year for 2009 . Matsui won the World Series MVP for his play , becoming the first Japanese player and first full @-@ time designated hitter to win the award . Several items related to the series were sent to the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum including bats from Jeter and Matsui ; caps from Rivera , Lee , and Pettitte ; and Johnny Damon 's cleats . 
 = = = Yankees = = = 
 The series win brought the Yankees ' franchise championship total to 27 , more than any other North American professional sports franchise . This championship came in the Yankees ' first year in their new stadium . They had also won the 1923 World Series , the opening year of the previous Yankee Stadium . The victory was noted by some sportswriters as a personal success for Alex Rodriguez , winning his first championship and succeeding in the playoffs where some had previously claimed he was a " choker and a loser " . Prior to this series , Rodriguez had appeared in 2 @,@ 166 regular season games without a World Series appearance , then the second @-@ most among active players to Ken Griffey , Jr . 
 The Yankees ' victory was credited to a number of different sources . Many players drew praise for their performances , including Series MVP Hideki Matsui ; free agents signed the previous offseason including Mark Teixeira , CC Sabathia , and A. J. Burnett ; and the so @-@ called " Core Four " of Derek Jeter , Mariano Rivera , Andy Pettitte , and Jorge Posada , who had all played a large role in the Yankees ' past success in the 1990s . Manager Joe Girardi was also credited for his management of the team , particularly in his decision to use only three starting pitchers in the Yankees postseason starting rotation . The Yankees were the first team to use only three starters in a World Series since the San Diego Padres in the 1998 Series . 
 Several members of the Yankees franchise dedicated the World Series in part to team owner George Steinbrenner , who had recently stepped back from his once prominent position with the team . Steinbrenner died on the day of the All @-@ Star Game the following season at the age of 80 . On November 6 , a victory parade took place for the Yankees in the " Canyon of Heroes " in Manhattan , New York City . The Yankees sent a group of players , coach Tony Peña , and team Senior Vice President Felix Lopez with the Commissioner 's Trophy to the Dominican Republic in early January 2010 to meet with President Leonel Fernández . Most of the 2009 Yankees received their championship rings on Opening Day the next season . Matsui was on the Angels in 2010 and when the Angels played their first series of the season in the Bronx , the Yankees home opener , they presented him with his ring . They also visited U.S. President Barack Obama in the White House in April 2010 , presenting him with a signed jersey . 
 The Yankees returned to the playoffs the following season , as the wild card . They lost to the Texas Rangers in the 2010 ALCS ; which included an 8 @-@ 0 shutout in Yankee Stadium by former Phillie ace Cliff Lee ; it was Lee 's seventh straight postseason win which included three victories against the Yankees ( two as a Phillie in the 2009 World Series , and in 2010 during the ALCS ) . 
 = = = Phillies = = = 
 Following Game 4 , after the Yankees took a 3 – 1 series lead , The Philadelphia Inquirer accidentally printed a three @-@ quarters @-@ page Macy 's advertisement congratulating the Phillies for winning the World Series , along with a picture of a Phillies championship T @-@ shirt . The newspaper subsequently apologized for the mistake . 
 Lee Jenkins of Sports Illustrated attributed Philadelphia 's loss to a lack of pitching depth , noting that three different Yankees starters managed to win games in the series , while only Cliff Lee won games for the Phillies . The Phillies ' 2008 postseason star pitchers , starter Cole Hamels and closer Brad Lidge , struggled in their only appearances of the 2009 World Series . The Phillies bullpen which did well in the NLCS performed poorly in the World Series , allowing seven runs in just 11 2 / 3 innings with a 5 @.@ 40 ERA . Jorge <unk> Jr. of ESPN partially attributed the Phillies ' loss to their lack of offensive production , citing the team 's .227 batting average in the World Series . Only Chase Utley performed well with 5 home runs and 22 of the Phillies ' 90 bases , while Shane Victorino and Jimmy Rollins struggled at the plate , and Ryan Howard struck out a record 13 times in the World Series after his NLCS MVP performance . 
 Before the start of the 2010 season , the Phillies traded away their 2009 postseason ace pitcher Cliff Lee . The Phillies posted the league 's best record in 2010 , and returned to the playoffs where they lost to the eventual champions the San Francisco Giants in the NLCS . 
 = = = David Paterson ticket scandal = = = 
 Among those in attendance during Game 1 was New York Governor David Paterson , whose party had five tickets behind home plate . On March 3 , 2010 , the New York Commission on Public Integrity found that Paterson had violated state laws concerning gifts to public officials , and that he lied under oath to the commission about his intent to pay for the tickets . The commission further found that Paterson used his position to solicit and receive the five tickets — valued at US $ 425 each — free of charge from the Yankees , that he had never intended to pay for the tickets despite testimony to the contrary , and that he or a person acting on his behalf wrote a backdated check to pay for them only after scrutiny in the case arose . The Commission ultimately fined Paterson $ 62 @,@ 125 for his actions . 
 = UHF – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack and Other Stuff = 
 UHF – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack and Other Stuff is the sixth studio album by " Weird Al " Yankovic , released on July 18 , 1989 . The album is the final of Yankovic 's to be produced by former The McCoys guitarist Rick Derringer . Recorded between December 1988 and May 1989 , the album served as the official soundtrack to 1989 film of the same name , although the original score by John Du Prez is omitted . The album 's lead single was the titular " UHF " , although it was not a hit and did not chart . 
 The music on UHF is built around pastiches of rock , rap , and pop music of the late @-@ 1980s , featuring parodies of songs by Dire Straits , Tone Lōc , Fine Young Cannibals , and R.E.M .. The album also features many " style parodies , " or musical imitations of existing artists . These style parodies include imitations of specific artists like Harry Chapin , as well as various musical genres like blues . The album also features many music cuts from the film as well as some of the commercials , like " Spatula City " , and other parody bits , like " Gandhi II " . 
 Peaking at only 146 on the Billboard 200 , the album was not a commercial success , and received only lukewarm critical attention . The UHF soundtrack is one of only a few of Yankovic 's studio albums that is not certified either Gold or Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . It would also be Yankovic 's last studio album to be released on vinyl record in the US until 2011 's Alpocalypse . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and recording = = = 
 Following the success of Yankovic 's 1988 album Even Worse , which featured the Michael Jackson spoof " Fat " , Yankovic pitched a screenplay co @-@ written by his manager Jay Levey called UHF to Orion Pictures . A satire of the television and film industries , the film starred Yankovic as George Newman , a man who stumbles into managing a low @-@ budget UHF television station and finds success with his eclectic programming choices . Also starring Michael Richards , Fran Drescher , and Victoria Jackson , it brought the floundering studio Orion their highest test scores since the movie RoboCop . Although the movie made slightly over US $ 6 million domestically — out of a budget of $ 5 million — it was considered unsuccessful . 
 In December 1988 , Yankovic returned to the studio to record the soundtrack to his feature film . Once again , former The McCoys guitarist Rick Derringer was brought in to produce the album . This would be Derringer 's last production credit for Yankovic , as subsequent studio albums would be produced by the artist himself . Recording with Yankovic were Jon " Bermuda " Schwartz on drums , Steve Jay on bass , and Jim West on guitar . The album was recorded in six different sessions at both Santa Monica Sound Records in Santa Monica , California and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles . During the first session , the song " Money for Nothing / Beverly Hillbillies " was recorded . The second session yielded the titular " UHF " and " Let Me Be Your Hog " . During the third session , Yankovic recorded " Stanley <unk> 's Theme " — which would later be renamed " Fun Zone " — as well as the skit " Gandhi II " . Only one song was recorded during the fourth sessions , the skit " Spatula City " . The fifth recording session resulted in five songs : " Spam " , " Attack of the Radioactive Hamsters From a Planet Near Mars " , " Hot Rocks Polka " , " Biggest Ball of Twine in Minnesota " , and " Generic Blues " . The sixth and final session produced the two parodies " Isle Thing " and " She Drives Like Crazy " . 
 = = = Originals = = = 
 On February 24 , 1989 , Yankovic recorded the first original song for the album , " Let Me Be Your Hog " . The song is a short rock snippet that is heard in the movie as Newman 's uncle Harvey ( Stanley Brock ) lounges in his pool . Originally , Yankovic had wanted to use the 1974 single " Kung Fu Fighting " by Carl Douglas for the scene , but he could not gain the rights to the song , and thus " Let Me Be Your Hog " was recorded . Yankovic then recorded the theme from his movie , the titular " UHF " , written in the style of a TV station 's large promotional campaign . On February 25 , Yankovic recorded the instrumental " Fun Zone " , also known as " Stanley <unk> 's Theme " . Originally written four years earlier for a failed Saturday Night Live replacement titled Welcome to the Fun Zone , this song is played at the beginning of every " Weird Al " concert . 
 Three months later , on May 24 , 1989 , Yankovic recorded three more originals . The first of these , " Attack of the Radioactive Hamsters from a Planet Near Mars " , is a rock song about a number of mutated hamsters terrorizing Earth . The second original song , " The Biggest Ball of Twine in Minnesota " , is a folk ballad about a family road trip to a tourist location in Minnesota . Musically , the song was inspired both by the book Roadside America , which " featured all the campy places around the country that one could possibly visit " , as well as the music of Harry Chapin and Gordon Lightfoot , which Yankovic described as " storyteller songs , [ with ] sprawling narratives . " The final original song recorded for the album was " Generic Blues " , Yankovic 's attempt to write " the ultimate blues song " . After the release of the song , B.B. King listed it as one of his top ten favorite blues songs . 
 UHF – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack and Other Stuff is also notable in that it was Yankovic 's first and only studio album to dabble in the art of skits . The first of these segments is called " Gandhi II " which re @-@ imagines Mahatma Gandhi as the hero of a blaxploitation @-@ style sequel to the film Gandhi , spoofing both the theme and promos for the film Shaft . The second skit is called " Spatula City " and is an advertisement for a spatula outlet store . These short segments were used in the film as commercials ; other commercial segments , such as " Plots ' R Us " and " Conan the Librarian " , were not used on the album . 
 = = = Parodies and polka = = = 
 On December 20 , 1988 , Yankovic recorded " Money for Nothing / Beverly Hillbillies " . The song features the lyrics of The Beverly Hillbillies theme song altered slightly and set to the tune of " Money for Nothing " . The song appears in its entirety within UHF as a computer @-@ animated dream sequence , framed as if it were part of a music video . As part of his terms that allowed Yankovic to record this parody , Dire Straits guitarist and " Money for Nothing " songwriter Mark Knopfler insisted that he be allowed to play the guitar featured in the parody . As a result , both he and Guy Fletcher — Dire Straits ' keyboardist — recorded their parts on guitar and synthesizer respectively . According to Yankovic , his guitarist Jim West had practiced the song for weeks , and , as a result could recreate the original ; Knopfler , on the other hand , had been playing the song for several years and was much more relaxed with his playing . As a result , West 's version sounded more like the original version , although Knopfler 's track was the one used . Yankovic revealed in the DVD commentary for UHF that the concept " Money for Nothing / Beverly Hillbillies " was originally a parody of Prince 's 1984 hit " Let 's Go Crazy " . Prince , however , refused , and has been unreceptive to any parody ideas Yankovic has ever presented him with . The fractured titled " Money for Nothing / Beverly Hillbillies " is a result of Dire Straits ' lawyers insisting that " Money for Nothing " remain in the parody 's title . Yankovic was unhappy with the title and stated that he would rather have had the title be either " Money for Nothing for the Beverly Hillbillies " or " Beverly Hillbillies for Nothing " . The legal title for the song features an asterisk after the word " Hillbillies " , although it is often printed without the marking . 
 On May 24 , 1989 , Yankovic started recording the second parody for the album , " Spam " . The song , a play on R.E.M. ' s hit " Stand " , is an ode to the canned luncheon meat Spam . Yankovic noted that it was " fun to pick [ apart the song ] and figure out some of those almost subliminal parts — parts that would fade in and out , little bell sounds , things you don 't really hear on first listening . " On May 25 , 1989 , Yankovic recorded " Isle Thing " , a parody of " Wild Thing " by Tone Lōc , about a woman who introduces the narrator to the television show Gilligan 's Island . Notably , the song is Yankovic 's first rap parody ; an earlier rap , " Twister " , is a Beastie Boys style spoof , but not a direct parody . Another Tone Lōc hit , " Funky Cold Medina " , is referenced in the lyrics : " Ginger and Mary Ann <unk> used some funky cold medina " . The final parody , " She Drives Like Crazy " — recorded the same day as " Isle Thing " — is a spoof of Fine Young Cannibals ' 1988 single " She Drives Me Crazy " . Lyrically , the song is about a man who fears his girlfriend 's crazy driving habits . 
 Much like Yankovic 's previous album , UHF – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack and Other Stuff features a polka medley of hit songs called " The Hot Rocks Polka " . All of the songs in the medley are songs written or made popular by the English rock band The Rolling Stones . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Due to the short stint of UHF in theaters , its soundtrack got " lost in the shuffle " and did not receive much of a critical response . However , from the few reviews it did receive , the album received a mixed response . Jacob <unk> of Allmusic awarded the album three stars out of five and called it a " guilty pleasure " . <unk> noted that the album " endures artistically as a transitional album between his ' 80s heyday and the imminent artistic makeover revealed on 1992 's Off the Deep End " . He ultimately concluded that the album is something that only " moderate [ to ] genuine " fans may want , but that it is " nearly as accessible " as many of his compilation albums . The Rolling Stone Album Guide awarded the album three stars out of five , denoting a " good " album . A TV Guide critic , in a review of the movie , wrote that " the quality of [ the movie 's ] parodies " are " inconsistent , with the movie and music takeoffs being obvious and out of date . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 UHF – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack and Other Stuff was released July 18 , 1989 . After it was released , the album peaked at number 146 on the Billboard 200 . Much like Polka Party ! ( 1986 ) , the album was considered a major commercial disappointment for the comedian ; the album is his second @-@ lowest charting album after Polka Party ! ( 1986 ) . The UHF soundtrack is one of only a few of Yankovic 's studio albums that is not certified either Gold or Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in the United States . The others include Polka Party ! and Poodle Hat ( 2003 ) . UHF would also be Yankovic 's last studio album to be released in the US on vinyl record until 2011 's Alpocalypse . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The following is adapted from the album liner notes . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = Sergei Shirokov = 
 Sergei Sergeyevich Shirokov ( Russian : Серге ́ й Серге ́ евич <unk> , Russian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born 10 March 1986 ) is a Russian professional ice hockey winger currently with SKA Saint Petersburg of the Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) . Drafted 163rd overall in the 2006 NHL Entry Draft , he is a prospect for the Florida Panthers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Prior to signing with Vancouver in 2009 , Shirokov played with CSKA Moscow for four seasons in the Russian Superleague and Kontinental Hockey League . He returned to CSKA Moscow in 2011 after two years with the Vancouver Canucks and Manitoba Moose . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 Shirokov first played in the Russian Hockey First League ( <unk> @-@ 3 ) with HC CSKA Moscow 's second @-@ tier team in 2001 . He spent several seasons at that level and debuted with CSKA 's senior team in the Russian Superleague in 2004 – 05 , going pointless in eight games . The following season , he recorded 14 points playing 39 games in the Superleague . Shirokov was then selected 163rd overall in the sixth round of the 2006 NHL Entry Draft by the Vancouver Canucks . The sixth round draft pick was acquired by the Canucks in a trade with the Florida Panthers . 
 Though selected by an NHL team , Shirokov continued to play in Russia for HC CSKA Moscow and recorded a team @-@ best and career @-@ high 40 points in 56 games for CSKA , who competed in the newly formed Kontinental Hockey League ( KHL ) in 2008 – 09 . He then turned down a tax @-@ free $ 500 @,@ 000 contract to stay in the KHL . Instead , Shirokov defected to North America and signed with the Canucks to a two @-@ year , two @-@ way US $ 1 @.@ 75 million contract on 17 August 2009 . The deal allowed him to make an annual US $ 875 @,@ 000 at the NHL level or C $ 67 @,@ 500 in the minor leagues . 
 Shirokov made an immediate impression in his first training camp with the Canucks , but suffered a minor setback during the pre @-@ season , missing a week with an injured knee . He recovered in time for the end of the pre @-@ season to lead the team in exhibition scoring with seven points in four games . As a result , Shirokov earned a roster spot for the start of the 2009 – 10 season , beating out fellow Canucks prospects Cody Hodgson and Michael Grabner . 
 Shirokov made his NHL debut on 1 October against the Calgary Flames , starting the season on the second line with Ryan Kesler and Mikael Samuelsson , as well as the first power @-@ play unit . However , after going pointless in his first three games before becoming a healthy scratch , he was sent down to the Canucks ' American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose on 8 October . Shirokov scored his first AHL goal in his Moose debut the next day against Drew MacIntyre of the Chicago Wolves , also adding an assist in a 4 – 1 win . After scoring 10 points in his first 10 games with the Moose , Shirokov was re @-@ called by the Canucks on 25 October after an injury to forward Kyle <unk> , but was returned to the AHL after three games on 30 October in favour of centre Mario <unk> . On 30 December , Shirokov was chosen to Team PlanetUSA for the 2010 AHL All @-@ Star Game . At the time of the selection , he was leading the Moose in scoring with 11 goals and 23 points through 33 games . He finished his first campaign in North America with 22 goals and 45 points over 76 games . Among AHL rookies , Shirokov was ninth in points and tied for third in goals . He added two assists in six playoff games as the Moose were eliminated by the Hamilton Bulldogs in the opening round . 
 Shirokov started the 2010 – 11 season with the Moose . After a slow start , he was leading the Moose in scoring with 33 points in 39 games , including a team record 12 @-@ game point streak , when he was recalled by the Canucks on 17 January 2011 . In his first game back in the NHL the following day , Shirokov scored his first NHL goal against Craig Anderson in a 4 – 3 overtime loss to the Colorado Avalanche . After two games , he was sent back to the Moose on 23 January . Shirokov was selected as the Moose representative for the 2011 AHL All @-@ Star Game , the second year in a row he would be at the game . He went on to complete the season with a team @-@ leading 22 goals , 36 assists and 58 points in 76 games . As the Moose advanced to the second round of the 2011 playoffs , he led the team in scoring with 7 goals , while adding 3 assists for 10 points over 14 games . 
 In the off @-@ season Shirokov signed a three @-@ year deal with CSKA Moscow . Then on 9 July 2011 , Vancouver traded his rights to the Florida Panthers for the rights to forward Mike <unk> . In his first year upon returning to CSKA Moscow , he finished eighth in KHL point scoring and was named to the 2012 KHL All @-@ Star Game . The following season , Shirokov participated in the 2013 KHL All @-@ Star Game . On 5 November 2013 , CSKA Moscow traded Shirokov to Avangard Omsk along with Maxim Goncharov in exchange for Alexander Frolov and Stanislav <unk> . On 19 December 2015 in exchange the Anton <unk> and Peter <unk> has joined SKA Saint Petersburg . 
 = = International play = = 
 Shirokov made his international debut with Russia at the 2003 U @-@ 18 Junior World Cup , earning a silver medal while contributing four points in five games . He continued to play with the national under @-@ 18 team , helping Russia to the best records at the 2003 Four Nations and 2004 Five Nations Tournaments . At the 2004 IIHF World U18 Championships , he helped Russia to another gold medal in Minsk , Belarus , defeating the United States 3 – 2 in the final . Shirokov contributed two goals in six games . 
 Shirokov made the jump to the Russia 's under @-@ 20 team in September 2004 , posting the second @-@ best record with Russia at the Four Nations Tournament . Several months later , he made his first of two appearance at the World Junior Championships . In 2005 he scored eight points in six games at the top under @-@ 20 tournament in Grand Forks , North Dakota , helping Russia to a silver medal finish , losing in the final to Canada . In April 2005 , Russia hosted the Big Prize Tournament in St. Petersburg , where Shirokov recorded an assist in two games as Russia posted the best record . 
 The next hockey season , Shirokov competed in the under @-@ 20 Four Nations Tournament in September 2005 , where Russia finished with the worst record of the tournament . A couple months later , he helped Russia to the best record at the Four Nations Tournament in November . At the 2006 World Junior Championships in British Columbia , Shirokov helped Russia to a second consecutive silver medal , losing once again to Canada in the final . He scored five points in six games . 
 Shirokov was a member of the gold medal @-@ winning Russian teams at the 2012 IIHF World Championship and 2014 IIHF World Championship tournaments , scoring a combined five goals and seven assists between the two events . He scored a goal and an assist in the gold @-@ medal match against Finland at the 2014 IIHF World Championship . He won a silver medal the following year at the 2015 IIHF World Championship in Czech Republic . 
 = = Awards and achievements = = 
 KHL All @-@ Star Game - 2012 , 2013 
 AHL All @-@ Star Game - 2010 , 2011 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 All statistics taken from NHL.com 
 = = International statistics = = 
 All statistics taken from <unk> 
 = Undone ( MercyMe album ) = 
 Undone is the third studio album by Christian rock band , MercyMe . It was produced by Pete Kipley and released on April 20 , 2004 on INO Records . Following the success of MercyMe 's previous studio efforts , they were given significantly more resources with which to develop the album and brought in a sixth member , guitarist Barry Graul . Unlike the band 's previous songwriting style , which was to write the lyrics first , they wrote the music for the songs on the album before writing the lyrics . The album has a pop rock and adult contemporary sound , while the lyrics are personal and convey Christian themes . 
 Undone received generally favorable reviews from critics with many praising the album 's personal style , although some critics argued the album 's songwriting and sound were too similar to MercyMe 's previous efforts . It won the GMA Dove Award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year at the 36th GMA Dove Awards . In the United States , Undone debuted at No. 12 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , selling over 55 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It spent a total of two weeks atop the Christian Albums chart and was the fifth @-@ best selling Christian album of 2004 and the fourteenth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2005 . Undone has sold over 627 @,@ 000 albums in the United States and was the thirty @-@ eighth best @-@ selling Christian album of the 2000s . 
 Three official singles were released from Undone . " Here with Me " , the album 's lead single , was released to Christian and mainstream radio , peaking at No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts as well as at No. 12 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart . The second single from the album , " Homesick " , peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts and at No. 9 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart . The third single , " In the Blink of an Eye " , peaked at No. 1 on the Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the success of the band 's previous albums Almost There and Spoken For , MercyMe was given " significantly " more resources to develop their next record by their record label , INO Records . Although they decided not to alter their Christian approach to songwriting , live performances , and interviews , they opted to work with outside songwriters on the album , employed the London Symphony Orchestra to play strings on several tracks , and added a sixth member to the band , guitarist Barry Graul . Additionally , MercyMe wrote and recorded the music for Undone before they wrote any of the lyrics . Lead singer Bart Millard noted that by using this method , instead of his lyrics swaying the musical elements of the song , the music acted as " a canvas with which to write [ the lyrics ] " . He elaborated that " We ’ ve been making records for 10 years , so anything that sparks creativity ... is very much welcomed " . The title of the album was inspired by " the unexpected twists and turns in the band 's journey " ; Millard commented that " We had our plans for what we were going to do ; but when the bigger picture happened , all of our plans came unraveled . We don ’ t know what tomorrow will hold . When you make your own plans , you suddenly find yourself undone ; and that ’ s exactly where God wants us in the first place " . 
 Undone was produced by Pete Kipley and was recorded by F. Reid Shippen , Mike O ' Connor , and Steve Bishir ; recording took place at Blueberry Hill , Sound Stage , Abbey Road , The Indigo Room , <unk> , Luminous Sound , and The <unk> . Mixing was conducted by F. Reid Shippen and Lee Bridges , while mastering was done by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound . The string tracks on " Homesick " , " Where You Lead Me " , " Unaware " , and " Here with Me " were arranged by Rob Mathes and recorded by Simon Rhodes and Andrew Dudman at Abbey Road . The cello on " Keep Singing " was performed by Matt Slocum . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Songwriting and lyrics = = = 
 Although he did not focus less on Christian lyrical material for Undone , mainstream radio was on Millard 's mind when he wrote the lyrics on the album . Millard attempted to write lyrics that , while still focused on God , tapped into the things people deal with every day . Further , he avoided using Christian jargon , as people who are not churchgoers might not understand what those terms mean ; instead , he tried to be " clearer in the things [ the band ] were talking about " . Another impact on the songwriting was the band 's experiences over the previous year ; while working on Undone , Millard and the other members of the band lost eight people close to them . Millard noted that " There 's a lot of personal stuff on [ the album ] about the things we 've gone through and how Christ has been the solution " . One particular song , " Homesick " , was written after two incidents . The first incident occurred during the holiday season of 2004 ; a friend of Millard 's lost her twin babies during pregnancy and was so far along in the pregnancy that doctors had to induce labor . After attending the funeral for the two babies , Millard wrote the chorus to the song . However , he didn 't write any more to " Homesick " after that as he did not want to " fake " his way through writing it . Following the death of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Chris , however , Millard finished the song . Although Undone was " essentially complete " at that point , the band recorded and included it on the album . 
 The album has been noted as having ' personal ' lyrics , a trait that is common for MercyMe . Otherwise , most of the lyrics deal with Christian themes and there is an " abundance " of " spiritually vertical " content . " Here with Me " discusses and conveys the theme of God 's love and omnipotence , while " Homesick " focuses on " persevering on earth in anticipation of heaven " . The title track describes the human " never @-@ ending quest for self @-@ improvement " . " Unaware " and " Caught Up In The Middle " are about making everything in life secondary to God while " Keep Singing " is about " pressing on and praising God in light of tragedy " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Musically , the band regarded the album as a ' new progression ' . Bassist Nathan Cochran said that " It ’ s not a sharp left turn ; it ’ s a step beyond what we ’ ve ever done . We feel like our message and calling are the same ... We ’ re still worship leaders ; we ’ re just on a different scale " . As a whole , Undone is a guitar @-@ driven album with a pop rock and adult contemporary sound . The album 's opening track , " Where You Lead Me " , builds from an acoustic guitar @-@ driven opening into a crescendo featuring synthesizers and guitars . " Here with Me " has a musical vibe similar to alternative rock band Coldplay . " Homesick " is a ballad featuring strings from the London Symphony Orchestra . More upbeat cuts on the album include " In The Blink Of An Eye " , " Caught Up In The Middle " , and " A Million Miles Away " , while " Keep Singing " is driven by a piano . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Undone received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Although some critics felt the songwriting and music were too similar to the band 's previous efforts , others praised the album 's ' personal ' style . Kim Jones of About.com gave the album five out of five stars , saying that " [ the album ] has been called by many people as one of the best new releases of 2004 and I have to agree " . Johnny Loftus of Allmusic gave it three out of five stars , saying that " With its slick production and MercyMe 's full lineup of guitars , percussion , and keys , [ Undone ] suggests the tangent of Nashville contemporary country that favors straightforward pop melody over any sort of hard twang . Likewise , the album 's more upbeat moments reflect the trend in secular adult alternative toward earnest vocals over whitewashed rock ( à la Vertical Horizon ) . Both sounds work well for MercyMe on Undone , doubtless giving fans of the band 's music and devotion plenty more to believe in " . David McCreary of CCM Magazine gave Undone an A , calling it " [ MercyMe 's ] most mature , personal recording to date " , also praising Bart Millard 's vocals . Tony Cummings of Cross Rhythms gave the album nine out of ten stars , calling it a " huge improvement " over Spoken For ( 2002 ) . 
 While calling Undone MercyMe 's " most satisfying " record to date , Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today regarded the songwriting as " monotonous " and felt that MercyMe was " beginning to sound like they 're repeating themselves " . Josh Taylor of Jesus Freak Hideout gave the album three out of five stars , opining that " Frankly , this is the same stuff they were doing three years and two albums ago ... If you ’ re a diehard MercyMe fan , this disc will be music to your ears . But for those of us who long for change ( Not drastic ones , mind you . But small , significant ones . ) , Undone seems redundant . It ’ s still good , but it ’ s beginning to become stale " . 
 At the 36th GMA Dove Awards , Undone won the award for Pop / Contemporary Album of the Year . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Undone sold 55 @,@ 000 copies in the United States in its first week , MercyMe 's highest sales week at that point . It debuted at No. 12 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 1 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , their second career number @-@ one album on the latter . The album 's lead single , " Here with Me " , played a large part in the early sales of the album by having success on both Christian and mainstream radio . It spent a total of two weeks atop the Christian Albums chart and became the fifth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2004 and fourteenth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2005 . It ranked as the thirty @-@ eighth best @-@ selling Christian album of the 2000s in the United States and has sold over 627 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Three official singles were released from Undone . " Here with Me " , the album 's lead single , topped the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart for thirteen weeks and the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart for ten weeks . It also appeared on mainstream chart formats , peaking at No. 12 on the Adult Contemporary chart and No. 38 on the Adult Top 40 chart . " Here with Me " ranked at No. 16 on the decade @-@ end Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 The album 's second single , " Homesick " , peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts and at No. 1 on the Radio & Records Christian AC Indicator and Inspo charts . It also peaked at No. 9 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart . 
 The third and final single from Undone , " In the Blink of an Eye " , spent five weeks atop the Billboard Hot Christian Songs chart and six weeks atop the Billboard Hot Christian AC chart . It ranked at No. 48 on the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Jim Bryson , Nathan Cochran , Barry Graul , Pete Kipley , Bart Millard , Mike Scheuchzer and Robby Shaffer except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 ( Credits lifted from the album liner notes ) 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Cyclone Hina = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Hina in March 1997 was the worst tropical cyclone to affect the South Pacific island nation of Tonga since Cyclone Isaac in 1982 . The system was first noted within the monsoon trough on March 11 , 1997 , as a weak shallow depression within the vicinity of Rotuma . Over the next two days , the depression remained near Rotuma with no preferred movement , as it started to develop further within favorable conditions for further development . The system was subsequently named Hina on March 15 , after it had started to move eastwards and had passed to the southeast of Niulakita , Tuvalu . During that day the system moved south @-@ eastwards and impacted Wallis and Futuna , before it passed over Tonga 's southern islands of Tongatapu and ' Eua during March 16 . After impacting Tonga the system moved rapidly towards the south @-@ southeast and weakened below tropical cyclone intensity , before it was last noted on March 21 about 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 mi ) to the south of the Pitcairn Islands . During the systems post analysis it was determined that the warning centers had underestimated Hina 's intensity as it passed over Tonga , after damage had been greater than expected in the island nation . 
 Within Tuvalu it was difficult to assess damage done by Hina alone , after Cyclone Gavin impacted the area a week earlier . Storm surge and strong winds from both cyclones caused a severe amount of coastal erosion on all of the country ’ s nine atolls , with about 6 @.@ 7 % of land washed into the sea . Hina caused no significant damage on Walls Island , while it caused some damage to crops and destroyed parts of the road on Futuna Island . As Hina affected Tonga , there were no casualties reported as the system affected the island nation , however , <unk> Hospital reported that they had treated a number of patients for injuries that were caused during the systems aftermath . One indirect death was also reported , after a person suffering a heart attack while evacuating from his home . The cyclone left extensive damage to utilities and agriculture on Tongatapu , where trees were uprooted and more than 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) of fruit and food crops were destroyed , mostly to banana and coconut trees . After the cyclone the Tongan Government requested and received emergency aid , from the governments of several countries including France , Australia , New Zealand , Japan and the United Kingdom . This was after the government had provided T $ 5 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 97 million ) , or about 5 % of its national budget to facilitate the immediate start of emergency relief and repairs to essential services . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 During March 11 , 1997 , a shallow tropical depression developed within the monsoon trough near the Fijian Dependency : Rotuma . Over the next two days the depression remained near Rotuma with no preferred movement , as it started to develop further in an area of minimal vertical wind shear and good upper air divergence . During March 13 , as the system moved northwards , the United States Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) subsequently initiated advisories on the system and designated it as Tropical Cyclone <unk> . During that day after having moved to the north , Hina curved to the east and later south @-@ eastwards , before it passed about 55 km ( 35 mi ) to the southeast of Niulakita the southernmost island of Tuvalu during March 14 . Early on March 15 , after the system had passed near Niulakita , the depression developed into a category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale and was named Hina by the Fiji Meteorological Service ( FMS ) . After being named the system accelerated towards the south @-@ southeast and an area of increasing vertical wind shear , as it passed near the west coast of Futuna Island . The system also crossed the 180th meridian during that day , which prompted the JTWC to pass the responsibility for warning the United States Government to the Naval Pacific Meteorology and Oceanography Center ( NPMOC ) . 
 Early on March 16 , as Hina passed over the southern islands of Tonga , the FMS reported that based on satellite imagery and guidance from other meteorological centers , the system had 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) . Hina subsequently passed over the islands of Tongatapu and <unk> in southern Tonga at around 08 : 30 UTC and took less than 2 hours to inflict considerable damage on the islands . The system subsequently emerged back into the South Pacific Ocean , with the FMS estimating that the system had storm force winds of about 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . Later that day the NPMOC estimated that Hina had peak 1 @-@ minute sustained windspeeds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) as it rapidly moved below 25 ° S and out of the FMS 's area of responsibility . Over the next few days the system continued to move towards the south @-@ southeast and gradually weakened , before the NPMOC issued its final advisory during March 18 , as the system was undergoing a transition to become an extratropical cyclone . The system weakened below tropical cyclone intensity during the next day , before it was last noted by the Wellington Tropical Cyclone Warning Center on March 21 , while located about 1 @,@ 500 km ( 930 mi ) to the south of the Pitcairn Islands . 
 After an analysis of the observed data and the damage in Tonga , the FMS estimated that Hina 's landfall intensity was underestimated . The observed wind data suggested that the system had storm force sustained winds but had peak gusts comparable to hurricane force . Furthermore , the lowest pressure values also indicated that the winds had to be stronger than estimated for it to fit known wind pressure relationships . It was subsequently deduced by the FMS that Hina was a minimal category 3 severe tropical cyclone , with peak 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) when it crossed the Tonga island of Tongatapu at around 08 : 30 UTC ( 21 : 30 UTC + 13 ) . The NPMOC also revised their estimate of Hina 's peak 1 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds from 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) to 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) during post analysis , which made the system equivalent to a category one hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Cyclone Hina caused over US $ 15 @.@ 2 million worth of damage and was indirectly responsible for one death as it affected Tuvalu , Wallis and Futuna and Tonga . The system 's worst impact was reported on the Tongatapu and ' Eua , which are the southern most islands of the Kingdom of Tonga . Due to the impact of this storm , the name Hina was retired from the tropical cyclone naming lists . 
 = = = Tuvalu = = = 
 On March 12 , the FMS issued gale warnings for the southern islands of Tuvalu and a tropical cyclone alert for the rest of the archipelago . The gale warning was subsequently extended out to cover the whole of the archipelago during the next day , after marginal squally gale force winds were observed to the north of the monsoon trough in association with the system . Over the next two days the warning was kept in force while Tuvalu experienced strong to gale force winds because of a convergence zone located over the islands and Hina which passed about 55 km ( 35 mi ) to the southeast of Niulakita , Tuvalu . Cyclone Hina was the second of three tropical cyclones to affect Tuvalu during the 1996 @-@ 97 cyclone season , after Cyclone Gavin had severely damaged the islands a weak earlier and Cyclone Keli affected the islands during June 1997 . 
 Cyclone Gavin and Hina 's waves , storm surge and strong winds both caused a severe amount of coastal erosion on all of the country ’ s nine atolls with about 6 @.@ 7 % of the land washed into the sea . Both cyclones caused severe coastal erosion and destruction to food crops , mostly to the southern islands of Niulakita and <unk> , while damage in northern and central islands was confined mostly to houses . A damage assessment team noted that it was difficult to assess damage done by Hina alone and estimated the total damage from both cyclones at US $ 2 @.@ 23 million ( AU $ 2 @.@ 14 million ) . It was later estimated after Cyclone Keli had affected the islands between June 12 – 16 , 1996 , that the three cyclones had been responsible for about 50 hectares ( 120 acres ) of land disappearing into the sea . Rehabilitation costs from all three cyclones , amounted to US $ 653 thousand ( AU $ 1 million ) . 
 = = = Wallis and Futuna = = = 
 As the system developed into a tropical cyclone during March 14 , gale warnings were issued for the French territory of Wallis and Futuna . The system at this time was located about 220 km ( 135 mi ) to the northwest of Futuna Island and subsequently accelerated , towards the south @-@ southeast and passed near the island during the next day . Cyclone Hina was the second of four tropical cyclones to affect Wallis and Futuna in a ten @-@ month period , after cyclone Gavin had severely damaged food crops ten days earlier and Cyclones Keli and Ron affected the islands during June 1997 and January 1998 . During March 15 as Hina affected the islands , winds of 76 km / h ( 47 mph ) and 115 km / h ( 71 mph ) were recorded at Hihifo on Wallis and Maopoopo on Futuna respectively . Rainfall totals of 220 @.@ 6 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 69 in ) and 182 @.@ 5 mm ( 7 @.@ 19 in ) were also recorded at Maopoopo and in Point Vele respectively . Hina caused no significant damage on Walls Island , while it caused some damage to the remaining crops and destroyed parts of the road on Futuna Island . 
 = = = Tonga = = = 
 Hina was the first of three tropical cyclones to affect Tonga during a ten @-@ month period , with Cyclones Keli and Ron affecting the island nation during June 1997 and January 1998 . Late on March 15 , ahead of the system affecting Tonga , gale warnings were issued for the Southern Tongan island groups of Haʻapai , Tongatapu and Vavaʻu . During the next day , Hina took less than two hours to inflict considerable damage on the Tongan islands and became the worst tropical cyclone to affect Tonga since Cyclone Isaac during 1982 . The two worst @-@ affected Tongan islands were Tongatapu and ' Eua after major damages were reported on both islands . As the system impacted Tonga , the FMS received several reports of one or more tornadoes occurring in Tonga ; however , during a post @-@ disaster survey no evidence was found to prove or disprove this claim . It was noted that several of the badly damaged houses had little or no cyclone protection while over 600 people were left homeless . Damages were greater than had been expected , with an estimated damage total of about T $ 18 @.@ 2 million Tongan Pa <unk> ( US $ 15 @.@ 2 million ) reported . A post disaster survey attributed the greater damages to higher than expected wind gusts caused by either a low level squall or a jet streak . There were no casualties reported as the system affected the island nation , however , <unk> Hospital reported that they had treated a number of patients for injuries that were caused during the system 's aftermath . One indirect death was also reported , after a sea captain suffered a heart attack while evacuating from his home . Within the islands severe damage to power lines and telecommunication systems was reported . The system affected the islands after the lowest tide for the day , as a result sea damage was minimal , though some evidence of salt damage to taro plantations was observed . 
 On the main island of Tongatapu , extensive damages to utilities , vegetation and agriculture in places , with more than 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) of fruit and food crops including banana trees and coconut palms destroyed . Some of the coconut palms were snapped , which suggested that wind gusts of between 165 – 185 km / h ( 105 – 115 mph ) had been experienced on the island . Within Nukuʻalofa the capital city of Tonga , there was not a lot of structural damage reported ; however , the villages to the east of the capital were severely affected . The roof and grand stand of <unk> Stadium was blown off , while the Parliament house , government buildings and schools were severely damaged . The MV <unk> was driven by fierce winds onto <unk> Reef in Nuku 'alofa Harbour . The Electric and Water boards sustained over T $ 2 @.@ 9 million in damage to its infrastructure , with power lines brought down throughout Tongatapu which caused a complete blackout during March 16 . Some of the uprooted trees knocked down power lines , sometimes causing a domino effect of bringing down additional power poles . As a result of the electric problems , there was a lack of electrical power to power pumps , with the water supply becoming intermittent . On ' Eua Island , Hina was estimated to have caused greater damage then Cyclone Isaac had done fifteen years previously , after the island was completely devastated by the system . The Tongan Government estimated that damage to the wharfs on <unk> and Foa islands would cost over T $ 10 thousand to repair , while the land bridge between the two islands was closed after Hina 's winds and waves swept boulders on to the bridge . 
 During the system 's aftermath , insurance companies flew in people to assess the damage , while agricultural authorities on Tongatapu and ' Eua advised landowners to plant fast maturing produce such as sweet potatoes . The Tongan Government provided T $ 5 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 97 million ) or about 5 % of its national budget to facilitate the immediate start of emergency relief and repairs to essential services . Tents were supplied by the National Disaster Committee and Ministry of Works to act as temporary shelters for those who were homeless after the system . By March 19 , the Tonga Electric Power Board had restored electricity to several consumers including major government buildings and the Nuku 'alofa Business District . However , several consumers were expected to be without electric until at least June 1997 . On March 25 , the Acting Prime Minister of Tonga convened a meeting of donors , where an official request for international assistance was presented . At the meeting donors were requested to review existing of proposed bilateral programs , to see if they can be adjusted or brought forward to cater for the repairs or rebuilding of schools and other government buildings . The New Zealand Government deployed to Tonga , four electricity line mechanics , a fully equipped truck , along with various supplies including tarpaulins , blankets and electric . New Zealand also offered grants off up to NZ $ 120 thousand to replace village water tanks , and NZ $ 7 thousand towards the clean @-@ up costs . 
 The Government of the United Kingdom granted T $ 60 thousand ( GB £ 30 thousand , US $ 48 thousand ) for ten emergency generators , while the Chinese Government pledged T $ 36 thousand ( US $ 30 thousand ) . The French government provided a cargo plane , to conduct a damage survey of the affected areas and US $ 100 thousand for tents , tarpaulins and blankets and two diesel generators . The Japanese Government provided tents , plastic sheets and other emergency aid materials to the value of T $ 59 thousand . Australia provided T $ 320 thousand for temporary roof repairs and equipment to restore electricity supplies in both Tongatapu and ' Eua . Grants between T $ 22 thousand and T $ 24 thousand were pledged by Germany , Norway and the United Nations Department of Humanitarian Affairs respectively . By early September 1997 , the reconstruction of primary school buildings damaged by the cyclone had been completed after the Tongan Government funded the project . New accommodation for primary school teachers in the Ha 'apai islands and the Niuas was also completed after the Australian and New Zealand Governments funded the projects . MMI insurance provided the Tonga Amateur Sports Association with T $ 384 thousand to cover damages to the <unk> Grand Stand . 
 = Walter O 'Malley = 
 Walter Francis O 'Malley ( October 9 , 1903 – August 9 , 1979 ) was an American sports executive who owned the Brooklyn / Los Angeles Dodgers team in Major League Baseball from 1950 to 1979 . In 1958 , as owner of the Dodgers , he brought major league baseball to the West Coast , moving the Dodgers from Brooklyn to Los Angeles despite the Dodgers being the 2nd most profitable team in baseball from 1946 – 1956 , and coordinating the move of the New York Giants to San Francisco at a time when there were no teams west of Kansas City , Missouri . For this , he was long vilified by Brooklyn Dodgers fans . However , Pro @-@ O 'Malley parties describe him as a visionary for the same business action , and many authorities cite him as one of the most influential sportsmen of the 20th century . Other observers say that he was not a visionary , but instead a man who was in the right place at the right time , and regard him as the most powerful and influential owner in baseball after moving the team . He was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame for his contributions to and influence on the game of baseball amidst allegations that his family donated money to get him into the Hall of Fame . 
 O 'Malley 's Irish father , Edwin Joseph O 'Malley , was politically connected . Walter , a University of Pennsylvania salutatorian , went on to obtain a Juris Doctor , and he used the combination of his family connections , his personal contacts , and both his educational and vocational skills to rise to prominence . First , he became an entrepreneur involved in public works contracting , and then he became an executive with the Dodgers . He progressed from being a team lawyer to being both the Dodgers ' owner and president , and he eventually made the business decision to relocate the Dodgers franchise . Although he moved the franchise , O 'Malley is known as a businessman whose major philosophy was stability through loyalty to and from his employees . 
 O 'Malley ceded the team presidency to his son , Peter , in 1970 but retained the titles of owner and chairman of the Dodgers until his death in 1979 . During the 1975 season , the Dodgers ' inability to negotiate a contract with Andy Messersmith led to the Seitz decision , which limited the baseball reserve clause and paved the way for modern free agency . He bequeathed the team to his children Peter O 'Malley and Therese O 'Malley Seidler upon his death in 1979 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Walter O 'Malley was the only child of Edwin Joseph O 'Malley ( 1883 – 1955 ) , who worked as a cotton goods salesman in the Bronx in 1903 . Edwin O 'Malley later became the Commissioner of Public Markets for New York City . Walter 's mother was Alma <unk> ( 1882 – 1940 ) . O 'Malley grew up as a Bronx @-@ born New York Giants fan . He frequently attended Giants games at the Polo Grounds with his uncle Clarence . O 'Malley was a Boy Scout who rose to the rank of Star . 
 O 'Malley attended Jamaica High School in Queens from 1918 to 1920 and then the Culver Academy ( the eventual high school alma mater of future New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner ) in Indiana . He managed both the baseball and tennis teams , served on the executive staff of the student newspaper , was a member of the Hospital Visitation Committee as well as the debate team , Bible Discipline Committee and the YMCA . At Culver , his baseball career was ended with a baseball that hit him on the nose . 
 Later , he attended the University of Pennsylvania ( Penn ) and graduated in 1926 as the senior class <unk> . At Penn , he was initiated into Theta Delta Chi , and he also served as president of the Phi Deuteron Charge . Upon his graduation from the University of Pennsylvania School of Engineering and Applied Science his father gave him a cabin cruiser that slept eight . He was also Junior and Senior class president . O ’ Malley originally enrolled at Columbia University in New York City for law school , but after his family lost their money in the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , he switched from Columbia Law School to night school at Fordham University . Edwin O 'Malley 's dry goods business was failing and Walter had to help run the business . 
 = = Personal = = 
 On September 5 , 1931 , he married Katherine Elizabeth " Kay " Hanson ( 1907 – 79 ) , whom he had dated since high school , at Saint Malachy 's Roman Catholic Church in Manhattan . They had two children : Therese O 'Malley Seidler ( born in 1933 ) and Peter O 'Malley ( born in 1937 ) . Kay had been diagnosed with laryngeal cancer in 1927 before the engagement and had to have her larynx removed . She was unable to speak above a whisper the rest of her life . Edwin O 'Malley encouraged Walter to break off his engagement , and after Walter refused his parents did not attend the wedding . O 'Malley was a smoker , who <unk> occasionally , but more commonly gardened for recreation . In 1944 , he remodelled his parents ' summer house in Amityville , New York and relocated his family there from Brooklyn . The house was next door to the house Kay had grown up and her parents lived next door . 
 As a family man , he attended church regularly , attended Peter 's football games at LaSalle Academy , chaperoned his daughter 's dances . On summer weekends he took the family sailing on his boat , which was named Dodger . 
 = = Pre @-@ baseball career = = 
 After he completed his law degree in 1930 at Fordham Law , he worked as an assistant engineer for the New York City Subway . After earning his law degree he needed to obtain a clerkship , but it was during the depression and no one could afford to hire him . He allowed a struggling lawyer to use space in his office and paid for his own clerkship . After working for the Subway , he worked for Thomas F. Riley , who owned the Riley Drilling Company , and they formed the partnership of Riley and O 'Malley . With the help of Edwin O 'Malley 's political connections , Walter 's company received contracts from the New York Telephone Company and the New York City Board of Education to perform geological surveys . Subsequently , Walter started the Walter F. O 'Malley Engineering Company and published the Subcontractors Register with his uncle , Joseph O 'Malley ( 1893 – 1985 ) . 
 Walter eventually concentrated on the field of law , starting with work on wills and deeds . By 1933 , he was senior partner in a 20 @-@ man Midtown Manhattan law firm . He developed the business habits of smoking cigars and of answering questions only after taking two puffs . During the Great Depression , O 'Malley represented bankrupt companies and enriched himself , while building his thriving law practice . He invested wisely in firms such as the Long Island Rail Road , Brooklyn Borough Gas Company , the New York Subways Advertising Company , a building materials firm , a beer firm and some hotels . His success begot both influence and attention . The Brooklyn Democratic Machine powers such as judge Henry <unk> and Brooklyn Trust Company president George Vincent McLaughlin were among those who noticed the rising O 'Malley . 
 = = Dodgers = = 
 McLaughlin had been New York City Police Commissioner in 1926 , knew O 'Malley 's father , and had attended Philadelphia Athletics games with O 'Malley when O 'Malley was still at the University of Pennsylvania . McLaughlin hired O 'Malley to administer mortgage foreclosures against failing businesses for the Trust Company . O 'Malley earned McLaughlin 's confidence by acting in numerous capacities including bodyguard , valet , chauffeur , adopted son , confidant and right @-@ hand man . The trust company owned the estate of Charles Ebbets , who had died in 1925 and owned half of the Brooklyn Dodgers . It was 1933 when Walter again met George V. McLaughlin , president of the Brooklyn Trust Company . O 'Malley was chosen to protect the company 's financial interests in the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1933 . O 'Malley also served as designated driver for the hard drinking McLaughlin . It was through McLaughlin that Walter was brought into the financial arrangements for Ebbets Field in 1940 . In 1942 , when Larry MacPhail resigned as general manager to serve in the United States Army as a Lieutenant colonel , O 'Malley was appointed the attorney for the Dodgers , and he obtained a minority ownership interest on November 1 , 1944 . He purchased 25 % as did Branch Rickey and John L. Smith ( president of Pfizer Chemical ) , while the heirs of Stephen McKeever retained the final quarter . In 1943 , he replaced Wendell Willkie as chief legal counsel . Branch Rickey , who had built the St. Louis Cardinals into champions , replaced MacPhail , and O 'Malley began to accumulate stock in the Dodgers . 
 Rickey was a conservative teetotaler , while O 'Malley freely enjoyed vices such as alcoholic beverages and tobacco . As O 'Malley became more involved in affairs , he became critical of Rickey , the highest @-@ paid individual in baseball , counting salary , attendance bonuses , and player contract sales commissions . O 'Malley and Rickey had very different backgrounds and philosophies . It was O 'Malley who put pressure on Rickey to fire manager Leo Durocher , who O 'Malley felt was a drain on attendance . In board of directors meetings , O 'Malley also opposed Rickey 's extravagances . When he was with his political friends , he made fun of Rickey at every chance . Daily News columnist Jimmy Powers would deride Rickey for selling off players and for general miserliness . When Rickey asked O 'Malley , the team lawyer , if he should sue , O 'Malley said no . Powers ' campaign became so public that after the 1946 season Rickey gave each player a new Studebaker , which gave O 'Malley , a Dodgers shareholder , reason to speak ill of Rickey in the press . It got to the point where everything Rickey did was something O 'Malley derided : O 'Malley thought Rickey 's construction of the state of the art Vero Beach spring training facility , known as Dodgertown , was extravagant ; he thought Rickey 's investment in the Brooklyn Dodgers of the All @-@ America Football Conference was questionable ; he fought Rickey on the team 's beer sponsor ; and he demanded that players return their 1947 World Series rings before receiving the new ones Rickey ordered . As team lawyer , O 'Malley had a role in breaking the racial barrier as well . In particular , he had a significant role in Rickey 's top @-@ secret search for suitable ballplayers to break the color barrier and then later he had a role in assessing the ongoing legal risks to the franchise . 
 = = = Control = = = 
 When co @-@ owner Smith died in July 1950 , O 'Malley convinced his widow to turn over control of the shares to the Brooklyn Trust Company , which O 'Malley controlled as chief legal counsel . Rickey 's contract as general manager was set to expire on October 28 , 1950 . Rickey 's Dodgers stock was held on margin and he had fully levered life insurance policy . O 'Malley <unk> Rickey with an offer of $ 346 @,@ 000 ( the purchase price ) . Rickey demanded $ 1 million ( $ 9 @,@ 835 @,@ 408 today ) . O 'Malley eventually pursued a complicated buyout of Rickey , who had received an outside offer from William Zeckendorf of $ 1 million for his interests . There were varying accounts about the sincerity of the offer because Zeckendorf and Pittsburgh Pirates owner John Galbreath were fraternity brothers , but there is a lot of evidence that he had a sincere interest in acquiring the team . The outside offer triggered a clause in the partnership agreement whereby the asking price of a third party had to be matched if a current owner wanted to retain control and the third party would be compensated $ 50 @,@ 000 . The canceled $ 50 @,@ 000 check would later include Rickey 's signature showing that Zeckendorf turned over the $ 50 @,@ 000 to Rickey . 
 O 'Malley replaced Rickey with Buzzie Bavasi . O 'Malley became the president and chief stockholder ( owner ) on October 26 , 1950 . O 'Malley assumed the title of president from Rickey , who was a trailblazer in baseball both for instituting the farm system and for breaking the racial barrier with Jackie Robinson . According to pitcher Clem Labine and noted author Roger Kahn , the first thing O 'Malley did when he took over was assign Bavasi to <unk> himself to Dick Young of the Daily News so that O 'Malley would not have to worry about ever getting bad press from the Daily News . 
 After the ownership transfer , O 'Malley 's rivalry with Rickey became very public . O 'Malley forbade the speaking of Rickey 's name in Dodgers offices with transgressors being subjected to a fine . He abolished Rickey 's title of General Manager so that no front office person could perpetuate Rickey 's role . In addition , when Rickey assumed the title with the Pittsburgh Pirates , O 'Malley arranged for the Dodgers to omit the Pirates from their spring training schedule . Nonetheless , after the transfer , the Dodgers remained successful under O 'Malley : they won the National League pennants in 1952 , 1953 , 1955 , and 1956 . Under O 'Malley , the Dodgers were the most overtly political post World War II franchise . In 1951 , Brooklyn native and United States Congressman Emanuel Celler 's Judiciary Committee investigated whether the reserve clause was in violation of federal anti @-@ trust laws . Celler represented half of Brooklyn in Congress and O 'Malley used the local press such as the Brooklyn Eagle to pressure Celler into backing off of the issue . During the 1951 season , the Dodgers engaged former West Point varsity baseball player and U.S. Army General Douglas MacArthur to lure war veterans . O 'Malley attempted to entice him to take the post of Commissioner of Baseball . After the 1956 season , O 'Malley sold Ebbets Field to Marvin <unk> and agreed to lease the stadium for three years . 
 Robinson had been a Rickey protege , and O 'Malley did not have the same respect for Robinson that Rickey did . O 'Malley referred to him as " Rickey 's prima donna " . Robinson did not like O 'Malley 's choice for manager , Walter Alston . Robinson liked to argue with umpires , and Alston rarely did so . Robinson derided Alston in the press . In 1955 , Alston played Don Hoak at third base during the exhibition season . Robinson voiced his complaints to the press . Robinson did not get along with Bavasi either , and the three seasons under Alston were uncomfortable for Robinson . Robinson announced his retirement in Look magazine after the 1956 season . 
 The signing of Robinson brought the team international fame , making O 'Malley an international baseball ambassador to celebrities such as Iraq 's King Faisal II . In 1954 , Dodgers scout Al Campanis signed Sandy Koufax in large part for two reasons , according to a memo to O 'Malley that said " No. 1 , he 's a Brooklyn boy . No. 2 , he 's Jewish . " Bavasi noted that " there were many people of the Jewish faith in Brooklyn . " During the 1955 season , Dodgers catcher Roy Campanella had a medical billing controversy regarding neurosurgery services by Manhattan doctor Dr. Samuel Shenkman . Shenkman billed $ 9 @,@ 500 , an amount which Campanella forwarded to the Dodgers and the Dodgers refused to pay . O 'Malley felt the doctor was overcharging : " It appears that [ Dr. Shenkman ] thought he was operating on Roy 's bankroll ... " The Dodgers had convinced Campanella to have the surgery after enduring a slump in 1954 following MVP seasons in 1951 and 1953 . The surgery was intended to restore complete use of his hand . 
 Despite having won the National League pennants in 1947 , 1949 , 1952 and 1953 , they lost to the New York Yankees in the World Series each time , which frustrated O 'Malley and all Dodgers fans . In 1955 , the team won the World Series for the first time in their history . However , attendance declined from a peak of 1 @.@ 7 million in 1946 and 1947 to just over one million per year in the mid @-@ 1950s . With the advent of the affordable automobile and post @-@ war prosperity , Brooklyn 's formerly heterogeneous , middle @-@ class fan base for the Dodgers began to splinter . A large white flight took place , and Ebbets Field 's shabby condition and lack of parking spaces led to the loss of fans who relocated to Long Island . O 'Malley tried to raise money and get the political backing to build a new ballpark elsewhere in Brooklyn . The one person whose backing he needed was Robert Moses , a powerful figure who influenced development in New York through the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority . O 'Malley envisioned a domed stadium near the Long Island Rail Road station on Brooklyn 's west end , and even invited R. Buckminster Fuller to design the structure ; Fuller , in conjunction with graduate students from Princeton University , constructed a model of the " Dodgers ' Dome " . Moses did not like O 'Malley and derided O 'Malley 's pro @-@ Brooklyn and pro @-@ Irish sentiments in the press . O 'Malley wanted to build a new Brooklyn Dodgers stadium at Flatbush and Atlantic Avenue , but Moses wanted the Dodgers to move to Queens and play in Flushing Meadows Park ( the location where the New York Mets play today ) . Although O 'Malley lined up bipartisan political support including New York Governor W. Averell Harriman , Moses blocked the sale of the land necessary for the planned new Brooklyn stadium . O 'Malley bought the Chicago Cubs minor league baseball team , the Los Angeles Angels , as well as their stadium , Wrigley Field , from Philip Wrigley in 1956 at the winter baseball meetings , and during spring training , Los Angeles Mayor Norris Poulson traveled to the Dodgers ' training camp at Vero Beach , Florida in an attempt to lure the franchise . O 'Malley met with Moses at Moses ' home after purchasing the Angels to discuss final offers from New York to no avail . O 'Malley noticed the great success of the Milwaukee Braves after their move from Boston in 1953 . They had a 43 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium , parking for 10 @,@ 000 cars and an arrangement for no city or real estate taxes . He also felt the limitations of the small landlocked Ebbets Field , which held less than 32 @,@ 111 fans and accommodated only 700 parking spaces . Attendance between 1950 and 1957 was between 1 @,@ 020 @,@ 000 in 1954 and 1 @,@ 280 @,@ 000 in 1951 . Ultimately , O 'Malley decided to leave Brooklyn for Los Angeles in 1957 . Robert Moses authority Robert Caro and other contemporaneous sports historians felt that Moses was more to blame for the Dodgers ' leaving . The 1956 season had marked the end of the Jackie Robinson era in which the Dodgers won six pennants , lost two pennant series and finished as low as third only once in ten years , and the new era would begin in a new home . During the 1957 season , he negotiated a deal for the Dodgers to be viewed on an early pay TV network by the <unk> Corporation subject to the approval of other teams and owners . The rest of baseball was not ready for the risks of such a venture and it did not pan out at the time . 
 = = = Move to Los Angeles = = = 
 O 'Malley is considered by baseball experts to be " perhaps the most influential owner of baseball 's early expansion era . " Following the 1957 Major League Baseball season , he moved the Dodgers to Los Angeles , and New York 's Dodgers fans felt betrayed . O 'Malley was also influential in getting the rival New York Giants to move west to become the San Francisco Giants , thus preserving the two teams ' longstanding rivalry . He needed another team to go with him , for had he moved out west alone , the St. Louis Cardinals — 1 @,@ 600 mi ( 2 @,@ 575 @.@ 0 km ) away — would have been the closest National League team . The joint move would make West Coast road trips more economical for visiting teams . O 'Malley invited San Francisco Mayor George Christopher to New York to meet with Giants owner Horace Stoneham . Stoneham was considering moving the Giants to Minnesota , but he was convinced to join O 'Malley on the West Coast at the end of the 1957 campaign . Since the meetings occurred during the 1957 season and against the wishes of Commissioner of Baseball Ford Frick , there was media gamesmanship . On April 15 , 1958 , the Dodgers and Giants ushered in West Coast baseball at Seals Stadium . When O 'Malley moved the Dodgers from Brooklyn the story transcended the world of sport and he found himself on the cover of Time . The cover art for the issue was created by sports cartoonist Willard Mullin , long noted for his caricature of the " Brooklyn Bum " that personified the team . The dual moves broke the hearts of New York 's National League fans but ultimately were successful for both franchises – and for Major League Baseball as a whole . In fact , the move was an immediate success as well since the Dodgers set a major league single @-@ game attendance record in their first home appearance with 78 @,@ 672 fans . During the first year after the move , the Dodgers made $ 500 @,@ 000 more profit than any other Major League Baseball team and paid off all of their debts . In the years following the move of the New York clubs , Major League Baseball added two completely new teams in California , as well as two in Texas , one each in the Twin Cities , Denver , and Phoenix , and two teams at separate times in Seattle . In addition , the Athletics , who had already moved to Kansas City , Missouri , moved to Oakland , California ; Kansas City would get a new team the year after the A 's moved to Oakland . Most importantly , though , the National League returned to New York with the introduction of the New York Mets four years after the Dodgers and Giants had departed for California . 
 The dealings with the city of Los Angeles after the Vero Beach meeting were controversial . The initial offer of 500 acres ( 2 @.@ 02 km2 ) and tax exemptions was determined to be illegal and improper . The minor league San Diego Padres owners led an opposition effort to stop the transfer of 352 acres ( 1 @.@ 42 km2 ) in Chavez Ravine via a referendum . O 'Malley engaged in an extensive marketing and media campaign that helped the referendum pass , but there were extensive subsequent taxpayer lawsuits . The plaintiffs initially prevailed in some of these suits . Finally , during the middle of the 1959 season , the Los Angeles City Council was able to approve the final parcel for the stadium . One legendary negotiation with the city over concession revenue is that in O 'Malley 's move to the Coliseum he agreed to accept concession revenues from only half the team 's games — the home half . The land was eventually transferred by the Los Angeles city government to O 'Malley by an agreement which required O 'Malley and the Dodgers to design , build , privately finance and maintain a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ seat stadium ; develop a youth recreation center on the land . O 'Malley was to pay $ 500 @,@ 000 initially , plus annual payments of $ 60 @,@ 000 for 20 years ; and pay $ 345 @,@ 000 in property taxes starting in 1962 , putting the land on the tax rolls . Also , the Dodgers would transfer team @-@ owned Wrigley Field , then appraised at $ 2 @.@ 2 million , to the city . The city exchanged " 300 acres , more or less , in the Chavez Ravine area " , while L.A. County Supervisors unanimously agreed to provide $ 2 @.@ 74 million for access roads . In addition , the Dodgers also had to pay $ 450 @,@ 000 for territorial rights to the Pacific Coast League , whose Los Angeles Angels and Hollywood Stars suspended play . 
 When he made the decision to relocate in October 1957 to Los Angeles , O 'Malley did not have an established location for where the Dodgers would play in 1958 . O 'Malley worked out a deal with Los Angeles County and the state of California to rent the Los Angeles Coliseum for $ 200 @,@ 000 per year for 1958 and 1959 , plus 10 % of the ticket revenue , and all concession profits for the first nine games of each season following an opening series with the San Francisco Giants . The Dodgers temporarily took up residence while they awaited the completion of 56 @,@ 000 @-@ seat capacity Dodger Stadium , built for $ 23 million . The Dodgers were soon drawing more than two million fans a year . They remained successful on the field as well , winning the World Series in 1959 , 1963 , and 1965 . The Los Angeles Angels also played in Dodger Stadium from 1962 to 1965 . In the 1960s , O 'Malley attempted to buy out the contract of Shigeo Nagashima of the Tokyo Yomiuri Giants from <unk> <unk> . In 1960 , O 'Malley refused to pay right fielder Carl Furillo for the 1960 season after he was released early due to injury . This forced Furillo to sue the team . Because of this , O 'Malley allegedly blacklisted Furillo from any job in baseball . 
 His son , Peter O 'Malley , described his management style as follows : " As president , the way he ran the business , he believed in stability and very little turnover . It was the strength of the organization . The management team worked as well as the team on the field . " This is evidenced in many ways , including the long tenure of both Walter Alston and Tommy Lasorda as Dodgers managers and Vin Scully , the broadcast voice of the Dodgers . Alston was repeatedly rehired to consecutive one @-@ year contracts from 1954 – 1976 until he retired . Then Lasorda , who had been a long @-@ time employee in as a coach and minor league baseball manager , took over as manager for another 20 years . Scully has been the voice of the Dodgers since the O 'Malley family acquired the team . In addition , the infield of first baseman Steve Garvey , second baseman Davey Lopes , shortstop Bill Russell and third baseman Ron Cey was the longest @-@ running intact infield in major league history . Furthermore , O 'Malley is said to have kept Bowie Kuhn in office as the Commissioner of Baseball until O 'Malley 's death . O 'Malley rewarded loyal employee Bavasi by allowing the San Diego Padres franchise to establish an expansion team with Bavasi as President in Southern California . Alston said O 'Malley convinced him that when he signed his first one @-@ year contract it could be a lifetime job by pointing out that " signing one @-@ year contracts can mean a lifetime job , if you keep signing enough of them . " Although O 'Malley had good stories of loyalty with some employees , there were several stories of O 'Malley 's frugality . 
 Although O 'Malley was loyal to his employees , he did not take kindly to demands from employees such as manager Charlie Dressen 's request for a three @-@ year contract . When Dressen requested a multi @-@ year contract after losing a second consecutive World Series to the Yankees , he was released . Then when he hired Walter Alston as a replacement , he made it clear to the press that Alston would only receive one @-@ year contracts and would not attempt to show up the management in the national media . There were rumors that Alston even signed blank contracts in the fall and showed up in the spring to find out his salary . O 'Malley also did not support those who remained friends with Rickey , which was a large factor in Red Barber quitting as Dodgers announcer . 
 O 'Malley believed that employees should accept whatever salaries they were offered . In 1966 , this led to the contract holdouts of Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale , who employed the same lawyer . The duo of pitching aces decided to strike together until they were both satisfied . They had earned $ 70 @,@ 000 and $ 75 @,@ 000 respectively during the 1965 season , during which the Dodgers won the World Series , and O 'Malley offered $ 105 @,@ 000 and $ 95 @,@ 000 for the 1966 season . At the time , Willie Mays was Major League Baseball 's highest paid player at $ 125 @,@ 000 per year and multi @-@ year contracts were very unusual . They demanded three @-@ year $ 167 @,@ 000 per year contracts and after holding out until less than two weeks before Opening Day , they received one @-@ year $ 130 @,@ 000 and $ 115 @,@ 000 contracts respectively . 
 O 'Malley liked clubhouse turmoil only slightly less than free agent disloyalty . When he traded Maury Wills to the Pittsburgh Pirates following consecutive National League pennants , it was attributed to Wills having quit during the middle of the Dodgers ' post @-@ season tour of Japan . 
 = = = Retirement from presidency = = = 
 On March 17 , 1970 , Walter turned over the presidency of the team to his son Peter , remaining as Chairman until his death in 1979 . Peter O 'Malley held the position until 1998 when the team was sold to Rupert Murdoch . The team remained successful on the field under Peter and won the World Series in both 1981 and 1988 . They remained successful at the box office as well : by the end of the 1980s , they had not only became the first franchise to draw three million fans , but also they had done it more times than all other franchises combined . During the 1970s , O 'Malley was credited for <unk> Lasorda 's career . Lasorda become known for his die @-@ hard Dodgers clichés , such as describing the color of his blood by saying " Cut me , I bleed Dodger blue . " It was even said that the reciprocal loyalty and respect between Lasorda and O 'Malley was so high that O 'Malley gave Lasorda a tombstone as a gift that had an inscription that read " <unk> <unk> , A <unk> " . 
 The <unk> held their 25 % interest in the Dodgers until 1975 when Dearie McKeever died . They sold out to O 'Malley making him the sole owner of the Dodgers . Also during 1975 , the Dodgers franchise was embroiled in the Andy Messersmith controversy that led to the Seitz decision , which struck down baseball 's reserve clause and opened up the sport to modern free agency . Messersmith and the Dodgers were unable to come to contract terms in part because of a then unheard of no @-@ trade clause demand , and Messersmith pitched the entire season without a contract under the reserve clause , which stated that team has the right to extend the prior years contract one year if a player does not agree to terms . Teams had previously had the right to continue such re @-@ signings year after year . This gave owners the right to issue " take it or leave it " offers to the players . Although the Dodgers and Messersmith nearly hammered out a deal monetarily , they could not come to terms on the no @-@ trade clause . Supposedly Major League Baseball instructed the Dodgers not to surrender such a clause for the good of the game . The Seitz decision limited the re @-@ signings to one year , and since Messersmith performed quite well in 1975 , winning a Gold Glove Award and leading the National League in complete games and shutouts , while finishing second in earned run average , he was a valuable talent . He earned offers from six different teams . Messersmith became the first free agent , except for Catfish Hunter who had been declared a 1974 free agent by breach of contract . O 'Malley felt the price wars would be the downfall of baseball because the fans only have so much money . The scenario led to an eighteen @-@ day lockout during spring training in 1976 over the prospect of dozens of players playing becoming free agents and the inability to redesign the reserve clause . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 O 'Malley was diagnosed with cancer , and he sought treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minnesota . He died of congestive heart failure on August 9 , 1979 at the Methodist Hospital in Rochester , and was buried at Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City , California . His wife Kay had died a few weeks earlier . 
 At one time , Brooklyn Dodgers fans hated O 'Malley so much for moving their beloved team that he was routinely mentioned along with Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin as the most villainous 20th @-@ century men ; one version of a joke went , " If a Brooklyn man finds himself in a room with Hitler , Stalin , and O 'Malley , but has only two bullets , what does he do ? Shoot O 'Malley twice . " Some still consider him among the worst three men of the 20th century . Much of the animosity was not just for moving the team , but robbing Brooklyn of the sense of a cohesive cultural and social identity that a major sports franchise provides . Despite the long @-@ standing animosity of Brooklyn fans and their supporters in baseball , O 'Malley was posthumously inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2008 after having been elected by the Veterans Committee with the minimal number of votes necessary for acceptance . 
 His legacy is that of changing the mindset of a league that for a long time had had the St. Louis Cardinals as its southernmost and westernmost team ( American League Kansas City Athletics had moved west 3 years earlier from Philadelphia ) . Tommy Lasorda said upon hearing of his election to the Hall , " He 's a pioneer . He made a tremendous change in the game , opening up the West Coast to Major League Baseball . " When asked how he wanted to be remembered , O 'Malley said , " for planting a tree . " The tree provided the branches to open up the West Coast to baseball , but O 'Malley 's son remembers his father 's 28 years on Major League Baseball 's executive council as service that " was instrumental in the early stages of the game 's international growth . " His contributions to baseball were widely recognized even before his Hall of Fame election : he was ranked 8th and 11th respectively by ABC Sports and The Sporting News in their lists of the most influential sports figures of the 20th century . 
 On July 7 , 2009 , Walter O 'Malley was inducted into the Irish American Baseball Hall of Fame along with two other Dodger icons : slugger Steve Garvey and announcer Vin Scully . " Over the years , we have learned more of his decade @-@ long quest to build a new stadium in Brooklyn and about how those efforts were thwarted by city officials . Perhaps this induction will inspire fans who themselves started new lives outside the borough to reconsider their thoughts about Walter O ’ Malley " , said John Mooney , curator of the Irish American Baseball Hall of Fame . " He privately built one of baseball 's more beautiful ballparks , Dodger Stadium , and set attendance records annually . While New York is the home of the Irish American Baseball Hall of Fame , it seeks to honor inductees whose impact was and is national . " 
 O 'Malley 's detractors say that he was not a visionary for taking baseball west . They say the game was naturally heading toward geographical expansion and O 'Malley just an opportunist . Rather than truly being a leader these detractors say his leadership was a manifestation of making the most money . 
 = = Popular culture = = 
 O 'Malley was mentioned several times in Danny Kaye 's 1962 song tribute The D @-@ O @-@ D @-@ G @-@ E @-@ R @-@ S Song ( Oh , Really ? No , O 'Malley ! ) , which spins a tale of a fantasy game between the Dodgers and the Giants . At one point , the umpire 's call goes against the home team : 
 Down in the dugout , Alston <unk> 
 Up in the booth , Vin Scully frowns ; 
 Out in the stands , O 'Malley grins ... 
 Attendance 50 @,@ 000 ! 
 So .... what does O 'Malley do ? <unk> ! ! 
 Just before the St. Louis Cardinals began a series of games against the Dodgers at Dodger Stadium , in 1963 , the Los Angeles Times published a large cartoon , drawn by artist Pete <unk> , modeled on the movies about the German submarine captain . The captain is Cards ' manager Johnny Keane ; his " lieutenant " is Stan Musial . They wear Cardinal uniforms with naval officers ' caps bearing the " <unk> " emblem . While Keane and Musial are speaking , other crew members load bats , like torpedoes , into torpedo tubes ; the bats have players ' faces ( and names and batting averages ) drawn on them . Keane looks through the periscope ; the inset shows a battleship with a large head of O 'Malley , wearing a naval officers cap bearing the " LA " emblem and puffing a cigar . Keane : " Achtung <unk> [ Stan ] ! I <unk> ve sunk sem last year ? " Musial : " <unk> , Mein <unk> , Ve vill blast <unk> vit bigger und better torpedoes zis <unk> ! " ( The Cards made a terrific drive for the pennant but finished the season six games back of the Dodgers . ) 
 O 'Malley was featured prominently in the HBO documentary film Brooklyn Dodgers : Ghosts of Flatbush , which chronicled his executive management of the Brooklyn / Los Angeles Dodgers . The documentary focuses on the post World War II glory years of the franchise and presents a compelling case that O 'Malley truly wanted to keep the Dodgers in Brooklyn in a stadium near a railroad station , but he was unable to get the proper support from Moses . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = 1989 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1989 Pacific hurricane season was a really active Pacific hurricane season that produced a lot of tropical cyclones near Mexico and Baja California . It officially started on May 15 , 1989 in the eastern Pacific , and June 1 , 1989 in the central Pacific , and lasted until November 30 , 1989 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . A total of 17 storms and 9 hurricanes formed , which was near long @-@ term averages . Four hurricanes reached major hurricane status ( Category 3 or higher ) on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 Notable storms include Hurricanes Cosme , Kiko , and Raymond . Cosme crossed over Mexico and killed 30 people . Hurricane Kiko made landfall on the Gulf of California side of the Baja California Peninsula . Hurricane Raymond was the strongest storm of the season , but weakened significantly before landfall . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 Overall , the season continued the general trend in the 1980s of near to above @-@ average seasons in the East Pacific . Seventeen cyclones formed . Eight peaked at tropical storm strength . Nine systems became hurricanes , of which four were major hurricanes at Category 3 intensity or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . On August 28 , three systems were active , one of a few times when there has been three tropical cyclones active simultaneously ( Kiko , Lorena , and Manuel ) in the east Pacific ( west of 140 ° W ) . Despite the activity this season , no named storms formed in October . This was the second consecutive season this happened . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Winona = = = 
 During the second week of January , an upper @-@ level trough located east of Hawaii created an area of divergence to its southeast , allowing an area of low pressure to develop alongside deep convection . Initially , the system was hampered by wind shear as it moved west @-@ northwestward to the south of Hawaii ; however , by January 11 , the system was able to maintain convection over its center and was classified as a tropical depression . On January 13 , it was estimated in post @-@ storm analysis to have become a tropical storm at an unprecedented 20 @.@ 7 ° N 170 @.@ 5 ° W ﻿ / 20 @.@ 7 ; <unk> . Meteorologists at the time struggled to forecast the storm as climatological forecast guidance ( modeling based off previous cyclones ) , was not available due to the uniqueness of Winona . On January 15 , the system crossed the International Dateline and entered the Western Pacific basin . 
 As a tropical depression , Winona brought heavy rains to portions of Hawaii , triggering flash flooding on a few islands . No damage resulted from the floods . After becoming a tropical storm , the system brushed Wake Island , bringing gusty winds and moderate rainfall . Several days later , the storm passed near the Mariana Islands and Guam , bringing tropical storm @-@ force wind gusts and heavy rainfall . Minor damage resulted from Winona but there was no loss of life . Operationally , this system was not classified a tropical storm until January 16 , thus it was not warned upon by the Central Pacific Hurricane Center during its early stages . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Adolph = = = 
 The first storm of the season developed out of a weak area of low pressure situated about 570 mi ( 925 km ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco , Mexico . Tracking towards the west , the circulation briefly dissipated on May 30 , before redeveloping the following day into Tropical Depression One @-@ E. A ridge of high pressure north of the system steered it towards the west @-@ northwest . By 0600 UTC on June 1 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name Adolph . Adolph continued to strengthen until early on June 2 , at which time it reached its peak intensity with winds of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 994 mbar ( hPa ) . Shortly after peaking , cool , dry air became entrained in the circulation , preventing further intensification . Early on June 3 , Adolph weakened slightly due to unfavorable conditions . Later that day , Adolph briefly re @-@ intensified . On June 4 , strong wind shear displaced convection associated with the storm to the west of the center of circulation ; this resulted in Adolph weakening to a tropical depression by 1800 UTC that day , and Adolph persisted until June 5 at which time it dissipated . 
 = = = Hurricane Barbara = = = 
 On June 10 , an area of disturbed weather was located several hundred miles southwest of Acapulco , Mexico , and the system slowed to a westward drift . After gradually becoming better organized , the NHC estimated that the wave spawned Tropical Depression Two @-@ E around 1800 UTC on June 15 . Initially , the depression towards the northwest before a ridge of high pressure situated over Mexico caused the storm to turn towards the west @-@ northwest . Based on improving satellite presentation , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Barbara . With favorable conditions , Barbara continued to intensify , attaining hurricane @-@ status roughly 24 hours after being named . Six hours later , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) Satellite images early on June 18 showed that cool , dry air was becoming entrained into the northern inflow of the storm and Barbara was nearing cooler waters . These factors led to the storm weakening below hurricane intensity by 0000 UTC on June 19 . Wind shear at this time also began to increase , displacing all convection associated with the storm to the northeast of the center . By June 20 , the former hurricane was further downgraded to a tropical depression . The NHC issued their final advisory on the system early on June 21 ; however , the remnants of the storm persisted until June 27 . 
 = = = Hurricane Cosme = = = 
 On June 18 a tropical disturbance formed several hundred miles off the coast of Mexico . Ships in the vicinity of the storm , in addition to satellite images , indicated that the disturbance had developed into Tropical Depression Three @-@ E around 1800 UTC . Remaining nearly stationary , the depression gradually strengthened into a tropical storm by June 20 , receiving the name Cosme at that time . Early on June 21 , Cosme began to track towards the north and intensify . Around 1200 UTC , Cosme strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Several hours later , Cosme reached its peak intensity . Late on June 21 , the center of the hurricane made landfall on the Mexican coast , just east of Acapulco with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . The low associated with the former hurricane was last identified near Brownsville , Texas . 
 Cosme brought heavy rains , which killed at least 30 people due to drowning . Many adobe homes were destroyed , but a specific cost of damage is not known . The highest rainfall recorded in relation to Cosme was 16 @.@ 1 in ( 410 mm ) in Yautepec San Bartolo , Mexico . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Four @-@ E = = = 
 The fourth tropical cyclone of the season formed as a well @-@ organized depression on July 9 . Deep convection associated with the system indicated that intensification into a tropical storm was possible . The system track generally westward in response to high pressure system to the north . On July 10 , the depression quickly became disorganized , with only a small area of convection around the center remaining by midday . Although the depression was nearly at tropical storm intensity , the NHC held off on upgrading it due to its proximity to Tropical Depression Five @-@ E. However , the system failed to intensify . By July 11 , the depression entered the Central Pacific hurricane center 's area of responsibility . Tracking generally northwest , the system slowly weakened before dissipating on July 14 to the south of Hawaii . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Five @-@ E = = = 
 On July 10 , a tropical depression formed far from land . Upon formation , there was uncertainty of the location of center . Shortly thereafter , the system became sheared and further intensification was no longer anticipated . On July 11 , the low @-@ level center became displaced form the deep <unk> the next day , the center was relocated , and moved to the west . While the NHC noted the possibility of intensification , the depression was forecasted to dissipate in 36 hours . It failed to intensify , and moved into the Central Pacific on July 14 . The fast @-@ moving tropical depression dissipated two days later . The remnants of the depression passed far to the south of Hawaii , thus there was no damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Dalilia = = = 
 On July 9 , a defined low pressure system formed south of Baja California and increased convective activity led to the NHC classifying it Tropical Depression Six @-@ E on July 11 . About 24 hours later , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Dalilia . By July 13 , Dalilia had intensified into a minimal hurricane as it tracked generally toward the northwest . Two days later , the storm took a nearly due west track , which it maintained until July 19 . Although the storm tracked near cool waters , a well @-@ developed outflow allowed it to maintain hurricane @-@ intensity . Shortly before crossing into the Central Pacific basin , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) and a central pressure of 977 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 85 inHg ) . After crossing 140 ° W , Dalilia weakened to a minimal hurricane . The storm maintained this intensity until July 19 , at which time the system slowed and turned northwest . The following day , the weakening tropical storm brushed the Hawaiian Islands to the south , eventually curving away from the island chain on July 21 . Later that day , Dalilia further weakened to a tropical depression , with the Central Pacific Hurricane Center issuing their final advisory at that time . The remnants of the former hurricane continued to track northwest . 
 While tracking near the Hawaiian islands , Dalilia produced waves up to 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) along south @-@ facing coastlines . Along the coasts of Ka 'u and South Kona , winds gusted up to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) ; the winds caused minor damage Along the southeast slopes of Mauna Loa , heavy rains caused minor flooding which forced transit officials to shut down several roads . Localized areas received rainfall in excess of 10 in ( 250 mm ) . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Seven @-@ E = = = 
 On July 16 , an area of disturbed weather located 900 mi ( 1 @,@ 400 km ) organized into a tropical depression . Upon formation , the NHC did not anticipate significant intensification due to it close distance to both cooler waters and Hurricane Dalilia . The next day , however , the center became difficult to locate and the system was no longer forecast to intensity . By the night , only minimal deep convection remained . The depression soon moved into cold water and as such the system was expected to dissipate within 24 hours . It dissipated the next day . The remnants of this system contributed to a surge in the monsoon trough that led to the formation of Tropical Storm Erick . This system never impacted land , and thus no damage or deaths were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Erick = = = 
 On July 16 , there was a surge in convection in the monsoon trough . The most concentrated area soon separated for the trough and by July 19 , satellite imagery indicated an area of deep convection that was located nearly 1 @,@ 237 mi ( 1 @,@ 991 km ) away from Mexico . Early that day , the system was upgraded to a tropical depression . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , only slight intensification was anticipated . The system intensified to a tropical storm 24 hours after forming . Erick soon moved into cooler waters . This quickly weakened the cyclone and was downgraded to a tropical depression on July 20 . It dissipated the next day , without ever impacting any land masses . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Flossie = = = 
 Flossie originated form a tropical wave that entered the Pacific Ocean on July 20 . The system began to show sings of organization two days later . Continuing to organize , the system was upgraded Tropical Depression Nine @-@ E on July 23 . Despite being located over warm waters , only gradual intensification was anticipated . It strengthened into Tropical Storm Flossie the next day . Shortly thereafter the upgraded , convection began to diminish . The cyclone then drifted northwest . The upper @-@ level environment rapidly changed , and the cyclones convection became disorganized . The convection separated from the center of circulation . The cluster of convection developed a new center of circulation on July 24 . The original center drifted away from Flossie for 12 hours before dissipating . The new center , which was still a tropical storm , drifted northwest . Flossie then encountered an unfavorable environment , and weakened into a depression on July 25 . Flossie continued drifting to the northwest until dissipating July 28 , while just off the coast of the Baja California Peninsula . Despite its close distance to Mexico , no damage or deaths was reported . 
 = = = Hurricane Gil = = = 
 Gil formed from an area of disturbed weather located near the Mexico – Guatemala border developed a circulation in the Gulf of Tehuantepec and then dissipated . On July 30 , the disturbance redeveloped a circulation and then convection . It paralleled the coast of Mexico and headed in a northwesterly direction . The low continued to organize , and was upgraded into a tropical depression . Initially , there was some uncertain in the storms future path , and there was a possibility of the system recurving towards the coast . It strengthened into a tropical storm on July 31 . The system continued to become better organized , with further intensification <unk> because the low was located over very warm waters ; and was upgraded into a hurricane that same day . Shortly thereafter , the cyclone developed an eye . Gil was a hurricane for only about 30 hours , and it began to encounter dry air . By the August 1 , Gill had lost hurricane intensity . It was downgraded to a tropical depression the next day . The cyclone dissipated on August 5 . 
 The outer bands of Gil produced significant amounts of rainfall over coastal areas of Mexico , with satellites estimating areas of rainfall in excess of 5 in ( 130 mm ) . The heavy rains may have triggered deadly flooding and landslides ; however , no reports from Mexican officials have been received to confirm this . However , officials reported 4 @.@ 8 in ( 120 mm ) of rain in a 12 @-@ hour period . 
 = = = Hurricane Ismael = = = 
 A tropical wave crossed Central America on July 11 , and then became an area of low pressure . While located of the coast of Mexico it became better organized on August 14 . This was enough to warrant an upgrade to Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E. This system slowly became better organized , but northerly wind shear prevent rapid intensification . Initially , this system was slow to intensify . After strengthening into Tropical Storm Ismael , it closely paralleled the coast of Mexico , Ismael turned to the west . It would maintain that generally westerly direction for the rest of its long path across the Pacific Ocean . The system steadily intensified , and by August 16 , Ismael had developed a fair outflow . It reached hurricane strength later that day . Continuing to intensify , the hurricane reached Category 2 intensity . However , the system was not expect to intensify further due to cool sea surface temperatures . However , Ismael managed reached Category 3 status . It then reached a peak intensity of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a peak pressure of 955 millibars . Shortly after its peak , Ismael underwent fluctuations in strength . On August 21 , Ismael passed over cooler waters . In addition , the storm encountered strong wind shear . The hostile environment continued to take its toll on Ismael , and it weakened to a tropical storm on August 23 . Ismael dissipated not long after weakening to a depression on August 25 . The remains of Ismael , which was only a swirl of clouds , dissipated near Hawaii . 
 Between August 15 and 17 , the outer bands of Ismael produced heavy rains along coastal areas of Mexico between Acapulco and Manzanillo , Colima . At least three people were killed by flooding triggered by the storm ; however , no structural damage was reported . Despite the rainfall , there were no reports of flooding . The remnants of the hurricane passed near , but did not pose a threat Hawaii . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Henriette = = = 
 On August 12 , a tropical wave formed in the Pacific <unk> it steadily organized into the twelfth tropical depression of the season early on August 14 . It slowly strengthened and was named Henriette after strengthening into a tropical storm . After peaking with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and a peak pressure of 1 @,@ 000 mbar ( 30 inHg ) on August 15 , wind shear immediately began to weaken the tropical cyclone . On August 16 , after becoming devoid of any convection , it was downgraded into tropical depression status on August 16 . Henriette degenerated into a remnant low on August 17 . The low persisted for a few more days until completely dissipating . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Juliette = = = 
 A surge in convection in the monsoon trough caused by nearby Hurricane Ismael interacted with a tropical wave to form the thirteenth tropical depression of the season on August 21 . Due to the small distance of 621 miles ( 999 km ) between the cyclones , the depression followed Ismael . Despite strong wind shear caused by Ismael , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Juliette on August 22 as a strong burst of convection occurred . After Ismael dissipated , steering currents collapsed , and Juliette moved over cool waters in the open ocean for several days . In addition , strong wind shear took toll on the system . The low had completely dissipated during the evening of August 25 . Juliette never impacted land . 
 = = = Hurricane Kiko = = = 
 On August 25 , the seasons fourteenth tropical depression formed off the coast of Sonora , Mexico from a Mesoscale Convective System . A small cyclone , the system rapidly intensified over the warm waters of the Gulf of California , becoming Tropical Storm Kiko hours after forming and a hurricane 12 hours later . The fast rate of strengthening continued until August 27 , at which time Kiko peaked in intensity as a strong Category 3 hurricane with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 955 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 2 inHg ) . Slight weakening occurred before the storm made landfall near Punta Arena , Mexico , becoming one of the strongest storms to make landfall in Mexico since reliable records began in 1949 . The hurricane quickly weakened as it moved over the Baja Peninsula , being downgraded to a tropical depression before emerging into the Pacific Ocean on August 28 . The following day , the remnants of Kiko were absorbed by the nearby Hurricane Lorena . 
 Although Kiko was a major hurricane upon landfall , little damage resulted from the storm . However , 20 homes were destroyed and numerous highways were flooded by torrential rains . 
 = = = Hurricane Lorena = = = 
 In the Atlantic , a tropical wave spawned Tropical Depression Six . Twenty four hours later , wind shear degenerated the depression back into a wave . The wave continued westward , and in the southern Caribbean Sea , split in two on August 21 . The southern part crossed Central America and emerged into the Pacific Ocean . Banding and convection steadily organized , and Tropical Depression Fifteen @-@ E formed on August 27 . It strengthened into Tropical Storm Lorena the next day . At this time , three systems were active and in close proximity . Lorena and a weakening Kiko started a Fujiwhara interaction . Lorena eventually became the dominate system , and absorbed the remnants of Kiko on August 29 . Moving slowly out to sea , Lorena reached minimal hurricane strength on the September 1 as the convection became more concentrated . Lorena was a hurricane for less than a day . It weakened quickly to a depression on September 3 . The cyclone was devoid of convection by September 7 , and was thus declared a remnant low . The system never affected land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Manuel = = = 
 An area of thunderstorms organized into a tropical depression on August 28 . The next day , convection increased near the center , and was respectively upgraded into a tropical storm . Manuel gradually strengthened , reaching a peak of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Manuel approached to within 578 mi ( 930 km ) of Lorena . Due to its proximity to the storm , Manuel lost its center circulation on August 31 . The storms only impact on land was light rainfall near Manzanillo , Colima . No reports of death or damage were reported . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Narda = = = 
 On September 2 , a tropical wave began showing sings of organization , and on September 3 , it organized into a tropical depression . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , Narda was located over warm sea surface temperatures . Moving rapidly , to the west @-@ northwest , Narda strengthened into a tropical storm . Strong wind shear prevented significant intensification beyond minimal tropical storm strength , with winds peaking at 50 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Initially , Narda managed to produce brief burst of convection . By September 7 , however , Narda was devoid of convection , and was respectively downgraded to a tropical depression . It never impacted land . 
 = = = Hurricane Octave = = = 
 At low latitude in the Atlantic , Tropical Depression Nine formed from a tropical wave on August 28 . The depression degenerated the next day due to strong wind shear . The wave continued drifting westward , and entered the Pacific Ocean on the September 2 . It slowly developed , and organized into Tropical Depression Eighteen @-@ E on September 8 . The cyclone turned northwestward , and strengthened into Tropical Storm Octave on September 10 . After strengthening into a hurricane the next day , Octave started deepening . After peaking as a Category 4 on September 13 with 135 mph ( 217 km / h ) winds , Octave moved into a region of cooler waters and strong shear . Octave weakened to a storm at midday on September 14 and a depression 32 hours later . The depression hooked to the east , and dissipated on September 18 near Guadalupe Island . The remnants eventually turned to the north before dissipating . 
 While Octave had no significant effects on land as a hurricane , its remnants did move into California . In the Sacramento Valley , the town of Redding recorded 2 @.@ 21 in ( 56 mm ) of rain in a 12 hour span . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Priscilla = = = 
 Tropical Depression Nineteen @-@ E organized from an area of low pressure on September 21 . Upon being upgraded , the depression was anticipated to slowly strengthen , becoming a strong tropical storm in three days . Moving northwestward , it was named Priscilla the next day . Continuing to intensify , it reached its peak intensity of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . Due to its close proximity to the cooler waters , Priscilla began weakening almost immediately thereafter . The cyclone weakened into a tropical depression on September 24 and dissipated the next day . 
 Although Priscilla did not directly impact land as a tropical cyclone , the remnant moisture enhanced a non @-@ tropical low off the California coastline , resulting in heavy rainfall along the Pacific coast of the United States . In southern California , the system also resulted in hot and humid weather , with some areas reaching up to 108 ° F ( 42 ° C ) . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E = = = 
 On September 24 , Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ E formed southwest of Guatemala . Although convection increased , significant development was not anticipated due to its <unk> to land . It was also forecasted to make landfall in 36 hours . A small cyclone , its close distance to Hurricane Raymond hindered development . Moving very little , the winds soon diminished . The depression dissipated on September 27 . When the depression was anticipated to make landfall in Mexico . As such , the NHC noted the possibility of heavy rains especially over the higher elevations . However , no impact was reported from the tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Raymond = = = 
 Tropical Depression Twenty One @-@ E formed from part of the same tropical wave that had earlier spawned Hurricane Hugo . Moving slowly to the west @-@ northwest , it accelerated to the northwest in response to a trough and strengthened into the seventeenth named storm of the season on September 26 . Raymond turned to the west again and entered a favourable environment . Raymond eventually peaked as a Category 4 hurricane and the strongest storm of the season on October 1 . A trough over Mexico destroyed the ridge that was steering Raymond and recurved the cyclone to the northeast . The hurricane accelerated into a less favorable environment , and slowly weakened as its forward speed increased to 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) . Raymond made landfall as a tropical storm on October 4 . Northern Mexico 's mountains disrupted Raymond 's circulation , and dissipated over New Mexico on October 5 after passing over that state and Arizona as a depression . 
 Since Raymond had significantly weakened prior to its first landfall , only minor impacts were recorded in Mexico . The highest rainfall was recorded in Nogales at 4 @.@ 72 in ( 120 mm ) . In the city , the swollen Santa Cruz River destroyed a heavily traveled bridge , known as the Calle Obregon , and destroyed a store which was situated on the banks of the river . Mexican officials estimated damages at $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1989 USD , $ 477 thousand 2016 USD ) . The remnants of the storm tracked into the Southwest United States and further into the Central United States before dissipating . Rainfall in excess of 3 in ( 76 mm ) fell in parts of southern Arizona ; the highest total was recorded in Independence , Kansas at 3 @.@ 91 in ( 99 mm ) . One person was killed in a mobile home which was destroyed by high winds . Flash flooding triggered by Raymond caused an estimated $ 1 @.@ 5 million ( 1989 USD , $ 2 @.@ 86 million 2016 USD ) in damages in Arizona . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty Two @-@ E = = = 
 On October 3 , a tropical depression formed 475 mi ( 764 km ) south of Mexico from an area of disturbed weather that had become better organized . Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the cyclone was located in a favorable environment . As such , it was forecasted to reach a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) to be named " Sonia " . Later that day , convection increased , but the NHC did not upgrade the system into a tropical storm . However , increased wind shear quickly caused the system to become exposed . After drifting westbound , it did not become a tropical storm and dissipated on October 4 . However , it regenerated on October 7 as deep convection had developed near the center for about 12 hours . Upon regenerating , it was forecasted to intensify into a strong tropical storm as it was expected to turn to the north . Shortly thereafter , the system became less organized ; it dissipated again the next day . The depression never threatened land . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty Three @-@ E = = = 
 On October 15 , Tropical Depression 23E developed about 550 mi ( 890 km ) to the southwest of Mexico City , within an area of warm water and diminishing wind shear and as a result was expected to slowly intensify further . However , during October 16 , all of the deep convection associated with 23E dissipated , before the National Hurricane Center issued its final advisory during the next day . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Twenty Four @-@ E = = = 
 On October 18 , the NHC began issuing advisories on Tropical Depression Twenty Four @-@ E. Although the depression was located within an area of high wind shear , convection had managed to partially develop around the center of circulation . A ship nearby the system reported sustained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) ; however , the winds were not considered to be representative of the actual intensity of the depression . Further intensification was not expected as the depression tracked in a northward direction Shortly after the first advisory was issued , convection rapidly dissipated , leaving an exposed low pressure area , devoid of shower and thunderstorm activity . The system was forecast to dissipate within 36 hours due to high shear . Late on October 18 , the forward motion of the depression abruptly changed towards the west . The final advisory on Tropical Depression Twenty Four @-@ E was issued during the afternoon of October 19 as the system remained devoid of convection ; redevelopment of the system was not anticipated due to unfavorable conditions . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1989 . Since no names were retired , no new names were replaced for the 1995 season . However , the name Dalilia was later changed to Dalila through a misspelling of the name . The changed spelling has remained in use since 1995 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = = = Central Pacific = = = 
 Starting in the early 1980s , the Central Pacific Hurricane Center assigned names to tropical storms that formed between the 180 ° to 140 ° W. Names for the basin are taken off a single list due to the low frequency of storms in the area . Had a tropical storm formed in the Central Pacific during 1989 , it would have received the name Aka . The first six names on the list that could have been used are listed below . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 = Phallic architecture = 
 Phallic architecture consciously or unconsciously creates a symbolic representation of the phallus . Buildings intentionally or unintentionally resembling the human penis are a source of amusement to locals and tourists in various places around the world . Deliberate phallic imagery is found in ancient cultures and in the links to ancient cultures found in traditional artifacts . 
 The ancient Greeks and Romans celebrated phallic festivals and built a shrine with an erect phallus to honor Hermes , messenger of the gods . Those figures may be related to the Egyptian god Min who was depicted holding his erect phallus . Figures of women with a phallus for a head have been found across Greece and Yugoslavia . Phallic symbolism was prevalent in the architecture of ancient Babylon , and the Romans , who were deeply superstitious , often used phallic imagery in their architecture and domestic items . The ancient culture of many parts of Far East Asia including Indonesia , Mali , and the Buddhist parts of Korea and Japan , also used the phallus as a symbol of fertility in motifs on their temples and in other areas of everyday life . 
 Scholars of anthropology , sociology , and feminism have pointed out the symbolic nature of phallic architecture , especially large skyscrapers which dominate the landscape as symbols of male domination , power and political authority . Towers and other vertical structures may unintentionally or perhaps subconsciously have those connotations . There are many examples of modern architecture that can be interpreted as phallic , but very few for which the architect has specifically cited or admitted that meaning as an intentional aspect of the design . 
 = = History and background = = 
 = = = Antiquity = = = 
 The worship of the phallus has existed since the Stone Age , and was particularly prevalent during the Neolithic period and the Bronze Age . Phallic architecture became prominent in ancient Egypt and Greece , where genitalia and human sexuality received a high degree of attention . The ancient Greeks honored the phallus and celebrated phallic festivals . The Greco @-@ Roman deity Priapus was worshiped as a god of fertility , depicted with a giant phallus in numerous public architectural pieces . 
 The Greeks regularly built a shrine which they called " Herm " at the entrance of major public buildings , homes and along roads to honor Hermes , messenger of the gods . The shrines typically " took the form of a vertical pillar topped by the bearded head of a man and from the surface of the pillar below the head , an erect phallus protruded " . It is believed that they sought their inspiration from the ancient Egyptians and their phallic image of Min , the valley god , who was similarly " depicted as a standing bearded king with simplified body , one arm raised , the other hand holding his erect phallus . " 
 Herodotus , the ancient Greek historian , documented women carrying large phallic shaped monuments and ornaments the size of a human body in villages in ancient Dionysia . On the island of Delos a pillar supports a colossal phallus , the symbol of Dionysus . Phallus reliefs on buildings on such sites are also believed to have been apotropaic devices to ward off evil . The elaborate use of phallic architecture and sculpture in ancient Greek society can also be seen in sites such as Nea <unk> in northern Greece . Archaeologists excavating the ancient town discovered clay sculptures of plump women with phallic heads and folded arms . 
 Similar figurines of women with phallus heads from the Neolithic period have been found across Greece , Macedonia and parts of old Yugoslavia . The vast majority of the figurines of the <unk> culture have cylindrical phallus @-@ shaped heads without facial features , although some , particularly of the Aegean culture , had phallic sculptural pieces with phallic heads with a pinched nose and <unk> eyes . In these parts of the ancient world , obelisk like structures resembling the human penis were built , often with phallic symbols , representing human fertility and asserting male sexuality and orgasm . Phallic symbolism was prevalent in the architecture of ancient Babylonia , and in <unk> iconography , the obelisk was considered to be symbolic of the phallus of the masculine earth . The obelisks of ancient Egypt themselves had several functions , existing both as a reference to the cultus of the sun and of the phallus , representing fertility and power . 
 Although phallic architecture as individual pieces was not prevalent in ancient Rome as it was in ancient Greece or Egypt , the Romans were deeply superstitious and often introduced phallus @-@ related components as architectural pieces and domestic items . Archaeologists unearthing a site in Pompei discovered many vases , ornaments and sculptures unearthed revealing the preoccupation with the phallus , also unearthing an 18 @-@ inch terracotta phallus protruding from what was believed to have been a bakery with the inscription , " <unk> habitat <unk> " ( here dwells happiness ) , and many Romans wore phallus amulets to ward off the evil @-@ eye . 
 Priapic worship amongst the women of Sicily continued into the 18th century ; worshiping phallic votive objects and kissing such offerings before placing them upon the altar in the churches . Fetishism with the phallus architecturally and in smaller implements was also exhibited by certain Christian sects in medieval times , such as the Manichaeans , and was connected with masochism and sadism , a form of religious <unk> . Smaller phallic shaped monuments in the form of idols , even vases , rings , drinking vessels and jewellery have been well @-@ documented and could be found within medieval churches of Ireland . 
 In Hinduism , the Hindu <unk> represents Brahma , the creator , Vishnu , the preserver and Shiva , the destroyer . Shiva , the main deity in India , is both destroyer and is stated to also include his role of creation ; this creation role is represented by the phallic symbol , known as lingam in which form he is worshiped or in the form of male trinity of penis and two testicles . The linga , or phallus , is a common feature of Hindu temples across India , engrained as reliefs or other forms . The Brihadeeswarar Temple of Tanjore in Tamil Nadu , built during the Chola Dynasty , is dedicated to Shiva , and features lingam between the cells ; it is especially renowned for its " Hall of One Thousand <unk> " . 
 In Indonesia , the phallic lingga and feminine yoni , remain common symbols of harmony . The Sultan 's Palace of <unk> , in West Java , has a number of lingga @-@ yoni carvings along its walls . According to the Indonesian chronicles of the Babad Tanah Jawi , Prince <unk> gained the kingly power from God , by ingesting sperm from the phallus of the already @-@ dead Sultan <unk> II of Mataram . 
 Candi <unk> temple of <unk> , East Java , was built in the 10th century and is dedicated to Shiva and is evidence of Tantric ritual in Hinduism and the fertility cult practiced at the time and preoccupation with the lingga . The temple has numerous reliefs graphically depicting sexuality and fertility including several stone depictions of a copulating penis and vagina . It consists of a pyramid with reliefs and statues at the front . Among them is a male statue clutching his penis , with three tortoises with flattened shells . The temple once had a striking 1 @.@ 82 metre ( 5 ' 11 @.@ 5 ft ) representation of lingga with four testicles ; this is now housed in the National Museum of Indonesia . Phallic references were also made in Khmer architecture in Cambodia , and several Khmer temples depict the phallus in reliefs . 
 In Africa , Ancient <unk> , particularly the royals of <unk> , decorated their palaces with phallus like piers and columns at the entrance of their palaces and decorated the walls with phallus motifs . Similar features can be seen on the pillars of many temples across Africa , often interpreted by western scholars to be phallic symbols , but may often be more subtle and subject to varying interpretations . Like the ancient Egyptian pharaohs , Aksumite kings built temples with phallic pillars in ancient Ethiopian cities such as <unk> , and monolithic pillars with phallic representation have also been discovered in Madagascar . In ancient Maya , phallic architecture was rare but Uxmal in particular has a considerable number of phallus @-@ like architectural pieces . It contains a temple known as the Temple of the <unk> and phallic sculptures and motifs . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Claude Nicholas Ledoux was a major exponent of architectural development in the 17th century which " articulated across the tensions of form and ornament , symbol , and allegory , dogma , and fantasy " , at a time when western society was oppressive and particularly sensitive to public displays of sexuality ; blatant and graphic phallic architecture would have been considered an embarrassment and a shameful act . In his initial draft for the House of Pleasure in Chaux ( a proposed ideal city , near the Forest of Chaux ) , Ledoux drew upon allegorical ideas in his design with the union of man and woman , a physiological interpretation of intercourse and penetration . Private bedrooms were designed to " thrust out from the circular ring of the building , metaphorically representing penetration , the circular ring representing the vaginal passage and womb of the female . 
 The second revised design is said to " <unk> both elevated site and female gender " with a " lonely phallus " , without the original planned animated circular ring representing the female reproductive organs . Ledoux drew upon phallic and sexually charged inspiration in other buildings which he designed . His design of Besançon Theatre for instance was fueled by the exigencies of prostitution and ancient sexual ritual . However , in comparison to the likes of Jean @-@ Jacques <unk> , who gained notoriety for his pornographic architectural concoctions , Ledoux 's architectural inspiration was relatively mild , and he is said to have omitted towers from his designs on occasion as he was aware that they would be frowned upon shamefully by general society as a too obvious representation of the phallus ; Ledoux 's " missing erection " is explained to this effect in Jacques Lecan 's Significance of the Missing <unk> . 
 According to Oscar <unk> , the interest in neoclassical architecture in the 18th century was synonymous with and motivated by a similar interest in masculine virility . Works such as Francesco Colonna 's Hypnerotomachia Poliphili ( 1467 ) and Giovanni Battista Piranesi 's Campo Marzio ( 1762 ) show profoundly the ancient influence of phallic architecture in design and worship , and contain numerous illustrations of Priapic temples and architecture . Piranesi in particular is said to have offered a " prototype for the mysterious architecture of phallic worship that more closely resembles the houses of pleasure " in his etchings . 
 He located two designs for the <unk> <unk> Augusti , concluding that they were based upon sexual ritual , with " two phallic plans penetrating the semicircular <unk> " . Piranesi believed that the purpose of the phallic designs were to celebrate virility and male regenerative power . Other commentators such as Carl August Ehrensvärd also provided illustrations and analysis of Priapic temples and the meaning of phallic architecture . A work of note to this effect is Neoclassical Temple of <unk> and the Buildings with a Phallic Shaped Plan ( 1977 ) of the Institute for Art History of the University of Lund , Sweden . 
 In America , especially in Chicago and New York , and numerous other global cities , high rise skyscrapers of phallic shape grew up in the 20th century . Le Corbusier , the famous architect , propagated it in Europe in place of traditional decorative architecture . Similar futuristic developments took place in Italy with the initiative of Sant ’ Elia , symbolizing the triumph of man . Yet unlike those of ancient times which were blatant architectural representations of the phallus , in the West in modern times " shrines to the phallus " are more subtle , and may often be subject to interpretation as such ; very few architects have specifically admitted the human phallus as a source for their architectural creation . The Italian Fascists were cited as having an obsession with phallic architecture which was rigid and impermeable . In the last few decades the high @-@ rise phallic skyscraper has been a symbol of government quest for economic power in China , Hong Kong and South Korea and the other ASEAN / Pacific Rim nations . China fuels billions of dollars annually into high @-@ rise office and residential buildings with the aim of increasing GDP , at a rate far greater than they can be occupied . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 In art and architecture , acutely vertical buildings are often seen as a symbol of masculinity and horizontal buildings are seen as more feminine . The terms " phallic verticality " , " phallic <unk> " and " phallic brutality " have been referred to by architectural theorists , including the likes of French sociologist Henri Lefebvre , who argued that buildings of phallic architectural type metaphorically symbolize " force , male fertility , masculine violence " . Phallic <unk> " bestows a special status on the perpendicular , proclaiming <unk> as the orientation of space " while phallic brutality " does not remain abstract , for it is the brutality of political power . " 
 Lefebvre conducted considerable research into the meaning of high @-@ rise buildings . He said " The arrogant verticality of skyscrapers , and especially of public and state buildings , introduces a phallic or more precisely a <unk> element into the visual realm ; the purpose of this display , of this need to impress , is to convey an impression of authority to each spectator . <unk> and great height have ever been the spatial expression of potentially violent power . " Sigmund Freud metaphorically drew a comparison between " high achievement and the acquisition of wealth as building monuments to our penises . " 
 In the 19th century , Thomas <unk> argues that surrealists " capitalized on the phallic symbolism of monuments such as the ancient Egyptian obelisk from Luxor in the Place de la Concorde or the <unk> Column " by " supplementing these phallic structures with female counterparts " . Jules Breton for example suggested moving the obelisk to La Villette abattoir and designing a large gloved hand of a woman holding the obelisk in a suggestive manner , and adapting the <unk> into a factory chimney with a nude woman climbing it . Auguste Bartholdi 's 1870 monument Defense of Paris for instance , a commemoration of Leon Gambetta 's escape from Paris in balloon during the Franco @-@ Prussian War , was also subject to debate amongst Parisian artists of the late 19th century as they believed it resembled a testicle . Arthur <unk> proposed turning the monument into " an enormous sex , the balloon forming a testicle and the phallus being horizontal " , while Breton proposed turning it into copulating genitals , adding a twin balloon to form two testicles . 
 Contemporary scholars in architectural criticism have investigated the relationship between architecture and the body , sexuality , sex , power , and place . Feminists in particular , such as Margrit Kennedy , perceive high @-@ rise phallic @-@ like buildings on the urban landscape as " phallic symbols of male domination , power and rational instrumentality . " Esther M. K. Cheung believes the form of monumental high @-@ rise building which grew up in 20th century America can " be read as a phallic symbol of power " . The present trend symbolises " Science and technology over nature , incorporating all the maleness which that with sci @-@ fi utopias . " Elizabeth Grosz , however , offers a counter argument to <unk> in urban design theories , saying " not so much the dominance of the phallus as the pervasive unacknowledged use of the male or masculine to represent the human . The problem , then , is not so much to eliminate as to reveal the masculinity inherent in the notion of the universal , the generic human , or the unspecified subject . " Marc C. Taylor discusses phallic architecture and what makes a building masculine or feminine in his book <unk> : Art , Architecture , Religion . 
 = = = Symbols and shrines = = = 
 During the modern era , many sculptors have created some public phallic works of art , with varying degrees of subtlety . One of these examples may be the statue in honor to the Carnation Revolution on the top of a hill in Lisbon , Portugal by the sculptor João <unk> . Perhaps the greatest example of a phallic cemetery is the Khalid Nabi Cemetery in hills of northeastern Iran near the border with Turkmenistan , roughly 40 miles ( 64 km ) northeast of <unk> @-@ e <unk> . According to a popular belief , the cemetery house the tomb of a pre @-@ Islamic prophet , Khalid Nabi , who was born 40 years prior to the birth of Muhammad , in c . 530 . The ancient graveyard contains some 600 tombstones of unknown origin , many of which are clear representations of the phallus ; from a distance they resemble stone pegs . 
 Phallic shrines are common in Far East Asia , especially in Buddhist parts of Korea and Japan where they are seen as symbols of fertility or prowess . In Dragon Pool Temple in Jeju City , there is a phallic shrine which is visited by female pilgrims who come to worship it for its perceived fertility blessings . The phallic stone is made from granite , quite small in size and white and was reportedly found in a field nearby by a farmer . 
 In Thailand , the phallus is also considered to be a symbol of good luck and representative of fertility . There are numerous shrines in the country featuring phallic architecture . Chao Mae Tuptim shrine in Bangkok , behind the Swissôtel Bangkok hotel has over a hundred colored circumcised wooden penis statues of all shapes and sizes which are said to possess special cosmic powers and endow good fortune and fertility on anybody coming into contact with them . 
 Near <unk> <unk> Monastery in <unk> Province of Mongolia is <unk> Rock which contains a massive statue of a penis raised on a platform on the steppe . The statue has dual functions ; primarily it is a reminder to the monks to remain celibate , but it is also a symbol of fertility and human life . A smaller statue of a phallus is nearer the monastery . <unk> Park ( also known as " Penis Park " ) in Gangwon Province of South Korea , located about 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of <unk> , is a nature park which contains a number of erect statues . A tragic legend shrouds them in that a virgin was once swept out to sea and drowned , unable to be saved by her lover . The townspeople were devastated and helpless , and a curse appeared to have been cast over them , ruining the local fishing industry . One day , a local fisherman relieved himself in the sea and miraculously the fishing industry revived . He discovered that her restless spirit could be appeased in such a manner , so the townsfolk compensated for the woman 's inability to consummate beyond the grave by placing sexually potent phallic statues in view of the shore . The statues range in size and styles ; some have faces on them and are more animated in appearance and more colorful , but others are exact depictions of the human penis . 
 In some Asian countries such as Bhutan , many have a belief that a phallus brings good luck and drives away evil spirits . Phallus symbols are routinely painted outside walls of the new houses and carved wooden phalluses are hung ( sometimes crossed by a design of sword or dagger ) outside , on the eves of the new homes , at the four corners . On a road drive from Paro airport to Thimphu explicit paintings of phalluses are a common sight on the white @-@ washed walls of homes , shops and eateries . In the Chimi Lhakhang monastery , the shrine dedicated to <unk> <unk> , several wooden penises are used to bless people who visit the monastery on pilgrimage seeking blessings to bear a child or for welfare of their children . The glaringly displayed phallus in the monastery is a brown wooden piece with a silver handle , a religious relic considered to possess divine powers and hence used for blessing the spiritually oriented people . It is also said to prevent quarrels among family members in the houses which are painted with these symbols . 
 = = Buildings and structures = = 
 = = = Empire State Building = = = 
 The 102 @-@ story Empire State Building , located in Midtown Manhattan , New York City , at the intersection of Fifth Avenue and West 34th Street , is one of the world 's most famous landmarks , and is generally thought of as an American cultural icon . Cited by Valerie <unk> as a symbol of American pride and " the ultimate sign of American phallic power " , it was inaugurated on 31 May 1931 . 
 Designed in the Art Deco style , it has a roof height of 1 @,@ 250 feet ( 381 meters ) , and with its antenna spire included , it stands a total of 1 @,@ 454 ft ( 443 @.@ 2 m ) high . It stood as the world 's tallest building for 40 years , from its completion in 1931 until construction of the World Trade Center 's North Tower was completed in 1972 . Numerous people have mentioned its similarities in appearance to the phallus , with its " tall and glinting " towers . 
 = = = Leaning Tower of Pisa = = = 
 The Leaning Tower of Pisa in Pisa , Italy , dating from around 1173 , has long suffered from structural problems . The tower is eight stories high at 55 @.@ 86 metres ( 183 @.@ 3 ft ) and before restoration work from 1990 leaned 5 @.@ 5 degrees . It currently leans about 4 degrees but due to foundation problems it continues to sink about 1mm annually . The resemblance of the tower to a penis has seen the " Leaning Tower of Pisa " became a sexual slang term for a half erect penis . Local retailers have attempted to capitalize on the tower as a phallic architectural piece by making souvenirs featuring underwear with the tower resembling a penis . The Catholic Church denounced the promotion of the tower in such a manner as showing " a complete lack of respect and a " disgrace " and retailers can now be fined up to € 500 for selling items promoting the tower as a penis . 
 = = = Nelson 's Column = = = 
 Nelson 's Column , a monument to Admiral Horatio Nelson , was erected by a grateful nation between 1840 and 1843 to commemorate Nelson 's victory at the Battle of Trafalgar . However the Nelson Memorial Committee ran out of money , having only raised £ 20 @,@ 485 in public subscriptions . The column is Corinthian with a granite shaft . In his poem A Ballad of the Good Lord Nelson , Lawrence Durrell included the multiply allusive lines " Now stiff on a pillar with a phallic air / Nelson <unk> in Trafalgar Square / Reminds the British what once they were . " 
 = = = Colonna Mediterranea = = = 
 Colonna Mediterranea is a monumental column in Luqa , Malta . It has been described by its artist Paul Vella <unk> as an " Egyptian symbol " . However at a glance it could be observed to look similar to a large penile , and therefor was largely described to be a " phallic monument " . The monument has managed to attract several international media coverage in specific before and during the visit of Pope Benedict XVI to Malta as the pope mobile , carrying the papacy , had been planned and passed by it . Similarly the same artist has created another monumental column , the <unk> Eterna , which was also described as being phallic by critics . 
 = = = Obelisk of Luxor = = = 
 The Obelisk of Luxor , which stands in the Place de la Concorde of Paris , France , was given to the French by the Egyptians in the 1800s . The 23 @-@ meter ( 75 @-@ foot ) obelisk originally stood at the front of Luxor Temple , honoring Ramses II , pharaoh of the Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt . According to Michael D. <unk> , the French perceived the obelisk as " prodigiously phallic " from the moment it arrived . 
 = = = Oriental Pearl TV Tower = = = 
 The Oriental Pearl TV Tower , located in Pudong Park in <unk> , Shanghai , China , is the world ’ s third tallest TV and radio tower at 468 metres ( 1 @,@ 535 ft ) , the tallest such building in Asia . The tower houses restaurants , theaters , a conference hall , and a hotel and is a significant tourist attraction in the city . The tower has been met a mixed reception , however . The New York Times described it as a " great phallic monster of truly monumental ugliness , a bit like an enormous asparagus with a silver ball on top . " The long steel column tower is considered by some to be proof of the city 's phallic worship , and that such skyscrapers indicative of wealth are an increasing aphrodisiac of the materialist in Chinese cities . 
 = = = Burj Qatar = = = 
 The Burj Qatar was designed by French architect Jean Nouvel . In 2004 , the project was first called the " High Rise Office Building " . Following completion in 2012 , it was originally called the " Burj Doha " by its owner , H. E. Sheikh Saud bin Muhammed Al Thani . The public has noted the building 's " phallic form " , suggestive of what Nouvel calls a “ fully assumed virility . ” 
 = = = State Capitol , Lincoln = = = 
 The State Capitol building of Lincoln , Nebraska has been cited as the " apex " of phallic architecture . At 15 stories and 400 feet ( 121 m ) tall , it is the second @-@ tallest U.S. statehouse , surpassed only by the 34 @-@ story Louisiana State Capitol . It is the tallest building in Lincoln , the third @-@ tallest in the state , and also the heaviest Capitol building in North America . The building was designed by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue , who drew upon Classical and Gothic architectural traditions . It was constructed between 1922 and 1932 , of Indiana limestone , with a golden dome . The building is nicknamed " The Phallus of the Plains " for its phallus @-@ like appearance . 
 = = = 30 St Mary Axe = = = 
 30 St Mary Axe opened in London in April 2004 . Designed by Norman Foster , the 180 metres ( 590 ft ) structure , London ’ s first environmentally sustainable tall building using recycled and recyclable materials , has been compared to the phallus and a <unk> ; its nicknames include Gherkin , the Erotic Gherkin , Towering <unk> and the Crystal Phallus . Also likened to a " phallic fat cigar " , the building has been cited as a " crude anatomical metaphor " , yet has become one of the London 's most iconic buildings . Cabinet voted it the " Best <unk> Building in the World " . 
 = = = Torre Agbar = = = 
 The Torre Agbar is a 38 @-@ story skyscraper located in the Plaça de les <unk> Catalanes of the Poblenou neighborhood of Barcelona , Spain . Designed by Jean Nouvel , it is named after its owners , the Agbar Group , a holding company whose interests include the Barcelona water company <unk> de Barcelona . An example of high @-@ tech architecture in the city , its design combines a number of different architectural concepts , resulting in a striking structure built with reinforced concrete , covered with a facade of glass , and over 4 @,@ 500 window openings cut out of the structural concrete . The building stands out on the skyline of Barcelona ; it is the third tallest building in the city , standing at 144 @.@ 44 m ( 473 @.@ 88 ft ) , with an area of over 50 @,@ 000 square metres , of which 30 @,@ 000 are offices . 2 @,@ 500 LED bulbs cause the tower to change color at night . It was officially opened by the King of Spain on 16 September 2005 . Nouvel claims it to be inspired by a geyser and the nearby mountain of Montserrat , although he does note its phallic appearance . Although many draw comparisons with the phallus , locals refer to the structure as el <unk> ( the suppository ) , a drug delivery system that is inserted into the rectum or vagina . 
 = = = Washington Monument = = = 
 The Washington Monument in Washington D.C. is often seen as a prime example of phallic architecture and American masculinity . The towering monument , made of marble , granite , and bluestone gneiss , it is both the world 's tallest stone structure and the world 's tallest obelisk , standing 555 feet 5 1 ⁄ 8 inches ( 169 @.@ 294 m ) according to the National Park Service . Construction of the monument began in 1848 , was halted from 1854 to 1877 , and was completed in 1884 . In a Journal review , dated 17 October 1911 , Arnold Bennett said of the monument , " Saw Washington monument . Phallic . Appalling . A national catastrophe – only equalled by the Albert Memorial . Tiny doll @-@ like people waiting to go into it . " Dan Burstein says of it , " Speaking of sex symbols , there is no more phallic symbol in existence than the Washington Monument , and the Capitol dome can be viewed as <unk> . " James Webb used a metaphor to praise the " uplift [ ing ] " power of the Washington Monument as a white phallus , " piercing the air like a bayonet " . In the futuristic film <unk> , set in the United States where everything noteworthy is commercialized , the Washington Monument is used as a giant Trojan condoms billboard . 
 = = = Ypsilanti Water Tower = = = 
 Ypsilanti Water Tower is a historic water tower in Ypsilanti , Michigan , United States , listed as a National Register of Historic Places building in 1981 . The tower was designed by William R. Coats and constructed as part of an elaborate city waterworks project that began in 1889 . Located on the highest point in Ypsilanti , the tower was completed in 1890 at a cost of $ 21 @,@ 435 @.@ 63 . Today the tower is frequently joked about for its phallic shape and has earned the nickname " Brick Dick " . 
 It has become a well @-@ known landmark in Ypsilanti , and due to the building 's shape and location , the tower is frequently used by residents as a point for providing directions for visitors and residents . Iggy Pop said of it in a 1996 interview , " The most famous thing in Ypsilanti is this water tower made out of brick , about 175 years old . It looks like this big penis . " 
 The World 's Most Phallic Building contest was a contest held in 2003 by Cabinet magazine to find the building which most resembled a human phallus . The contest originated when writer Jonathan Ames drew the ire of Slate readers by claiming , in a diary that was later published in his book I Love You More Than You Know , that the Williamsburg Bank Building in Brooklyn , New York City , New York , was the world 's most phallic . This led Cabinet magazine to initiate a search of its own to find which building was truly the " world 's most phallic " . Cities and readers subsequently poured in their views and staked their claims to the magazine 's editors . After months of entries and discussion , the Ypsilanti Water Tower was announced as the winner , although the winner of a readers ' poll was the Florida State Capitol building in Tallahassee . Another notable nominee was the Torre Agbar of Barcelona . 
 = = = Christian Science Church , Dixon , Illinois = = = 
 The Christian Science Dixon church in Dixon , Illinois strongly resembles a penis when viewed from the <unk> church , however , claims it was tastefully designed around an old oak tree and declared that " We didn ’ t design it to be seen as what they ’ re seeing . And we didn ’ t design it to be seen from above . " 
 = = = Hyde Park , Hyde , Greater Manchester = = = 
 In 2012 , a beehive metal sculpture by Thompson Dagnall in Hyde , Greater Manchester , was criticized by the council for installment adjacent to the children ’ s play area in Hyde park for looking too rude and phallic . Although Dagnall was paid £ 3 @,@ 500 a week for his efforts , council workers modified the structure by stumping it and moved it to another part of the park . 
 = = = People 's Daily Tower = = = 
 A new headquarters for the People 's Daily newspaper has been under construction since 2013 and is slated for completion in 2014 . In May 2013 , China attempted to censor jokes about its phallic shape . 
 = = = Hyde Park Obelisk , Sydney = = = 
 The 22 @-@ metre high Hyde Park Obelisk , located in Hyde Park , Sydney Australia at the intersection of Elizabeth Street and Bathurst Street , is both a former sewer <unk> and a notable landmark in the Sydney CBD . Its phallic appearance was emphasised on 7 November 2014 , when the AIDS Council of NSW ( <unk> ) temporarily installed a giant condom over the Obelisk as part of a HIV awareness campaign . The installation generated a lot of media interest - including many phallic innuendos - and drew the ire of the Australian Christian Lobby . 
 = = = Church Office Building , Salt Lake City , Utah = = = 
 Completed in 1972 , the Church Office Building stands toward the eastern end of Temple Square in Salt Lake City , Utah . The building currently houses the administrative support staff and lay ministry of the The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . The building 's form , when viewed from the North or South faces , resembles a large phallus . The building 's first four floors extend outward , and are adorned with images of the world rendered in bas relief . These large ovular images are regarded by many locals to resemble testes , reinforcing the building 's overall phallic appearance . 
 = Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? = 
 " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " is the fourth episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 47th episode overall . The first half of the third season alternated entire episodes between the parallel universe ( the " Other Side " ) and the prime universe ( " Our Side " ) . " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " took place in the prime universe , and involved several shapeshifters , including Thomas Jerome Newton ( Sebastian Roché ) , who is eventually captured . Meanwhile , Fauxlivia ( Anna Torv ) attempts to maintain her cover and minimize the damage . 
 The episode was written by David Wilcox and Matthew Pitts , while Kenneth Fink served as director for the hour . It first aired on October 14 , 2010 in the United States to an estimated 5 @.@ 22 million viewers . It received mostly positive reviews , as many critics praised the plot 's focus on the shapeshifters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the prime universe , U.S. senator James Van Horn ( Gerard Plunkett ) , who has been reviewing the Fringe division 's activities , is hospitalized following a car accident . While in the hospital , Thomas Jerome Newton ( Sebastian Roché ) arrives and shoots him in the face , then escapes . The Fringe team discover that Van Horn was a shapeshifter . Walter ( John Noble ) finds that the body is still alive to some degree through a second " brain " on his back , and hopes to use Van Horn 's wife Patricia ( Shannon Cochran ) to try to awaken it and study the shapeshifter more . 
 Fauxlivia ( Anna Torv ) , still posing as the prime universe 's Olivia ( Torv ) , informs Newton of this development . Newton contacts a second shapeshifter , Ray ( Marcus Giamatti ) , to infiltrate the secured location where Van Horn 's body is being held to remove the data disc that Walter will ultimately find . Ray regrets the possibility of having to leave his current identity , a police officer with a wife and son . Meanwhile , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) and Fauxlivia discover that Van Horn has acquired a number of records on the personnel of the Fringe team , and likely has used the information to aid the parallel universe 's Walternate ( Noble ) . 
 At the secured facility , Fauxlivia is able to clear Peter , Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) and Walter from the lab in order to allow Ray access to the lab . Ray continues to avoid shifting to a new body . Walter returns to the lab to confirm a theory and is interrupted by Ray . Ray successfully removes the data device , knocks out Walter , and flees to give it to Newton . When Ray requests to be able to return to his family , Newton kills him near his home , but by this time , the Fringe division has identified Ray and have converged on his address . On spotting Newton , they engage in a car chase , eventually damaging Newton 's car . Fauxlivia recovers Van Horn 's data disc from Newton and hides it before taking Newton into custody . 
 Sometime later , Fauxlivia visits Newton in a high @-@ security prison , and passes him the equivalent of a suicide pill that causes him to self @-@ destruct and bleed out mercury . Fauxlivia realizes Peter has become suspicious of her actions , and sleeps with him to draw away his attention . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was co @-@ written by co @-@ executive producer David Wilcox and J.J. Abrams ' assistant , Matthew Pitts . CSI : Crime Scene Investigation veteran Kenneth Fink served as director , his only Fringe credit to date . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , executive producer Jeff Pinkner explained the role of the shapeshifters in the two universes , " The shapeshifters are Walternate 's ' soldiers . ' Part organic , part mechanical — they ' bleed ' mercury — and are able to take the shape of any human that they kill . Walternate sent them here years ago ( they were able to cross universes safely because they 're not human ) to act as sleeper agents " . 
 " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " featured the second appearance of guest actor Gerard Plunkett as Senator Van Horn , as well as the first appearance of Marcus Giamatti as a shapeshifter . It was the last episode with guest star Sebastian Roché ( who played the villain Thomas Jerome Newton ) . Despite his character 's death , executive producer J. H. Wyman hinted in a later Twitter post that Roché may return . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " , with the intention of having " students learn about memory , which is the ability to store , retain , and recall information and experiences . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode title " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep " refers to the Philip K. Dick science fiction novel Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? , which was later adapted into the film Blade Runner . The novel dealt with what it means to be human , exploring how faking an emotion long enough can actually develop into real feelings , much like in the episode where two shapeshifters first pretended but then developed feelings for their victims ' families . While Peter is drinking in a bar , science fiction movie The Invisible Boy is playing on a television in the background , with the character Robby the Robot visible . During the episode , Walter makes two requests in order to provide " brain stimulation " to the deceased Senator Van Horn : a portrait of former president George W. Bush , and a copy of Hump Magazine . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Do Shapeshifters Dream of Electric Sheep ? " was watched by 5 @.@ 22 million viewers in the United States , with 3 @.@ 2 / 5 share among all households and a 2 / 5 share for viewers aged 18 – 49 . SFScope reviewer Sarah Stegall commented that because of the show 's low ratings " it is almost at the point where it would be a top @-@ rated show on cable ; but these are not good numbers for broadcast TV . " Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's ratings by 45 percent among adults , resulting in a rise from 2 @.@ 0 to 2 @.@ 9 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews . Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times thought the episode continued the series ' season three " hot streak " , but wished the promo had not spoiled Senator Van Horn being a shapeshifter . Hanson also did not fully buy into the Peter @-@ Fauxlivia relationship , as he expected Peter to realize something different about her . Noel Murray from A.V. Club loved the shapeshifter focus of the episode and graded it an A- , explaining it was a " very strong episode " that " brings back one of my favorite Fringe concepts : those crazy super @-@ powered shapeshifters " . MTV 's Josh Wigler also enjoyed the shapeshifter plot , and wrote that " the latest episode of Fringe marks four fantastic installments in a row , instantly establishing season three as having the strongest opening act of any other previous year in the science fiction series . Fringe has reinvented itself by drastically altering just one ingredient in the show 's successful format — namely , the true identity of Olivia Dunham — to create something wholly new and amazing " . Television Without Pity gave the episode an A- . 
 Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker enjoyed the episode , writing that " this week 's Fringe contained everything I love about the show , from LSD to the great villain Thomas Jerome Newton . [ The episode ] didn 't use its Philip K. Dick @-@ shifted title as a coy joke — it really was about the dreams of shapeshifters , dreams and hopes which took a variety of forms " . Open Salon praised Torv 's performance this season , and thought it was a " very thought @-@ provoking episode , with some major implications for Peter and Olivia 's relationship moving forward " . Alex Zalben of UGO Networks , however , called the episode the " first clunker of the season " because despite approving of the plot and the acting , the " writing was uniformly obvious , stilted and kind of terrible ... there were more head @-@ slappingly stupid moments than I could count " . SFScope 's Sarah Stegall noted similarities to the film Blade Runner , and predicted that the consummation of their relationship would cause Peter to discover Fauxlivia 's true identity . 
 = Lactarius rufulus = 
 Lactarius rufulus , commonly known as the rufous candy cap , is a species of fungus in the Russulaceae family . The fruit bodies have fleshy brownish @-@ red caps up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , and closely spaced pinkish @-@ yellow gills . The stem is up to 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick and colored similarly to the cap . The species , known only from California , Arizona , and Mexico , grows on the ground in leaf litter near oak trees . The fruit bodies resembles those of L. rufus , but L. rufulus tends to grow in clusters at a common base , rather than solitarily or in groups . A distinguishing microscopic characteristic is the near absence of large , spherical cells called sphaerocysts that are otherwise common in Lactarius species . Lactarius rufulus mushrooms are edible , and have an odor resembling maple syrup . They have been used to flavor confections and desserts . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1907 , based on specimens collected at Stanford University in California . The type collections were made by A.M. Patterson and S. Nohara , botany students at the Leland Stanford Junior University who made a number of collections during the winter of 1906 – 07 . 
 Lactarius rufulus is classified in the section <unk> of the subgenus Russularia of the genus Lactarius . The surface characteristics of many species in section <unk> ( as defined by Hesler and Smith in 1979 ) are called <unk> @-@ areolate ( irregularly cracked , with the cracks crossing one another ) based on a surface with " numerous mounds of inflated cells " paired together with crevices . 
 The mushroom is commonly known as the " rufous candy cap " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of L. rufulus is 3 – 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide , broadly convex , becoming flattened and eventually shallowly funnel @-@ shaped , sometimes with a slight umbo . The cap margin ( edge ) is initially curved inwards but becomes curved upward in maturity . The surface is usually uneven or wrinkled . It is brownish @-@ red at first , but fades to orange @-@ brown with age . The attachment of the gills to the stem is adnate ( squarely attached ) to subdecurrent ( running slightly down the length of the stem ) . They are packed close together , at first pinkish @-@ yellow , but with age become a darker red or reddish @-@ brown . The gills are not forked , nor do they stain a different color when bruised . The stem is 4 – 8 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long , about 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) thick , nearly equal or slightly enlarged downward , dry , smooth , and reddish @-@ brown . It may be solid or stuffed ( filled with cotton @-@ like mycelia ) , but may become partially hollow with age . The flesh is firm , white to pinkish @-@ orange , and does not stain when cut . The latex is scant , yellowish @-@ white on exposure , unchanging , and does not stain tissues . Its taste is acrid . The spore print is white to creamy yellow . 
 The mushroom is edible , with a mild taste and a slight odor of maple syrup . American author David Arora suggests that the fruit bodies may be used in a manner similar to the candy cap mushrooms , despite being not as fragrant . Chefs in the San Francisco Bay Area have been known to use it for desserts such as ice creams , cakes and <unk> . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are 7 – 9 by 7 – 9 µm , spherical or nearly so , ornamented with a partial to complete reticulum ( a system of raised , net @-@ like ridges ) , with prominences up to 0 @.@ 5 µm high . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are both two- and four @-@ spored , and measure 45 – 52 by 9 – 11 µm . The cap cuticle is a poorly formed layer of inflated cells with scattered filamentous pileocystidia ( cystidia on the cap ) . Somewhat unusual for a Lactarius , L. rufulus lacks or has few swollen cells ( sphaerocysts ) in the cap and stem . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Lactarius rubidus is similar in appearance to L. rufulus , but it has watery to whey @-@ like latex and develops a strong odor of maple syrup or butterscotch when dried . Another lookalike is Lactarius thiersii , but it has a smaller cap and stem and has mild @-@ tasting flesh and latex . The flesh and latex of Lactarius rufus have a strongly acrid taste , and its fruit bodies are stouter and lack an umbo . Additionally , L. rufus typically grows in a caespitose manner — with the fruit bodies clustered at a common base , and has more pallid colors and a more intense odor than L. rufulus . L. vinaceorufescens has a yellowing latex . 
 = = Ecology , habitat and distribution = = 
 Lactarius rufulus is a mycorrhizal species , and lives in a mutualistic association with oak species . The fungus forms an ectomycorrhizae — characterized by an external sheath that surround the rootlets of the oak . The fungus receives soluble carbohydrates that are byproducts of the plant 's photosynthesis , while affording the plant greater access to soil nutrients needed for growth . The fruit bodies of L. rufulus grow scattered or in groups on the ground under oak , usually from January to March ; their appearance is uncommon . Once thought to be only in California ( where they are most prevalent in the southern part of the state ) , they were reported from Mexico in 1998 , and from Arizona in 2006 . 
 = Sustainable biofuel = 
 Biofuels , in the form of liquid fuels derived from plant materials , are entering the market , driven by factors such as oil price spikes and the need for increased energy security . However , many of the biofuels that are currently being supplied have been criticised for their adverse impacts on the natural environment , food security , and land use . 
 The challenge is to support biofuel development , including the development of new cellulosic technologies , with responsible policies and economic instruments to help ensure that biofuel commercialization is sustainable . Responsible commercialization of biofuels represents an opportunity to enhance sustainable economic prospects in Africa , Latin America and Asia . 
 Biofuels have a limited ability to replace fossil fuels and should not be regarded as a ‘ silver bullet ’ to deal with transport emissions . However , they offer the prospect of increased market competition and oil price moderation . A healthy supply of alternative energy sources will help to combat gasoline price spikes and reduce dependency on fossil fuels , especially in the transport sector . Using transportation fuels more efficiently is also an integral part of a sustainable transport strategy . 
 = = Biofuel options = = 
 Biofuel development and use is a complex issue because there are many biofuel options which are available . Biofuels , such as ethanol and biodiesel , are currently produced from the products of conventional food crops such as the starch , sugar and oil feedstocks from crops that include wheat , maize , sugar cane , palm oil and oilseed rape . Some researchers fear that a major switch to biofuels from such crops would create a direct competition with their use for food and animal feed , and claim that in some parts of the world the economic consequences are already visible , other researchers look at the land available and the enormous areas of idle and abandoned land and claim that there is room for a large proportion of biofuel also from conventional crops . 
 Second generation biofuels are now being produced from a much broader range of feedstocks including the cellulose in dedicated energy crops ( perennial grasses such as switchgrass and Miscanthus giganteus ) , forestry materials , the co @-@ products from food production , and domestic vegetable waste . Advances in the conversion processes will improve the sustainability of biofuels , through better efficiencies and reduced environmental impact of producing biofuels , from both existing food crops and from cellulosic sources . 
 In 2007 , Ronald <unk> suggested in The Courier @-@ Mail that production of biofuels could be either responsible or irresponsible and had several trade @-@ offs : " Produced responsibly they are a sustainable energy source that need not divert any land from growing food nor damage the environment ; they can also help solve the problems of the waste generated by Western society ; and they can create jobs for the poor where previously were none . Produced irresponsibly , they at best offer no climate benefit and , at worst , have detrimental social and environmental consequences . In other words , biofuels are pretty much like any other product . In 2008 the Nobel prize @-@ winning chemist Paul J. <unk> published findings that the release of nitrous oxide ( N2O ) emissions in the production of biofuels means that they contribute more to global warming than the fossil fuels they replace . 
 According to the Rocky Mountain Institute , sound biofuel production practices would not hamper food and fibre production , nor cause water or environmental problems , and would enhance soil fertility . The selection of land on which to grow the feedstocks is a critical component of the ability of biofuels to deliver sustainable solutions . A key consideration is the minimisation of biofuel competition for prime cropland . 
 = = Plants used as sustainable biofuel = = 
 = = = Sugarcane in Brazil = = = 
 Brazil ’ s production of ethanol fuel from sugarcane dates back to the 1970s , as a governmental response to the 1973 oil crisis . Brazil is considered the biofuel industry leader and the world 's first sustainable biofuels economy . In 2010 the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency designated Brazilian sugarcane ethanol as an advanced biofuel due to EPA 's estimated 61 % reduction of total life cycle greenhouse gas emissions , including direct indirect land use change emissions . Brazil sugarcane ethanol fuel program success and sustainability is based on the most efficient agricultural technology for sugarcane cultivation in the world , uses modern equipment and cheap sugar cane as feedstock , the residual cane @-@ waste ( bagasse ) is used to process heat and power , which results in a very competitive price and also in a high energy balance ( output energy / input energy ) , which varies from 8 @.@ 3 for average conditions to 10 @.@ 2 for best practice production . 
 A report commissioned by the United Nations , based on a detailed review of published research up to mid @-@ 2009 as well as the input of independent experts world @-@ wide , found that ethanol from sugar cane as produced in Brazil " in some circumstances does better than just “ zero emission ” . If grown and processed correctly , it has negative emission , pulling CO2 out of the atmosphere , rather than adding it . In contrast , the report found that U.S. use of maize for biofuel is less efficient , as sugarcane can lead to emissions reductions of between 70 % and well over 100 % when substituted for gasoline . Several other studies have shown that sugarcane @-@ based ethanol reduces greenhouse gases by 86 to 90 % if there is no significant land use change . 
 In another study commissioned by the Dutch government in 2006 to evaluate the sustainability of Brazilian bioethanol concluded that there is sufficient water to supply all foreseeable long @-@ term water requirements for sugarcane and ethanol production . This evaluation also found that consumption of agrochemicals for sugar cane production is lower than in citric , corn , coffee and soybean cropping . The study found that development of resistant sugar cane varieties is a crucial aspect of disease and pest control and is one of the primary objectives of Brazil ’ s cane genetic improvement programs . Disease control is one of the main reasons for the replacement of a commercial variety of sugar cane . 
 Another concern is the fact that sugarcane fields are traditionally burned just before harvest to avoid harm to the workers , by removing the sharp leaves and killing snakes and other harmful animals , and also to fertilize the fields with ash . Mechanization will reduce pollution from burning fields and has higher productivity than people , and due to mechanization the number of temporary workers in the sugarcane plantations has already declined . By the 2008 harvest season , around 47 % of the cane was collected with harvesting machines . 
 Regarding the negative impacts of the potential direct and indirect effect of land use changes on carbon emissions , the study commissioned by the Dutch government concluded that " it is very difficult to determine the indirect effects of further land use for sugar cane production ( i.e. sugar cane replacing another crop like soy or citrus crops , which in turn causes additional soy plantations replacing pastures , which in turn may cause deforestation ) , and also not logical to attribute all these soil carbon losses to sugar cane " . The Brazilian agency Embrapa estimates that there is enough agricultural land available to increase at least 30 times the existing sugarcane plantation without endangering sensible ecosystems or taking land destined for food crops . Most future growth is expected to take place on abandoned pasture lands , as it has been the historical trend in São Paulo state . Also , productivity is expected to improve even further based on current biotechnology research , genetic improvement , and better agronomic practices , thus contributing to reduce land demand for future sugarcane cultures . 
 Another concern is the risk of clearing rain forests and other environmentally valuable land for sugarcane production , such as the Amazonia , the Pantanal or the Cerrado . Embrapa has rebutted this concern explaining that 99 @.@ 7 % of sugarcane plantations are located at least 2 @,@ 000 km from the Amazonia , and expansion during the last 25 years took place in the Center @-@ South region , also far away from the Amazonia , the Pantanal or the Atlantic forest . In São Paulo state growth took place in abandoned pasture lands . The impact assessment commissioned by the Dutch government supported this argument . 
 In order to guarantee a sustainable development of ethanol production , in September 2009 the government issued by decree a countrywide <unk> land use zoning to restrict sugarcane growth in or near environmentally sensitive areas . According to the new criteria , 92 @.@ 5 % of the Brazilian territory is not suitable for sugarcane plantation . The government considers that the suitable areas are more than enough to meet the future demand for ethanol and sugar in the domestic and international markets foreseen for the next decades . 
 Regarding the food vs fuel issue , a World Bank research report published on July 2008 found that " Brazil 's sugar @-@ based ethanol did not push food prices appreciably higher " . This research paper also concluded that Brazil 's sugar cane – based ethanol has not raised sugar prices significantly . An economic assessment report also published in July 2008 by the OECD agrees with the World Bank report regarding the negative effects of subsidies and trade restrictions , but found that the impact of biofuels on food prices are much smaller . A study by the Brazilian research unit of the Fundação Getúlio Vargas regarding the effects of biofuels on grain prices concluded that the major driver behind the 2007 @-@ 2008 rise in food prices was speculative activity on futures markets under conditions of increased demand in a market with low grain stocks . The study also concluded that there is no correlation between Brazilian sugarcane cultivated area and average grain prices , as on the contrary , the spread of sugarcane was accompanied by rapid growth of grain crops in the country . 
 = = = Jatropha = = = 
 = = = = India and Africa = = = = 
 Crops like Jatropha , used for biodiesel , can thrive on marginal agricultural land where many trees and crops won 't grow , or would produce only slow growth yields . Jatropha cultivation provides benefits for local communities : 
 Cultivation and fruit picking by hand is labour @-@ intensive and needs around one person per hectare . In parts of rural India and Africa this provides much @-@ needed jobs - about 200 @,@ 000 people worldwide now find employment through jatropha . Moreover , villagers often find that they can grow other crops in the shade of the trees . Their communities will avoid importing expensive diesel and there will be some for export too . 
 = = = = Cambodia = = = = 
 Cambodia has no proven fossil fuel reserves , and is almost completely dependent on imported diesel fuel for electricity production . Consequently , Cambodians face an insecure supply and pay some of the highest energy prices in the world . The impacts of this are widespread and may hinder economic development . 
 Biofuels may provide a substitute for diesel fuel that can be manufactured locally for a lower price , independent of the international oil price . The local production and use of biofuel also offers other benefits such as improved energy security , rural development opportunities and environmental benefits . The Jatropha curcas species appears to be a particularly suitable source of biofuel as it already grows commonly in Cambodia . Local sustainable production of biofuel in Cambodia , based on the Jatropha or other sources , offers good potential benefits for the investors , the economy , rural communities and the environment . 
 = = = = Mexico = = = = 
 Jatropha is native to Mexico and Central America and was likely transported to India and Africa in the 1500s by Portuguese sailors convinced it had medicinal uses . In 2008 , recognizing the need to diversify its sources of energy and reduce emissions , Mexico passed a law to push developing biofuels that don 't threaten food security and the agriculture ministry has since identified some 2 @.@ 6 million hectares ( 6 @.@ 4 million acres ) of land with a high potential to produce jatropha . The Yucatán Peninsula , for instance , in addition to being a corn producing region , also contains abandoned sisal plantations , where the growing of Jatropha for biodiesel production would not displace food . 
 On April 1 , 2011 Interjet completed the first Mexican aviation biofuels test flight on an Airbus A320 . The fuel was a 70 : 30 traditional jet fuel biojet blend produced from Jatropha oil provided by three Mexican producers , Global <unk> <unk> ( a wholly owned subsidiary of U.S.-based Global Clean Energy Holdings , <unk> S.A. and Energy <unk> S.A. Honeywell 's <unk> processed the oil into Bio @-@ SPK ( Synthetic <unk> Kerosene ) . Global <unk> <unk> operates the largest Jatropha farm in the Americas . 
 On August 1 , 2011 Aeromexico , Boeing , and the Mexican Government participated in the first biojet powered transcontinental flight in aviation history . The flight from Mexico City to Madrid used a blend of 70 percent traditional fuel and 30 percent biofuel ( aviation biofuel ) . The biojet was produced entirely from Jatropha oil . 
