 " Pokey Mom " is the tenth episode of the twelfth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 2001 . In the episode , Marge befriends Jack Crowley , a convict who she believes has some artistic potential . With Marge 's help , Jack is granted parole and finds a mural @-@ painting job at Springfield Elementary School . Meanwhile , Homer suffers from a back injury and goes to see a chiropractor . Despite this his pain remains and it is not until he accidentally falls backwards onto a garbage can that his back injury disappears . Homer makes a successful business out of this injury @-@ healing garbage can , much to the dismay of chiropractors in town . 
 The episode was written by Tom Martin and directed by Bob Anderson , and it features guest appearances from Michael Keaton as Jack , Charles Napier as a prison warden , Robert Schimmel as a prisoner , and Bruce Vilanch as himself . " Pokey Mom " has been met with generally negative reviews from critics , being described as bland and drawn out . The staff members of the series received complaints from chiropractors after it aired , and some chiropractors have characterized the portrayal of the profession in the episode as stereotypical . Around 8 @.@ 79 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing , and in 2009 it was released on DVD along with the rest of the episodes of the twelfth season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpson family attends a prison rodeo where Marge meets Jack Crowley , a convict whom she believes to have great artistic potential after becoming impressed with his work . She later teaches a class on being an artist to the prisoners and befriends Jack . With Marge 's help , Jack is granted parole under her custody . Marge soon finds a mural @-@ painting job at Springfield Elementary School for him . Jack paints a powerful , epic mural symbolizing school spirit with a warrior woman riding a puma , which the whole school likes , but Principal Skinner ( who hates it ) demands that he tone it down using Skinner 's own childish idea of kittens in a fantasy land . Jack reluctantly gives into Skinner 's wishes ; however , upon its unveiling , the new mural is panned by everyone in town ( even Ned Flanders ) . Skinner blames Jack and fires him . 
 Sometime later , the mural is set on fire by a mystery arsonist . There are no suspects ; however , everyone in the school immediately assumes that Jack did it to get back at Skinner . While the police are out searching for Jack , Marge stumbles upon him hiding in the school playground . He swears to her that he did not start the fire , and Marge believes him . She then distracts Skinner and Chief Wiggum so he can escape ; however , instead , he immediately sets fire to Skinner 's car as he did to the mural , and dances around it laughing maniacally . Jack is arrested , and Marge is furious that he looked her in the eye and flat @-@ out lied to her . When Jack attempts to lie to her again — claiming this time that although he did burn the mural , he did not burn Skinner 's car ( despite the fact that she had just seen him do it ) — she ends all her involvement with him , and on the way to jail , Jack and Wiggum make conversation . 
 Meanwhile , Homer begins suffering from a back injury and goes to see a chiropractor . However , he fails to follow the instructions given to him by the chiropractor and his suffering continues . Later , Homer accidentally falls backwards onto a round garbage can at home and discovers that it solved his back problems . He names the garbage can " Dr. Homer 's Miracle Spine @-@ o @-@ Cylinder " , and makes a business out of his discovery . It turns out to be a successful method of solving problems with pain , causing the chiropractic business to go in decline until the chiropractors in town denounce the method and destroy the garbage can at the Simpsons ' home . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Pokey Mom " was written by Tom Martin and directed by Bob Anderson as part of the twelfth season of The Simpsons ( 2000 – 2001 ) . According to then @-@ showrunner Mike Scully , the story of this episode originated from the fact that the staff members of The Simpsons wanted to do an episode about Marge but felt they did not want it to revolve around her getting a new job , as that had been seen on the show " too often " . They decided to explore one of Marge 's attributes that had been seen in earlier episodes , eventually choosing her interest in art . Martin conceived of the sub @-@ plot surrounding Homer following a visit to a chiropractor . He has said that the " heart " of that story is that the chiropractors in Springfield become opposed to Homer 's method of healing people and try to stop it after losing business , in reference to how chiropractors in real @-@ life " are a bit hated by the AMA ( American Medical Association ) " and how the AMA has tried to restrict their businesses in the past . Martin has also noted that the episode shows how " a lot of chiropractors are these great healers and they do great work , and then there 's some that are crooked . " 
 Several famous Americans made guest appearances in the episode . Actor Michael Keaton guest starred as Jack Crowley , while stand @-@ up comedian Robert Schimmel appeared as a prisoner in Marge 's art class that wants to smell her clothes . Actor Charles Napier voiced the prison warden that <unk> the rodeo at the prison and later grants Jack his parole . Comedy writer and actor Bruce Vilanch guest starred in the episode as himself at the unveiling of Jack 's mural painting . There , Principal Skinner jokes to the audience that " when Superintendent Chalmers suggested a school mural , I almost thought he said a ' school Muriel ' , " referencing Chalmers ' sister Muriel . When no one laughs at his joke and the audience is dead silent , Skinner sarcastically says " Well , thank you , Bruce Vilanch , " to which Vilanch replies " Whoopi would 've made it work . " This is a reference to the fact that Vilanch has written comedy material for actress Whoopi Goldberg . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 14 , 2001 . It was viewed in approximately 8 @.@ 79 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 , " Pokey Mom " tied with an episode of 60 Minutes for the 38th place in the ratings for the week of January 8 – 14 , 2001 . It was the third highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week , following episodes of Temptation Island and Boston Public . On August 18 , 2009 , " Pokey Mom " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Twelfth Season . Staff members Tom Martin , Bob Anderson , Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , John Frink , Don Payne , Matt Selman , and Joel H. Cohen , as well as cast members Dan Castellaneta and Joe Mantegna , participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included on the box set . 
 Critics have given " Pokey Mom " generally negative reviews . Nancy Basile of About.com said she " loathed " it . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented that " Other than a nice guest turn from Michael Keaton , ' Mom ' doesn ’ t do much to stand out from the crowd . Oh , like much of Season 12 , it keeps us interested , but that ’ s not exactly a strong endorsement . ' Mom ' provides a watchable show but nothing more . " Den of Geek critic Matt Haigh wrote that the episode " starts well , but begins to feel tired and drawn out , and there just doesn 't seem to be much of a story there . " 
 Following the original broadcast of the episode , the staff members of the series received several complaints from chiropractors . The February 26 , 2001 issue of the magazine Dynamic Chiropractic featured an article about the episode that noted : " [ The Simpsons ] has poked fun at numerous people , and about every institution and profession imaginable . On January 17 , it was chiropractic 's turn . " In an article of the magazine Canadian <unk> , Steven R. Passmore ( D.C. , M.S. ) and Lorraine Kochanowski @-@ Sutter ( D.C. ) analyzed the portrayal of chiropractors in the media . They gave " Pokey Mom " as an example of how " chiropractors on sitcoms pok [ e ] fun at themselves as they prescribe the duration of a course of care . [ ... ] Dr. Steve on The Simpsons corroborates this stereotype when telling Homer that he will need to see him ' three times a week for many years . ' " Passmore and Kochanowski @-@ Sutter also noted that in the episode " we see a dreamcatcher on the wall behind Dr. Steve as he treats Homer . This strategically placed decoration could suggest that the chiropractor is in touch with native and / or natural healing , or it could be a jab at the field ’ s more esoteric practitioners . " 
 = History of Sesame Street = 
 The preschool educational television program Sesame Street was first aired on public broadcasting television stations November 10 , 1969 , and will reach its 46th season in 2016 . The history of Sesame Street has reflected changing attitudes to developmental psychology , early childhood education and cultural diversity . Featuring Jim Henson 's Muppets , animation , live shorts , humor and celebrity appearances , it was the first television program of its kind to base its content and production values on laboratory and formative research , and the first to include a curriculum " detailed or stated in terms of measurable outcomes " . Initial responses to the show included adulatory reviews , some controversy and high ratings . By its 40th anniversary in 2009 , Sesame Street was broadcast in over 120 countries , and 20 independent international versions had been produced . 
 The show was conceived in 1966 during discussions between television producer Joan Ganz Cooney and Carnegie Corporation vice president Lloyd Morrisett . Their goal was to create a children 's television show that would " master the addictive qualities of television and do something good with them " , such as helping young children prepare for school . After two years of research , the newly formed Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) received a combined grant of $ 8 million from the Carnegie Corporation , the Ford Foundation and the U.S. federal government to create and produce a new children 's television show . 
 By the show 's tenth anniversary in 1979 , nine million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily , and several studies showed it was having a positive educational impact . The cast and crew expanded during this time , including the hiring of women in the crew and additional minorities in the cast . In 1981 , the federal government withdrew its funding , so the CTW turned to other sources , such as its magazine division , book royalties , product licensing and foreign income . During the 1980s , Sesame Street 's curriculum expanded to include topics such as relationships , ethics and emotions . Many of the show 's storylines were taken from the experiences of its writing staff , cast and crew , most notably the death of Will Lee — who played Mr. Hooper — and the marriage of Luis and Maria . 
 In recent decades , Sesame Street has faced societal and economic challenges , including changes in the viewing habits of young children , more competition from other shows , the development of cable television and a drop in ratings . After the turn of the 21st century , the show made major structural adaptations , including changing its traditional magazine format to a narrative format . Because of the popularity of the Muppet Elmo , the show incorporated a popular segment known as " Elmo 's World " . Sesame Street has won eight Grammys and over a hundred Emmys in its history — more than any other children 's show . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 1960s , 97 % of all American households owned a television set , and preschool children watched an average of 27 hours of television per week ; programs created for them were widely criticized for being too violent and for reflecting commercial values . Producer Joan Ganz Cooney called children 's programming a " wasteland " , and she was not alone in her criticism . Many children 's television programs were produced by local stations , with little regard for educational goals , or cultural diversity and the use of children 's programming as an educational tool was " unproven " and " a revolutionary concept " . 
 According to children 's media experts Edward Palmer and Shalom M. Fisch , children 's television programs of the 1950s and 1960s duplicated " prior media forms " . For example , they tended to show simple shots of a camera 's @-@ eye view of a location filled with children , or they recreated storybooks with shots of book covers and motionless illustrated pages . The hosts of these programs were " insufferably condescending " , though one exception was Captain Kangaroo , created and hosted by Bob Keeshan , which author Michael Davis described as having a " slower pace and idealism " that most other children 's shows lacked . 
 Early childhood educational research had shown that when children were prepared to succeed in school , they earned higher grades and learned more effectively . Children from low @-@ income families had fewer resources than children from higher @-@ income families to prepare them for school . Research had shown that children from low @-@ income , minority backgrounds tested " substantially lower " than middle @-@ class children in school @-@ related skills , and that they continued to have educational deficits throughout school . The field of developmental psychology had grown during this period , and scientists were beginning to understand that changes in early childhood education could increase children 's cognitive growth . Because of these trends in education , along with the great societal changes occurring in the United States during this era , the time was ripe for the creation of a show like Sesame Street . 
 = = Pre @-@ production ( 1966 – 1969 ) = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Since 1962 , Cooney had been producing talk shows and documentaries at educational television station WNDT , and in 1966 had won an Emmy for a documentary about poverty in America . In early 1966 , Cooney and her husband Tim hosted a dinner party at their apartment in New York ; experimental psychologist Lloyd Morrisett , who has been called Sesame Street 's " financial godfather " , and his wife Mary were among the guests . Cooney 's boss , Lewis Freedman , whom Cooney called " the grandfather of Sesame Street " , also attended the party , as did their colleague Anne Bower . As a vice @-@ president at the Carnegie Corporation , Morrisett had awarded several million dollars in grants to organizations that educated poor and minority preschool children . Morrisett and the other guests felt that even with limited resources , television could be an effective way to reach millions of children . 
 A few days after the dinner party , Cooney , Freedman and Morrisett met at the Carnegie Corporation 's offices to make plans ; they wanted to harness the addictive power of television for their own purposes , but did not yet know how . The following summer , despite Cooney 's lack of experience in the field of education , Morrisett hired her to conduct research on childhood development , education and media , and she visited experts in these fields across the United States and Canada . She researched their ideas about the viewing habits of young children and wrote a report on her findings . 
 Cooney 's study , titled " Television for Preschool Education " , spelled out how television could be used to help young children , especially from low @-@ income families , prepare for school . The focus on the new show was on children from disadvantaged backgrounds , but Cooney and the show 's creators recognized that in order to achieve the kind of success they wanted , it had to be equally accessible to children of all socio @-@ economic and ethnic backgrounds . At the same time , they wanted to make the show so appealing to inner @-@ city children that it would help them learn as much as children with more educational opportunities . This was the show 's primary criterion for success . 
 Cooney proposed that public television , even though it had a poor track record in attracting inner @-@ city audiences , could be used to improve the quality of children 's programming . She suggested using the television medium 's " most engaging traits " , including high production values , sophisticated writing , and quality film and animation , to reach the largest audience possible . In the words of critic Peter Hellman , " If [ children ] could recite Budweiser jingles from TV , why not give them a program that would teach the ABCs and simple number concepts ? " Cooney wanted to create a program that would spread values favoring education to <unk> — including their parents and older siblings , who tended to control the television set . To this end , she suggested that humor directed toward adults be included , which , as Lesser reported , " may turn out to be a pretty good system in forcing the young child to stretch to understand programs designed for older audiences " . Cooney also believed cultural references and guest appearances by celebrities would encourage parents and older siblings to watch the show together . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As a result of Cooney 's proposal , the Carnegie Corporation awarded her a $ 1 million grant in 1968 to establish the Children 's Television Workshop ( CTW ) to provide support to the creative staff of the new show . Morrisett , who was responsible for fundraising , procured additional grants from the United States federal government , the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , and the Ford Foundation for the CTW 's initial budget , which totaled $ 8 million ; obtaining funding from this combination of government agencies and private foundations protected the CTW from economic pressures experienced by commercial networks . Sesame Street was an expensive program to produce because the creators decided they needed to compete with other programs that invested in professional , high quality production . 
 The producers spent eighteen months preparing the new show , something unprecedented in children 's television . The show had an " impressive " budget of $ 28 @,@ 000 per episode . After being named executive director of the CTW , Cooney began to assemble a team of producers : Jon Stone was responsible for writing , casting , and format ; David Connell took over animation and volume ; and Samuel Gibbon served as the show 's chief liaison between the production staff and the research team . Stone , Connell , and Gibbon had worked on Captain Kangaroo together , but were not involved in children 's television when Cooney recruited them . At first , Cooney planned to divide the show 's production of five episodes a week among several teams , but she was advised by CBS vice @-@ president Mike Dann to use only one . This production team was led by Connell , who had gained experience producing many episodes in a short period of time , a process called " volume production " , during his eleven years working on Captain Kangaroo . 
 The CTW hired Harvard University professor Gerald S. Lesser to design the show 's educational objectives and establish and lead a National Board of Advisers . Instead of providing what Lesser called " window dressing " , the Board actively participated in the construction of educational goals and creative methods . At the Board 's direction , Lesser conducted five three @-@ day curriculum planning seminars in Boston and New York City in summer 1968 . The purpose of the seminars was to ascertain which school @-@ preparation skills to emphasize in the new show . The producers gathered professionals with diverse backgrounds to obtain ideas for educational content . They reported that the seminars were " widely successful " , and resulted in long and detailed lists of possible topics for inclusion in the Sesame Street curriculum ; in fact , the seminars produced more suggested educational objectives than could ever be addressed by one television series . 
 Instead of focusing on the social and emotional aspects of development , the producers decided to follow the suggestions of the seminar participants and emphasize cognitive skills , a decision they felt was warranted by the demands of school and the wishes of parents . The objectives developed during the seminars were condensed into key categories : symbolic representation , cognitive processes , and the physical and social environment . The seminars set forth the new show 's policy about race and social issues and provided the show 's production and creative team with " a crash course " in psychology , child development , and early childhood education . They also marked the beginning of Jim Henson 's involvement in Sesame Street . Cooney met Henson at one of the seminars ; Stone , who was familiar with Henson 's work , felt that if they could not bring him on board , they should " make do without puppets " . 
 The producers and writers decided to build the new show around a brownstone or an inner @-@ city street , a choice Davis called " unprecedented " . Stone was convinced that in order for inner @-@ city children to relate to Sesame Street , it needed to be set in a familiar place . Despite its urban setting , the producers decided to avoid depicting more negativity than what was already present in the child 's environment . Lesser commented , " [ despite ] all its raucousness and slapstick humor , Sesame Street became a sweet show , and its staff maintains that there is nothing wrong in that " . 
 The new show was called the " Preschool Educational Television Show " in promotional materials ; the producers were unable to agree on a name they liked and waited until the last minute to make a decision . In a short , irreverent promotional film shown to public television executives , the producers parodied their " naming dilemma " . The producers were reportedly " frantic for a title " ; they finally settled on the name that they least disliked : Sesame Street , inspired by Ali Baba 's magical phrase , although there were concerns that it would be too difficult for young children to pronounce . Stone was one of the producers who disliked the name , but , he said , " I was outvoted , for which I 'm deeply grateful " . 
 The responsibility of casting for Sesame Street fell to Jon Stone , who set out to form a cast where white actors were in the minority . He did not begin auditions until spring 1969 , several weeks before five test shows were due to be produced . He filmed the auditions , and Palmer took them into the field to test children 's reactions . The actors who received the " most enthusiastic thumbs up " were cast . For example , Loretta Long was chosen to play Susan when the children who saw her audition stood up and sang along with her rendition of " I 'm a Little Teapot " . Stone reported that casting was the only aspect that was " just completely haphazard " . Most of the cast and crew found jobs on Sesame Street through personal relationships with Stone and the other producers . Stone hired Bob McGrath ( an actor and singer best known at the time for his appearances on Mitch Miller 's sing @-@ along show on NBC ) to play Bob , Will Lee to play Mr. Hooper , and Garrett Saunders to play Gordon . 
 = = = Use of research in production = = = 
 Sesame Street was the first children 's television program that used a curriculum with clear and measurable outcomes , and was the first to use research in the creation of the show 's design and content . Research in Sesame Street had three functions : to test if the show was appealing to children , to discover what could be done to make the show more appealing , and to report to the public and the investors what impact the show had on its young viewers . Ten to fifteen percent of the show 's initial budget of $ 8 million was devoted to research , and researchers were always present in the studio during the show 's filming . A " Writer 's Notebook " was developed to assist writers and producers in translating the research and production goals into televised material ; this connected the show 's curriculum goals and its script development . The Muppet characters were created to fill specific curriculum needs : Oscar the Grouch , for example , was designed to teach children about their positive and negative emotions . Lesser called the collaboration between researchers and producers , as well as the idea of using television as an educational tool , the " CTW model " . Cooney agreed , commenting , " From the beginning , we — the planners of the project — designed the show as an experimental research project with educational advisers , researchers , and television producers collaborating as equal partners " . 
 The producers of Sesame Street believed education through television was possible if they captured and sustained children 's attention ; this meant the show needed a strong appeal . Edward Palmer , the CTW 's first Director of Research and the man Cooney credited with building the CTW 's foundation of research , was one of the few academics in the late 1960s researching children 's television . He was recruited by the CTW to test if the curricula developed in the Boston seminars were reaching their audience effectively . Palmer was also tasked with designing and executing the CTW 's in @-@ house research and with working with the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) . His research was so crucial to Sesame Street that Gladwell asserted , " ... without Ed Palmer , the show would have never lasted through the first season " . 
 Palmer and his team 's approach to researching the show 's effectiveness was innovative ; it was the first time formative research was conducted in this way . For example , Palmer developed " the distractor " , which he used to test if the material shown on Sesame Street captured young viewers ' attention . Two children at a time were brought into the laboratory ; they were shown an episode on a television monitor and a slide show next to it . The slides would change every seven seconds , and researchers recorded when the children 's attention was diverted away from the episode . They were able to record almost every second of Sesame Street this way ; if the episode captured the children 's interest 80 – 90 % of the time , the producers would air it , but if it only tested 50 % , they would reshoot . By the fourth season of the show , the episodes rarely tested below 85 % . 
 = = = July 1969 test episodes = = = 
 During the production of Sesame Street 's first season , producers created five one @-@ hour episodes to test the show 's appeal to children and examine their comprehension of the material . Not intended for broadcast , they were presented to preschoolers in 60 homes throughout Philadelphia and in day care centers in New York City in July 1969 . The results were " generally very positive " ; children learned from the shows , their appeal was high , and their attention was sustained over the full hour . However , the researchers found that although children 's attention was high during the Muppet segments , their interest wavered during the " Street " segments , when no Muppets were on screen . This was because the producers had followed the advice of child psychologists who were concerned that children would be confused if human actors and Muppets were shown together . As a result of this decision , the appeal of the test episodes was lower than the target . 
 The Street scenes , as Palmer described them , were " the glue " that " pulled the show together " , so producers knew they needed to make significant changes . On the basis of their experience on Captain Kangaroo , Cannell , Stone , and Gibbon thought the experts ' opinions were " nonsense " ; Cooney agreed . Lesser called their decision to defy the recommendations of their advisers " a turning point in the history of Sesame Street " . The producers reshot the Street segments ; Henson and his coworkers created Muppets that could interact with the human actors , specifically Oscar the Grouch and Big Bird , who became two of the show 's most enduring characters . In addition , the producers found Saunders ' role as Gordon not to be as likable by children watching the show , resulting in the character being recast by Matt Robinson , who was initially the show 's filmed segments producer . These test episodes were directly responsible for what Gladwell called " the essence of Sesame Street — the artful blend of fluffy monsters and earnest adults " . 
 = = Premiere and first season ( 1969 – 1970 ) = = 
 Two days before the show 's premiere , a thirty @-@ minute preview entitled This Way to Sesame Street aired on NBC . The show was financed by a $ 50 @,@ 000 grant from Xerox . Written by Stone and produced by CTW publicist Bob Hatch , it was taped the day before it aired . Newsday called the preview " a unique display of cooperation between commercial and noncommercial broadcasters " . 
 Sesame Street premièred November 10 , 1969 . It was widely praised for its originality , and was well received by parents as well as children . The show reached only 67 @.@ 6 % of the nation , but earned a 3 @.@ 3 Nielsen rating , meaning 1 @.@ 9 million households and 7 million children watched it each day . In Sesame Street 's first season , the ETS reported that children who watched the show scored higher in tests than less @-@ frequent viewers . 
 In November 1970 , the cover of Time magazine featured Big Bird , who had received more fan mail than any of the show 's human hosts . The magazine declared , " ... It is not only the best children 's show in TV history , it is one of the best parents ' shows as well " . David Frost , speaking about the versions of Sesame Street that were being produced in other countries , declared it was " a hit everywhere it goes " . An executive at ABC , while recognizing that Sesame Street was not perfect , said the show " opened children 's TV to taste and wit and substance " and " made the climate right for improvement " . Other reviewers predicted commercial television would be forced to improve its children 's programming , something that did not substantially occur until the 1990s . Sesame Street won a Peabody Award , three Emmys , and the Prix Jeunesse award in 1970 . President Richard Nixon sent Cooney a congratulatory letter , and Dr. Benjamin Spock predicted the program would result in " better @-@ trained citizens , fewer <unk> in the next generation , fewer people on welfare , and smaller jail populations " . 
 Sesame Street was not without its detractors ; there was little criticism of the show in the months following its premiere , but it increased at the end of its first season and beginning of the second season . In May 1970 , a state commission in Mississippi voted to not air the show on the state 's newly launched public television network . A member of the commission leaked the vote to The New York Times , stating that " Mississippi was not yet ready " for the show 's integrated cast . Cooney called the ban " a tragedy for both the white and black children of Mississippi " . The state commission reversed its decision after the vote made national news . 
 The producers of Sesame Street made a few changes in its second season . Segments that featured children became more spontaneous and allowed more impromptu dialogue , even when it meant cutting other segments . Since federal funds had been used to produce the show , more segments of the population insisted upon being represented on Sesame Street ; for example , the show was criticized by Hispanic groups for the lack of Latino characters in the early years of production . A committee of Hispanic activists , commissioned by the CTW in 1970 , called Sesame Street " racist " and said the show 's bilingual aspects were of " poor quality and patronizing " . The CTW responded to these critics by hiring Hispanic actors , production staff , and researchers . By the mid @-@ 70s , Morrow reported that " the show included Chicano and Puerto Rican cast members , films about Mexican holidays and foods , and cartoons that taught Spanish words " . 
 While New York Magazine reported criticism of the presence of strong single women in the show , organizations like the National Organization for Women ( NOW ) expressed concerns that the show needed to be " less male @-@ oriented " . For example , members of NOW took exception to the character Susan , who was originally a housewife . They complained about the lack of , as Morrow put it , " credible female Muppets " on the show ; Morrow reported that Henson 's response was that " women might not be strong enough to hold the puppets over the long hours of taping " . The show 's producers responded by making Susan a nurse and by hiring a female writer . 
 = = 1970s = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1970s , Sesame Street , according to Davis , had become " an American institution " . ETS conducted two " landmark " studies of the show in 1970 and 1971 which demonstrated Sesame Street had a positive educational impact on its viewers . The results of these studies led to the producers securing funding for the show over the next several years , and provided the CTW with additional ways to promote it . By the second season , Sesame Street had become so popular that the design of ETS ' experiments to track the show 's educational outcomes had to be changed : instead of comparing viewers with a control group of non @-@ viewers , the researchers studied the differences among levels of viewing . They found that children who watched Sesame Street more frequently had a higher comprehension of the material presented . 
 Producer Jon Stone was instrumental in guiding the show during these years . According to Davis , Stone " gave Sesame Street its soul " ; without him " there would not have been Sesame Street as we know it " . Frank Oz regarded Stone as " the father of Sesame Street " , and Cooney considered Stone " the key creative talent on Sesame Street and " probably the most brilliant writer of children 's material in America " . Stone was able to recognize and mentor talented people for his crew . He actively hired and promoted women during a time when few women earned top production jobs in television . His policies provided the show with a succession of female producers and writers , many of whom went on to lead the boom in children 's programming at Nickelodeon , the Disney Channel , and PBS in the 1990s and 2000s . One of these women was Dulcy Singer , who later became the first female executive producer of Sesame Street . 
 After the show 's initial success , its producers began to think about its survival beyond its development and first season and decided to explore other funding sources . The CTW decided to depend upon government agencies and private foundations to develop the show . This would protect it from the financial pressures experienced by commercial networks , but created problems in finding continued support . This era in the show 's history was marked by conflicts between the CTW and the federal government ; in 1978 , the US Department of Education refused to deliver a $ 2 million check until the last day of the CTW 's fiscal year . As a result , the CTW decided to depend upon licensing arrangements , publishing , and international sales for its funding . Henson owned the trademarks to the Muppet characters : he was reluctant to market them at first , but agreed when the CTW promised that the profits from toys , books , and other products were to be used exclusively to fund the CTW . The producers demanded complete control over all products and product decisions ; any product line associated with the show had to be educational , inexpensive , and not advertised during its airings . The CTW approached Random House to establish and manage a non @-@ broadcast materials division . Random House and the CTW named Christopher Cerf to assist the CTW in publishing books and other materials that emphasized the curriculum . In 1980 , the CTW began to produce a touring stage production based upon the show , written by Connell and performed by the Ice Follies . 
 Shortly after the premiere of Sesame Street , the CTW was approached by producers , educators , and officials in other nations , requesting that a version of the show be aired in their countries . Former CBS executive Mike Dann left commercial television to become vice @-@ president of the CTW and Cooney 's assistant ; Dann began what Charlotte Cole , vice president for the CTW 's International Research department , called the " globalization " of Sesame Street . A flexible model was developed , based upon the experiences of the creators and producers of the original show . The shows came to be called " co @-@ productions " , and they contained original sets , characters , and curriculum goals . Depending upon each country 's needs and resources , different versions were produced , including dubbed versions of the original show and independent programs . By 2009 , Sesame Street had expanded into 140 countries ; The New York Times reported in 2005 that income from the CTW 's international co @-@ productions of the show was $ 96 million . 
 Sesame Street 's cast expanded in the 1970s , better fulfilling the show 's original goal of greater diversity in both human and Muppet characters . The cast members who joined the show were Sonia Manzano ( Maria ) , who also wrote for the show , Northern Calloway ( David ) , Alaina Reed ( Olivia ) , Emilio Delgado ( Luis ) , Linda Bove ( Linda ) , and Buffy Sainte @-@ Marie ( Buffy ) . In 1975 , Roscoe Orman became the third actor to play Gordon , succeeding Hal Miller , who had briefly replaced Matt Robinson . 
 New Muppet characters were introduced during the 1970s . Count von Count was created and performed by Jerry Nelson , who also voiced Mr. Snuffleupagus , a large Muppet that required two puppeteers to operate . Richard Hunt , who , in Jon Stone 's words , joined the Muppets as a " wild @-@ eyed 18 @-@ year @-@ old and grew into a master puppeteer and inspired teacher " , created Gladys the Cow , Forgetful Jones , Don Music , and the construction worker Sully . Telly Monster was performed by Brian <unk> ; Marty Robinson took over the role in 1984 . Frank Oz created Cookie Monster . Matt Robinson created the " controversial " ( as Davis called him ) character Roosevelt Franklin . Fran Brill , the first female puppeteer for the Muppets , joined the Henson organization in 1970 , and originated the character Prairie Dawn . In 1975 , Henson created The Muppet Show , which was filmed and produced in London ; Henson brought many of the Muppet performers with him , so opportunities opened up for new performers and puppets to appear on Sesame Street . 
 The CTW wanted to attract the best composers and lyricists for Sesame Street , so songwriters like Joe Raposo , the show 's music director , and writer Jeff Moss were allowed to retain the rights to the songs they wrote . The writers earned lucrative profits , and the show was able to sustain public interest . Raposo 's " I Love Trash " , written for Oscar the Grouch , was included on the first album of Sesame Street songs , The Sesame Street Book & Record , recorded in 1970 . Moss ' " Rubber Duckie " , sung by Henson for Ernie , remained on the Top @-@ 40 Billboard charts for seven weeks that same year . Another Henson song , written by Raposo for Kermit the Frog in 1970 , " Bein ' Green " , which Davis called " Raposo 's best @-@ regarded song for Sesame Street " , was later recorded by Frank Sinatra and Ray Charles . " Sing " , which became a hit for The Carpenters in 1973 , and " Somebody Come and Play " , were also written by Raposo for Sesame Street . 
 In 1978 , Stone and Singer produced and wrote the show 's first special , the " triumphant " Christmas Eve on Sesame Street , which included an O Henry @-@ inspired storyline in which Bert and Ernie gave up their prized possessions — Ernie his rubber <unk> and Bert his paper clip collection — to purchase each other Christmas gifts . Bert and Ernie were played by Frank Oz and Jim Henson , who in real life were , like the puppets they played , colleagues and friends . To Davis , this demonstrated the puppeteers ' remarkable ability to play " puppetry 's Odd Couple " . In Singer 's opinion , the special — which Stone also wrote and directed — demonstrated Stone 's " soul " , and Sonia Manzano called it a good example of what Sesame Street was all about . The special won Emmys for Stone and Singer in 1979 . 
 By the show 's tenth anniversary in 1979 , nine million American children under the age of six were watching Sesame Street daily . Four out of five children had watched it over a six @-@ week period , and 90 % of children from low @-@ income inner @-@ city homes regularly viewed the show . 
 = = 1980s = = 
 In 1984 , the Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) deregulated commercial restrictions on children 's television . Advertising during network children 's programs almost doubled , and deregulation resulted in an increase in commercially oriented programming . Sesame Street was successful during this era of deregulation despite the fact that the United States government terminated all federal funding of the CTW in 1981 . By 1987 , the show was earning $ 42 million per year from its magazine division , book royalties , product licensing , and foreign income — enough to cover two @-@ thirds of its expenses . Its remaining budget , plus a $ 6 million surplus , was covered by revenue from its PBS broadcasts . 
 According to Davis , Sesame Street 's second decade was spent " turning inward , expanding its young viewers ' world " . The show 's curriculum grew to include more " affective " teaching — relationships , ethics , and positive and negative emotions . Many of the show 's storylines were taken from the experiences of its writing staff , cast , and crew . In 1982 , Will Lee , who had played Mr. Hooper since the show 's premiere , died . For the 1983 season , the show 's producers and research staff decided they would explain Mr. Hooper 's death to their preschool audience , instead of recasting the role : the writer of that episode , Norman Stiles , said , " We felt we owed something to a man we respected and loved " . They convened a group of psychologists , religious leaders , and other experts in the field of grief , loss , and separation . The research team conducted a series of studies before the episode to ascertain if children were able to understand the messages they wanted to convey about Mr. Hooper 's death ; the research showed most children did understand . Parents ' reactions to the episode were , according to the CTW 's own reports , " overwhelmingly positive " . The episode , which won an Emmy , aired on Thanksgiving Day in 1983 so parents could be home to discuss it with their children . Author David Borgenicht called the episode " poignant " ; Davis called it " a landmark broadcast " and " a truly memorable episode , one of the show 's best " . Caroll Spinney , who played Big Bird and who drew the caricatures prominently used in the episode , reported the cast and crew were moved to tears during filming . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s , Americans were becoming more aware of the prevalence of child abuse , so Sesame Street 's researchers and producers decided to " reveal " Mr. Snuffleupagus in 1985 . " Snuffy " had never been seen by any of the adults on the show and was considered Big Bird 's " imaginary friend " . The show 's producers were concerned about the message being sent to children ; " If children saw that the adults didn 't believe what Big Bird said ( even though it was true ) , they would be afraid to talk to adults about dramatic or disturbing things that happened to them " . 
 For the 1988 and 1989 seasons , the topics of love , marriage , and childbirth were addressed when the show presented a storyline in which the characters Luis and Maria fall in love , marry , and have a child named Gabi . Sonia Manzano , the actress who played Maria , had married and become pregnant ; according to the book Sesame Street Unpaved , published after the show 's thirtieth anniversary in 1999 , Manzano 's real @-@ life experiences gave the show 's writers and producers the idea . Before writing began , research was done to gain an understanding of what previous studies had revealed about preschoolers ' understanding of love , marriage , and family . The show 's staff found that at the time that there was very little relevant research done about children 's understanding of these topics , and no books for children had been written about them . Studies done after the episodes about Maria 's pregnancy aired showed that as a result of watching these episodes , children 's understanding of pregnancy increased . 
 = = 1990s = = 
 Davis called the 1990s a " time of transition on Sesame Street " . Several people involved in the show from its beginnings died during this period : Jim Henson in 1990 at the age of 53 " from a runaway strep infection gone stubbornly , foolishly untreated " ; songwriter Joe Raposo from non @-@ Hodgkin 's lymphoma fifteen months earlier ; long @-@ time cast member Northern Calloway of cardiac arrest in January 1990 ; puppeteer Richard Hunt of AIDS in early 1992 ; CTW founder and producer David Connell of bladder cancer in 1995 ; director Jon Stone of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in 1997 ; and writer Jeff Moss of colon cancer in 1998 . 
 By the early 1990s , Sesame Street was , as Davis put it , " the undisputed heavyweight champion of preschool television " . Entertainment Weekly reported in 1991 that the show 's music had been honored with eight Grammys . The show 's dominance , however , was soon challenged by another PBS television show for preschoolers , Barney & Friends , and Sesame Street 's ratings declined . The producers of Sesame Street responded , at the show 's twenty @-@ fifth anniversary in 1993 , by expanding and redesigning the show 's set , calling it " Around the Corner " . New human and Muppet characters were introduced , including Zoe ( performed by Fran Brill ) , baby Natasha and her parents Ingrid and Humphrey , and Ruthie ( played by comedian Ruth <unk> ) . The " Around the Corner " set was dismantled in 1997 . Zoe , one of the few characters that survived , was created to include another female Muppet on the show : her spunky and fearless personality was intended to break female stereotypes . According to Davis , she was the first character developed on the show by marketing and product development specialists , who worked with the researchers at the CTW . ( The quest for a " break @-@ out " female Muppet character continued into 2006 with the creation of Abby Cadabby , who was created after nine months of research . ) In 1998 , for the first time in the show 's history , Sesame Street pursued funding by accepting corporate sponsorship . Consumer advocate Ralph Nader , who had been a guest on the show , urged parents to protest the move by boycotting the show . 
 For Sesame Street 's 30th anniversary in 1999 , its producers researched the reasons for the show 's lower ratings . For the first time since the show debuted , the producers and a team of researchers analyzed Sesame Street 's content and structure during a series of two @-@ week @-@ long workshops . They also studied how children 's viewing habits had changed in the past thirty years . They found that although the show was produced for those between the ages of three and five , children began watching it at a younger age . Preschool television had become more competitive , and the CTW 's research showed the traditional magazine format was not the best way to attract young children 's attention . The growth of home videos during the ' 80s and the increase of thirty @-@ minute children 's shows on cable had demonstrated that children 's attention could be sustained for longer periods of time , but the CTW 's researchers found that their viewers , especially the younger ones , lost attention in Sesame Street after 40 to 45 minutes . 
 Beginning in 1998 , a new 15 @-@ minute segment shown at the end of each episode , " Elmo 's World " , used traditional elements ( animation , Muppets , music , and live @-@ action film ) , but had a more sustained narrative . " Elmo 's World " followed the same structure each episode , and depended heavily on repetition . Unlike the realism of the rest of the show , the segment took place in a stylized crayon @-@ drawing universe as conceived by its host . Elmo , who represented the three- to four @-@ year @-@ old child , was chosen as host of the closing segment because he had always tested well with this segment of their audience . He was created in 1980 and originally performed by Brian <unk> , and later Richard Hunt , but did not become what his eventual portrayer , Kevin Clash , called a " phenomenon " until Clash took over the role in 1985 . Eventually , Elmo became , as Davis reported , " the embodiment " of Sesame Street , and " the marketing wonder of our age " when five million " Tickle Me Elmo " dolls were sold in 1996 . Clash believed the " Tickle Me Elmo " phenomenon made Elmo a household name and led to the " Elmo 's World " segment . Michael Jeter was a favorite with younger audiences in his role as Mr. Noodle 's brother , Mister Noodle on Sesame Street from 1999 to 2003 . 
 = = 2000s and 2010s = = 
 In 2002 , Sesame Street 's producers went further in changing the show to reflect its younger demographic , fundamentally changing the show 's structure , which had relied on " Street scenes " interrupted by live @-@ action videos and animation . The target age for Sesame Street shifted downward , from four years to three years , after the show 's 33rd season . As co @-@ executive producer Arlene Sherman stated , " We basically deconstructed the show " . The producers expanded upon the " Elmo 's World " by changing from a magazine format to a narrative format , which made the show easier for young children to navigate . Sherman called the show 's new look " startlingly different " . Following its tradition of addressing emotionally difficult topics , Sesame Street 's producers chose to address the attacks of 9 / 11 during this season on its premiere episode , which aired February 4 , 2002 . This episode , as well as a series of four episodes that aired after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 , were used in Sesame Workshop 's Community Outreach program . 
 In 2006 , the United States Department of State called Sesame Street " the most widely viewed children 's television show in the world " . Over half of the show 's international co @-@ productions were made after 2001 ; according to the 2006 documentary The World According to Sesame Street , the events of 9 / 11 inspired the producers of these co @-@ productions . In 2003 , Takalani Sesame , a South African co @-@ production , elicited criticism in the United States when its producers created Kami , the first HIV @-@ positive Muppet , whose purpose was educating children in South Africa about the epidemic of AIDS . The controversy , which surprised the Sesame Workshop , was short @-@ lived and died down after Kofi Annan and Jerry Falwell praised the Workshop 's efforts . By 2006 , Sesame Street had won more Emmy Awards than any other children 's show , including winning the outstanding children 's series award for twelve consecutive years — every year the Emmys included the category . By 2009 , the show had won 118 Emmys throughout its history , and was awarded the Outstanding Achievement Emmy for its 40 years on the air . 
 By Sesame Street 's 40th anniversary , it was ranked the fifteenth most popular children 's show on television . When the show premiered in 1969 , 130 episodes a year were produced ; in 2009 , because of rising costs , twenty @-@ six episodes were made . In 2009 , the Children 's Television Workshop , which had changed its name to the Sesame Workshop ( SW ) in June 2000 to better reflect its entry into non @-@ television and interactive media , launched a website with a library of free video clips and free podcasts from throughout the show 's history . The 2008 – 2009 recession , which led to budget cuts for many nonprofit arts organizations , severely affected Sesame Street ; in spring 2009 , the SW had to lay off 20 % of its staff . 
 Sesame Street 's 40th anniversary was commemorated by the 2008 publication of Street Gang : The Complete History of Sesame Street , by Michael Davis , which has been called " the definitive statement " about the history of the show . 
 Starting in 2009 , the producers of Sesame Street took steps to bring back older viewers ; it was also successful in increasing its audience viewership among 3 @-@ to @-@ 5 year @-@ olds by the end of the 40th season . In 2012 , the show 's 43rd season , Elmo 's World was replaced with Elmo the Musical , which was targeted at the program 's older viewers . Subsequently in September 2014 , starting with the show 's 45th season , Sesame Workshop began distributing a half @-@ hour version of the program to PBS member stations . The new version , which complemented the existing hour @-@ long broadcast and focuses more on interstitial segments ( although certain segments such as Elmo the Musical or Abby 's Flying Fairy School are omitted from that version ) , was added because of increasing mobile and online viewing among children as well as growing competition for preschoolers on linear and online television , an increase in use of PBS Kids ' mobile video app during 2013 and decreasing broadcast viewership ; the half @-@ hour version airs weekday afternoons on PBS member television stations ( with the hour @-@ long version continuing to air in the morning ) and was made available for streaming online and on mobile devices through PBS ' website , mobile app and Roku channel . 
 On August 13 , 2015 , as part of a five @-@ year programming and development deal , Sesame Workshop announced that first @-@ run episodes of Sesame Street would move to premium television service HBO ( which had not aired any original children 's programming since 2005 ) in late 2015 . Sesame Workshop sought the deal because of declining revenue from viewer donations , and decreases in distribution fees paid by PBS member stations and licensing for merchandise sales ( particularly through Sesame Workshop 's dependence upon revenue from DVD sales ) , with the intent to having the show remain on PBS in some fashion ( HBO already had involvement in public television at the time of the deal , providing funding for the talk show Charlie Rose ) ; the deal also came in the wake of changing viewer habits of American children over the previous ten years . HBO will hold first @-@ run rights to all newer episodes of the series starting with season 46 , after which they will air on PBS member stations following a nine @-@ month exclusivity window , with no charge to the stations for airing the content ; however , HBO has not announced whether first @-@ run episodes will air on the pay service 's main channel or its multiplex channel HBO Family . The agreement also gives HBO exclusive rights to stream past and future Sesame Street episodes on HBO Go and HBO Now – assuming those rights from Amazon Video and Netflix . On August 14 , Sesame Workshop announced that it would phase out its in @-@ house subscription streaming service , Sesame Go , as a standalone service ; instead of shutting it down entirely , it intends to scale back its offerings to either provide access to a reduced slate of free content or act as a portal for Sesame Street 's website . 
 = Hands All Over ( Maroon 5 song ) = 
 " Hands All Over " is a song recorded by American band Maroon 5 , for their 2010 third studio album of the same name . It was written by Adam Levine , Jesse Carmichael , Sam Farrar , while the production was done by Robert John " Mutt " Lange . A funk metal and rock song , " Hands All Over " features an instrumentation consisting of electronic tones , drums , guitar , piano and percussion accompanied with heavy backing vocals ; lyrically , the song speaks of sexiness . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics , with some of them calling it the best track on the album . It received comparison to the works of Prince , Nine Inch Nails and most notably to English band Def Leppard . Upon the release of the album , " Hands All Over " debuted on national charts in South Korea and Spain ; it peaked at number 20 on the Gaon Chart and 38 on the Spanish Singles Chart , respectively . A music video for the song was shot by Don Tyler was released on December 24 , 2010 . It features a nude animated woman flirting and dancing for the band members . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Maroon 5 began writing material for their third studio album , Hands All Over , after completion of a world tour that was launched in support of their 2007 studio album It Won 't Be Soon Before Long . Months later , the band received a phone call from Robert John " Mutt " Lange , who had heard that the band were beginning to write a new album , and expressed an interest in producing it . In a press release on their official website , the album is described as " a killer hybrid of rock , pop , funk and R & B. " The band 's frontman Adam Levine described Mutt as one of the most successful producers who have ever lived . Jesse Carmichael , the band ’ s keyboardist , said , " Mutt really helped us play to the best of our ability . And it drove us to be bigger and better than ever . " Hands All Over was released on September 21 , 2010 in the United States . It received generally favorable reviews from music critics and debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 . 
 The album 's title track was written by Levine , Jesse Carmichael and Sam Farrar , while the production was done by Mutt . The additional production , engineering and programming was provided by Farrar and Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy . The song was recorded at Mutt 's studio in Vevey ( Lake Geneva ) , Switzerland by Olle Romo who also provided the Pro @-@ Tools . Mike Shipley did the additional recording and also mixed " Hands All Over " . Additional engineering of the song was done by Isha Erskine , while Eric Rose and Chad Hugo did the additional programming . Scott Cooke and Lenny Castro played the percussion . Brad Blackwood from <unk> Masters was the mastering engineer . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hands All Over " is a funk metal and rock song with a length of three minutes and thirteen seconds ( 3 : 13 ) . It has an instrumentation consisting of drums , guitar , piano and percussion . Bill Lamb of About.com wrote for the song , " crunchy guitars and a rock star sway animate the title song " . Contactmusic 's Nima Baniamer stated that " Hands All Over " , follows a trend consisting of heavy percussions and more heavier backing vocals . Melinda Newman of HitFix wrote that the song " is a heavy thump of a song that sounds pure Lange with a big kick drum propelling it forward . " In a review of the album , Fraser McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that the track contains a " rude guitar sleaze " , while according to Ben <unk> of 411mania " Hands all Over " borders on anthemic rock with a biting guitar technique " . 
 Written in the key of C minor , the song is placed in common time , with a moderate funk tempo . " Hands " All Over " starts with dark and shadowed electronic undertones before " sudden " bursts of electronic guitars start playing before transitioning into a " rock @-@ studded " production . The track also contains a lot of electronic guitar solo 's in the chorus and the verses , in the verses and the bridges and so forth . According to a reviewer of Billboard , at some points during the duration of the song , the guitars " just bleed " throughout the verses . " Put your hands all over me " , " Levine bellows over burly power chords " according to Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone . Thomas Conner of Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that , lyrically , " Hands All Over " together with " Never Gonna Leave This Bed " speak of sexiness . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics . Jakob Dorof of Slant Magazine wrote that " Hands All Over " is " the one real gamble " ; despite the fact that it tries to hard to find a missing connection between the works of Prince , Queen and Nine Inch Nails , " it 's certainly one of the more interesting things the band has ever recorded . " Similarly , McAlpine of BBC Music wrote that on songs like " Hands All Over " and " Stutter " , the Maroon 5 shows a band " who are really at their best when they play pop music like the sleazy rockers they clearly are . " Contactmusic 's <unk> stated that although the track is a little repetitive , it shows what kind of band Maroon 5 wants to be . 
 Rosen of Rolling Stone magazine wrote that it is a " big , silly arena @-@ rock song reminiscent of Def Leppard " . She further noted , " but Maroon 5 are too meticulous , a little too uptight , to make good on the song 's party @-@ hearty promise . Levine and crew could be blue @-@ eyed @-@ soul godheads , the 21st @-@ century Hall and Oates . But they need to loosen up first . " Leah Greenblat of Entertainment Weekly also spotted the Def Leppard influence on " Hands All Over " . Writing for the Bay of Plenty Times , Tamlyn Stewart said that the song is sexy and funky and is similar to the band 's works on their second studio album It Won 't Be Soon Before Long ( 2007 ) . Billboard 's reviewer labeled " Hands All Over " the best track among others including " Give a Little More " , " Misery " and " Out of <unk> " . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Upon the release of Hands All Over , due to the strong digital downloads , " Hands All Over " appeared on the national charts in South Korea and Spain . The song debuted and peaked at number 20 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart . On the Spanish Singles Chart , " Hands All Over " peaked at number 38 and stayed on the chart for one week . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for the song was released on December 24 , 2010 . It was directed by Don Tyler , who previously worked on videos for the bands A Day to Remember and Flyleaf . It was digitally released on June 14 , 2011 via iTunes Store and the same day was also uploaded on the band 's Vevo channel on YouTube . Shot in an animated technique , the video starts with an animated version of lead singer Levine singing on a microphone while hands are behind his back touching his body . As the video progresses , a nude animated woman is shown dancing around him and flirting with the other members of the band . Several animation effects such as angel wings and devil elements are shown behind Levine as he is singing , while the woman is also dancing for the other members . The video finishes with a close shot of Levine 's face . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Hands All Over , A & M / Octone Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Glassheart Tour = 
 The Glassheart Tour was the second headlining concert tour by British recording artist Leona Lewis . It was launched in support of her third studio album , Glassheart ( 2012 ) . Announced on 8 October 2012 , with an initial run of sixteen dates in the United Kingdom , the Glassheart Tour was extended to include five dates in Germany and one in Switzerland . English singer @-@ songwriter Ryan Keen served as the support act . It marks the first time that Lewis has performed material in Europe as part of a headline tour ; her previous tour The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) , only visited the UK . 
 Lewis was inspired by American hip hop artist and music producer Kanye West 's style of performance and noted British playwright William Shakespeare as inspiration for the tour . Lewis performed the set list with her band which consisted mostly of a string quartet and acoustic song arrangements . It was the acoustic performances and Lewis ' vocals that garnered the most praise from critics ; however , there was a mixed reaction to some of the arrangements such as the reggae influences on " Better in Time " . Critics were also divided over the lack of diversity from previous live performances though Lewis ' stage presence was commended . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Lewis released her third studio album Glassheart on 12 October 2012 , almost a year after the original release date of November 2011 . The album had been conceptualised in July 2010 , following Lewis ' completion of her first tour , The Labyrinth . The album title Glassheart was inspired from a conversation that Lewis had with Ryan Tedder . During the conversation , Tedder asked Lewis about her past experiences with love and life in general . Lewis ' response led him to the word " Glassheart . " During an interview with Clyde 1 radio , Lewis said " Glassheart represents protecting your heart , yourself and protecting your emotions , its very poignant " . On 8 October 2012 , a week before the album 's UK release , Lewis announced her supporting tour of the same name . The tour is named after the album , and although Lewis said she is not American hip hop artist and music producer Kanye West 's " biggest fan " , she was inspired by his tour performances where he appeared on stage alone and just " did his thing " . 
 During an interview with Digital Spy , Lewis told Tom Eames that Glassheart has a running theme about " star @-@ crossed lovers that can 't be together " , and so it was likely that this idea would feature on the tour . Lewis also cited William Shakespeare as another source of inspiration . She spent the three days of the final tour rehearsals at The Backstage Centre in Purfleet , Essex ( UK ) . The Glassheart Tour was scheduled to visit twenty @-@ one venues across Germany and the United Kingdom . The tour was expected to begin on 15 April in Berlin . The list had expanded from an initial sixteen to include five dates in Germany . Lewis would then proceed with UK dates beginning in Glasgow , including two dates at London 's Royal Albert Hall before finishing on 18 May in Plymouth . Speaking about the tour , Lewis said " I can 't wait to get out there and play my new songs . I had such fun on my last tour and I 'm really excited about doing it again next year . " Barclaycard ran a competition which gave fans the chance to win tickets to 6 May concert at Birmingham 's National Indoor Arena . 
 = = Critics ' reviews = = 
 In a review for the Express & Star , Elizabeth Joyce said although Lewis was not like her contemporaries : " meat dress @-@ wearing " Lady Gaga or the Russell Brand @-@ marrying Katy Perry , " no one can reach those soft lows or soaring highs quite like her " . Joyce praised the concert for showing the best of Lewis ' vocal abilities . <unk> predominately on songs from Spirit ( 2007 ) and Glassheart ( 2012 ) , the concert was largely acoustic music with a band and string quartet . In particular Joyce praised Lewis ' performances of " First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " and " Bleeding Love " which earned her standing ovations , in addition to the " note perfect " rendition of " Run " . Katherine Hollisey @-@ McLean for the Worthing Herald largely agreed , commenting that if anyone expected Lewis to be " belting out song after song " they were right . Hollisey @-@ McLean praised the decisions to switch the song arrangements , for example adding reggae beats to " Better in Time " and performing the acoustic version of " Trouble " . She ended by saying that Lewis ' vocals were " flawless " and that her stage presence and confidence had vastly improved over the last seven years . 
 The Guardian 's Malcolm Jack was less impressed ; he stated that when Lewis tried to diversify the show by dancing or switching the arrangements , she risked becoming the British diva that pop music forgot . Jack said that during a " sassy dance routine " for " Forgive Me " Lewis came off as a " budget Beyoncé " , whilst on the " cringey <unk> ' and <unk> ' reggae take on ' Better in Time ' song " she comes across like a " reasonably priced Rihanna " . Jack concluded by saying the show was in need of a shot of " adrenaline " . In writing for the Nottingham Post , Paul Hindle agreed , saying that when the tempo increased and choreography was introduced " Lewis looked endearingly uncomfortable " ; however , Hindle was positive about Lewis ' vocals , calling her vocal performance " virtuoso " . He concluded that Lewis ' " spellbinding rendition " of " Run " was a highlight of the concert , and that fans should not have left disappointed . 
 = = Set list = = 
 The following set list is representative of the show in Berlin on 15 April 2013 . It may not represent the setlist from all of the shows . 
 " Come Alive " 
 " Fireflies " 
 " A Moment Like This " ( Acoustic version ) 
 " Collide " 
 " Forgive Me " 
 " Better in Time " ( contains elements of " Man Down " , a song originally performed by Rihanna ) 
 " Happy " 
 " Sugar " 
 " I to You " 
 " Broken " 
 " Trouble " ( Acoustic version ) 
 " Locked Out of Heaven " ( A cover originally performed by Bruno Mars ) 
 " Footprints in the Sand " 
 " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " 
 " Bleeding Love " 
 " Glassheart " 
 " Run " 
 Notes 
 Lewis performed a cover of the Rihanna song " Diamonds " in Scarborough on 12 July 2013 . 
 = = Shows = = 
 = New Jersey Route 177 = 
 Route 177 was the shortest state highway recorded in Somerset County , New Jersey and the second shortest around the entire state of New Jersey . ( New Jersey Route 59 is the shortest recorded route in the state at 0 @.@ 15 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 24 km ) long . ) Route 177 went for a short , 0 @.@ 24 miles ( 0 @.@ 39 km ) state @-@ maintained portion of Bridge Street in Somerville . One of only three state highways in Somerset County after the 1953 state highway renumbering , Route 177 was the only one to be decommissioned later on . ( The other two highways are Route 27 further south and Route 28 further north ) The short @-@ lived designation went from U.S. Route 206 in Somerville , up Bridge Street near the Old Cemetery to Fifth Street , where state maintenance terminated . In 1974 , the Department of Transportation turned maintenance of this short highway over to the borough of Somerville for future use . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 177 began at a traffic light intersection with U.S. Route 206 in the city of Somerville . At the intersection , southbound traffic on Route 206 had to use a jughandle to connect to Route 177 . The state highway went northeastward , progressing along as South Bridge Street through a curve . Heading northward , the route passed the Somerville Old Cemetery before intersecting with Fifth Street . There , state @-@ maintenance ended , and the designation of Route 177 terminated . Entering downtown Somerville , South Bridge Street continued northward into a large residential community . Passing to the east and west of several residential homes , South Bridge Street continued into the downtown portion , crossing the current @-@ day Raritan Valley Line tracks maintained by New Jersey Transit and served the Somerville train station . After a couple of blocks of residential homes and businesses , South Bridge Street came to an intersection with New Jersey Route 28 , where it switched to North Bridge Street . 
 = = History = = 
 The alignment of Route 177 was a former alignment of State Highway Route 31 through Somerville . The highway was instated in 1926 as U.S. Route 206 and 1927 as State Highway Route 31 by the New Jersey State Highway Department and the Federal Highway Administration respectively . By 1930 , Routes 206 and 31 was shifted off of Bridge Street , running along a partially completed bypass of Somerville . By 1938 , this was completed and Route 206 was shifted to the southern terminus of Bridge Street south of the old cemetery . Bridge Street remained unnumbered until the second state highway renumbering on January 1 , 1953 . That day , the unnumbered alignment became Route 177 , running from US 206 to Fifth Street , where it met US 206 's former alignment . The route remained intact for a couple of decades , as one of three state highways in Somerset County ( along with Route 28 and Route 27 ) until 1974 , when the route was decommissioned and turned over to the borough of Somerville . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Somerville , Somerset County . 
 = Dan Leno = 
 George Wild Galvin ( 20 December 1860 – 31 October 1904 ) , better known by the stage name Dan Leno , was a leading English music hall comedian and musical theatre actor during the late Victorian era . He was best known , aside from his music hall act , for his dame roles in the annual pantomimes that were popular at London 's Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , from 1888 to 1904 . 
 Leno was born in St Pancras , London , and began to entertain as a child . In 1864 , he joined his parents on stage in their music hall act , and he made his first solo appearance , aged nine , at the Britannia Music Hall in Coventry . As a youth , he was famous for his clog dancing , and in his teen years , he became the star of his family 's act . He adopted the stage name Dan Leno and , in 1884 , made his first performance under that name in London . As a solo artist , he became increasingly popular during the late 1880s and 1890s , when he was one of the highest @-@ paid comedians in the world . He developed a music hall act of talking about life 's mundane subjects , mixed with comic songs and surreal observations , and created a host of mostly working @-@ class characters to illustrate his stories . In 1901 , still at the peak of his career , he performed his " Huntsman " sketch for Edward VII at Sandringham . The monarch was so impressed that Leno became publicly known as " the king 's jester " . 
 Leno also appeared in burlesque and , every year from 1888 to 1904 , in the Drury Lane Theatre 's Christmas pantomime spectacles . He was generous and active in charitable causes , especially to benefit performers in need . Leno continued to appear in musical comedies and his own music hall routines until 1902 , although he suffered increasingly from alcoholism . This , together with his long association with dame and low comedy roles , prevented him from being taken seriously as a dramatic actor , and he was turned down for Shakespearean roles . Leno began to behave in an erratic and furious manner by 1902 , and he suffered a mental breakdown in early 1903 . He was committed to a mental asylum , but was discharged later that year . After one more show , his health declined , and he died aged 43 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Family background and early life = = = 
 Leno was born in St Pancras , London . He was the youngest of six children , including two elder brothers , John and Henry , and an elder sister , Frances . Two other siblings died in infancy . His parents , John Galvin ( 1826 – 1864 ) and his wife Louisa ( née Dutton ; 1831 – 1891 ) , performed together in a music hall double act called " The Singing and Acting Duettists " . They were known professionally as Mr. and Mrs. Johnny Wild . They were not very successful , and the family struggled in poverty . 
 Having had very little schooling , and being raised by performers , Leno learned to entertain as a child . In 1862 , Leno 's parents and elder brothers appeared at the Surrey Music Hall in Sheffield , then performed in northern cities later in the year . In 1864 , at the age of four , Leno joined his parents on stage for the first time , at the <unk> Music Hall in Paddington , under the billing " Little George , the Infant Wonder , <unk> , and <unk> " . 
 When Leno was still four , his father , an alcoholic , died at the age of 37 . The family moved to Liverpool a few months later , where his mother married William Grant ( 1837 – 1896 ) , on 7 March 1866 . Grant was a comedian of Lancastrian and Irish descent , who performed in music halls throughout the British provinces under the stage name of William Leno . He was a seasoned actor and had previously been employed by Charles Kean in his theatre company at the Princess 's Theatre in London . In 1866 , the family home in Marylebone was demolished to make way for St Pancras railway station and , as a result , Leno 's sister Frances was sent to live with an uncle , while his brother John , who performed occasionally with his parents , took full @-@ time employment . Leno , his mother , stepfather and brother Henry moved north and settled in Liverpool , where they performed in various halls and theatres , including the Star Music Hall , but they often returned to London to perform in the capital 's music halls . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 In 1865 , Leno and his brother Henry , who first taught Leno to dance , formed a clog dancing double act known as " The Great Little Lenos " . This was the first time that Leno used his stepfather 's stage name , " Leno " , which he never registered legally . The same year , Leno also appeared in his first pantomime , in Liverpool , where he had a supporting part as a juvenile clown in Fortunatus ; or , The Magic Wishing Cap alongside his parents , who appeared as " Mr and Mrs Leno – Comic Duettists " . On 18 July 1866 , Leno , Henry and their parents appeared on the opening night of the Cambridge Music Hall in Toxteth , Liverpool , under the billing " Mr. and Mrs. Leno , the Great , Sensational , Dramatic and Comic Duettists and The Brothers Leno , Lancashire Clog , Boot and Pump Dancers " . The following year , the brothers made their first appearance without their parents at the Britannia music hall in Hoxton . Although initially successful , the pair would experience many bouts of unemployment and often busked outside London pubs to make a living . Tired of surviving on little or no money , Henry left the clog dancing act to take up a trade in London , forcing Leno to consider a future as a solo performer . Henry later founded a dance school . Soon , however , Henry was replaced intermittently in the act by the boys ' uncle , Johnny Danvers , who was a week older than Leno . Leno and Danvers were close from an early age . 
 Leno made his debut as a solo performer in 1869 , returning to the Britannia music hall in Hoxton , where he became known as " The Great Little Leno , the Quintessence of Irish Comedians " . The name was suggested by his stepfather , William , who thought the Irish connection would appeal to audiences on their upcoming visit to Dublin . Arriving in Ireland the same year , the Lenos were struggling financially and stayed with William 's relatives . In addition to his performances as part of the family act , young Leno appeared as a solo act under an Irish @-@ sounding stage name , " Dan Patrick " . This allowed him to earn a separate fee of 23 shillings per performance plus living expenses . The name " Dan " was chosen to honour Dan Lowery , a northern music hall comedian and music hall proprietor whom the Lenos had met a few months earlier . During this tour of Ireland , the Lenos appeared in Dublin in a pantomime written by Leno 's father : Old King Humpty ; or , Harlequin Emerald Isle and <unk> of Killarney ( 1869 ) , in which Leno received praise from Charles Dickens , who was in the audience and told him : " Good little man , you 'll make headway ! " 
 In 1870 , the Lenos appeared in another pantomime by Leno 's father , Jack the Giant Killer ; or , Harlequin Grim Gosling , or the Good Fairy Queen of the Golden Pine Grove , in which Leno played the title character and also featured in the variety entertainment that preceded the pantomime . This was his last theatrical role until 1886 . Throughout the 1870s , Leno and his parents performed as " The Comic Trio ( Mr. & Mrs. Leno and Dan Patrick ) In Their Really Funny Entertainments , Songs and Dances " . In the family act with his parents and Danvers , young Leno often took the leading role in such sketches as his stepfather 's The Wicklow Wedding . Another of their sketches was Torpedo Bill , in which Leno played the title role , an inventor of explosive devices . His parents played a " washerwoman " and a " comic cobbler " . This was followed by another sketch , Pongo the Monkey . Opening at Pullan 's Theatre of Varieties in Bradford on 20 May 1878 , this burlesque featured Leno as an escaped monkey ; it became his favourite sketch of the period . 
 The teenage Leno 's growing popularity led to bookings at , among others , the Varieties Theatre in Sheffield and the Star Music Hall in Manchester . At the same time , Leno 's clog dancing continued to be so good that in 1880 he won the world championship at the Princess 's Music Hall in Leeds , for which he received a gold and silver belt weighing 44 @.@ 5 oz ( 1 @.@ 26 kg ) . His biographer , the pantomime librettist J. Hickory Wood , described his act : " He danced on the stage ; he danced on a pedestal ; he danced on a slab of slate ; he was encored over and over again ; but throughout his performance , he never uttered a word " . 
 = = = 1880s = = = 
 In 1878 , Leno and his family moved to Manchester . There , he met Lydia Reynolds , who , in 1883 , joined the Leno family theatre company , which already consisted of his parents , Danvers and Leno . The following year , Leno and Reynolds married ; around this time , he adopted the stage name " Dan Leno " . On 10 March 1884 , the Leno family took over the running of the Grand Varieties Theatre in Sheffield . The Lenos felt comfortable with their working class Sheffield audiences . On their opening night , over 4 @,@ 000 patrons entered the theatre , paying sixpence to see Dan Leno star in Doctor Cut ' Em Up . In October 1884 , facing tough competition , the Lenos gave up the lease on the theatre . 
 In 1885 , Leno and his wife moved to Clapham Park , London , and Leno gained new success with a solo act that featured comedy patter , dancing and song . On the night of his London debut , he appeared in three music halls : the Foresters ' Music Hall in Mile End , Middlesex Music Hall in Drury Lane and Gatti 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Road , where he earned £ 5 a week in total ( £ 487 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) . Although billed as " The Great Irish Comic Vocalist and Clog Champion " at first , he slowly phased out his dancing in favour of character studies , such as " Going to Buy Milk for the Twins " , " When Rafferty <unk> his Watch " and " The Railway Guard " . His dancing had earned him popularity in the provinces , but Leno found that his London audiences preferred these sketches and his comic songs . Leno 's other London venues in the late 1880s included the Collins Music Hall in Islington , the Queen 's Theatre in Poplar and the Standard in Pimlico . 
 Leno was a replacement in the role of Leontes in the 1888 musical burlesque of the ancient Greek character Atalanta at the Strand Theatre , directed by Charles Hawtrey . It was written by Hawtrey 's brother , George P. Hawtrey , and it starred Frank Wyatt , Willie Warde and William Hawtrey . The Illustrated Sporting and Dramatic News praised Leno 's singing and dancing and reported that : " He brings a good deal of fun and quaintness to the not very important part of Leontes . " Leno accepted the role at short notice , with no opportunity to learn the script . But his improvised comedy helped to extend the life of the show . When Leno and another leading actor left a few months later , the production closed . 
 = = = Music hall = = = 
 During the 1890s , Leno was the leading performer on the music hall stage , rivalled only by Albert Chevalier , who moved into music hall from the legitimate theatre . Their styles and appeal were very different : Leno 's characters were gritty working @-@ class realists , while Chevalier 's were overflowing in romanticism , and his act depicted an affluent point of view . The two represented the opposite poles of cockney comedy . 
 For his music hall acts , Leno created characters that were based on observations about life in London , including <unk> , grocer 's assistants , <unk> , huntsmen , <unk> , firemen , fathers , henpecked husbands , garrulous wives , pantomime dames , a police officer , a Spanish bandit , a fireman and a hairdresser . One such character was Mrs. Kelly , a gossip . Leno would sing a verse of a song , then begin a monologue , often his You know Mrs. Kelly ? routine , which became a well @-@ known catchphrase : " You see we had a row once , and it was all through Mrs. Kelly . You know Mrs. Kelly , of course . ... Oh , you must know Mrs. Kelly ; everybody knows Mrs. Kelly . " 
 For his London acts , Leno purchased songs from the foremost music hall writers and composers . One such composer was Harry King , who wrote many of Leno 's early successes . Other well @-@ known composers of the day who supplied Leno with numbers included Harry Dacre and Joseph Tabrar . From 1890 , Leno commissioned George Le Brunn to compose the incidental music to many of his songs , including " The Detective " , " My Old Man " , " Chimney on Fire " , " The Fasting Man " , " The Jap " , " All Through A Little Piece of Bacon " and " The Detective Camera " . Le Brunn also provided the incidental music for three of Leno 's best @-@ known songs that depicted life in everyday occupations : " The Railway Guard " ( 1890 ) , " The <unk> " and " The Waiter " ( both from 1891 ) . The songs in each piece became instantly distinctive and familiar to Leno 's audiences , but his occasional changes to the characterisations kept the sketches fresh and topical . 
 " The Railway Guard " featured Leno in a mad characterisation of a railway station guard dressed in an ill @-@ fitting uniform , with an unkempt beard and a whistle . The character was created by exaggerating the behaviour that Leno saw in a real employee at Brixton station who concerned himself in other people 's business while , at the same time , not doing any work . " The <unk> " was full of comic one @-@ liners and was heavily influenced by pantomime . Leno played the part of a shop assistant , again of manic demeanour , enticing imaginary clientele into the shop before launching into a frantic selling technique sung in verse . Leno 's depiction of " The Waiter " , dressed in an oversized dinner jacket and loose @-@ fitting white <unk> , which would flap up and hit his face , was of a man consumed in self @-@ pity and indignation . Overworked , overwrought and overwhelmed by the number of his customers , the waiter gave out excuses for the bad service faster than the customers could complain : 
 Yes , sir ! No , sir ! Yes , sir ! When I first came here these trousers were knee @-@ breeches . Legs worn down by waiting . Sir ! What did you say ? How long would your steak be ? Oh , about four inches I should say , about four inches . No , sir ! sorry sir . Can 't take it back now , sir . You 've stuck your fork in and let the steam out ! 
 = = = Pantomime = = = 
 Leno 's first London appearance in pantomime was as Dame Durden in Jack and the Beanstalk , which he performed at London 's Surrey Theatre in 1886 , having been spotted singing " Going to Buy Milk " by the Surrey Theatre manager , George Conquest . Conquest also hired Leno 's wife to star in the production . The pantomime was a success , and Leno received rave reviews ; as a result , he was booked to star as <unk> the Tinker in the following year 's pantomime , which had the unique title of Sinbad and the Little Old Man of the Sea ; or , The Tinker , the Tailor , the Soldier , the Sailor , Apothecary , <unk> , Gentleman Thief . 
 After these pantomime performances proved popular with audiences , Leno was hired in 1888 by Augustus Harris , manager at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , to appear in that year 's Christmas pantomime , Babes in the Wood . Harris 's pantomime productions at the huge theatre were known for their extravagance and splendour . Each one had a cast of over a hundred performers , ballet dancers , acrobats , marionettes and animals , and included an elaborate transformation scene and an energetic harlequinade . Often they were partly written by Harris . Herbert Campbell and Harry Nicholls starred with Leno in the next fifteen Christmas productions at Drury Lane . Campbell had appeared in the theatre 's previous five pantomimes and was a favourite of the writer of those productions , E. L. Blanchard . Blanchard left the theatre when Leno was hired , believing that music hall performers were unsuitable for his Christmas pantomimes . This was not a view shared by audiences or the critics , one of whom wrote : 
 I am inclined to think " the cake " for frolicsome humour is taken by the dapper new @-@ comer , Mr. Dan Leno , who is sketched as the galvanic baroness in the wonderfully amusing dance which sets the house in a roar . The substantial " babes " , Mr. Herbert Campbell and Mr. Harry Nicholls , would have no excuse if they did not vie in drollery with the light footed Dan Leno . 
 Babes in the Wood was a triumph : the theatre reported record attendance , and the run was extended until 27 April 1889 . Leno considerably reduced his music @-@ hall engagements as a consequence . Nevertheless , between April and October 1889 , Leno appeared simultaneously at the Empire Theatre and the Oxford Music Hall , performing his one @-@ man show . By this time , Leno was much in demand and had bookings for the next three years . On 9 May 1889 he starred for George P. Hawtrey in a matinee of Penelope , a musical version of a famous farce The Area Belle , to benefit the Holborn Lodge for Shop Girls . In this benefit , he played the role of Pitcher opposite the seasoned Gilbert and Sullivan performer Rutland Barrington . The Times considered that his performance treated the piece " too much in the manner of pantomime " . During Leno 's long association with the Drury Lane pantomimes , he appeared chiefly as the dame . After Harris died in 1896 , Arthur Collins became the manager of the theatre and oversaw ( and often helped to write ) the pantomimes . 
 In their pantomimes , the diminutive Leno and the massive Campbell were a visually comic duo . They would often deviate from the script , improvising freely . This was met with some scepticism by producers , who feared that the scenes would not be funny to audiences and observed that , in any event , they were rarely at their best until a few nights after opening . George Bernard Shaw wrote of one appearance : " I hope I never again have to endure anything more dismally futile " , and the English essayist and caricaturist Max Beerbohm stated that " Leno does not do himself justice collaborating with the public " . He noted , however , that Leno " was exceptional in giving each of his dames a personality of her own , from extravagant queen to artless gossip " . In Sleeping Beauty , Leno and Campbell caused the audience to laugh even when they could not see them : they would arrive on stage in closed palanquins and exchange the lines , " Have you anything to do this afternoon , my dear ? " – " No , I have nothing on " , before being carried off again . Leno and Campbell 's pantomimes from 1889 were Jack and the Beanstalk ( 1889 and 1899 ) , Beauty and the Beast ( 1890 and 1900 ) , Humpty Dumpty ( 1891 and 1903 ) , Little Bo @-@ Peep ( 1892 ) , Robinson Crusoe ( 1893 ) , Dick Whittington and His Cat ( 1894 ) , Cinderella ( 1895 ) , Aladdin ( 1896 ) , Babes in the Wood ( 1897 ) and the Forty Thieves ( 1898 ) . 
 Leno considered the dame roles in two of his last pantomimes , Bluebeard ( 1901 ) and Mother Goose ( 1902 ) , written by J. Hickory Wood , to be his favourites . He was paid £ 200 ( £ 19 @,@ 582 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) for each of the pantomime seasons . Leno appeared at Drury Lane as Sister Anne in Bluebeard , a character described by Wood as " a sprightly , somewhat below middle aged person who was of a coming on disposition and who had not yet abandoned hope " The Times drama critic noted : " It is a quite peculiar and original Sister Anne , who dances breakdowns and sings strange ballads to a still stranger harp and plays ping @-@ pong with a frying @-@ pan and potatoes and burlesques Sherlock Holmes and wears the oddest of garments and dresses her hair like Miss <unk> <unk> , and speaks in a piping voice – in short it is none other than Dan Leno whom we all know " . Mother Goose provided Leno with one of the most challenging roles of his career , in which he was required to portray the same woman in several different guises . Wood 's idea , that neither fortune nor beauty would bring happiness , was illustrated by a series of magical character transformations . The poor , unkempt and generally ugly Mother Goose eventually became a rich and beautiful but tasteless parvenu , searching for a suitor . The production was one of Drury Lane 's most successful pantomimes , running until 28 March 1903 . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 In 1896 , the impresario Milton Bode approached Leno with a proposal for a farcical musical comedy vehicle devised for him called Orlando Dando , the Volunteer , by Basil Hood with music by Walter Slaughter . Leno 's agent declined the offer , as his client was solidly booked for two years . Bode offered Leno £ 625 ( £ 82 @,@ 880 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) for a six @-@ week appearance in 1898 . Upon hearing this , the comedian overrode his agent and accepted the offer . Leno toured the provinces in the piece and was an immediate success . So popular was his performance that Bode re @-@ engaged him for a further two shows : the musical farce In Gay Piccadilly ! ( 1899 ) , by George R. Sims , in which Leno 's uncle , Johnny Danvers appeared ( The Era said that Leno was " attracting huge houses " and called him " excruciatingly funny " ) ; and the musical comedy Mr. Wix of Wickham ( 1902 ) . Both toured after their original runs . In 1897 , Leno went to America and made his debut on 12 April of that year at Hammerstein 's Olympia Music Hall on Broadway , where he was billed as " The Funniest Man on Earth " . Reviews were mixed : one newspaper reported that the house roared its approval , while another complained that Leno 's English humour was out of date . His American engagement came to an end a month later , and Leno said that it was " the crown of my career " . Despite his jubilation , Leno was conscious of the few negative reviews he had received and rejected all later offers to tour the United States and Australia . 
 The same year , the comedian lent his name and writing talents to Dan Leno 's Comic Journal . The paper was primarily aimed at young adults and featured a mythologised version of Leno – the first comic paper to take its name from , and base a central character on , a living person . Published by C. Arthur Pearson , Issue No. 1 appeared on 26 February 1898 , and the paper sold 350 @,@ 000 copies a year . Leno wrote most of the paper 's comic stories and jokes , and Tom Browne contributed many of the illustrations . The comedian retained editorial control of the paper , deciding which items to omit . The Journal was known for its slogans , including " One Touch of Leno Makes the Whole World Grin " and " Won 't wash clothes but will mangle melancholy " . The cover always showed a caricature of Leno and his editorial staff at work and play . Inside , the features included " Daniel 's Diary " , " <unk> from the Martyr " , two yarns , a couple of dozen cartoons and " Leno 's Latest – Fresh Jokes and <unk> Made on the Premises " . After a run of nearly two years the novelty wore off , and Leno lost interest . The paper shut down on 2 December 1899 . 
 A journalist wrote , in the late 1890s , that Leno was " probably the highest paid funny man in the world " . In 1898 , Leno , Herbert Campbell and Johnny Danvers formed a consortium to build the Granville Theatre in Fulham , which was demolished in 1971 . Leno published an autobiography , Dan Leno : <unk> Booke , in 1899 , ghostwritten by T. C. Elder . Leno 's biographer J. Hickory Wood commented : " I can honestly say that I never saw him absolutely at rest . He was always doing something , and had something else to do afterwards ; or he had just been somewhere , was going somewhere else , and had several other appointments to follow . " That year , Leno performed the role of " <unk> <unk> " ( a slang expression for a black @-@ face performer ) in the Doo @-@ da @-@ Day Minstrels , an act that included Danvers , Campbell , Bransby Williams , Joe Elvin and Eugene Stratton . The troupe 's only performance was at the London Pavilion on 29 May 1899 as part of a benefit . Leno 's song " The Funny Little Nigger " greatly amused the audience . His biographer Barry Anthony considered the performance to be " more or less , the last gasp of black @-@ face minstrelsy in Britain " . 
 Between 1901 and 1903 , Leno recorded more than twenty @-@ five songs and monologues on the Gramophone and Typewriter Company label . He also made 14 short films towards the end of his life , in which he portrayed a bumbling buffoon who struggles to carry out everyday tasks , such as riding a bicycle or opening a bottle of champagne . On 26 November 1901 , Leno , along with Seymour Hicks and his wife , the actress Ellaline Terriss , was invited to Sandringham House to take part in a Royal Command Performance to entertain King Edward VII , Queen Alexandra , their son George and his wife , Mary , the Prince and Princess of Wales . Leno performed a thirty @-@ five @-@ minute solo act that included two of his best @-@ known songs : " How to Buy a House " and " The Huntsman " . After the performance , Leno reported , " The King , the Queen and the Prince of Wales all very kindly shook hands with me and told me how much they had enjoyed it . The Princess of Wales was just going to shake hands with me , when she looked at my face , and couldn 't do it for some time , because she laughed so much . I wasn 't intending to look funny – I was really trying to look dignified and courtly ; but I suppose I couldn 't help myself . " As a memento , the king presented Leno with a jewel @-@ encrusted royal tie pin , and thereafter , Leno became known as " the King 's Jester " . Leno was the first music hall performer to give a Royal Command Performance during the king 's reign . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1883 , Leno met Sarah Lydia Reynolds ( 1866 – 1942 ) , a young dancer and comedy singer from Birmingham , while both were appearing at King <unk> 's Circus of Varieties , Rochdale . The daughter of a stage carpenter , Lydia , as she was known professionally , was already an accomplished actress as a teenager : of her performance in Sinbad the Sailor in 1881 , one critic wrote that she " played <unk> very well for a young artiste . She is well known at this theatre and with proper training will prove a very clever actress . " She and Leno married in 1884 in a discreet ceremony at St. George 's Church , in Hulme , Manchester , soon after the birth of their first daughter , Georgina . A second child died in infancy , and John was born in 1888 . Their three youngest children – Ernest ( b . 1889 ) , Sidney ( b . 1891 ) and May ( b . 1896 ) – all followed their father onto the stage . Sidney later performed as Dan Leno , Jr . After Leno 's mother and stepfather retired from performing , Leno supported them financially until their deaths . 
 Leno owned 2 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) of land at the back of his house in Clapham Park , and was self @-@ sufficient , producing cabbages , potatoes , poultry , butter and eggs . He would also send these as gifts to friends and family at Christmas . In 1898 , Leno and his family moved to 56 Akerman Road , Lambeth , where they lived for several years . A blue plaque was erected there in 1962 by the London County Council . 
 = = = Charity and fundraising = = = 
 The Terriers Association was established in 1890 to help retired artists in need of financial help . Leno was an active fundraiser in this and in the Music Hall Benevolent Fund , of which he became President . He was an early member of the entertainment charity Grand Order of Water Rats , which helps performers who are in financial need , and served as its leader , the King Rat , in 1891 , 1892 and 1897 . Near the end of his life , Leno co @-@ founded The Music Hall Artistes Railway Association , which entered a partnership with the Water Rats to form music hall 's first trade union . Some of Leno 's charity was discreet and unpublicised . 
 In the late 1890s , Leno formed a cricket team called the " <unk> " , for which he recruited many of the day 's leading comedians and music hall stars . They played for charity against a variety of amateur teams willing to put up with their comedic mayhem , such as London 's Metropolitan Police Force ; Leno 's and his teammates ' tomfoolery on the green amused the large crowds that they drew . From 1898 to 1903 , the <unk> continued to play matches across London . Two films of action from the matches were produced in 1900 for audiences of the new medium of cinema . In September 1901 , at a major charity match , the press noted the carnival atmosphere . The comedians wore silly costumes – Leno was dressed as an undertaker and later as a schoolgirl riding a camel . Bands played , and clowns circulated through the crowd . The rival team of professional Surrey cricketers were persuaded to wear tall hats during the match . 18 @,@ 000 spectators attended , contributing funds for music hall and cricketers ' charities , among others . 
 = = = Decline and mental breakdown = = = 
 Leno began to drink heavily after performances , and , by 1901 , like his father and stepfather before him , he had become an alcoholic . He gradually declined physically and mentally and displayed frequent bouts of erratic behaviour that began to affect his work . By 1902 , Leno 's angry and violent behaviour directed at fellow cast members , friends and family had become frequent . Once composed , he would become remorseful and apologetic . His erratic behaviour was often a result of his diminishing ability to remember his lines and <unk> in performance . Leno also suffered increasing deafness , which eventually caused problems on and off stage . In 1901 , during a production of Bluebeard , Leno missed his verbal cue and , as a result , was left stuck up a tower for more than twenty minutes . At the end of the run of Mother Goose in 1903 , producer Arthur Collins gave a tribute to Leno and presented him , on behalf of the Drury Lane Theatre 's management , with an expensive silver dinner service . Leno rose to his feet and said : " Governor , it 's a magnificent present ! I congratulate you and you deserve it ! " 
 Frustrated at not being accepted as a serious actor , Leno became obsessed with the idea of playing Richard III and other great Shakespearean roles , inundating the actor – manager Herbert Beerbohm Tree with his proposals . After his final run of Mother Goose at the Drury Lane Theatre in early 1903 , Leno 's delusions overwhelmed him . On the closing evening , and again soon afterwards , he travelled to the home of Constance Collier , who was Beerbohm Tree 's leading lady at His Majesty 's Theatre , and also followed her to rehearsal there . He attempted to persuade her to act alongside him in a Shakespearean season that Leno was willing to fund . On the second visit to her home , Leno brought Collier a jewellery box holding a diamond @-@ encrusted plaque . Recognising that Leno was having a mental breakdown , she sadly and gently refused his offer , and Leno left distraught . 
 Two days later , he was admitted into an asylum for the insane . Leno spent several months in Camberwell House Asylum , London , under the care of Dr. Savage , who treated Leno with " peace and quiet and a little water colouring " . On his second day , Leno told a nurse that the clock was wrong . When she stated that it was right , Leno remarked , " Well if it 's right , then what 's it doing here ? " Leno made several attempts to leave the asylum , twice being successful . He was found each time and promptly returned . 
 = = = Last year and death = = = 
 Upon Leno 's release from the institution in October 1903 , the press offered much welcoming commentary and speculated as to whether he would appear that year in the Drury Lane pantomime , scheduled to be Humpty Dumpty . Concerned that Leno might suffer a relapse , Arthur Collins employed Marie Lloyd to take his place . By the time of rehearsals , however , Leno persuaded Collins that he was well enough to take part , and the cast was reshuffled to accommodate him . Leno appeared with success . Upon hearing his signature song , the audience reportedly gave him a standing ovation that lasted five minutes . He received a telegram from the King congratulating him on his performance . Leno 's stage partner Herbert Campbell died in July 1904 , shortly after the pantomime , following an accident at the age of fifty @-@ seven . The death affected Leno deeply , and he went into a decline . At that time , he was appearing at the London Pavilion , but the show had to be cancelled owing to his inability to remember his lines . So harsh were the critics that Leno wrote a statement , published in The Era , to defend the show 's originality . On 20 October 1904 , Leno gave his last performance in the show . Afterwards , he stopped at the Belgrave Hospital for Children in Kennington to leave a donation of £ 625 ( £ 60 @,@ 527 in 2016 adjusted for inflation ) . 
 Leno died at his home in London on 31 October 1904 , aged 43 , and was buried at Lambeth Cemetery , Tooting . The cause of death is not known . His death and funeral were national news . The Daily Telegraph wrote in its obituary : " There was only one Dan . His methods were inimitable ; his face was indeed his fortune ... Who has seen him in any of his disguises and has failed to laugh ? " Max Beerbohm later said of Leno 's death : " So little and frail a lantern could not long harbour so big a flame " . His memorial is maintained by the Grand Order of Water Rats , which commissioned the restoration of his grave in 2004 . 
 = 1980 National League West tie @-@ breaker game = 
 The 1980 National League West tie @-@ breaker game was a one @-@ game extension to Major League Baseball 's ( MLB ) 1980 regular season , played between the Houston Astros and the Los Angeles Dodgers to decide the winner of the National League 's ( NL ) West Division . The game was played on October 6 , 1980 , at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles , California . It was necessary after the Dodgers overcame a three @-@ game deficit in the final three games of the season and both teams finished with identical win – loss records of 92 – 70 . The Dodgers won a coin flip late in the season which , by rule at the time , awarded them home field for the game . 
 The Astros won the game , 7 – 1 , with Houston starter Joe Niekro throwing a complete game . This victory advanced the Astros to the 1980 NL Championship Series ( NLCS ) , in which they lost to the Philadelphia Phillies , ending the Astros ' season . In baseball statistics , the tie @-@ breaker counted as the 163rd regular season game for both teams , with all events in the game added to regular season statistics . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Cincinnati Reds won the West division the previous season with the Astros finishing 1 @.@ 5 games back in second , and the Dodgers 11 @.@ 5 back in third . However , the Reds went on to lose the 1979 NLCS in three games to the Pittsburgh Pirates , ending their season . The Astros acquired Joe Morgan and Nolan Ryan via free agency during the offseason and the Dodgers signed Dave Goltz . Dave Kindred of the Washington Post , George Vecsey of The New York Times , and Astros ' relief pitcher Joe <unk> all credited Morgan 's leadership with the Astros ' success in 1980 . 
 The Reds maintained early success in 1980 with an eight @-@ game winning streak to open the season and held at least a share of first place in the division until April 30 . They were not as successful over the remainder of the season , only occasionally taking the division lead and last holding it on August 16 . The Astros held the lead for the majority of the season thereafter , including a three @-@ game lead over Los Angeles entering the final series of the season . The series matched the Astros with the Dodgers for three games at Dodger Stadium . The Dodgers won all three games , all by a single run , stopping the Astros from clinching a division championship as the two teams sat tied at 92 – 70 . Kindred described the Astros as losing each game of the series by " fail [ ing ] to make elementary fielding plays . " The final game included a run @-@ scoring pinch hit single by Manny Mota , who had been almost exclusively a coach and not a player that season , and a home run by Ron Cey which also scored Steve Garvey , who had reached base in the previous at bat on an error . The Dodgers needed each of these runs as they won the game 4 – 3 . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 Box score for Monday October 6 , 1980 — 3 : 10 p.m. ( PT ) at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles , California 
 The Astros took their lead early , scoring in the top of the first inning . Terry Puhl led off the game reaching base on an error by the second baseman . Enos Cabell followed Puhl with a single and , while Joe Morgan batted , stole second base to put runners at second and third . Morgan struck out and José Cruz appeared to hit into a fielder 's choice but a catching error by the catcher allowed Puhl to score , Cabell to advance to third base , and Cruz to reach safely all with no out recorded . Cabell then scored on a César Cedeño ground out to make the game 2 – 0 . Art Howe singled to advance Cruz to third , but Dodgers ' starting pitcher Dave Goltz escaped the inning without further scoring . 
 The Astros ' Joe Niekro retired the Dodgers in order in the first and second innings . The Astros added to their lead in the top of the third as Cedeño singled , stole second ( after Cruz had been caught stealing earlier in the inning ) , and scored on Art Howe 's home run to make the game 4 – 0 . Niekro allowed two successive singles to lead off the bottom of the inning , but proceeded to retire three straight Dodgers without allowing either runner to score . The Astros further added to their lead in the fourth , as Puhl singled on a bunt to third base and then stole second and third base while Cabell batted . Both he and Morgan walked to load the bases with one out . Puhl scored on a Cruz sacrifice fly , Cedeño walked to re @-@ load the bases , and finally a Howe single gave the Astros another two runs to make the game 7 – 0 . 
 The Dodgers scored their only run in the bottom of the fourth as Dusty Baker singled , advanced to second on an error , and scored on another single . They threatened again in the sixth inning , loading the bases , though they failed to score . That was the only inning after the fourth in which a Dodgers ' runner reached scoring position . Niekro steadied again after the sixth , allowing just one baserunner on a two @-@ out ninth @-@ inning single over the remaining three innings . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Houston 's win clinched the team 's first postseason berth in franchise history . The Astros lost the five @-@ game NLCS to the Phillies 3 – 2 , ending their season . Due to the 1981 Major League Baseball strike , the following season was split into halves and the winner of each half advanced to the postseason . The Dodgers won the first half and the Astros the second and so met in the first National League Division Series . The Dodgers won , and went on to win the 1981 World Series . The Astros did not return to the NLCS until 1986 and did not win a NL pennant until 2005 , leading to a loss in the 2005 World Series . 
 In baseball statistics , tie @-@ breakers count as regular season games , with all events in them added to regular season statistics . Niekro , for example , reached his 20th win to break a tie with Jim Bibby for the 2nd most wins in the NL that season . Similarly , Steve Garvey played in his 163rd game of the season , leading the league with a figure which could not have been equaled by anyone not on the Astros or Dodgers . Dusty Baker won a Silver Slugger Award and Steve Howe , who pitched the final two scoreless innings of the tie @-@ breaker for the Dodgers in relief , won the Rookie of the Year Award for their performances in the regular season . Additionally six Dodgers ( Garvey , Davey Lopes , Bill Russell , Reggie Smith , Jerry Reuss , and Bob Welch ) and two Astros ( J. R. Richard and Cruz ) were named to the National League 's All @-@ Star team . 
 = Hutchinson Letters Affair = 
 The Hutchinson Letters Affair was an incident that increased tensions between the colonists of the Province of Massachusetts Bay and the British government prior to the American Revolution . In June 1773 letters written several years earlier by Thomas Hutchinson and Andrew Oliver , governor and lieutenant governor of the province at the time of their publication , were published in a Boston newspaper . The content of the letters was <unk> claimed by Massachusetts radical politicians to call for the abridgement of colonial rights , and a duel was fought in England over the matter . 
 The affair served to inflame tensions in Massachusetts , where implementation of the 1773 Tea Act was met with resistance that culminated in the Boston Tea Party in December 1773 . The response of the British government to the publication of the letters served to turn Benjamin Franklin , one of the principal figures in the affair , into a committed Patriot . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the 1760s , relations between Great Britain and some of its North American colonies became strained by a series of Parliamentary laws ( including the 1765 Stamp Act and the 1767 Townshend Acts ) , intended to raise revenue for the crown , and to assert Parliament 's authority to pass such legislation despite a lack of colonial representation . These laws had sparked strong protests in the Thirteen Colonies ; the Province of Massachusetts Bay in particular saw significant unrest and direct action against crown officials . The introduction of British Army troops into Boston in 1768 further raised tensions that escalated to the Boston Massacre in 1770 . 
 In the years after the enactment of the Townshend Acts , Massachusetts Lieutenant Governor Thomas Hutchinson and his colonial secretary ( and brother @-@ in @-@ law ) Andrew Oliver wrote a series of letters concerning the acts , the protests against them , and containing suggestions on how to respond , to Thomas Whately , an assistant to Prime Minister George Grenville . <unk> died in 1772 , and his papers were turned over to his brother William . <unk> at one point gave access to his brother 's papers to John Temple , another colonial official who sought to recover letters of his own from those papers . 
 Hutchinson was appointed governor of Massachusetts in 1770 , following the critical publication by opposition politicians of letters written by his predecessor , Francis Bernard . Over the next two years Hutchinson engaged in an extended and rancorous written debate with the provincial assembly and the governor 's council , both of which were dominated by radical leadership hostile to Parliamentary authority . The debate centered on the arbitrariness of executive prerogative and the role of Parliament in colonial governance , and greatly deepened divisions in the province . 
 The Massachusetts debate reached a pitch in England when the colonial secretary , Lord Dartmouth , insisted that Benjamin Franklin , then acting as agent for Massachusetts in London , demanded that the Massachusetts assembly retract its response to a speech the governor gave early in 1772 as part of this ongoing debate . Franklin had acquired a packet of about twenty letters that had been written to Whately . Upon reading them , Franklin concluded that Hutchinson and Oliver had mischaracterized the situation in the colonies , and thus misled Parliament . He felt that wider knowledge of these letters would then focus colonial anger away from Parliament and at those who had written the misleading letters . Franklin sent the letters to Thomas Cushing , the speaker of the Massachusetts assembly , in December 1772 . He insisted to Cushing that they not be published or widely circulated . He specifically wrote that they should be seen only by a few people , and that he was not " at liberty to make the letters public . " 
 The letters arrived in Massachusetts in March 1773 , and came into the hands of Samuel Adams , then serving as the clerk of the Massachusetts assembly . By Franklin 's instructions , only a select few people , including the Massachusetts Committee of Correspondence , were to see the letters . Alarmed at what they read , Cushing wrote Franklin , asking if the restrictions on their circulation could be eased . In a response received by Cushing in early June , Franklin reiterated that they were not to be copied or published , but could be shown to anyone . 
 = = Publication = = 
 A longtime opponent of Hutchinson 's , Samuel Adams narrowly followed Franklin 's request , but managed to orchestrate a propaganda campaign against Hutchinson without immediately disclosing the letters . He informed the assembly of the existence of the letters , after which it designated a committee to analyze them . Strategic leaks suggestive of their content made their way into the press and political discussions , causing Hutchinson much discomfort . The assembly eventually concluded , according to John Hancock , that in the letters Hutchinson sought to " overthrow the Constitution of this Government , and to introduce arbitrary Power into the Province " , and called for the removal of Hutchinson and Oliver . Hutchinson complained that Adams and the opposition were misrepresenting what he had written , and that nothing he had written in them on the subject of Parliamentary supremacy went beyond other statements he had made . The letters were finally published in the Boston Gazette in mid @-@ June 1773 , causing a political firestorm in Massachusetts and raising significant questions in England . 
 = = Content of the letters = = 
 The letters were written primarily in 1768 and 1769 , principally by Hutchinson and Oliver , although the published letters also included some written by Charles Paxton , a customs official and Hutchinson supporter , and Hutchinson 's nephew Nathaniel Rogers . The letters written by Oliver ( who became lieutenant governor when Hutchinson became governor ) proposed a significant revamping of the Massachusetts government to strengthen the executive , while those of Hutchinson were ruminations on the difficult state of affairs in the province . Historian Bernard Bailyn confirms Hutchinson 's own assertion that much of the content of his letters expressed relatively little that had not already been publicly stated . 
 According to Bailyn , Hutchinson 's ruminations included the observation that it was impossible for colonists have the full rights they would have in the home country , essentially requiring an " abridgement of what are called English liberties " . Hutchinson , unlike Oliver , made no specific proposals on how the colonial government should be reformed , writing in a letter that was not among those published , " I can think of nothing but what will produce as great an evil as that which it may remove or will be of a very uncertain event . " Oliver 's letters , in contrast , specifically proposed that the governor 's council , whose members where then elected by the assembly with the governor 's consent , be changed to one whose members were appointed by the crown . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 In England , speculation ran rampant over the source of the leak . William Whately accused John Temple of taking the letters , which Temple denied , challenging Whately to a duel . Whately was wounded in the encounter in early December 1773 , but neither participant was satisfied , and a second duel was planned . In order to forestall that event , Franklin on Christmas Day published a letter admitting that he was responsible for the acquisition and transmission of the letters , to prevent " further mischief " . He justified his actions by pointing out that the letters had been written between public officials for the purpose of influencing public policy . 
 When Hutchinson 's opponents in Massachusetts read the letters , they seized on key phrases ( including the " abridgement " phrase ) to argue that Hutchinson was in fact lobbying the London government to make changes that would effect such an abridgement . Combined with Oliver 's explicit recommendations for reform , they presented this as a clear indication that the provincial leaders were working against the interests of the people and not for them . 
 Bostonians were outraged at the content of the published letters , burning Hutchinson and Oliver in effigy on Boston Common . The letters were widely reprinted throughout the British North American colonies , and acts of protest took place as far away as Philadelphia . The Massachusetts assembly and governor 's council petitioned the Board of Trade for Hutchinson 's removal . In the Privy Council hearing concerning Hutchinson 's fate , in which the aftermath of the Boston Tea Party was also discussed , Franklin stood silently while he was lambasted by Solicitor General Alexander Wedderburn for his role in the affair . He was accused of thievery and dishonor , and called the prime mover in England on behalf of Boston 's radical Committee of Correspondence . The Board of Trade dismissed Franklin from his post as colonial Postmaster General , and dismissed the petition for Hutchinson 's removal as " groundless " and " vexatious " . Parliament then passed the so @-@ called " Coercive Acts " , a package of measures designed to punish Massachusetts for the tea party . Hutchinson was recalled , and the Massachusetts governorship was given to the commander of British forces in North America , Lieutenant General Thomas Gage . Hutchinson left Massachusetts in May 1774 , never to return . Andrew Oliver suffered a stroke and died in March 1774 . 
 Gage 's implementation of the Coercive Acts further raised tensions that led to the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War in April 1775 . Franklin , who had been politically neutral with respect to the colonial radicals prior to his appearance before the Board of Trade , returned to America in early 1775 , committed to independence . He went on to serve in the Second Continental Congress and became a leading figure in the American Revolution . 
 = = Who gave Franklin the letters ? = = 
 A number of candidates have been proposed as the means by which Benjamin Franklin acquired the letters . John Temple , despite his political differences with Hutchinson , was apparently able to convince the latter in 1774 that he was not involved in their acquisition . He did , however , claim to know who was involved , but refused to name him , because that would " prove the ruin of the guilty party . " Several historians ( including Bernard Bailyn and Bernard <unk> ) have concluded that Thomas Pownall was the probable source of the letters . Pownall was Massachusetts governor before Francis Bernard , had similar views to Franklin on colonial matters , and had access to centers of colonial administration through his brother John , the colonial secretary . Other individuals have also been suggested , but all appear to have an only tenuous connection to Franklin or the situation . Historian Kenneth <unk> believes the question will remain unanswerable unless new documents emerge to shed light on the episode . 
 = Massive Attack ( song ) = 
 " Massive Attack " is a song by American rapper Nicki Minaj and American recording artist Sean Garrett . Written by Minaj , co @-@ written and produced by Garrett and Alex da Kid , " Massive Attack " was released on April 13 , 2010 . It was initially intended to be the first single from Minaj 's debut studio album Pink Friday , but the release was later scrapped in favor of " Your Love " . The song was a distinct change in Minaj 's previous work on mixtapes and features , thus receiving mixed to positive reviews from critics , commending lyrical content and distinctiveness , and critiquing that it did not fit her " Barbie " persona well . An accompanying music video which features a helicopter chase , and militaristic jungle and desert scenes , was positively received . 
 Commercially , the song had limited success , reaching number 65 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart but only managing to bubble under the Billboard Hot 100 at 22 . Later in an interview with Billboard magazine , Garrett revealed that the song would not be included on Pink Friday and that the poor performance of the song was out of his control , " I was only able to do as much as I was allowed to do . Sometimes you have to step back and get off the wheel . I didn 't have control of the entire creative process . A lot of [ other ] artists trust me enough and allow me to do what I know is best to do as a producer " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with Rap @-@ Up in March 2010 , Minaj revealed the title to the song , and Garrett later hinted around details around his single with Minaj , stating , 
 " I just did Nicki ’ s first single featuring me . It ’ s gonna be a fucking bomb . It ’ s very , very explosive ! It ’ s a club banger . It ’ s a lot broader than what people would expect her to come with . The record puts her in the game in a way that says she should ’ ve been here a long time ago . She has a real way of how she wants to do this . It ’ s just gonna be a surprise when it comes . She just wants to make it as huge as possible . " 
 Additionally , co @-@ producer Alex da Kid said , " I started on the train and finished in the studio . I knew it was special from the start . It wasn 't like I was aiming for Nicki with this track ; I had a idea I thought was crazy . Nicki heard it and the rest was history . " In an interview with MTV News , Minaj stated when she first heard the song she felt she was in Africa and fell in love with the drum beats , and commented , " It 's a very rare . ... You 're not gonna get the song the first time you hear it . After the second or third time , you 're gonna be like , ' Whoa , what is this ? ' It sounds nothing like anything that 's out right now . " She also called the song " next @-@ level futuristic " , and said that she chose Garrett for the song in that he would be the best to " illustrate Nicki Minaj " , as he got her and her personality " . In an interview on the set of the video shoot for " Massive Attack " , Minaj said , " I 'm excited for people to hear me ... doing more than one verse . It 's really creative . I wanted to be theatrical , but I am very serous about what I do . " Also on the set of the video , Garrett said , " We wanted to give her something that was global , " he continued . " We wanted to give her something that was urban ; we wanted to give her something that was mainstream pop , you know what I mean , that the world could get a chance to see her out on this pedestal . And of course , you know , I had to come along with her , because I 've got an album dropping soon . " The song made its debut March 29 , 2010 on WQHT . The song leaked onto the Internet on March 30 , 2010 , the day before its music video premiere on 106 & Park . The single 's art cover was revealed on April 1 , 2010 , featuring a still of Minaj in the music video as a ninja and comic book font designs . Alex da Kid said that a lot of artists wanted the beat such as Jamie Foxx and Young Jeezy but he gave it to Nicki because it fit her " quirky , left @-@ field vibe . " 
 Alex da Kid was also interviewed by Rap @-@ Up , and when asked about the commercial flop of the song and he said , " My whole thing [ is that ] I don ’ t want to do anything that ’ s the same as what ’ s out there , I think ' Massive Attack ' may have been too different . If we would 've put a big feature on it , like a Kanye or Rihanna or someone , I think it might 've done a bit better . It needed something familiar about it . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The song fuses hip @-@ hop and dance as Minaj delivers her lyrics in a Caribbean accent . It is composed in a " futuristic " style with heavy drum beats . It carries a " chaotic " beat with " screechy Euro @-@ club synths " compared to Timbaland . Minaj references E.T. The Extra Terrestrial , Mr. Miyagi , The Phantom of the Opera , and Simba and Mufasa of The Lion King film in her lines . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Monica Herrera of Billboard gave the single a mixed review , stating that Minaj , being " one of the most visually distinctive rappers to come along in years " , that the single was an " anticlimatic coming out song " , " considering the hype Minaj has generated through mixtapes , cameos and her co @-@ starring role in Lil Wayne 's Young Money project " . However Hererra did commend the lyrical content , stating " her sassy one @-@ liners are as entertaining as always " , and the overall production although it didn 't suit Minaj 's " her mental @-@ patient delivery nearly as well as , say , Kane Beatz ' simpler track for Young Money 's " BedRock " . Robbie Daw of ' Idolator ' said , " we wouldn ’ t expect Nicki to do any less than come out of the gate charging full force , lyrically , on her debut single . That said , we were expecting maybe a tad more of a melody on the track . " Chris Ryan of ' MTV Buzzworthy ' gave the song a positive review , stating " you get the feeling , listening to the song 's air @-@ raid keyboards and thunderous beats , that the Young Money princess really wants to separate herself from the rap pack and carve out a space all her own " . Ryan also said , " her verbal dexterity , complex flow and humor , Nicki is reminiscent of classic Missy Elliott -- and that 's a compliment of the highest order " . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video for the single was shot on March 15 , 2010 in the deserts of Lancaster , California , directed by Hype Williams . When talking to ' MTV News ' about the video Minaj stated , 
 " I didn 't want to shoot the typical new @-@ artist vision . Thank God I have a wonderful label that stands behind me and my vision . I met Hype in a freakin ' airport ... and it happened to be a week before I wanted to shoot a video . I told him the idea . Of course , I had to let Baby and Slim know and hope they would understand my expensive taste . It all came together . " It 's just beautiful — the clothes , everything . The ambiance .. It 's for all the girls that like to play dress @-@ up . They 're gonna love this one ... we get on the walkie @-@ talkie , like , ' Mayday ! Mayday ! ' It 's really fashion and beauty shots , and we 're acting like we 're doing something important . We wanted to make it pretty in the dirt . We wanted to have a very crazy contrast . I didn 't want to do everything clean . I like the dirt . All that pink stuff looks even prettier in the dirt . " 
 = = = Concept = = = 
 Sean Garrett appears in the video and Birdman , Amber Rose , and <unk> of Season 3 of America 's Best Dance Crew make cameos . The video premiered on BET 's 106 & Park on March 31 , 2010 The video comprises a helicopter chase and militaristic desert and jungle scenes . The music video begins with Birdman giving Minaj a stack of money to carry to an unknown area in the desert . As the song begins Minaj appears in a blonde wig with a pink background which than cuts to Minaj riding in a pink Lamborghini with Amber Rose driving as a potential new take on Thelma & Louise in a helicopter chase . Shots of desert creatures and Minaj in her Barbie wig are shown during the first hook . As the helicopter chase progresses , Minaj is seen singing to the camera in military gear and is later shown walking in an attacking line with her Harajuku Army , which are all dressed in the same gear with pink wigs under helmets . During the chorus of the song , a shirtless Garrett is shown singing into the camera while clips of the helicopter chase are interpreted . During the second verse Minaj is in the jungle as a ninja with a long pink braid running down her back as she crawls on the ground and walks around the jungle . Some clips of two men ( from <unk> ) dancing with double @-@ jointed shoulders are also shown . During the climax of the song Minaj is still in the jungle this time with a green wig were dancing in the mud and comes out of the water , crawling through the forest . The video ends as clips of the entire video are shown and closes with Minaj and Rose escaping in the pink Lamborghini . 
 = = = Reception and lawsuit = = = 
 The video garnered media attention , with Monica Herrera of Billboard commenting on a review for the single , " It figures , then , that discussion of her debut single , " Massive Attack , " would take a back seat to its Hype Williams @-@ directed , B @-@ movie @-@ inspired video . " Chris Ryan of MTV News commented on the video , saying , " We L @-@ U @-@ V Barbie because she 's a trendsetter and a strident , unique artist . But with great style comes great responsibility . Her video for ' Massive Attack , ' the first single off her long @-@ awaited debut album , is bananas " . 
 On June 11 , 2010 Hollywood Exotic Car Rental filed a lawsuit against Minaj for damages and unpaid rental charges on the car . They claimed that the vehicle was driven " off @-@ road " and damaged “ in the approximate amount of $ 11 @,@ 589 @.@ 41 . " Along with damages to the car , Minaj rented the car for $ 1 @,@ 750 a day , and used the vehicle an additional three days totaling in an extra $ 5 @,@ 250 owed . The rental company is suing for unpaid rental charges , property damage , and punitive damage . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Shepseskare = 
 Shepseskare or Shepseskara ( Egyptian for " Noble is the Soul of Ra " ) was an Ancient Egyptian pharaoh , the fourth or fifth ruler of the Fifth Dynasty ( 2494 – 2345 BC ) during the Old Kingdom period . Shepseskare lived in the mid @-@ 25th century BC and was probably the owner of an unfinished pyramid in Abusir , which was abandoned after a few weeks of work in the earliest stages of its construction . 
 Following historical sources , Shepseskare was traditionally believed to have reigned for seven years , succeeding Neferirkare Kakai and preceding Neferefre on the throne , making him the fourth ruler of the dynasty . He is the most obscure ruler of this dynasty and the Egyptologist Miroslav Verner has strongly argued that Shepseskare 's reign lasted only a few months at the most , after that of Neferefre . This conclusion is based upon the state and location of Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid in Abusir as well as the very small number of artefacts attributable to this king . Verner 's arguments have now convinced several Egyptologists such as Darrell Baker and Erik Hornung . 
 Shepseskare 's relations to his predecessor and successor are not known for certain . Verner has proposed that he was a son of Sahure and a brother to Neferirkare Kakai , who briefly seized the throne following the premature death of his predecessor and probable nephew , Neferefre . Shepseskare may himself have died unexpectedly or he may have lost the throne to another of his nephews , the future pharaoh Nyuserre Ini . The possibility that Shepseskare was a short @-@ lived usurper from outside the royal family cannot be totally excluded . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Contemporaneous sources = = = 
 Shepseskare was a king of Ancient Egypt , the fourth or fifth ruler of the Fifth Dynasty . Egypt was unified at the time , with its capital located at Memphis . Shepseskare is the least @-@ known king of the Fifth Dynasty as very few artefacts dating to his reign have survived to this day . Only two cylinder seals of Shepseskare are known : one , made of bronze , bears Shepseskare 's Horus name and was uncovered in the ruins of Memphis in the early 20th century . The second seal , of unknown provenance , is made of black serpentine and reads " Shepseskare beloved of the gods , Shepseskare beloved of Hathor " . Beyond these two seals the only surviving artefacts attributable to Shepseskare are five fragments of seal impressions on clay from Abusir and six further fragments discovered in the mortuary temple and Sanctuary of the Knife of the Pyramid of Neferefre , also in Abusir . These fragments probably come from three different seals and were most likely placed on the doors of magazine rooms in the temple . 
 Finally , there is a single scarab seal reading " <unk> " [ sic ] that the Egyptologist Flinders Petrie attributed to Shepseskare at the end of the 19th century . Modern scholars doubt this attribution and rather believe the scarab to be a work of the much later Saite period ( 685 – 525 BC ) executed in archaic style . Equally , the scarab could belong to <unk> <unk> , an obscure kinglet of Tanis during the 25th Dynasty ( 760 – 656 BC ) . 
 = = = Historical sources = = = 
 The only ancient Egyptian king list mentioning Shepseskare is the Saqqara Tablet ( on the 28th entry ) . The tablet was inscribed during the reign of Ramesses II ( 1279 – 1213 BC ) , around 1200 years after Shepseskare 's lifetime , and records the dynastic succession <unk> → Shepseskare → <unk> ( a variant name of Neferefre ) . Shepseskare is completely absent from another king list dating to the same period : the Abydos king list , written during the reign of Seti I ( 1294 – 1279 BC ) . He is also absent from the Turin canon ( reign of Ramses II ) , although in this case a lacuna affects the papyrus on which the list is written at the place where Shepseskare and Neferefre 's names should have been . Of the two entries concerning Shepseskare and Neferefre on the king list , only one reign length is still legible and it has been variously read as one year , eleven years or one to four months . The damaged state of the papyrus also makes it impossible to decide safely whose reign length this is . 
 Shepseskare was also likely mentioned in the Aegyptiaca , a history of Egypt written in the 3rd century BC during the reign of Ptolemy II ( 283 – 246 BC ) by the Egyptian priest Manetho . No copies of the Aegyptiaca have survived to this day and it is now known only through later writings by Sextus Julius Africanus and Eusebius . Africanus relates that the Aegyptiaca mentioned the succession " <unk> → Sisires → <unk> " for the mid Fifth Dynasty . <unk> and <unk> are believed to be the hellenized forms for Neferirkare and <unk> ( that is Neferefre ) , respectively . Thus , " Sisires " is traditionally believed to be the Greek name of Shepseskare , making Manetho 's reconstruction of the Fifth Dynasty in good agreement with the Saqqara tablet . Furthermore , according to Africanus , Manetho credits Sisires with seven years of reign while other sources report Manetho 's figure as nine years . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Chronological position = = = 
 Both the relative chronological position and absolute dates of Shepseskare 's reign are uncertain . The Saqqara Tablet records Shepseskare as the successor of Neferirkare Kakai and the predecessor of Neferefre , which became the traditional opinion among Egyptologists . Following discoveries in the early 1980s , the Czech Egyptologist Miroslav Verner advocates the hypothesis that Shepseskare succeeded , rather than preceded , Neferefre . 
 In support of this hypothesis , Verner first emphasizes the presence of several clay seal impressions bearing Shepseskare 's Horus name " <unk> " ( meaning " He whose apparitions are powerful " ) in the oldest part of <unk> 's mortuary temple , which was not built " until Neferefre 's death " . This appears to suggest that Shepseskare ruled after — rather than before — Neferefre . Verner 's second argument concerns the alignment of pyramids of Sahure , Neferirkare Kakai and Neferefre : they form a line pointing to Heliopolis , just as the three pyramids of Giza do . In contrast , Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid does not fall on the line to Heliopolis , which strongly suggests that Neferefre 's pyramid had already been in place when Shepseskare started his . Finally , Verner observes that Neferefre is known to have been Neferirkare 's eldest son and around 20 years old when his father died so that he was in optimal position to inherit the throne . <unk> thus most likely took the throne after Neferefre . As Verner notes , while Shepseskare is noted as the immediate predecessor of Neferefre in the Saqqara tablet , " this slight discrepancy can ... be attributed to the [ political ] disorders of the time and its dynastic disputes . " 
 = = = Duration = = = 
 In two articles published in 2000 and 2001 Verner argues that , contrary to what Manetho indicates , Shepseskare must have reigned for a couple of months at the most , an hypothesis already proposed by the French Egyptologist Nicolas Grimal in 1988 . Verner 's conclusion is based on the archeological record , in particular Shepseskare 's intended pyramid at Abusir . Verner emphasizes that the progress of the pyramid , which is unfinished , 
 was interrupted [ and ] corresponds to the work of several weeks , perhaps no more than one or two months . In fact , the place was merely leveled and the excavation of the pit for the construction of the underground funerary apartment had only commenced . Moreover , the owner of the building obviously wanted to demonstrate by his choice of place ( half @-@ way between Sahure 's pyramid and the sun temple of Userkaf ) his relationship to either Sahure or Userkaf . Theoretically , only two kings of the Fifth Dynasty whose pyramids had not yet been identified can be taken into consideration – Shepseskara or Menkauhor . However , according to a number of contemporaneous documents , Menkauhor ... probably completed [ his ] pyramid elsewhere , in North Saqqara or Dahshur . Shepseskara , therefore , seems to be the likelier owner of the unfinished platform for a pyramid in North Abusir . Anyway , the builder of the platform [ viz . , Shepseskare ] must have reigned for a very short time . 
 The rediscovery in 2008 of the Headless Pyramid in Saqqara and its subsequent attribution to Menkauhor Kaiu by the excavators under the direction of Zahi Hawass confirms Verner 's attribution of the unfinished pyramid of Abusir to Shepseskare . 
 Unlike the other kings of the Fifth Dynasty , Shepseskare 's name appears neither in the personal names of people of the time nor in the names of funerary estates . He is also absent from the titles and biographies of state officials . For example , the stela of the Fifth Dynasty official <unk> @-@ Ptah lists an uninterrupted sequence of kings whom he served under , namely Sahure , Neferirkare , Neferefre and Nyuserre . The omission of Shepseskare , be it between Neferirkare and Neferefre or between Neferefre and Nyuserre , indicates that his reign must have been very short . Since Manetho 's Aegyptiaca dates to the 3rd century BC , <unk> @-@ Ptah 's contemporary account can be regarded as a more accurate indication of the political situation during the Fifth Dynasty . 
 Verner 's arguments together with the scarcity of artefacts attributable to Shepseskare have now convinced many Egyptologists , such as Darrell Baker and Erik Hornung , that Shepseskare 's reign was indeed ephemeral . 
 = = Family = = 
 In view of the scarcity of sources concerning Shepseskare , nothing is known for certain about his relation to his predecessors . He was most likely a member of the royal family , although the possibility that he was a usurper unrelated to his predecessors cannot be totally excluded . 
 Verner has proposed that Shepseskare was a son of Sahure who managed to briefly seize power after the premature death of Neferefre . This would explain the proximity of Shepseskare 's unfinished pyramid to that of Sahure . Lending credence to this theory is the discovery by Verner and Tarek El Awady in 2005 of reliefs from the causeway of Sahure 's pyramid complex showing him , his wife <unk> and their two sons Ranefer and Netjerirenre . The relief gives both sons the title of " king 's eldest son " , indicating that they were possibly twins . The relief further indicates that Ranefer took the throne as " Neferirkare king of Upper and Lower Egypt " . Verner and Awady thus speculate that while Ranefer and his son Neferefre became kings , Netjerirenre could have attempted to seize the throne at the death of the latter . In this hypothesis Shepseskare would be the throne name of Netjerirenre . 
 Shepseskare 's reign may have been cut short by his unexpected death or his claim to the throne could have been thwarted by Nyuserre Ini , Neferefre 's younger brother and the younger son of King Neferirkare and Queen Khentkaus II . Khentkaus II 's pivotal role in Nyuserre 's eventual accession to the throne might explain her high esteem in Egyptian folklore and " the additional enlargement and upgrading of her mortuary temple " by Nyuserre . Nyuserre also seemed to have been favored by powerful courtiers and officials , foremost among whom was Ptahshepses , who would become Nyuserre 's son @-@ in @-@ law and vizier . 
 = = Building activities = = 
 = = = Pyramid = = = 
 An unfinished pyramid located in north Abusir , between the sun temple of Userkaf and the Pyramid of Sahure , is believed to belong to Shepseskare . The structure was discovered in 1980 by a Czechoslovakian archaeological team led by Miroslav Verner and seems to have been abandoned after no more than a few weeks or months of work . A square area of roughly 100 m2 ( 1 @,@ 100 sq ft ) was leveled and the digging of a T @-@ shaped ditch was just started in its center . This ditch was to be left open during the pyramid construction to allow for simultaneous works on the pyramid filling and its substructures . This construction technique is common to all pyramids of the Fifth Dynasty and can directly be seen in the case of the Pyramid of Neferefre , which was also left unfinished . This technique as well as the location of the unfinished pyramid in the royal necropolis of the Fifth Dynasty indicates that it belonged in all likeliness to Shepseskare , the pyramids of the other kings of the dynasty being already known . If finished according to the established pattern , the pyramid would have reached 73 m ( 240 ft ) high , similar to the Pyramid of Neferirkare . 
 Analyzing the fragments of clay seals bearing <unk> 's name , the Swiss Egyptologist Peter Kaplony has proposed that the ancient name of Shepseskare 's pyramid could be reconstructed as <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ k3 @-@ Rˁ , reading " <unk> @-@ <unk> " and meaning " The awakening of Shepseskare " . Verner rejects this hypothesis , and he contests the reading of certain signs and their interpretation as the name of a pyramid . 
 = = = Sun temple = = = 
 Kaplony has proposed that Shepseskare started to build a sun temple named <unk> @-@ jb @-@ Rˁ , reading " Hotepibre " and meaning " Satisfied is the heart of Ra " . Although all the kings of the early to mid @-@ Fifth Dynasty , from Userkaf to Menkauhor Kaiu , did build sun temples , Verner regards Kaplony 's hypothesis as " sheer speculation " since it is based on the tentative reconstruction of a single clay seal . Verner first argues that this seal is not inscribed with Shepseskare 's name but rather bears traces of a Horus name which could equally well be that of Djedkare Isesi . Second , Verner notes that the name of a sun temple is rarely found with that of the king who built it : more often it is found with the name of another king during whose reign the seal was made . Finally , he doubts that the sign reading <unk> , " Hotep " , is really part of the name of a sun temple . Instead , he believes it is more probable that the seal either refers to the sun temple of Neferirkare , named St @-@ jb @-@ <unk> , that is " <unk> " ; or to that of Nyuserre , which was called <unk> @-@ jb @-@ Rˁ , " <unk> " . 
 = = = Mortuary temple of Neferefre = = = 
 It is possible that Shepseskare continued the construction of the funerary complex of his predecessor . As Neferefre had died after a short reign , his pyramid complex was far from finished and neither the burial chamber nor the mortuary temple had been built . The planned pyramid was thus hastily changed into a square mastaba representing a stylized primeval hill and the accompanying mortuary temple was completed during the reign of Nyuserre . The presence of seals of Shepseskare in the oldest part of Neferefre 's mortuary temple could indicate that the former also undertook construction works there . The evidence for such works is uncertain : these seals could have been placed on boxes which were later moved into the magazine rooms of the temple . For example , seals of Userkaf , Sahure and Neferirkare Kakai were also found in the temple , while these three pharaohs died before Neferefre 's reign . 
 = Lum You = 
 Lum You ( ca . 1861 – January 31 , 1902 ) — sometimes spelled Lum Yu — was an immigrant Chinese laborer and convicted murderer in the Pacific Northwest . He is famous for being the only person to have been legally executed in Pacific County , Washington , and for his death row prison break supposedly arranged by the very jailers charged with his captivity . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Lum You was among the many Chinese laborers who came to Washington near the turn of the century . A proud , sociable dandy , You was well @-@ liked in the white community . He spoke a little English , and acted as an agent between the Chinese workers and their employers . 
 In 1894 You approached the South Bend police chief , Marion Egbert , complaining that a fellow Chinese resident by the name of Ging had threatened him . Egbert brushed You off and suggested he deal with the situation himself . You took this advice , attacking Ging with an axe . For this act he was convicted of assault ; he was fined $ 500 and was sentenced to a prison term of six months . 
 In the summer of 1901 , You was employed as a cannery worker and living in Bay Center . While playing cards on August 6 of that year , he was assaulted , threatened , and robbed by Oscar Bloom , a white man with a reputation as a bully . This time You did not approach the police , but instead immediately took matters into his own hands : he went to his room to retrieve his gun , sought out and shot Bloom in the abdomen , and then fled the scene . Bloom survived long enough to swear a deathbed affidavit identifying You as his killer . 
 Public sympathy for You was high , but white employers of the Chinese workers pressed officials for action to be taken against him . Accordingly , You was arrested on August 7 and in October 1901 was tried and convicted for the murder of Oscar Bloom . Contrary to the jurors ' belief that You would receive a light sentence , the judge ordered that You be hanged . The execution was scheduled for January 31 , 1902 . 
 Even after his conviction You continued to enjoy public support . Petitions for clemency , one of which was signed by one of the jurors , were sent to the state governor . County officials sympathized with You , supposedly leaving his cell door unlocked at night and encouraging him to escape . You eventually did escape , early in the morning of January 14 : one news report claimed the improvised lock to his cell door had been picked with the aid of a confederate . You hid in the environs of South Bend for several days , during which he was hunted by a squad led by sheriff Thomas A. Roney . On January 15 he was sighted by two men ; the following day the county commissioners met and agreed to offer a reward of $ 200 for You 's capture . On January 17 You was finally apprehended by a three @-@ man posse . You offered no resistance , and when asked how he escaped , said only that the door was open and he walked out . 
 On January 27 governor Henry McBride rejected one of the petitions for clemency on procedural grounds , and on January 30 confirmed by wire that he would not be commuting You 's sentence . Anticipation of the execution became so great that Roney was besieged with requests to attend . Roney issued 500 invitation cards , some examples of which survive . 
 You 's hanging proceeded as planned inside the courthouse of the county seat , South Bend , on the morning of January 31 , 1902 . Though it had been expected that he would break down , You ate fairly well that morning and went to the gallows without assistance . He bade his friends goodbye and then uttered his last words , to his executioners : " Kill me good . " The trap was sprung by means of a rope which , along with three dummy ropes , extended into an adjoining room . Each of the four executioners concealed in that room pulled his rope simultaneously , but only the sheriff knew which was the trigger . 
 You 's was the first and only official execution ever to take place in Pacific County . A month after his arrest , a new act of the Washington State Legislature took effect which required executions for any future crimes to be carried out at the Washington State Penitentiary in Walla Walla . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Lum You 's trial and execution attracted a great deal of contemporary publicity in Pacific County , and has since passed into the realm of folk legend . His story has been researched and recounted by local historians Ruth Dixon , Willard R. Espy , and Sydney Stevens . Espy , also a nationally renowned poet , memorialized You in a humorous epitaph . You was also the subject of a biographical play , The Hanging of Lum You by the <unk> @-@ based Shoalwater Storytellers . 
 = Henry Allingham = 
 Henry William Allingham ( 6 June 1896 – 18 July 2009 ) was a British supercentenarian , the oldest British man ever , First World War veteran and , for one month , the verified oldest living man in the world . He is also the second @-@ oldest military veteran ever , and at the time of his death , he was the 12th @-@ verified oldest man of all time . 
 Allingham was the oldest ever surviving member of any of the British Armed Forces and one of the oldest surviving veterans of the First World War . He was the last survivor of the Battle of Jutland , the last surviving member of the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) and the last surviving founding member of the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . In 2001 he became the face of the First World War veterans ' association and made frequent public appearances to ensure that awareness of the sacrifices of the First World War was not lost to modern generations . He received many honours and awards for his First World War service and his longevity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Allingham was born in 1896 in Clapton , County of London . When he was 14 months old , his father , Henry Thomas Allingham ( 1868 @-@ 1897 ) , died at age 29 of tuberculosis . Henry is recorded in the 1901 census with his widowed mother Amy Jane Allingham ( née Foster ) ( 1873 @-@ 1915 ) , a laundress forewoman , living with her parents and brother at 23 Verulam Avenue , Walthamstow . His mother remarried in 1905 to Hubert George Higgs and in 1907 the family moved to Clapham , London . Henry and his mother are recorded in the 1911 Census living at 21 Heyford Avenue , Lambeth , while his stepfather was lodging away from home working as a wheelwright . Henry attended a London County Council school before attending the Regent Street Polytechnic . Allingham remembered seeing the City Imperial Volunteers return from the Second Boer War , and also recalled watching W. G. Grace play cricket . On leaving school , Allingham started work as a trainee surgical instrument maker at St. Bartholomew 's Hospital . He did not find this job very interesting , and so left to work for a coachbuilder specialising in car bodies . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Allingham wanted to join the war effort in August 1914 as a despatch rider , but his critically ill mother managed to persuade him to stay at home and look after her . However , after his mother died in 1915 , aged 42 , Allingham enlisted with the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) . He became formally rated as an Air Mechanic Second Class on 21 September 1915 , and was posted to Chingford before completing his training at Sheerness , Kent . His RNAS serial number was RNAS <unk> . 
 After graduation , Allingham was posted to the RNAS Air Station at Great Yarmouth where he worked in aircraft maintenance . On 13 April 1916 , King George V inspected the air station and its aircraft . Allingham later reported disappointment at barely missing an opportunity to speak with the king . 
 Allingham also worked in <unk> , Norfolk , further up the coast , where night @-@ flying was conducted and was later involved in supporting anti @-@ submarine patrols . A typical patrol would last two or three days and would involve the manual labour of hoisting a seaplane in and out of the water by means of a deck @-@ mounted derrick . 
 During the preparations for what has become known as the Battle of Jutland , Allingham was ordered to join the naval trawler HMT Kingfisher . Onboard was a Sopwith Schneider seaplane that was used to patrol the surrounding waters for the German High Seas Fleet . Allingham 's responsibilities included helping to launch this aircraft . Although the Kingfisher was not directly involved in the battle ( it shadowed the British Grand Fleet and then the High Seas Fleet ) , Allingham still rightfully claimed to be the last known survivor of that battle and could recall " seeing shells ricocheting across the sea . " 
 In September 1917 , Allingham , by then an Air Mechanic First Class , was posted to the Western Front to join No. 12 Squadron RNAS . This unit acted as a training squadron for other RNAS squadrons based on the Western Front . There is also some evidence that the squadron was involved in combat operations . When Allingham arrived at Petite @-@ <unk> , both the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) and the RNAS were involved in the Ypres offensive . Allingham also instrumented the very first reconnaissance aircraft camera during the First World War . On 3 November 1917 , he was posted to the aircraft depot at Dunkirk , France where he remained for the rest of the war , on aircraft repair and recovery duties . He recalls being bombed from the air and shelled from both the land and the sea . 
 He transferred to the Royal Air Force when the RNAS and the RFC were merged on 1 April 1918 . The creation of the Royal Air Force did not initially have a big impact on Allingham and he later remarked that at that time he still considered himself a navy man . In the RAF he was ranked as a Rigger Aero , Aircraft Mechanic Second Class and was given a new service number : <unk> . Allingham returned to the Home Establishment in February 1919 and was formally discharged to the RAF Reserve on 16 April 1919 . During the last few years of his life Allingham was recognized as the last surviving founding member of the RAF . Speaking with Dennis Goodwin of the First World War Veterans ' Association , Allingham said , " It is a shock as well as a privilege to think that I am the only man alive from that original reorganisation when the RAF was formed . " 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 = = = Career = = = 
 In addition to his military service as a mechanic , Allingham spent the vast majority of his professional life as an engineer . His employers included Thorns Car Body Makers , Vickers General Motors and <unk> Car Body Builders . He started his longest stretch of employment in 1934 designing new car bodies for the Ford Motor Company at their Dagenham plant which had opened only a few years previously in 1931 . 
 = = = Family life = = = 
 Allingham met Dorothy Cator ( 1895 – 1970 ) in Great Yarmouth , Norfolk in 1918 . They married the same year in Romford , when she was 22 . They moved to Eastbourne , Sussex in 1960 and remained married until she died there from acute and chronic lymphatic leukaemia . They had two daughters , Betty ( born 1920 ) and Jean ( 1923 – 2001 ) . Jean emigrated to the United States and died aged 78 in 2001 . At the time of his death Allingham believed that Betty had died . He had lost touch with her in the 1970s following a family rift after the death of his wife in 1970 . In fact Betty Hankin was still alive aged 89 when her father died , and living in Stroud , Gloucestershire . In addition to his one remaining daughter Betty , at the time of his death Allingham had seven grandchildren , 16 great @-@ grandchildren , 14 great @-@ great @-@ grandchildren , and one great @-@ great @-@ great @-@ grandchild . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 During the Second World War , Allingham was in a reserved occupation and worked on a number of projects . Perhaps his most significant contribution was the design of an effective counter @-@ measure to the German magnetic mines . During his Christmas lunch in 1939 he was called away to help design a system that would neutralise the mines and open the port of Harwich , Essex . Nine days later , he had successfully completed the task . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the Second World War Allingham continued to work for Ford until he retired in 1960 . After Denis Goodwin of the First World War Veterans ' Association tracked him down in 2001 , Allingham took a prominent role in telling his story so that later generations would not forget . On 16 October 2003 , he helped launch the 2003 Royal British Legion Poppy Appeal with model Nell McAndrew aboard the cruiser HMS Belfast . He was quoted as saying " [ The veterans ] have given all they have got for the country ... I owe them ... we all owe them . " 
 A ceremony at the Cenotaph in Whitehall , London on 4 August 2004 , marked the 90th anniversary of Britain 's entry into the First World War . Allingham attended , together with three other First World War veterans , William Stone , Fred Lloyd and John Oborne . Allingham also marched past the Cenotaph on Remembrance Sunday in 2005 and laid wreaths at memorials in Saint @-@ Omer on Armistice Day . That was the last time a First World War veteran marched past the Cenotaph and it marked the end of an era . No First World War veterans were present at the Cenotaph for the 2006 Remembrance Sunday Parade . 
 As the last surviving member of the RNAS , and the last living founding member of the RAF , Allingham was an honoured guest when the British Air Services Memorial was unveiled at Saint @-@ Omer on 11 September 2004 . During the ceremony Allingham was given the Gold Medal of Saint @-@ Omer , which marked the award of the Freedom of the Town . The group of RAF technical trainees that joined him at this ceremony continued to visit Allingham at his retirement home in Eastbourne , demonstrating the bond of respect that these men had for Allingham . 
 In November 2005 Allingham accepted an invitation from the International Holographic Portrait Archive to have his holographic portrait taken . His image was recorded for posterity in December 2005 . At the same time , an exhibition was being planned for London 's floating naval museum on board HMS Belfast , entitled the Ghosts of Jutland . A copy of this portrait was donated to the museum and HRH The Duchess of Gloucester unveiled the portrait to mark the opening of the exhibition . 
 Allingham was awarded the freedom of his home town of Eastbourne by the mayor on 21 April 2006 . He lived on his own until May 2006 when , one month before his 110th birthday and with failing eyesight , he moved to St Dunstan 's , a charity for blind ex @-@ service personnel , at Ovingdean , near Brighton . Aside from his poor eyesight , he was reportedly in good health , with visitors remarking on his memory and voice . Allingham attended the 1 July 2006 commemorations at the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing . He did not attend the 2006 Remembrance Day parade on 11 November at the Cenotaph as he was in France at a wreath @-@ laying ceremony and to receive the Freedom of The Town of Saint @-@ Omer . He did , however , launch the Eastbourne Poppy Appeal before leaving for this trip . 
 On 18 April 2007 Allingham visited <unk> High School in Tamworth , Staffordshire to answer students ' questions about the First World War , after they wrote to veterans asking them about their experiences . In October 2007 he was honoured at the Pride of Britain Awards . Between his 110th and 111th birthdays Allingham made over 60 public appearances , including a visit to The Oval on 5 June 2007 , the day before his 111th birthday , where he was wheeled around the boundary in front of the spectators . 
 On his 111th birthday , a Royal Marines band played to Allingham on board HMS Victory before he returned with friends and relatives to the Queen 's Hotel on the Portsmouth seafront for afternoon tea . Asked how it felt , Allingham replied , " I 'm pleased to be seeing another tomorrow . It 's just the same as it was as at any age , it 's no different . I 'm happy to be alive and I 'm looking forward to the celebrations . I never imagined I 'd get to 111 . " 
 On 1 April 2008 , the 90th anniversary of the establishment of the Royal Air Force , Allingham was guest of honour at the celebratory events at RAF Odiham in Hampshire . By then , Allingham was the only surviving founder member of the RAF . 
 Allingham celebrated his 112th birthday with members of his family at RAF Cranwell , Lincolnshire as the guest of honour at a luncheon at the college . During the day the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight performed a flypast which was followed by an aerobatic display from two Tutor aircraft . In June 2008 , at his personal request , Allingham was taken on a guided tour of the Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft at BAE Systems in Warton , Lancashire , as part of the National Veterans ' Day celebrations . 
 On 23 September 2008 , Allingham launched a book about his life , co @-@ written by Denis Goodwin , with an event at the RAF Club in London . On 11 November 2008 , marking the 90th anniversary of the end of the First World War , together with Harry Patch and Bill Stone , Allingham laid a commemorative wreath for the Act of Remembrance at The Cenotaph in London . Allingham was invested as a Scout on 18 November 2008 , 100 years after he first joined as a youth . He said he was only able to spend six weeks with his local group as a boy . Allingham celebrated his 113th birthday on HMS President , at an event hosted by the Royal Navy . He received a signed birthday card from First Sea Lord Sir Jonathon Band and saw a Mark 8 Royal Navy Lynx flying overhead while he was sitting outside in his wheelchair . When asked the secret of his long life , Allingham said , " I don 't know , but I would say , be as good as you possibly can . " 
 = = Oldest living man = = 
 Allingham credited " cigarettes , whisky and wild , wild women – and a good sense of humour " for his longevity . 
 Allingham overtook George Frederick Ives as the longest lived member of the British Armed Forces on 1 November 2007 . He was therefore the longest lived British First World War veteran to date . 
 Following the death of Tomoji Tanabe on 19 June 2009 , Allingham became the oldest living man . At his death , he was the oldest living veteran of the First World War , but not the longest lived member of any armed force in any conflict ; this record is held by Emiliano Mercado del Toro of Puerto Rico , who also served in the First World War . 
 Allingham was the oldest living man in England for several years . Official recognition by Guinness World Records came in January 2007 . On 8 February 2007 , when 110 @-@ year @-@ old Antonio Pierro died , Allingham became the oldest known living veteran of the First World War , and the third @-@ oldest living man in the world . After French supercentenarian Maurice <unk> died on 10 November 2006 , Allingham was the oldest validated living man in Europe . After Japanese man <unk> Nakanishi died on 22 August 2007 , Allingham shared the position of second @-@ oldest man in the world with George Francis , an American man also born on 6 June 1896 , for more than a year until Francis died on 27 December 2008 . On 29 March 2009 , Allingham became the oldest British man of all time . With the death of Tomoji Tanabe on 19 June 2009 he became the oldest living man in the world ; after Allingham died , that title passed to Walter Breuning of Montana . 
 On 13 February 2007 , he became Britain 's second @-@ oldest living person , behind Florrie Baldwin , and on 29 March 2009 , he became the oldest ever British man , surpassing Welshman John Evans who died aged 112 years and 295 days . He was also the first ever verified British man to reach the age of 113 . On 18 July 2009 , Allingham died of natural causes aged 113 years and 42 days . 
 As the number of First World War veterans dwindled , calls grew to give the last remaining veteran a state funeral . The calls resulted in Her Majesty 's Government approving on 27 June 2006 a National Memorial Service at Westminster Abbey to take place after the death of the last known British First World War veteran . Prior to this announcement Allingham often said that he tried not to think about the prospect , but has also been quoted as saying " I don 't mind — as long as it 's not me . " Allingham received a letter from Member of Parliament Tom Watson on 14 July 2006 explaining the reasoning for a national memorial service rather than a state funeral , as the intention is to commemorate the entire generation that fought in the war rather than single out an individual . 
 In Harry Patch 's book The Last Fighting Tommy , the author claims that Allingham planned to leave his body to medical science . In his own book Kitchener 's Last Volunteer Allingham confirmed that he was intending to leave his body to medical science . However he was persuaded by Denis Goodwin to change his mind , as he became a symbol of World War I to remind people of the sacrifices made during the conflict . To that end he agreed to a funeral and cremation . 
 = = = Milestones = = = 
 6 June 1996 – 100th birthday 
 20 July 2003 – Oldest verified living British veteran of the First World War upon the death of Jack Davis 
 6 December 2005 – Oldest man living in Britain upon the death of Jerzy <unk> @-@ <unk> 
 6 June 2006 – 110th birthday 
 10 November 2006 – Oldest living man in Europe following the death of Frenchman Maurice <unk> 
 13 February 2007 – Second oldest person in Britain upon the death of Aida Mason 
 1 November 2007 – Oldest ever member of any British armed forces , surpassing George Ives who died in 1993 aged 111 years and 146 days 
 13 March 2008 – Oldest ever English man , surpassing John Mosely Turner who died in 1968 aged 111 years and 280 days 
 29 March 2009 – Oldest ever British man , surpassing Welshman John Evans who died in 1990 aged 112 years and 295 days 
 6 June 2009 – First British man to reach the age of 113 
 19 June 2009 – Oldest living man in the world following the death of Japanese man Tomoji Tanabe 
 18 July 2009 – Died aged 113 years 42 days , the second oldest man ever to die in Europe , behind only Joan <unk> of Spain who died in 2004 aged 114 years and 81 days . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = War medals and awards = = = 
 Allingham was awarded four medals , two of which were medals from the First World War . The Gold Medal of Saint @-@ Omer was awarded to Allingham on 11 September 2004 when he was given the Freedom of the Town of Saint @-@ Omer . He was also awarded France 's highest military honour , the Légion d 'honneur , in which he was appointed a chevalier in 2003 and promoted to officier in 2009 . The remaining two medals are British Campaign Medals from the First World War : the British War Medal and the Victory Medal ; those two medals are colloquially known as " Mutt and Jeff " . These two medals are replacement medals supplied by the Ministry of Defence after discovering at a recent cenotaph parade that Allingham 's original campaign medals were destroyed during the Blitz of the Second World War . 
 = = = Honorary awards = = = 
 As well as the above @-@ mentioned decorations , Allingham won several awards and honorary memberships . Examples include the Pride of Britain award , and a position as an honorary member of the Fleet Air Arm Association . 
 Although not formally qualified he was recognised by the Institute of Mechanical Engineers ( <unk> ) who presented him with a Chartered Engineer award on 19 December 2008 . 
 Allingham had the following to say about the award : 
 Since entering the engineering profession I always hoped to become a chartered engineer , but when I was younger we just couldn ’ t afford it . It ’ s something I never thought would happen for me , so to receive this honorary certificate from <unk> is a lifetime ’ s goal finally realised . I am very grateful to the Institution for presenting me with the award . 
 This was followed on 22 May 2009 with the award of an honorary doctorate in engineering at the Southampton Solent University by the university 's chancellor , the former First Sea Lord Alan West , for his contribution to Britain and its allies during two world wars and his continuing charity work , especially connected with veteran servicemen and women . 
 = = Death and funeral = = 
 Allingham died of natural causes in his sleep at 3 : 10 am on 18 July 2009 at his care home , St Dunstan 's Centre in Ovingdean near Brighton , aged 113 years and 42 days . After his death Walter Breuning took over as the world 's oldest man . 
 Allingham 's funeral took place at St Nicholas ' Church , Brighton at noon on 30 July 2009 , with full military honours . His coffin was carried by three Royal Navy seamen and three RAF airmen . The service was preceded by a half @-@ muffled quarter peal on the church 's bells , rung by local ringers and members of the RAF and Royal Navy change ringing associations . Among the mourners were the Duchess of Gloucester , representing the Queen , and Veterans ' Minister Kevan Jones . Senior Royal Navy and Royal Air Force officers , including Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Adrian Johns and Air Vice @-@ Marshal Peter Dye , represented the two services of which Allingham had been a member . Allingham 's surviving daughter , Betty Hankin , 89 , attended the funeral , with several members of her family . The funeral was followed by a flypast of five replica First World War aircraft ; British and French buglers played the Last Post and Reveille ; and a bell was tolled 113 times , once for each year of his life . 
 The BBC commissioned Carol Ann Duffy , the Poet Laureate , to write a poem to mark the deaths of Allingham and Harry Patch , who died one week after Allingham on 25 July 2009 . The result , Last Post , was read by Duffy on the BBC Radio 4 programme Today on the day of Allingham 's funeral . A tree was planted , and a commemorative plaque unveiled , at the Eastbourne Redoubt on 22 May 2010 to mark Allingham 's residence in the town . 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Allingham , Henry ; Goodwin , Denis ( 2008 ) . Kitchener 's Last Volunteer . Mainstream Publishing . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 84596 @-@ 416 @-@ 0 . 
 = Ottoman ironclad Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik = 
 Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik ( Ottoman Turkish : God 's Favor ) was an ironclad warship of the Ottoman Navy built in the 1860s , the only member of her class . She was built as part of a major expansion program for the Ottoman fleet in the 1860s following the Crimean War . Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was a 4 @,@ 600 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 4 @,@ 500 @-@ long @-@ ton ; 5 @,@ 100 @-@ short @-@ ton ) barbette ship armed with a main battery of eight 220 @-@ millimeter ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) guns in a central battery . In 1903 – 1906 , the ship was extensively rebuilt in Germany and a new battery of 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) quick @-@ firing guns replaced the older weapons . 
 Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik served in the Ottoman fleet for more than four decades . During this period , she saw action in two major wars , the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 88 and the First Balkan War in 1913 . During the first conflict , she was torpedoed by a Russian torpedo boat but was only slightly damaged . She took part in the abortive Battle of Elli against the Greek Navy in December 1912 during the First Balkan War . While operating against Bulgarian positions in February 1913 , she ran aground ; Bulgarian field artillery then shelled the ship . The damage they inflicted , coupled with heavy seas , destroyed the ship . 
 = = Design = = 
 In the aftermath of the Crimean War , where an entire Ottoman squadron was destroyed by a Russian fleet at Sinop , the Ottoman Empire began a small naval construction program , limited primarily by the chronically weak Ottoman economy . The design for Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was based on contemporary French warships like the Colbert @-@ class ironclads , although significantly reduced in size . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was 83 @.@ 01 meters ( 272 @.@ 3 ft ) long between perpendiculars and she had a beam of 16 m ( 52 ft ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 5 m ( 21 ft ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 687 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 613 long tons ; 5 @,@ 167 short tons ) normally . The ship had an iron hull with a partial double bottom and a ram bow , as was customary for ironclads of the period . She had a crew of 320 officers and enlisted men . In 1903 – 06 , the ship was substantially rebuilt . Both ends were cut down , a single military mast was installed amidships , and a new conning tower was built . 
 The ship was powered by a single horizontal compound steam engine that drove one screw propeller . Steam was provided by six box boilers , which were trunked into a single funnel amidships . The engines and boilers were both manufactured by her builder at the La Seyne shipyard . The engines were rated at 3 @,@ 560 indicated horsepower ( 2 @,@ 650 kW ) for a top speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) , though by 1895 poor maintenance over her career had reduced her top speed to 8 knots ( 15 km / h ; 9 @.@ 2 mph ) . The steam engine was supplemented by a barque sailing rig . During the reconstruction , the sailing rig was removed and the old boilers were replaced with newer Niclausse boilers . She also received a new engine , the performance of which is unknown . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was armed with a main battery of eight 220 @-@ millimeter ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) muzzle @-@ loading guns manufactured by Armstrong Whitworth . Six of the guns were mounted in an armored battery amidships , with three on each broadside , and the other two were placed directly above in open barbettes . In 1891 , the two barbette guns were replaced with 210 mm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) breech @-@ loading guns built by Krupp , and several smaller Krupp guns were installed . These included a pair of 87 mm ( 3 @.@ 4 in ) guns and a pair of 63 @.@ 5 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) guns . Two 25 @.@ 4 mm ( 1 in ) Nordenfelt guns were also added . 
 The ship 's armament was radically revised during the 1903 – 06 reconstruction . All of the old guns were removed and a battery of medium @-@ caliber quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns manufactured by Krupp was installed . Three 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 40 guns in single shielded mounts were placed forward , with one on the forecastle and the other two abreast of the conning tower . The central battery guns were replaced with six 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) SK L / 40 guns , with a seventh gun mounted on the stern . Six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) and two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) QF guns were also added . 
 As built , the ship was protected with an iron armored belt that was 200 mm ( 8 in ) thick . The transverse bulkheads that connected both ends of the belt were 75 mm ( 3 in ) thick . The central battery had thinner iron plating than the belt , at 150 mm ( 6 in ) , and the barbette guns were protected with 130 mm ( 5 in ) of iron . The reconstruction added a 75 mm armored deck , and the new conning tower was protected with 150 mm thick armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was ordered in 1865 by the government of Egypt as <unk> and laid down two years later at the French Société Nouvelle des Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in La Seyne . The ship was launched in 1868 and completed by 1869 for sea trials . In the meantime , Egypt had transitioned from a state directly ruled by the Ottoman government to the autonomous Khedivate of Egypt , and on 29 August 1868 the Khedivate transferred the ship to the Ottoman Navy . She was commissioned as Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik in 1870 . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 The ship saw action during the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 88 . She spent the war in the Black Sea squadron . The Ottoman fleet , commanded by Hobart Pasha , was vastly superior to the Russian Black Sea Fleet ; the only ironclads the Russians possessed there were the two Admiral Popov @-@ class ships , circular vessels that had proved to be useless in service . The presence of the fleet did force the Russians to keep two corps in reserve for coastal defense , but the Ottoman high command failed to make use of its naval superiority in a more meaningful way , particularly to hinder the Russian advance into the Balkans . Hobart Pasha took the fleet to the western Black Sea , where he was able to make a more aggressive use of it to support the Ottoman forces battling the Russians in the Caucasus . The fleet bombarded Poti and assisted in the defense of Batumi . 
 In June , the Russian Baltic Fleet began a campaign to neutralize the Ottoman ironclads using torpedo boats equipped with towed and spar torpedoes . On the night of 23 – 24 August 1877 , three Russian torpedo boats , Miner , Navarin , and Sinop , attempted to sink the ship with spar torpedoes while she was moored in <unk> . Gunfire from the Ottoman ships , along with troops on the shore , made the Russian attack difficult . Sinop detonated her torpedo against a boat that was protecting Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik , causing only minor damage to the ironclad , though the Russians initially believed they had sunk her . The ship was able to steam to Batumi , where she was repaired . The attackers had been aided by a fire burning on the beach , which illuminated the Ottoman vessels in the harbor . The Ottoman fleet continued to support the Ottoman garrison at Batumi , when held out against constant Russian attacks to the end of the war . After the end of the war , the ship was laid up in 1878 at Constantinople , the Ottoman capital . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 From 1890 to 1892 , the ship was re @-@ boilered at the Imperial Arsenal on the Golden Horn . Following the Greco @-@ Turkish War in 1897 , which highlighted the seriously degraded state of the Ottoman fleet , the government decided to begin a naval reconstruction program . The first stage was to rebuild the older armored warships , including Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik . Requests for proposals were sent to foreign shipyards , and in October 1898 the Gio . Ansaldo & C. shipyard in Genoa requested permission to survey the ship and the ironclad Mesudiye . Both vessels were accordingly sent to Genoa in January 1899 , arriving on the 28th . There she was briefly laid up . Instead , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was transferred to the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel , Germany for a major reconstruction , arriving on 29 May 1900 , with the transport İzmir . 
 After docking in Kiel , the men from Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik were transferred to İzmir , but with no funds to buy coal , the men were stranded in Germany . Germaniawerft stripped down Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik , but then halted work to await the first Ottoman payment . By mid @-@ 1901 , the men had accumulated significant debt and the Ottoman government had made no effort to return them or pay the installments for the modernization program . Even Kaiser Wilhelm II became involved in an attempt to press the Ottoman government to settle the debts incurred by the sailors . Instead , the Ottomans demanded that Krupp , the owner of the Germaniawerft shipyard , make an advance of 6 @,@ 000 lira so that İzmir could be prepared for the voyage back to Constantinople . The Ottomans were at the time negotiating for a large armament contract with Krupp for the Army , and used this as leverage ; by late 1901 , Krupp conceded , rather than risk the lucrative contract . The debts in Kiel were paid and İzmir finally departed for home . 
 No work was done to the ship over the following two years . On 18 January 1904 , Ottoman negotiators began a new round of talks with Krupp , demanding a reduction in the cost of the modernization from 282 @,@ 000 lira to 65 @,@ 000 lira ; this amount does not cover the preparatory work that had been initially carried out , let alone the reconstruction . In return , the Ottoman government would order a pair of torpedo cruisers — the Peyk @-@ i Şevket class — from Germaniawerft . With the armament contract still under negotiation , Krupp was forced to concede , despite the significant financial loss the reconstruction deal represented . By April , the armament contract was signed , and so work began slowly on Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik . Work was completed by late 1906 . The reconstructed ship departed Kiel on 19 November , and arrived in Constantinople on 4 January 1907 . 
 In 1909 , she participated in the first fleet maneuver conducted by the Ottoman Navy in twenty years . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was assigned to the Reserve Division , along with Mesudiye and the torpedo cruiser Berk @-@ i Satvet . She did not see action during the conflict , since the Ottoman fleet spent the war in port . This was in part due to the rising tensions in the Balkans that presaged the Balkan Wars ; the Ottomans kept their fleet in port so it could be prepared for the inevitable conflict . 
 = = = First Balkan War = = = 
 The ship saw significant service during the First Balkan War of 1912 – 13 . At the start of the war , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was suffering from boiler trouble , which necessitated repairs that lasted until 9 November . She was then sent to support the Ottoman troops defending the Çatalca Line against Bulgarian troops . She took up a position off <unk> to provide gunfire support . After the Bulgarians occupied the town , she bombarded their positions , but the attack had little effect . The ship was then moved to Büyükçekmece , where she joined the rest of the fleet . They had no contact with Bulgarian forces during this period . 
 She took part in the Battle of Elli , the first Ottoman surface action involving major warships since the Russo @-@ Turkish War , on 16 December 1912 . Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik joined a fleet consisting of the pre @-@ dreadnought battleships Barbaros Hayreddin and Turgut Reis , Mesudiye , and several smaller warships . The Ottoman fleet sortied from the Dardanelles at 9 : 30 ; the smaller craft remained at the mouth of the straits while the battleships sailed north , hugging the coast . The Greek flotilla , which included the armored cruiser Georgios Averof and three Hydra @-@ class ironclads , sailing from the island of Lemnos , altered course to the northeast to block the advance of the Ottoman battleships . 
 The Ottoman ships opened fire on the Greeks at 9 : 40 , from a range of about 15 @,@ 000 yd ( 14 @,@ 000 m ) . Five minutes later , Georgios Averof crossed over to the other side of the Ottoman fleet , placing the Ottomans in the unfavorable position of being under fire from both sides . At 9 : 50 and under heavy pressure from the Greek fleet , the Ottoman ships completed a 16 @-@ point turn , which reversed their course , and headed for the safety of the straits . The turn was poorly conducted , and the ships fell out of formation , blocking each other 's fields of fire . By 10 : 17 , both sides had ceased firing and the Ottoman fleet withdrew into the Dardanelles . When they approached the straits , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik and Mesudiye took up positions to cover the withdrawal of the damaged pre @-@ dreadnoughts . The ships reached port by 13 : 00 and transferred their casualties to the hospital ship Resit Paşa . Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik had not been hit in the engagement . The battle was considered a Greek victory , because the Ottoman fleet remained blockaded . 
 On 10 January 1913 , Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik supported another sortie by the fleet , this time patrolling off the Dardanelles while the rest of the fleet raided Imbros . While protecting the fleet 's flank , she encountered Greek destroyers and forced them to withdraw after firing a few shots . Neither side scored any hits in the engagement . The ship was lost while operating in the Black Sea against Bulgarian forces . On 7 February , the ship was ordered to proceed to <unk> to support a raid by the Army . The following day , the raid was launched on the town , but was quickly forced to withdraw from heavy Bulgarian resistance ; Âsâr @-@ ı Tevfik was ordered to move in and shell the town , but ran aground on an uncharted sandbank at 12 : 45 . On 10 February , salvage work began , beginning with the removal of equipment . By the 12th , all armament and coal had been removed , but the ship could not be freed . Heavy seas and Bulgarian artillery damaged the wreck , which rendered her a total loss . 
 = Jill Marsden ( EastEnders ) = 
 Detective Chief Inspector Jillian " Jill " Marsden is a fictional character in the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Sophie Stanton . She made her first appearance on 5 March 2001 investigating the shooting of Phil Mitchell ( Steve McFadden ) , which was part of the whodunit storyline " Who Shot Phil ? " . Marsden returned in 2002 , 2003 and 2009 ( for another whodunit storyline , " Who Killed Archie ? " ) . She returned on 5 January 2012 for her third whodunit storyline , " Who 's Stalking Phil ? " , departing four months later on 10 May 2012 . Marsden returned for two episodes on 17 August 2012 to conclude the latter storyline . On 16 July 2015 , she returned for part of the " Who Killed Lucy Beale ? " whodunit storyline . 
 When she was brought back in 2009 , Marsden 's feelings were explored in a segment of the BBC EastEnders homepage entitled " Marsden 's Video Diaries " , documenting the character 's thoughts about the storyline in which she was involved . Marsden 's relationship with Phil has been explored since her first appearance , with the BBC describing their relationship as a " romance in negative ... her ultimate dream is that some day she 'll get [ Phil ] behind bars " and the Daily Mirror 's Tony Stewart calling her Phil 's " arch enemy " . 
 The character has been criticised by police detectives who felt that Marsden 's habit of discussing investigation details with suspects ( as her colleagues accepted bribes ) did not properly represent their profession . In response , the BBC said it had sought advice from a police consultant for storylines involving Marsden . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = 2001 – 03 = = = 
 Marsden first arrives in Albert Square in March 2001 , investigating Phil Mitchell 's shooting in her first case as detective chief inspector . She identifies the five main suspects : Ian Beale ( Adam Woodyatt ) , Dan Sullivan ( Craig Fairbrass ) , Steve Owen ( Martin Kemp ) , Mark Fowler ( Todd Carty ) and Lisa Shaw ( Lucy Benjamin ) . Marsden arrests Dan for the shooting , although he is later acquitted due to lack of evidence . Dan was set up by Phil but it was , in fact , Lisa who shot him . Marsden later arrests Little Mo Slater ( Kacey Ainsworth ) for the attempted murder of her husband Trevor Morgan ( Alex Ferns ) . Little Mo claims self @-@ defence , since she has been a victim of domestic violence at the hands of Trevor . The trial ends , with Trevor 's treatment of Little Mo revealed . In 2003 , Sonia Jackson ( Natalie Cassidy ) visits Marsden with evidence that Phil killed his ex @-@ girlfriend Lisa . Jill helps set up a honey @-@ trap for Phil in order to obtain a confession from him , with PC Kate Morton ( Jill Halfpenny ) and DI Dominic Price ( Paul <unk> ) , but it fails when Kate falls in love with Phil and Marsden fires her . Marsden arrests Phil , but with insufficient evidence and no confession he is released . It later emerges that Lisa is safe and well , and Phil is innocent . Marsden later arrests Phil when Dennis Rickman ( Nigel Harman ) and Den Watts ( Leslie Grantham ) set him up in an armed robbery . 
 = = = 2009 – 10 = = = 
 Marsden reappears on Albert Square in 2009 when Archie Mitchell ( Larry Lamb ) is murdered . She arrives on the scene when several people say they suspect Janine Butcher ( Charlie Brooks ) , but Marsden waits before questioning her , and questions the Mitchells first . She makes a televised appeal for witnesses and later interviews Phil , but he is provided an alibi by his girlfriend Shirley Carter ( Linda Henry ) . A few days later , a red fingernail is found at the scene of the murder ; Marsden visits the female locals , checking their hands . Seeing an upset Heather Trott ( Cheryl Fergison ) , knowing that she is vulnerable and lives with Shirley , she talks to Heather about Christmas Day and Heather accidentally tells Marsden that Phil wasn 't there . Marsden interviews Phil and later visits his home , asking to see the clothes he was wearing on Christmas Day . Shirley shows her a clean shirt ; Marsden closes the laundrette , hoping anyone with blood @-@ stained clothes will not be able to wash them . After a tip @-@ off Marsden arrests Sam Mitchell ( Danniella Westbrook ) ; Sam accuses her mother , Peggy Mitchell ( Barbara Windsor ) , of the murder . Marsden confirms that she was there to talk to Peggy , questioning Peggy and Sam at the police station . Peggy is released without charge ; however , Sam is detained for jumping bail . Marsden visits Janine , who insists that people will say anything to get her in trouble . She asks Janine why she was out in the cold on Christmas Day , and asks if Janine knows where Archie 's laptop as it had gone missing . 
 On 18 January , Marsden arrests Ian after Janine told her that Ian took advantage of her , stole Archie 's laptop , which had a recording of them having sex on it , and dumped it in the canal . Ian refuses to talk , but when Marsden shows him CCTV footage of him dumping the laptop , and then shows him the recovered laptop , he admits visiting Archie on Christmas Day , claiming that Archie was threatening him . He wanted to delete the recording and denies murdering Archie , but Marsden charges him . Days later , Janine tells Marsden she saw Ian leave the Queen Victoria on Christmas Day but the bust of Queen Victoria was on the bar after he left . Marsden places Janine at the scene , but she also denies murdering Archie . Marsden tells Ian that although the murder charge will be dropped , he will still be charged with burglary and theft of Archie 's laptop . She and DC Wayne Hughes ( Jamie Treacher ) attend Archie 's funeral , watching people 's reactions in the hope of a new lead . Peggy returns to Archie 's grave ; when Marsden asks why , she explains that she didn 't believe him when he said his cancer had returned . 
 The following week , Ronnie Mitchell ( Samantha Womack ) spots her ex @-@ boyfriend Jack Branning ( Scott Maslen ) talking to Marsden ; Jack tells Ronnie that he was fishing for information . With no new leads , Marsden 's boss threatens to take her off the case . She reviews the suspects and decides to question Jack , since he is asking more questions than he has answered . In the café Marsden and Hughes discuss new information she has obtained , ensuring that she is overheard . Chinese whisper @-@ style rumours circulate , ending with the certainty that Marsden would arrest Ronnie . Ronnie sees Marsden in the Square , and a struggle ensues . She knocks Marsden down , is arrested and charged with assaulting a police officer but is released on bail . Marsden suspects Ronnie further , saying that she has now shown her true colours . Later , DC Jasmine Field ( Karen <unk> ) enters the pub with other officers to arrest a suspect ; frightened , Ronnie leaves Walford . The police officers are there to arrest Dot Branning ( June Brown ) , who was accused by Dotty Cotton ( Molly Conlin ) after Dot slapped her . Jack confronts Marsden for unnecessarily sending a uniformed officer to arrest Dot and unsettling the locals , and realises there was no new information . 
 Janine tells Marsden that Ronnie has fled , but Marsden finds her at the Queen Vic . Marsden remarks that a new forensic profile has been found , and DNA screening of white males will shortly begin . After Hughes accepts a bribe from Jack to make the DNA samples disappear , Marsden receives an anonymous tip @-@ off . The police search Janine 's flat , finding the engagement ring that went missing the night of Archie 's murder , and Janine is arrested but later released for lack of evidence . Becca Swanson ( Simone James ) calls the police , saying that Bradley Branning ( Charlie Clements ) attacked Archie on Christmas Day , and the police arrive to arrest him . Marsden spots him when his phone rings ; two officers chase him to the roof , where he stumbles and falls to his death . The investigation ends , since the police believe that Bradley had killed Archie ; however , his killer was actually Stacey Slater ( Lacey Turner ) . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 In January 2012 , Denise Fox ( Diane Parish ) gives Marsden a letter incriminating Phil in the death of a homeless man , who died when he torched the car lot in an insurance scam in 1994 ; she adds that Phil also murdered Stella Crawford ( Sophie Thompson ) , and Marsden thanks Denise for the information . Marsden arrives in Walford and begins trailing Phil . She asks Denise not to tell Phil that she is in town , wanting to ensure Phil 's imprisonment . Marsden then targets Phil 's son Ben ( Joshua Pascoe ) , interviewing him about Stella 's death . Ben was abused by Stella and finds Marsden 's questions distressing ; however , she continues to press him . After a falling @-@ out with Phil Ben changes his statement , telling Marsden that Phil told Stella to jump off a building or he would push her . Marsden then arrests Phil for murder , and Ben reveals he was stalking him . She informs Phil 's partner , Shirley , that he has been charged with Stella 's murder . Ben pleads with Marsden to keep his statement a secret from the Mitchells , but she tells him he must accept that his father will learn about Ben 's involvement in his arrest eventually . After discovering Ben 's lies about Phil , Ian then passes this information on to Marsden and Ben is arrested . On the day of Phil 's release he helps Ben hide his involvement in Heather 's murder ; Marsden tells Phil at the police station she will contact him about Ben 's accusations . The charges against Ben are dropped ; Marsden visits Phil , taunting him that he will eventually slip up , and suggests that Ben may ultimately bring Phil down . 
 In August , Marsden reappears when Ben confesses Heather 's murder . She does not believe his confession , thinking it is another lie to get attention from Phil . However , Ben is arrested and charged with the murder after Marsden helps DS Luke Crisp ( Rufus Wright ) convince Jay Brown ( Jamie Borthwick ) to implicate Ben as Heather 's killer . 
 = = = 2015 – = = = 
 In July 2015 , the Beales are informed by DI Samantha Keeble ( Alison Newman ) that the police have a new DCI dealing with the murder of Lucy Beale ( Hetti Bywater ) , who is making an arrest . At Phil 's house , Marsden knocks on his door and Phil is shocked to see her . Marsden wants to speak to Ben about Lucy 's murder , but Phil slams the door in her face and then attempts to delay Marsden so Ben can flee Walford , but Ben is eventually arrested . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Nicknamed the " female sleuth " by the Daily Record , Marsden 's profile on the EastEnders website describes her as " fearless , [ a ] no @-@ nonsense copper and the scourge of Walford ’ s criminal fraternity . " The East Anglian Daily Times described Marsden as " tough " , Ian Hyland from The Mirror called her " scary " and Nancy Banks @-@ Smith from The Guardian characterised her as " strict " . Naomi Mcelroy described Marsden as a " curly @-@ haired copper " , but said as a detective she was " rubbish " ; Polly Hudson from The Daily Mirror similarly opined , saying she was " useless " ( as did Mcelroy ) , and stated that Marsden was " making a right pig 's ear " of investigating Archie 's ( Lamb ) murder . The Daily Mirror 's Tony Stewart characterised her as " vindictive " . 
 = = = Introduction , 2002 and 2003 returns = = = 
 Marsden first appeared on 5 March 2001 in the " Who Shot Phil ? " storyline . In the whodunit storyline the five main suspects were Dan Sullivan , Steve Owen , Lisa Shaw , Ian Beale and Mark Fowler . A source in the Daily Record said , " Sooner or later the truth will out . But until then there 's going to be a lot of probing going on . " She left on 27 March 2001 after unsuccessfully identifying the shooter ( who turned out to be Lisa ) . In 2002 she appeared in January , April and from 14 November to 6 December . In November , when Marsden returns , the police suspect that Phil has murdered his ex @-@ wife Lisa . The Daily Mirror said , " They are the words Phil Mitchell has heard many times before . ' You 're nicked ' , <unk> . Intrepid DCI Marsden may not be a Jane Tennison , but she 's nabbed her prime suspect . " I 've got some good news for you , Phil , " she says , after arresting him on suspicion of murder . " The police in Portugal found your jacket . Unfortunately for you , it 's covered in blood . Mrs Fowler 's blood ... " In 2003 , Marsden returned in March July , August , November and for a longer stint in December . 
 = = = Who Killed Archie ? and 2012 returns = = = 
 In November 2009 , it was reported that Stanton would reprise her role as Jill . Digital Spy forum members had previously pointed out that her return was hinted at in a photo on the official EastEnders website and in a feature ( " Script Peek " ) where Phil is quoted as saying , " I know exactly what makes her tick " before adding " I 've wriggled off her hook so many times . She 's already picturing me standing in the dock " in the 29 December episode . Marsden returned to investigate the murder of Archie Mitchell . A source told Digital Spy , " Marsden has a score to settle with Phil . She was never far behind Phil when he put a foot out of place all those years ago and she 's back with a vengeance ... With so many people in the frame for Archie 's murder , Marsden has a difficult job on her hands if she wants to pin it on Phil . " Of her return she said , " It came completely out of the blue , and knocked me for six . " ... I really thought Marsden was no more . It was a really great surprise because I ’ d just finished a year ’ s run at the National Theatre , appearing in a new play called England People Very Nice – so it couldn ’ t have come at a better time . " She returned on 28 December 2009 . 
 Although Stanton did not know who murdered Archie , she guessed that it could be Stacey Slater ( which turned out to be correct ) . Speaking of this , she said that Sophie was one of the few to correctly guess it was Stacey . " I had an epiphany about a week before the live episode . It was a memory of the whole Who Shot Phil ? storyline , and how there were eight different suspects , including some really hard blokes , and it turned out to be Lisa . I knew DCI Marsden wasn ’ t going to get the culprit , because of a couple of scenes of the following episode we ’ d shot in December , and I thought that narratively , Stacey was the only person who the audience would forgive , and who could get away with it . That was my theory and it turned out to be right ! " Naomi Mcelroy from The Sunday Mirror thought that Marsden could be Archie 's killer . Marsden left on 22 February 2010 , and returned on 5 January 2012 . She returned after Phil is framed for Kevin Wicks ' ( Phil Daniels ) ' s death and that of a homeless man , who died accidentally in a car @-@ lot fire ( part of an insurance scam ) . According to Inside Soap the police would begin questioning Phil 's former fiancée Stella Crawford 's death , teasing Marsden 's return : " The investigation is set to bring Phil face to face with his old <unk> , DCI Marsden – and this time she 'll stop at nothing to put the bad boy permanently behind bars " . Digital Spy reported that Marsden re @-@ opens the investigation into Stella 's death , " suspecting that all is not what it seems " . Finally , Marsden returned for two single episodes on 17 August 2012 . 
 = = = Who Killed Lucy Beale ? = = = 
 In July 2015 , it was revealed that Stanton would be reprising her role as Marsden for the continuation of the Who Killed Lucy Beale ? storyline . Whilst viewers know Bobby Beale is the culprit , Marsden , Samantha Keeble and Cameron Bryant will reportedly make an arrest for the murder , arresting an innocent suspect . 
 = = Related media = = 
 The BBC used viral promotion on the EastEnders homepage to further develop the storyline of Who Killed Archie ? , with Marsden the main character in the nine videos . A new section ( " Marsden 's Video Diaries " ) was launched , encompassing events on the show from 25 December 2009 onwards in diary style from Marsden 's point of view . Insight was provided on the character 's thoughts and feelings on the events surrounding her each week , beginning with the introduction : " Christmas Day . I should be at home with my feet up eating a mince pie and watching the Doctor Who Christmas special . Instead , I ’ ve been called into work . Murder . A bloody one too . The victim , one Archibald Mitchell . Not the first time a Mitchell 's ruined my night . Still , if this leads to Phil Mitchell all wrapped up in Walford nick by New Years day , might be the best present I ’ ve ever had . " On the videos Marsden discussed evidence , suspects she had brought in and her relationship with Phil . 
 During the next three video diaries , Marsden talks about the suspects and the evidence against them . In episode three it is Ronnie , Peggy and Sam ; in episode four she talks about Janine Butcher , and in episode five she discusses Ian 's motives . Towards the end of the series ( in episode seven ) , Marsden 's boss threatens to fire her if she does not capture the culprit : " I ’ ve got to get someone . I ’ ve got to pin this on someone . Every address in the immediate area door @-@ stopped . Five suspects questioned , one arrest . Nothing . They tell me nothing . Mitchell , the ex wife , the daughter , Beale , Butcher , [ Jack ] Branning , I ’ m getting closer , I just need time . Of course my boss is putting pressure on . Says I ’ m losing my touch , That he 'll take the case of me . This is my case . Somebody 's going down for it and it ain ’ t going to be me . " In the penultimate episode , Marsden announces that the DNA results have come through ; this is aired on EastEnders . The final episode of Marsden 's Video Diaries aired on 19 February 2010 , three days before Marsden 's departure in 2010 . In this episode ( " Case Closed " ) , the Lionel Richie song " Hello " plays as the " Who Killed Archie ? " storyline replays with the focus on Marsden . The BBC described the episode : " DCI Marsden 's caught Archie 's killer – or she 's collared someone for it at least . But Hello ! ? Was it Phil she was looking for ? Don 't tell us you didn 't spot the latent chemistry between this pair . Shirley must have been livid . We wouldn 't like to surmise what the DCI planned to do with Phil if she got him behind bars . But we do hope this is one Endless Love that will be revisited ... " 
 = = Reception = = 
 When Marsden returned in December 2002 , Ian Hyland of The Mirror said he disliked the " smouldering " sexual tension between Phil and Marsden . Jo <unk> of the Western Mail discussed the Marsden @-@ Kate @-@ Phil storyline , saying , " Betrayal with a capital B is the order of the day in the Square this week . It 's the cop Kate plot I 'm interested in . To shop or not to shop is a dilemma that Kate finds hard to cope with as she waits for the confession that will nail Phil for good " . In an interview with the East Anglian Daily Times , Stanton remarked that she was frequently asked to have her photo taken due to her role in EastEnders . 
 Real @-@ life police detectives criticised the portrayals of detectives Marsden and her colleague DC Wayne Hughes in the show , saying that viewers who see them talking to residents about the case and accepting bribes may believe that the police operate that way in reality . The BBC insisted that a police consultant was used , adding that " this is heightened fiction and all the things that we show might not always represent real life . " A spokesperson said , " We always have a police consultant on shows like this that we go to before casting . " Jane Simon and Brian <unk> described Marsden as having an " appetite for making random arrests " . Simon added , " While the list of suspects includes the entire northern hemisphere , it 's time for DCI Marsden to make another of her daily arrests . Like a Formula One pit stop , she has got it down to a fine art . " Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Sunday Mirror commented on the " Who Killed Archie ? " storyline : " Despite widespread apathy , Albert Square 's Cockney rabble <unk> on with the life @-@ sapping saga of Who Killed Archie ? Who gives a toss ? While potential murderers Phil , Ian , Bradley ( Charlie Clements ) and the gang hint furtively at their guilt , the absurd DCI Marple – sorry Marsden – keeps arresting bunny @-@ boiler Ronnie without a shred of evidence . " I 've spent 20 years building a career on hunches , " bragged Miss Marsden . Yeah , and you 've made it all the way to Walford nick . A real high flyer ! " 
 In 2015 , Laura @-@ Jayne Tyler from Inside Soap bemoaned Marsden 's return , saying " Can someone please explain to us why DCI Marsden is now in charge of the Lucy Beale case ? She couldn 't catch a bus , let along a killer . " 
 = Roxy Ann Peak = 
 Roxy Ann Peak is a 3 @,@ 576 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 1 @,@ 090 m ) mountain in the Western Cascade Range at the eastern edge of Medford , Oregon . Composed of several geologic layers , the majority of the peak is of volcanic origin and dates to the early Oligocene . It is primarily covered by oak savanna and open grassland on its lower slopes , and mixed coniferous forest on its upper slopes and summit . Despite the peak 's relatively small topographic prominence of 753 feet ( 230 m ) , it rises 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 670 m ) above Medford and is visible from most of the Rogue Valley . The mountain is Medford 's most important <unk> , open space reserve , and recreational resource . 
 The peak was originally settled 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years ago by ancestors of the Latgawa Native American tribe . In the early 1850s , a sudden influx of non @-@ indigenous settlers resulted in the Rogue River Wars . After the wars , the Latgawa were forced away from the region onto reservations . The peak was named in the late 1850s after one of its first landowners , Roxy Ann Bowen . 
 In 1883 , the city of Medford was established to the west of the mountain , and became incorporated two years later . After acquiring a large amount of land from the Lions Club and the federal government between 1930 and 1933 , the city created the 1 @,@ 740 @-@ acre ( 704 ha ) Prescott Park in 1937 . The park protects much of the upper slopes and summit of the peak and remains largely undeveloped . The peak 's southern foothills have some quickly expanding single @-@ family residential subdivisions . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Roxy Ann Peak is part of the old and deeply eroded Western Cascades , along with nearby Pilot Rock , Grizzly Peak , and Baldy . It is composed of several distinct geologic layers . The oldest layer , the 35- to 50 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old Payne Cliffs Formation , forms the base of the peak and consists of sedimentary sandstone , shale , and conglomerates . Most of the rest of the mountain is made up of 30- to 35 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old volcanic basalt , breccias , and <unk> , known as the Roxy Formation . These rocks are some of the oldest in the Cascades . At the summit , younger basalt dikes and intrusions K – Ar dated to 30 @.@ 82 ± 2 million years ago form a relatively erosion @-@ resistant cap , likely contributing to the peak 's isolation and familiar conical shape . Much of the lower slopes of Roxy Ann are covered by a 4 @-@ to @-@ 5 @-@ foot @-@ thick ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) layer of dense , sticky clay . Due to the clay 's low shear strength , the soil is prone to creep , earthflows , and landslides . Several large subdivisions lie on top of these deposits , some of which are up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) thick . 
 The peak stands 3 @,@ 576 feet ( 1 @,@ 090 m ) above sea level with a topographic prominence of 753 feet ( 230 m ) , and rises 2 @,@ 200 feet ( 670 m ) above the surrounding Rogue Valley . The unique rounded top , location , and height of the peak create a landmark distinguishable from as far away as Shady Cove , 15 @.@ 5 miles ( 24 @.@ 9 km ) to the north , and the Siskiyou Summit , 23 @.@ 5 miles ( 37 @.@ 8 km ) to the south . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Humans have lived in the vicinity of Roxy Ann Peak for the past 8 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 years . The first inhabitants were semi @-@ nomadic , most likely living off edible bulbs and large mammals such as mastodons and giant bison . Within the last millennium , the region became home to the Latgawa Native American tribe , who called the peak Al @-@ <unk> . They probably used the mountain for gathering acorns and hunting black @-@ tailed deer and small birds , animals which are still abundant there . 
 The first European Americans to visit the area were a group of fur trappers led by Peter Skene Ogden who traveled north through the Rogue Valley on February 14 , 1827 . The first non @-@ indigenous settlers arrived a few decades later . The sudden increase in population created conflicts with the Latgawa , which ultimately led to the Rogue River Wars of 1855 and 1856 . After the wars , the remaining Latgawa were forced hundreds of miles north to the Siletz Reservation on the central Oregon Coast . 
 Early settlers named the peak Skinner Butte , after Alonzo A. Skinner , the Rogue Valley Indian agent between 1851 and 1853 . The current name of the mountain originates from one of its first residents , Roxy Ann Bowen . Two couples — Roxy Ann and her husband John McKee and Stephen and Mary Taylor — claimed almost the entire peak in 1853 , and by the late 1850s , it came to be known as Roxy Ann Peak . 
 In November 1883 , the Oregon and California Railroad was built through the center of the Rogue Valley , bypassing Jacksonville , the county seat . The railroad company also constructed a train depot halfway between Central Point and Phoenix , and platted 82 city blocks around it . The townsite was named Medford in December . In 1884 , residents celebrated the town 's first Independence Day by firing 38 cannon blasts — one for each U.S. state — from Roxy Ann Peak 's summit . Medford grew quickly , and was incorporated on February 24 , 1885 . 
 Beginning in the early 1900s , the mountain 's foothills were predominantly used for pear orchards and lignite mining . Mining ceased at the onset of World War I , and many of the orchards were abandoned during the Great Depression , but some still remain . 
 = = = Prescott Park = = = 
 In 1929 , the Lions Club purchased two sizable portions of land on the peak , and deeded 200 acres ( 80 @.@ 9 ha ) to Medford for recreational use the following year . In 1931 , the city acquired another 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 607 @.@ 0 ha ) via the Recreation and Public Purposes Act , and 40 acres ( 16 ha ) more in 1933 . The park was dedicated in 1937 to George J. Prescott , a Lions Club leader and Medford police officer who was killed on duty on March 16 , 1933 . 
 Starting in 1933 , the Civilian Conservation Corps ( CCC ) made the first improvements to Prescott Park , including constructing 18 miles ( 29 km ) of trails and a 16 @-@ foot @-@ wide ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) access road ( Roxy Ann Road ) , creating several picnic areas and overlooks , and digging drainage ditches . The CCC stopped work in 1942 , soon after the beginning of World War II . Park maintenance ceased due to municipal budget problems , and gasoline rationing caused the number of visitors to drop markedly . By 1956 , the CCC 's improvements had suffered $ 110 @,@ 000 in damage . The trend of disrepair continued for several decades . 
 During the late 1990s , the park experienced a surge in vandalism , littering , and wildfires caused by off @-@ roading , and Roxy Ann Road became nearly impassable because of lack of maintenance . Medford police officers had to devote much of their time to patrolling the mountain , made difficult by the park 's remote location . To alleviate these problems , the city regraded Roxy Ann Road in 1998 , and installed two gates near the park entrance two years later . By 2006 , vandalism had decreased by 70 percent . 
 At 1 @,@ 740 acres ( 704 @.@ 2 ha ) , Prescott Park is Medford 's largest park , covering much of the upper slopes and summit of Roxy Ann . It is two and a half times larger than the city 's other parks combined . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Prescott Park and Roxy Ann Peak 's upper slopes remain relatively undeveloped , being outside of Medford 's city limits and urban growth boundary . The summit of the peak is home to a 180 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) radio tower built in 2007 ; the new tower replaced three of four existing 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) towers . Roxy Ann Peak and nearby Baldy are the only two primary transmitter station sites in the Rogue Valley . 
 Residential development of the mountain 's southern foothills has been on the rise for several years , primarily in the form of single @-@ family residences . Construction costs have continued to rise as well , in part because of a bill passed in 2003 . Oregon House Bill <unk> required that new construction on slopes of 20 percent or greater with unstable soil undergo increased regulation and an extended approval process . The bill doubled the cost of new foundations to around $ 20 @,@ 000 to $ 30 @,@ 000 , and the cost of retrofitting an existing structure approached $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Roxy Ann Peak 's southern foothills are also home to the <unk> Winery , a Rogue Valley AVA winery founded in 2002 . On the opposite side of the mountain is the first bioreactor landfill in Southern Oregon , the Dry Creek Landfill , which began a program in 2006 to generate power from collected methane . 
 On September 21 , 2009 , a wildfire broke out on Roxy Ann Peak 's western slopes and consumed approximately 633 acres ( 256 ha ) . It left 25 @,@ 000 residents without electricity , forced the evacuation of over 100 homes , and cost over $ 1 @.@ 3 million to fight , but no structures were damaged . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Roxy Ann Peak 's high biodiversity is due to its wide range of elevations and its location between the Cascade , Klamath , and Eastern Cascade ecoregions . The lower slopes of the peak support chaparral , oak savanna , and open grassland . Scattered California black oak , Oregon white oak , and Pacific madrone trees grow in these areas , as do sclerophyllous shrubs such as <unk> mountain mahogany , sticky whiteleaf manzanita , buckbrush , antelope bitterbrush , and Pacific poison oak . Common grasses include blue <unk> and prairie <unk> . Wildflowers including Southern Oregon buttercup , common yarrow , and Tolmie star @-@ tulip also grow in these regions . At higher elevations , the vegetation transitions to mixed coniferous forest , dominated by Douglas fir , ponderosa pine , incense cedar , western juniper , and Pacific madrone trees . Shrubs such as common snowberry , <unk> , <unk> manzanita , sticky whiteleaf manzanita , <unk> , and Pacific poison oak make up the understory of the forest , along with herbaceous plants such as creeping snowberry and Idaho fescue . 
 The peak is home to many species of birds , including blue @-@ gray gnatcatchers , lazuli buntings , oak titmice , acorn woodpeckers , and California quail on the lower slopes , and mountain quail , mountain chickadees , and red @-@ breasted nuthatches on the upper slopes . Wild turkeys and raptors such as Cooper 's hawks , golden eagles , bald eagles , and prairie falcons are also common . A few species migrate to the peak in the winter , including ruby @-@ crowned kinglets , yellow @-@ rumped warblers , and golden @-@ crowned sparrows . Mammals that inhabit the mountain include black @-@ tailed deer , cougars , bobcats , skunks , raccoons , coyotes , bears , weasels , and squirrels . A large herd of Roosevelt elk frequent the peak 's western foothills . The herd swelled to over 100 individuals in the mid @-@ 2000s , causing traffic problems and severe damage to local pear orchards , but shrank to about 40 members by 2009 after an Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife relocation effort . Other common animals on the peak include western rattlesnakes and western <unk> ticks . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Roxy Ann Peak and Prescott Park serve as Medford 's most important <unk> , open space reserve , and recreational resource . Popular recreational activities on the peak include picnicking and hiking , mountain biking , and horseback riding on the 4 miles ( 6 km ) of designated trails in Prescott Park , which range in difficulty from moderate to steep . In August 2013 , the city of Medford and the International Mountain Bicycling Association released a conceptual plan detailing future improvements to the park 's trail system . The plan would add 30 miles ( 48 km ) of new multi @-@ use trails throughout the park , improve existing trails and trail signage , and add a new trailhead on the mountain 's western slope , at an estimated cost of between $ 360 @,@ 000 and $ 720 @,@ 000 . If approved , construction on the first phase could begin by 2015 . 
 A challenge course opened in Prescott Park in April 2012 , operated by the Tigard @-@ based company <unk> . The course has 15 elements — eight low and seven high — each formed by various combinations of ropes , wires , platforms , ladders , and swings . They range from 2 to 40 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 12 m ) above the ground . 
 The peak and park can be accessed via Roxy Ann Road on the southern side of the mountain . There are two gates on the road ; the first is near the base of the peak and is opened and closed on a set schedule , and the second is about one mile beyond it at the park boundary , and is closed to all unauthorized motor vehicles . One mile past the second gate , the road splits into a 2 @.@ 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 3 km ) loop around the summit . Tower Road begins on the north side of the loop and ascends to the summit of the peak . The peak offers expansive views of the surrounding landscape , including the Rogue Valley , Mount Ashland , Mount McLoughlin , Pilot Rock , the Crater Lake rim , and even Mount Thielsen , 66 miles ( 110 km ) to the north , and Mount Shasta , 72 miles ( 120 km ) to the south . 
 = I Take Thee Quagmire = 
 " I Take Thee Quagmire " is the 21st episode of season four of Family Guy , originally broadcast on March 12 , 2006 . Peter wins free maid service for a week ; he intentionally creates extra work for the maid , Joan . Quagmire meets her and instantly falls in love with her , leading him to propose to her after the second date . After the marriage , Quagmire comes to regret his new relationship , but learns that Joan will kill him and herself if he leaves her , so he fakes his own death . 
 The episode was written by Tom Maxwell , Don Woodard and Steve Callaghan and directed by Seth Kearsley . It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 06 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Adam Carolla , Stephan Cox , Bryan Cranston , Darrel Heath , Beth Littleford , Christy Carlson Romano , Nicole Sullivan , Fred Tatasciore , Alex Thomas , and Alex Trebek , as well as several recurring voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter is a contestant on Wheel of Fortune , advances to the bonus round , and wins , despite choosing Z , 4 , three Qs , and the Batman symbol for his consonants and vowel , and taking a self @-@ described " shot in the dark " with his answer , " Alex Karras in ' Webster ' " , managing to get the correct answer on his first try , to Pat 's shock . He chooses , among several other prizes , one week of free maid service . When his maid Joan arrives , Peter has her pull items out of his belly button ( including , among other things , a ColecoVision set and a carton of Parliament Cigarettes to the shock of Peter , who says he hasn 't smoked in ten years ) , and rides her back to the store . Peter decides to over @-@ work Joan on her last night by giving Meg a watermelon filled with chocolate pudding and firecrackers , which explodes in her face . After being introduced to her by Peter , Quagmire falls in love with her . After dating Joan , Quagmire proposes marriage to her , which she accepts and the couple prepare their marriage ceremony . Lois , Peter and their neighbors visit Quagmire 's house , finding that he has changed his personality significantly . Peter still believes this to be a prank and shows Quagmire porn magazines in an attempt to change him back to his former ways . Meanwhile , Lois begins to question whether she should keep breastfeeding Stewie , as he 's hurting her when feeding . 
 By the time of Quagmire 's wedding , Lois ' breasts have gotten very large after deciding to wean Stewie , on the advice of Brian . While at the reception , the top of her shirt rips open . Peter notices that Quagmire is staring at Lois ' huge breasts , and spills champagne on them . Peter then " helps " Lois by shaking her , which makes her large breasts jiggle . This arouses Quagmire , and he realizes that he has made a mistake by marrying Joan . He informs Joan that some of his friends think they should get an annulment after discussing it with Peter , Joe and Cleveland , but she threatens to cut herself and him if he <unk> their marriage . As a result , Peter decides to help Quagmire fake his death . He shows Joan a video of Quagmire being attacked by a ninja ( Joe ) , a Nazi ( Cleveland ) , a " pots and pans " robot ( Peter ) , and the body being consumed by a dinosaur held by Peter ( to the theme of Jurassic Park ) . Joan is unconvinced by the video . Peter and his friends then operate plan B , which consists of Quagmire pretending to suffer a heart attack and die . Quagmire is buried in a coffin with enough oxygen to last him a short period of time so Peter can return after the funeral has finished and dig him up . However , when Mayor West announces that all coffins must be buried in concrete ( to guard against zombies ) , Peter exclaims that Quagmire is not dead , and brings him out of the coffin , alive . Death shows up to retrieve his body . Joan pleads for Quagmire 's life , and touches Death 's arm , which kills her instantly . Death takes Joan instead , as " she was suicidal and her last name was Quagmire . " However , before he leaves , Quagmire asks Death to leave the body for another five minutes , thus turning him back into his old usual self . 
 Meanwhile , Stewie has been having drug @-@ like withdrawals since Lois decided to wean him . He becomes so desperate that when he and Lois are at the park , he jumps on a woman breastfeeding her baby and greedily suckles on her , but is pulled off by Lois . One night , he then tries to milk Lois in her sleep . He pumps her breasts and succeeds , but spills and desperately tries licking it up . Stewie realizes how pathetic he is and accepts his weaning . He comes to Brian and informs that he is now off breast milk , but Lois has other plans . Lois allows Stewie to be <unk> again , thus delighting him . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode starts by depicting the game show Wheel of Fortune . When Brian is watching Malcolm in the Middle on television , a scene begins showing the mother of the fictional family screaming at the children and father . Jane Kaczmarek was asked to do the voice as she was the original actor in the series , however she refused . MacFarlane said that he gets a message that Kaczmarek wishes to portray that character as likable , and does not wish to jeopardize that . The father during that scene was voiced by Bryan Cranston , the original actor in the series , who accepted the role . Seth MacFarlane comments that " this is the first real Quagmire story we 've ever done . " A scene was made of Stewie attending a meeting similar to those at Alcoholics Anonymous , however the meeting was designed for those who are too addicted to breast milk . The format of Wheel of Fortune is somewhat similar to the layout of the modern @-@ day program , but the scene also features several aspects which are now no longer broadcast , such as not automatically being given R , S , T , L , N , and E , and were featured in the 1980s . 
 Two scenes during this episode were censored for television broadcasting . When Quagmire meets Joan and invites her out on a date , Cleveland asks , " Is that a banana in your pocket , or a erection in your pocket ? " Although this entire scene was not censored , Fox Broadcasting Company bleeped " erection " , which , according to DVD commentary , made what Cleveland said sound worse than what was intended . The scene where Peter is promoting ' Crystal Pepsi ' was shown only on the DVD , because it is prohibited to promote one product over another on television . 
 There is also a scene after the watermelon exploding trick where Meg was supposed to say " Fuck you , asshole ! I 'll kick your ass to hell ! " , but Fox also censored the line and was replaced by " I hate you ! I hate you ! " instead . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Adam Carolla , actor Stephan Cox , actor Bryan Cranston , actor Darrel Heath , actress Beth Littleford , actress Christy Carlson Romano , voice actress Nicole Sullivan , voice actor Fred Tatasciore , actor Alex Thomas , and game show host Alex Trebek guest starred in the episode . Recurring voice actors Ralph Garman , Mike Henry , writer Danny Smith , actress Jennifer Tilly , and writer John Viener made minor appearances in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Patrick Warburton and Adam West made appearances in the episode as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening scene of the episode , Peter is shown playing on the gameshow Wheel of Fortune , with hosts Pat Sajak and Vanna White also appearing . When Mayor West is playing as a contestant on Jeopardy ! , he spells the name of the host , Alex Trebek backwards ( <unk> Xela ) , sending him back to the fifth dimension ; this is a reference to when DC Comics supervillain and nemesis to Superman , Mister Mxyzptlk , is sent to the fifth dimension when someone makes him say his own name backwards . A Family Guy fan later did this in a real life episode of Jeopardy ! When Peter and the children are flying through space and singing , this is a reference to The Great Space Coaster . The two Asian men who meet Peter at the traffic lights when riding Joan 's back speak in a very similar tone to Howard Cosell , a reference to the 1985 cult film Better Off Dead . When Quagmire fantasizes about being alone in the forest with Joan and speaking to her in Elvish , this is a reference to a scene from The Lord of the Rings ; Quagmire goes on to imagine himself with Joan dancing dressed as the title characters from Beauty and the Beast , eating a plate of spaghetti similar to that shown in Lady and the Tramp , and flying on a magic carpet dressed as Aladdin and Princess Jasmine . They also fly through Baghdad which is in ruins from terrorism . Adam West 's response to seeing the Statue of Liberty is taken from the original Planet of the Apes . Also , there is a scene where Brian watches Malcolm in the Middle . In the scene , Lois nags the boys so much that she will go on strike , so Hal ends up killing her with a refrigerator door and walks away blissfully with the boys . Twice during the episode Quagmire engraves his name with his nose much like Woody Woodpecker . In the end , he engraves " giggity giggity goo " in the same fashion . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Bob Sassone of TV Squad commented that " this episode had one of the more hysterical / disturbing images of this TV season : Lois flashing her breasts to Brian after giving Stewie his lunch . " Michael Drucker of IGN noted that " the volume four episodes are easily funnier than the volume three ones " , referring to the episode . 
 = Episode 3 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 3 " , later also known as " Rest in Pain " , is the fourth episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by Harley Peyton , and directed by Tina Rathborne . " Episode 3 " features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Michael Ontkean and Ray Wise , and introduces Sheryl Lee 's second role , Maddy Ferguson . 
 Rathborne has highlighted the episode 's introduction of Jungian analytical psychology to the series . She also described MacLachlan 's character Dale Cooper as not only a wholesome , grounded anchor against which the series ' more bizarre elements could be contrasted ; but as the central component of the series ' coming @-@ of @-@ age " Bildungsroman " narrative . 
 " Episode 3 " was first broadcast on April 26 , 1990 , and was viewed by approximately 18 percent of the available audience in its initial airing . The episode received positive reviews from critics , with its mix of comedy and tragedy seen as a highlight , and Miguel Ferrer 's character Albert Rosenfield singled out as a particularly successful example of this . The episode also drew praise from The New York Times for its compelling and unusual cast of characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her friend Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate , and initial suspicion has fallen upon Palmer 's boyfriend Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and the man with whom she was cheating on Briggs , James Hurley ( James Marshall ) . However , other inhabitants of the town have their own suspicions : the violent , drug @-@ dealing truck driver Leo Johnson ( Eric Da Re ) is seen as a possible suspect . Cooper experiences a surreal dream in which a dwarf and a woman resembling Laura reveal the identity of the killer . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Cooper and Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) share breakfast , as he realizes she had slipped a note under his hotel room door ; the note referred to One @-@ Eyed Jacks , a brothel over the Canadian border . When she leaves , Cooper discusses his dream with Sheriff Harry S. Truman ( Michael Ontkean ) , believing it to be a coded solution to the murder . 
 Cooper 's colleague , Albert Rosenfield ( Miguel Ferrer ) wishes to conduct a further post @-@ mortem on Laura 's body , but it is due to be released for the funeral that day . As the argument grows more heated , Truman ends it by punching Rosenfield and knocking him down . Later , Rosenfield shares what he has found ; Laura had been bound when she was killed , had been addicted to cocaine , and had been clawed by a bird . An unidentified plastic shard was also found in her stomach . 
 Leland Palmer ( Ray Wise ) is at home when he is visited by his niece , Madeline Ferguson ( Lee ) . Ferguson is identical to Laura save for having black hair , not blonde . At the same time , Cooper and Truman question Johnson about Laura 's death , believing him to be lying when he denies knowing her . Later , Hurley arrives at Laura 's funeral late , watching from a distance . Briggs begins to accost the mourners , accusing them of doing nothing when they knew Laura had been troubled . Hurley intervenes and the two begin fighting ; Leland falls on the casket as it is being lowered into the grave , sobbing uncontrollably . 
 That night , Cooper , Truman , Deputy Hawk ( Michael Horse ) and Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) meet at the RR Diner . Truman explains that someone has been smuggling cocaine into town ; he suspects that Jacques Renault ( Walter Olkewicz ) , bartender at the town 's Roadhouse Bar , is involved . He also explains that the woods around the town seem to contain a " darkness " , and reveals that there is a secret society of men gathered to stand watch against this : the <unk> Boys . Truman and the others bring Cooper to their headquarters , where James has Jacques ' brother Bernard ( Clay Wilcox ) bound and gagged . They question Bernard but he denies any crime . 
 Elsewhere , Jacques realizes his brother is in trouble , and calls Johnson for help . When Johnson leaves , his abused wife Shelley ( Mädchen Amick ) hides a gun in a secret drawer . Meanwhile , sawmill owner Josie Packard ( Joan Chen ) tells Truman , her lover , that her sister @-@ in @-@ law Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) is scheming to take over the mill . Packard knows there are two account books , one fake and one real , but cannot locate the real one Martell has been hiding . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 3 " was the first of the series to be written by Harley Peyton ; Peyton returned to pen a number of other episodes across both seasons . The episode was directed by Tina Rathborne , who would also go on to helm " Episode 17 " in the second season . Rathborne had previously worked with series co @-@ creator David Lynch when she had cast him in her 1988 feature film <unk> and Me . 
 The episode introduces the character of Maddy Ferguson , Laura 's nearly identical cousin , the second role in the series played by Sheryl Lee . Lee had been a stage actor living in Washington , where " Pilot " was filmed , and had remained there after production moved to Los Angeles as she believed that , with her character dead , she would have no further part in the series . However , Lynch was impressed with her performance and called to ask her to return , telling her he would " figure [ ... ] out " a way for her to continue appearing . 
 Rathborne chose to open the episode with a shot centered on Sherilyn Fenn , finding the actress to be " seductive " and " absorbing " in a similar manner to screen icon Marilyn Monroe . Rathborne had initially worried that the episode featured too many static scenes of characters sitting and talking , with little action , and asked Lynch if she could borrow some of the imagery of the previous episode 's surreal dream sequence to keep these conversations more interesting , adding brief snippets of footage as Cooper discussed the dream with the others . Rathborne has noted that this dream @-@ centric approach to the character of Cooper is rooted in Carl Jung 's theories of analytical psychology . She felt this was something that had not been seen on television before , and credits Lynch with introducing it to the series . She has also described the narrative , both of " Episode 3 " and of Twin Peaks as a whole , as a " Bildungsroman " showing Cooper 's development into a more rounded and enlightened person . 
 Working on studio sets was a new experience for Rathborne , whose previous work had all been filmed on location . She also found it refreshing to work with the series ' ensemble cast , recalling that Miguel Ferrer often had the cast and crew laughing at the way he approached his material , imbuing the atmosphere during filming with a mix of comedy and drama . Rathborne has also noted the use of ordinary , almost banal , daily life in the series , finding it a necessary element to be able to play the series ' more violent and surreal elements against effectively . She particularly singled out Cooper as a wholesome " boy next door " character who allowed the town 's more unusual residents to stand out more starkly . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 3 " was first broadcast by the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on April 19 , 1990 . In its initial airing , it was viewed by 11 @.@ 3 percent of US households , representing 18 percent of the available audience . This marked a slight decline from the previous episode , which had attracted 13 @.@ 1 percent of the population and 21 percent of the available audience . 
 The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps rated the episode a B + , finding that it struggled to live up to the preceding episode ; however , he felt that this was understandable , as " after pushing television to the limits of sanity there was nowhere to go but back " . Phipps also described the funeral scene as a highlight of the episode , finding that he grew to appreciate its mix of tragic and comic more over repeated viewings . Writing for Allrovi , Andrea LeVasseur rated the episode four stars out of five . 
 John J. O 'Connor , writing for The New York Times praised the episode , stating that it features " the most bizarrely compelling collection of characters ever to hit prime time " . O 'Connor spoke positively of the intricate plot seen in the episode and the series as a whole , noting that " the overall narrative is paramount " and affirming his belief that the series " seems to have been mapped out carefully " by Lynch and Frost . Television Without Pity 's Daniel J. Blau praised the episode 's black humour , singling out in particular the scene in which Ferrer 's character is punched after an argument in the town morgue . However , Blau was critical of guest stars Olkewicz and Wilcox , finding their attempted French @-@ Canadian accents particularly poor . Writing for Digital Spy , Tony Delgado has also praised Ferrer 's role as Rosenfield , adding that his dialogue " may not appear to be the epitome of wit , but the way [ Ferrer ] delivered such lines caused plenty of howling hysterics in living rooms across the globe " . 
 = Gunther E. Rothenberg = 
 Gunther Erich Rothenberg ( 11 July 1923 – 26 April 2004 ) was an internationally known military historian , best known for his publications on the Habsburg military and Napoleonic Wars . He had a fifteen @-@ year military career , as a British Army soldier in World War II , a Haganah officer in the 1948 Arab – Israeli War , and in the United States Air Force during the Korean War . 
 = = Escape from Nazi Germany and military service = = 
 Gunther Erich Rothenberg was born in Berlin . His family was a culturally assimilated German Jewish family . In 1937 , Rothenberg moved to the Netherlands with his mother ; his father later joined them . The family moved next to Britain , where Rothenberg had some schooling . In 1939 , he moved to Mandatory Palestine , then under British rule . There he joined the Zionist movement and Hashomer <unk> ( The Youth Guard ) , a Socialist @-@ Zionist youth movement . He retained his passion for a Jewish homeland throughout his life . 
 On 13 July 1941 , his parents emigrated to the United States on the Villa de Madrid , an overcrowded ocean @-@ liner that left Barcelona on 20 June . His father , Erich Joseph Rothenberg , was an importer , and both his parents spoke English , Hebrew , French , and German . Their visas , issued in Lisbon , Portugal , claimed Cuban citizenship . At the age of 57 , his father registered for the fourth draft in 1942 , listing his residence as New York City , and his next of kin as his wife , Lotte . 
 In 1941 , Gunther Rothenberg volunteered for the British army , serving in an all @-@ Jewish unit . He was wounded in North Africa . He transferred from the Royal Army Service Corps to the Intelligence Corps and fought with the Eighth Army . He served in the Italian campaign , in the Yugoslav war of liberation and in Austria . His service continued in the occupation of Austria until 1946 . He was a civilian employee of U.S. Intelligence 1946 @-@ 1948 . Rothenberg returned to Palestine and joined the Haganah for Israel 's War of Independence . He rose to the rank of captain in the Israel Defense Forces . 
 By 1948 , Rothenberg 's father had died and his mother , Lotte ( 1894 – 1990 ) , had become a naturalized United States citizen . To be with her in New York City , Rothenberg journeyed to Canada , arriving in Halifax , Nova Scotia ; traveling from there to Toronto , he lived for a while at Wycliffe College , where he worked briefly as a construction laborer . On 19 November 1948 , he crossed the international border into the United States at Buffalo , with $ 12 @.@ 00 in his pocket . In 1951 , he volunteered for the United States Army , transferred to the Air Force , and served in the Korean War until 1955 . He remained guided by a deep sense of duty and a strong sense of American patriotism throughout his life . 
 = = Education and career = = 
 After military service in the United States Air Force , he graduated from the University of Illinois with an undergraduate degree . Two years later , he had a master 's degree from the University of Chicago . In 1959 he finished his doctoral degree at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign . He retired from Purdue University , was appointed Professor Emeritus , and lived in Canberra , Australia , where he continued to write about the Napoleonic Wars . 
 He wrote several ground @-@ breaking books on the organization of the Habsburg military and the military reforms of Archduke Charles in the first decade of the Napoleonic Wars . His last book , The Emperor 's Last Victory , about the Battle of Wagram in 1809 , was published posthumously . Although he had never finished high school , with the help of the GI Bill , Rothenberg completed a bachelor 's degree from the University of Illinois in 1954 . He attended graduate school at the University of Chicago , where he was recognized as an argumentative , sometimes abrasive , graduate student with a keen mind . As a graduate student , Rothenberg reviewed <unk> Allen 's Caucasian Battlefields : A History of the Wars on the Turco @-@ Caucasian Border , 1828 – 1921 ( Cambridge University Press , 1953 ) for Journal of Modern History , He wrote his 1956 masters ' thesis entitled General Crook and the Apaches , 1871 – 1874 : the campaign in the Tonto Basin . Rothenberg received his doctorate from the University of Illinois : his 1959 dissertation , <unk> <unk> : then military border in Croatia , 1522 – 1749 , was published in 1960 by the University of Chicago Press , as The Military Border in Croatia , 1522 – 1749 ; he followed this with a second study , The Military Border in Croatia , 1750 – 1888 : a study of an imperial institution in 1966 , also published by University of Chicago Press . Both volumes were translated into German in 1970 . 
 In part @-@ time temporary teaching positions in Illinois and four years at the Southern Illinois University , Rothenberg taught European and world history , and published an instructor 's manual on history of the world , with Henry C. Boren . In 1962 , Rothenberg joined the faculty of the University of New Mexico ; over the following ten years , he rose to the position of full professor . In 1972 , he accepted a position at Purdue University . There , he taught courses in military and European history . As a teacher , his popular course on World War II attracted more than 250 undergraduates annually . 
 In the 1970s , Rothenberg also established himself as an international Napoleonic scholar with The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon , published in 1977 . He also mentored hundreds of graduate and doctoral students . He regularly published in such peer @-@ reviewed publications as Journal of Military History and served on the editorial board of War in History . In 1985 , Rothenberg was a visiting Fulbright fellow in the Department of History in the Faculty of Military Studies at the Australian Royal Military College , Duntroon . He retired from Purdue in 1999 and was named Professor Emeritus . 
 From 1995 – 2001 , Rothenberg was a visiting fellow at the School of Historical Studies , Monash University . After his retirement , he moved to Melbourne , Australia , and then to Canberra , where his third wife , Eleanor Hancock , taught at the Australian Defence Force Academy . Although retired , he continued to teach , lecture , and publish reviews . He also wrote two more books . 
 Life in Australia did not always please him ; he missed both his colleagues in North America and his Purdue students . His politics — he " was anything but politically correct " — did not mesh well with Australia 's leftist atmosphere . He wrote indignantly to a friend in the United States that he regretted moving to Australia when the authorities confiscated his muzzle loaders , which were prohibited " Down Under . " 
 In 2004 , he returned to the United States to present the keynote address at the 34th Annual Conference of the Consortium on Revolutionary Europe . He had recently completed The Emperor ’ s Last Victory : Napoleon and the Battle of Wagram , which was published posthumously in November 2004 . He died at the age of 80 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Rothenberg 's legacy is not only the generations of scholars he prepared , but also his vast historiographical contribution to understanding the Revolutionary era . For many years , his Army of Francis Joseph ( 1976 ) was the standard and the only English language analysis of the Habsburg Army in the French Revolutionary and the Napoleonic wars . He changed the widespread perception of Archduke Charles ' military acumen . A masterful historian , Rothenberg was known furthermore as an eminently fair scholar . After publishing a critique of a publication , the author contacted him , and proved the critique unjust ; Rothenberg immediately wrote to a review retracting the criticism , and the two scholars remained friends for the remainder of his life . 
 Some of his colleagues considered Rothenberg " the greatest scholar of the Napoleonic era of our day . " His adventurous life and diverse experiences gave him a deep understanding of human nature . This made him a valuable colleague and a treasured mentor for his many graduate students . 
 High Point University conducts the Gunther E. Rothenberg Seminar in Military History . 
 = = Personal life and family = = 
 His first marriage in 1952 ended in a 1967 divorce . In 1969 , Rothenberg married Ruth <unk> Smith , a widow with three daughters ( Judith Goris , Laura Allman , Georgia Jones ( all born Herron ) ) , whom he helped to raise ; she died in 1992 . In 1995 , he married for a third time , to Eleanor Hancock , a lecturer at Monash University in Australia . She is now a Senior Lecturer in History at the Australian Defence Force Academy at the University of New South Wales , and has written the first biography of Ernst Julius Röhm . Her 1988 doctoral thesis , National Socialist Leadership And Total War , 1941 – 45 for the Australia National University was published by St. Martin 's Press in 1992 . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Rothenberg published hundreds of journal articles , reviews , and lectures . This is a partial list . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1960 ) . The Austrian Military Border in Croatia , 1522 – 1747 . Urbana , IL : University of Illinois Press . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1966 ) . The Austrian Military Border in Croatia , 1740 – 1881 ; a Study of an Imperial Institution . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1976 ) . The army of Francis Joseph . West Lafayette , Indiana : Purdue University Press . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1979 ) . The anatomy of the Israeli army . London : B. T. Batsford . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1982 ) . Napoleon 's Great Adversaries : the Archduke Charles and the Austrian Army , 1792 – 1814 . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . ( Subsequent editions titled Napoleon 's Great Adversary : the Archduke Charles and the Austrian Army . ) 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 1978 ) . The Art of Warfare in the Age of Napoleon . Bloomington : Indiana University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 253 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 2000 ) . Keegan , John , ed . The Napoleonic Wars . London : Cassell . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther Erich ( 2004 ) . The Emperor 's Last Victory : Napoleon and the Battle of Wagram . London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Király , Béla Kalman ; Rothenberg , Gunther E. , eds . ( 1979 ) . Special topics and generalizations on the 18th and 19th centuries . New York : Brooklyn College Press . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . Distributed by Columbia University Press 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ; Király , Béla K. ; Sugar , Peter F. , eds . ( 1982 ) . East Central European society and war in the <unk> eighteenth century . New York : Boulder Social Science Monographs . ISBN <unk> . LCCN <unk> . Distributed by Columbia University Press 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( June 1960 ) . " The Origins of the Austrian Military Frontier in Croatia and the Alleged Treaty of 22 December 1522 " . The Slavonic and East European Review ( Modern Humanities Research Association ) 38 ( 91 ) : 493 – 498 . Retrieved 2014 @-@ 02 @-@ 01 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1961 ) . " Venice and the Uskoks of Senj : 1537 – 1618 " . The Journal of Modern History 33 ( 2 ) : 148 – 156 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1963 ) . " Aventinus and the Defense of the Empire Against the Turks " . Studies in the Renaissance 10 : 60 – 67 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1964 ) . " The Croatian Military Border and the Rise of Yugoslav Nationalism " . The Slavonic and East European Review 43 ( 100 ) : 34 – 45 . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1964 ) . " The Struggle Over the Dissolution of the Croatian Military Border , <unk> 1871 " . Slavic Review 23 ( 1 ) : 63 – 78 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1968 ) . " The Austrian Army in the Age of Metternich " . The Journal of Modern History 40 ( 2 ) : 155 – 165 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1086 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1972 ) . " Toward a National Hungarian Army : The Military Compromise of 1868 and its Consequences " . Slavic Review 31 ( 4 ) : 805 – 816 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1973 ) . " The Austrian Sanitary Cordon and the Control of the Bubonic Plague : 1710 – 1871 " . Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / <unk> / <unk> 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1973 ) . " The Habsburg Army in the Napoleonic Wars " . Military Affairs : The Journal of Military History , Including Theory and Technology 37 ( 1 ) : 1 – 5 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1976 ) . " Nobility and Military Careers : The Habsburg Officer Corps , 1740 @-@ 1914 " . Military Affairs : The Journal of Military History , Including Theory and Technology 40 ( 4 ) : 182 – 186 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1988 ) . " The Origins , Causes , and Extension of the Wars of the French Revolution and Napoleon " . Journal of Interdisciplinary History 18 ( 4 ) : 771 – 793 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 Rothenberg , Gunther E. ( 1989 ) . " The Austro @-@ Hungarian Campaign Against Serbia in 1914 " . Journal of Military History 53 ( 2 ) : 127 – 146 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> . 
 = Symphony Six = 
 The Symphony Six were a group of Canadian musicians under contract to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra ( TSO ) who were denied entry to the United States for a concert tour in November 1951 . Coming at the height of the McCarthy era in the US , the six musicians – Ruth Budd , Dirk Keetbaas , William Kuinka , Abe Mannheim , John Moskalyk , and Steven Staryk – were denied visas on the suspicion of being involved in communist activities . The TSO sent other musicians in their place and completed its tour . The six musicians resumed playing with the orchestra upon its return to Canada . 
 At the end of the 1951 @-@ 1952 season , the TSO refused to renew the contracts of these musicians , stating that they had not fulfilled their contractual agreements . The six musicians appealed this decision to its union , the Toronto Musicians ' Association ; the Mayor of Toronto ; the Canadian Civil Liberties Association ; and many other bodies , without success . They received support from the Federation of Canadian Artists and the Canada Council for the Arts , but not from the Canadian Congress of Labour . The incident garnered extensive media coverage in both Canada and the United States , and sparked a protest against the TSO 's decision . The orchestra 's director , Ernest MacMillan , did not speak about the matter in public , which also prompted criticism , and two members of the TSO board resigned . The six musicians were viewed with suspicion by their colleagues and people avoided them to protect themselves from guilt by association . Budd and Staryk later returned to the TSO , while the four other musicians continued their careers elsewhere . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Toronto Symphony Orchestra was founded by Luigi von <unk> in 1922 . From 1931 to 1956 it was conducted by Sir Ernest MacMillan , who achieved renown as " the leading figure in Canadian music " . By the 1940s the orchestra 's popularity had increased , but its financial condition did not allow it to tour or invite many guest conductors and soloists . In 1951 @-@ 52 it received CA $ 56 @,@ 000 in donations and grants , CA $ 10 @,@ 000 less than the amount raised by the smaller Vancouver Symphony Orchestra . Some TSO musicians freelanced for the CBC Symphony Orchestra and a few left the TSO to work for the CBC . MacMillan hoped that the TSO could boost its reputation through international engagements . 
 = = Event = = 
 The Toronto Symphony Orchestra was invited to perform at the Detroit Masonic Temple auditorium on November 27 , 1951 as part of the Major Symphony Series , which also featured the Boston Symphony Orchestra , the Chicago Symphony Orchestra , the Cleveland Orchestra , and the Philadelphia Orchestra . TSO director MacMillan viewed this first @-@ ever US invitation as a golden opportunity to garner more international invitations for the orchestra . He added vocal soloist Lois Marshall to the orchestra , as well as a piece by an American composer , Herbert Elwell 's work Pastorale , and Edward Elgar 's Enigma Variations , to the repertoire . 
 At this time in the United States , McCarthyism was at its height , generating fear and suspicion of entertainment industry figures , academics , military figures , and government officials by accusing them of real or suggested links to communist activities . The TSO was required to submit to United States immigration authorities all the names of its musicians and other staff who would be accompanying the tour . The immigration department approved visas for all but seven musicians , suspecting them of communist activities . One of the musicians was later cleared , leaving six musicians who were denied entry . 
 These six musicians , who became known as the Symphony Six , were : 
 Ruth Budd , double bassist . Born in Winnipeg , she joined the TSO in 1947 , becoming Canada 's first professional female bassist . 
 Dirk Keetbaas , Jr . , principal flautist . Born in the Netherlands , Keetbaas was a naturalized Canadian citizen . He also performed in the CBC Symphony Orchestra and in chamber music groups . He joined the TSO in 1949 . 
 William Kuinka , double bassist . Born in British Columbia , he had served in the Second World War . He was self @-@ taught in mandolin and guitar as well . The 1951 @-@ 1952 season was his first and last year in the TSO . 
 Abe Mannheim , bassist . This was his fourth season with the orchestra . Immigration officials had questioned him for 4 hours . 
 John Moskalyk , violinist . He joined the TSO in 1945 . 
 Steven Staryk , violinist . Born in Toronto , he studied violin as a child with , among others , John <unk> , and performed in his first recital on CBC Radio at the age of 14 . He joined the TSO in 1950 when he was still in his teens . 
 Several of the six musicians had been involved with Canadian @-@ Russian friendship organizations formed in the 1940s for the purposes of artistic collaboration ; however , they denied charges of political involvement . Staryk related that he had played at Ukrainian and other ethnic events , and Budd admitted to being a member of a left @-@ wing youth group . John Moskalyk 's surname was listed in the TSO 's programs as " Moscow " ; he had conducted the Budapest orchestra for two concert performances in August 1949 . Keetbaas could not recall any association with left @-@ wing groups . Harry Freedman , who was on the board of the Toronto Musicians ' Association at the time and whose vote thwarted unanimous decisions against the Symphony Six , stated that he was not aware of any of the six musicians promoting communism . Later , he felt that he should have taken " more direct action " . 
 MacMillan himself had been involved in the National Council for Canadian @-@ Soviet Friendship in the 1940s , though he had since quit that organization . In 1950 , with an eye to taking the orchestra on international tours , he had written a letter to the American consul in Toronto admitting his former affiliation . He received his visa in November 1951 without any difficulties . After the six musicians were denied entry and before the orchestra had left for the United States , MacMillan solicited help for them from the Canadian ambassador in Washington , but his plea was unsuccessful . In January 1952 he wrote to US immigration officials trying to clear Staryk 's name , lauding him as " an exceptionally talented violinist and valuable member of the orchestra . I have no reason to doubt that he has no Communist affiliations other than that he played from ages twelve to fourteen with a Ukrainian orchestra that is under some suspicion " . His entreaties on behalf of Staryk did not help to exonerate the musician . 
 The TSO board sent other musicians in place of the six who had been denied visas , and the concert went on as planned . The orchestra 's performance was a success and received positive reviews from both the American and Canadian press . After the TSO returned to Canada , the six musicians resumed their positions . 
 = = Refusal to renew contracts = = 
 At the end of the 1951 @-@ 1952 season , with more American concerts planned for the orchestra in Boston , New York , and Philadelphia in the coming season , the TSO did not renew its contracts with all six musicians . Jack Elton , manager of the orchestra , discussed the problem of these six players with the TSO board in a meeting held on April 21 , 1952 . At the meeting , Elton said that " for artistic reasons there could be no substitutes for such an important concert " . The board agreed with Elton 's arguments and contended that the six musicians had not fulfilled their contractual agreement to join the orchestra on international tours , and that being barred from entering the United States would prevent them from joining the orchestra in future US appearances . Ernest MacMillan was not present at the meeting . 
 The incident and the board 's decision not to renew the musicians ' contracts created controversy when it became public , garnering media attention both nationally and internationally . Members of the press castigated the TSO for not cancelling the US tour in protest over the immigration department ’ s decision , citing a similar case in which the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra of Amsterdam had cancelled its US tour when several of its musicians were denied entry . One reporter , Langford Dixon of The Globe and Mail , " defended the six so vehemently that it led to his dismissal from the paper " . Many people wrote letters to the TSO and some even cancelled their subscriptions . For its part , the TSO board blamed the newly established Canadian television for the unprecedented decline in subscriptions . A letter to the editor of Toronto Daily Star called the firing " an offence against Canadian independence . " 
 The TSO board gave orchestra manager Jack Elton the authority to decide what steps should be taken . Elton asked the Toronto Musicians ' Association to intervene . The union upheld the board 's decision . The six musicians appealed but the union turned them down , stating that they had not fulfilled their contractual agreements and so the orchestra had the right not to renew their contracts . Walter Murdoch , president of the Toronto Musicians ' Association , said that it was " a straight contractual matter " and " there is nothing wrong in the orchestra 's not rehiring musicians " . 
 On May 26 , 1952 twelve members of the TSO board met to review their decision not to renew the contracts . Nine of the members voted in favor of the decision while three voted against it . It was decided that the contracts would not be renewed , but if the United States immigration officials would issue entry permits to the six musicians by September 1 , the TSO would renew the contracts . This decision created a controversy and a split within the TSO board , which eventually led to the resignation of two members , Mrs. Edmund Boyd and Mrs. R. B. Whitehead , although these two remained members of the orchestra 's women 's committee . 
 The Assembly for the Canadian Arts called a rally in support of the Symphony Six on May 29 . The Toronto Musicians ' Association instructed its members not to attend and sent members to stand outside the entrance " to intimidate members from entering " . Aspersions were cast on the Assembly for the Canadian Arts as being a communist front organization , and the Toronto Evening Telegram called the gathering " a communist meeting " . Several members of the Assembly quit the group in fear " of being labelled communists " . On June 4 the United Church of Canada urged the TSO board to reconsider its decision . 
 The controversy continued into the orchestra 's 1952 @-@ 1953 season . The six musicians appealed again to the TSO board and the Toronto Musicians ' Association , but made no headway . The musicians also held meetings with the Canadian Civil Liberties Association and the Toronto Board of Control , and pleaded their case to the Mayor of Toronto , Allan A. Lamport , and the American Federation of Musicians , without success . While the Federation of Canadian Artists and the Canada Council for the Arts supported the six musicians , the Canadian Congress of Labour rejected a proposal to back them . In 1952 then @-@ Canadian foreign minister Lester Pearson was quoted as saying that it would not " serve any useful purpose to take the matter up again " . Pearson blamed the Cold War for such incidents , and added that the Canadian government was also denying entries to people wishing to attend communist meetings and was providing US officials with " security information " . A special committee was set up by the TSO board to screen all its members . 
 MacMillan stayed out of the matter ; he did not attend meetings of the TSO board and maintained a public silence through the spring and summer of 1952 . According to TSO archivist Warren , MacMillan 's correspondence indicates that he supported the board 's decision not to rehire the six musicians . 
 While the Symphony Six garnered support from many corners , they did not receive widespread support from their peers . While some orchestra members were " genuinely supportive " , according to Budd , many others publicly shunned them for fear of being perceived as communist sympathizers and losing their own jobs . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Only two of the Symphony Six eventually returned to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra : Ruth Budd and Stephen Staryk . After her contract was not renewed , Budd played with orchestras in Halifax and other Canadian cities . She was rehired by the TSO in 1964 and continued as a double bassist until 1989 , becoming " one of the most beloved members of the orchestra " . Staryk played in the CBC Symphony Orchestra from 1952 to 1956 and then traveled to London , where he was appointed concertmaster of the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . In 1960 he became concertmaster of the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra in Amsterdam and toured the US with them , although he had not been officially cleared by the US immigration department . Staryk was the first Canadian concertmaster of the Chicago Symphony Orchestra from 1963 to 1967 . He returned to the Toronto Symphony Orchestra in 1982 , serving as concertmaster until 1986 . 
 Keetbaas became the principal flautist for the Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra and the CBC Winnipeg Orchestra from 1953 to 1968 . From 1956 to 1966 he directed and performed with the Dirk Keetbaas Players , a wind quintet featuring flute , oboe , clarinet , bassoon , and French horn . 
 Kuinka performed with the Toronto Renaissance Quintet from 1963 to 1965 . In 1964 he formed the Toronto Mandolin Chamber Ensemble , which existed until 1969 . He also performed with the orchestra of the National Ballet of Canada . He received a research grant from the Canada Council to study European teaching methods and repertoire in 1966 . 
 Mannheim later performed in the Vancouver Symphony Orchestra and the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 Moskalyk joined the Faculty of Music at the University of Toronto and also became a faculty member of The Royal Conservatory of Music . 
 The TSO board had not renewed the musicians ' contracts hoping that it would receive more concert invitations from the United States . However , it received only eight invitations in the following four years , all from the state of Michigan . The eighth tour had to be cancelled because of a snowstorm . 
 In a letter written to Dan Cameron , President of the Canadian Federation of Music Teachers , in November 1952 , MacMillan reflected that " the orchestra , far from suffering musically , has in some respects improved . " 
 = Alisia Dragoon = 
 Alisia Dragoon ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> <unk> ) is a 1992 platform game developed by Game Arts for the Sega Genesis . The player controls Alisia , a young woman who is on a quest to avenge her father and save the world . She can fire lightning from her hands and summon four faithful beasts to aid her . 
 The game was released outside of Japan by Sega , who packaged the heroine as a rugged gladiator instead of the dainty @-@ looking sorceress she originally was . Due to the lack of publicity for the game internationally , Alisia Dragoon did not make a big impact on the video game market , despite the critical acclaim it received . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 In Alisia Dragoon , the player controls the female protagonist , Alisia , in her quest to save the world by defeating the evil forces that killed her father . The game consists of eight levels of side @-@ scrolling environments ; Alisia has to jump across gaps and kill the enemies that stand in her way . Each stage is completed by defeating the boss at the end . 
 Alisia attacks by shooting streaks of lightning from her hands . The attack automatically targets enemies in range but gets weaker with each volley as Alisia 's power is depleted . Her power recharges when she stops attacking ; when fully charged , it allows her to unleash a smart @-@ bomb @-@ like attack , hitting every enemy on the screen . The energy system introduces an element of strategy , encouraging the player to manage Alisia 's power to have her able to defend herself at critical moments . 
 Helping Alisia in her quest are her pet monsters . These creatures fly around the heroine on their own , attacking her foes , and blocking enemy attacks from hitting her . There are four pets , each with its own type of attack . The Dragon Frye spits fireballs , and the Boomerang Lizard hurls boomerangs . The Thunder Raven emits a thunder blast that affects enemies across the screen , and the Ball O ' Fire burns enemies on contact . Only one pet can fight alongside Alisia in her quest , but the player can select any of the four ( or none ) as the active companion at any time . 
 Over the course of the game , Alisia and her monsters can improve their abilities by collecting power @-@ ups . These enhancement items are placed throughout the first seven stages , mostly in hidden locations . The various power @-@ ups can heal Alisia and her monsters , increase their maximum life bars , improve their attacks , or grant invulnerability for a certain time . Life bars are lost by taking damage from enemy attacks and traps . When Alisia 's pets lose all their life bars , they are removed from play and cannot be brought back until a " Revive " power @-@ up is collected . If Alisia loses all her life bars , she can restart the level by expending a continue . The game ends if all the continues have been used . Alisia Dragoon has no features for saving the player 's progress . After the game is completed , a screen is shown , charting the overall performance of the player based on the number of kills , the power level of Alisia 's attack , and the frequency the pet monsters are used . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Similar to most action games on the Sega Genesis , the plot in Alisia Dragoon is simple and short . The game goes straight into the action , tasking Alisia to kill everything in sight . After defeating the final boss , the player is treated to a cinematic cutscene of Alisia 's triumphant return to her home . 
 For the Japanese release , much of the back @-@ story was described in the manual . Alisia is the daughter of a sorcerer who has imprisoned the main villain , <unk> , in a cocoon and sent it into outer space . Her father is in turn tortured to death by <unk> 's followers . When the villain crashes back to the planet and begins to awaken , Alisia sets out to defeat him and his followers . The American and European versions of the game promoted a different back @-@ story , with Alisia as a gladiator who champions the cause of the people with her four pet companions . Her task is to eradicate the evil monsters and the source of their production , a " silver star " that has crashed to Earth . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 1992 , Japanese animation studio Gainax was in a collaboration with Game Arts , the makers of the Lunar role @-@ playing games , to produce an action video game . Gainax 's video game product line tended to target a niche crowd who generally preferred dating simulations and anime @-@ based adventure games . Alisia Dragoon is a departure from this tradition . The animation studio handled the artistic end of the production , writing the story and creating the artwork that would be used for the design of the game 's environments and characters . Several of its founders had worked on Hayao Miyazaki 's animated films , and the influences of Miyazaki 's 1984 science fiction animated film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind were evident in certain levels of the game . Similarly , due to the predominance of mixing science fiction with fantasy themes in the Japanese animation circles at that time , Alisia Dragoon featured high @-@ tech spaceships and robots alongside mythical zombies and dragons . The composition of the soundtrack was delegated to Mecano Associates , who had produced the music for other works from Game Arts , such as the action games Fire Hawk : <unk> 2 and Silpheed . Game Arts , however , did most of the work in producing Alisia Dragoon , adapting the artwork into environments and creatures that can be rendered by the console hardware , and writing them as lines of software code . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Due to a small customer base in Japan , Alisia Dragoon sold few copies on its release ( April 24 , 1992 ) ; the console it was made for , the Sega Mega Drive , was not a popular device in Japan , selling 3 – 3 @.@ 5 million units ( 10 % of all Mega Drives / Genesis sold around the world ) . The game was published earlier by Sega for North America and Europe , on March 30 . However , it was a subdued release ; Sega did not place major advertisements for the game in the media . To localize the contents for the Western market , the video game publisher made several cosmetic changes to Alisia Dragoon . Instead of a big @-@ eyed heroine drawn in typical anime styling , Alisia was portrayed as a golden bikini @-@ wearing female barbarian on the box covers outside Japan . The Western version of Alisia was likened to the scantily clad females in artist Boris Vallejo 's work . 
 Westerners were more enthusiastic toward the game than were the Japanese , although there were a few negative appraisals . GamePro magazine opined Alisia Dragoon 's responsive controls , coupled with the hectic action and handsome graphics , made the game highly desirable for owners of the Genesis console . The Lessers of Dragon magazine were equally impressed with the gameplay , praising Alisia Dragoon for its " solid arcade action " that satisfied their " need for fast reflexes " . Mean Machines 's Julian Rignall praised the game for its pet monsters design , calling the management of the pets in the game an encouragement toward tactics . His fellow reviewer , Richard Leadbetter , wrote the game was visually attractive with " beautiful sprites " and " amazing backdrops " . He found the gameplay challenging , being forced to conserve energy as the game " [ threw ] everything but the kitchen sink at [ him ] " . Rignall agreed with Leadbetter on the game 's difficulty , which along with the secret rooms and power @-@ ups to be discovered made Alisia Dragoon an excellent action platform game that had long @-@ lasting appeal . Of the hundreds of Genesis games , Mega magazine rated Alisia Dragoon among the top 100 games , calling it " [ probably ] the best dragon @-@ based platform game around . " Despite the positive sentiments , sales of the game outside Japan were weak . 
 Sixteen years after the game 's release , Todd Ciolek of Anime News Network reviewed Alisia Dragoon and repeated much of the same sentiments as the Mean Machines reviewers . Noting Gainax 's catalog of games , he noted that Alisia Dragoon was very different from the rest ; instead of targeting hardcore fans of anime and focusing on exploitive themes , the game 's appeal was for everyone . In light of this , Ciolek called Alisia Dragoon " the best video game Gainax ever touched " and " a spectacular ride in its own right " . 
 Alisia Dragoon has been recognized retrospectively as a relatively early video game to challenge a gender bias prevalent in the industry at the time . In the early 1990s , the video game market was skewed toward the young male demographic , and games often portrayed women as " damsels in distress " , submissive and requiring rescue by the male protagonists . Along with contemporary games like Streets of Rage or Wurm : Journey to the Center of the Earth , Alisia Dragoon featured a female leading character who can defend herself without the help of a male hero . 
 = Maurice ( Shelley ) = 
 " Maurice , or the Fisher 's Cot " is a children 's story by the Romantic writer Mary Shelley . Written in 1820 for Laurette Tighe , a daughter of friends of Percy and Mary Shelley , Mary Shelley tried to have it published by her father , William Godwin , but he refused . The text was lost until 1997 , when a manuscript copy was discovered in Italy . 
 " Maurice " tells the story of a boy searching for a home and his encounters with a traveller who turns out to be his long @-@ lost father . The story is narrated in a melancholy tone from several points of view and focuses on the theme of loss , particularly the separation of parents and children . Shelley explored this partly autobiographical theme in other works written at the same time , including her novel Mathilda and her play Proserpine . The story 's straightforward language reflects that of the Romantic poet William Wordsworth , whose works Shelley was reading while she composed " Maurice " . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1814 , the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Mary Shelley ( Mary Godwin , at the time ) ran off with Percy Bysshe Shelley to continental Europe , accompanied by Claire Clairmont , Mary 's stepsister . After six weeks of travelling , they returned to England but continued to live together . Mary returned pregnant with Percy 's child , but their infant daughter died soon after her premature birth . Percy was alienated from his family and received little financial support from them ; he was therefore harassed by creditors . In 1816 , Mary and Percy had a second child , William . The same year , Claire Clairmont began an affair with the poet Lord Byron , and in January 1817 she had a daughter by him , Allegra . The group spent the summer of 1817 with Byron at Lake Geneva , where Mary Shelley wrote Frankenstein . That fall , Percy 's wife , Harriet , committed suicide , and in December Percy and Mary were married . In September 1817 , Mary and Percy had another child , Clara . 
 The group traveled to Italy in early 1818 . They first surrendered Allegra to Byron in April , much to Claire 's distress . In August , Percy Shelley took Claire to see Allegra , at her request . Percy arrived in Venice , telling Byron he had the entire family . Mary was thus summoned to Venice to substantiate Percy 's story . However , baby Clara Shelley was sick and traveling made her even more ill . She died shortly after arriving in Venice . In the winter of 1818 , Percy registered a child in Naples to himself and Mary : Elena Adelaide . However , it is unclear who this child 's parents really were . 
 In 1819 , the group moved to Rome , where Mary and Percy Shelley 's son William died . Mary Shelley had now lost all three of her children and was very depressed . Claire became increasingly concerned about Allegra , as Byron refused to allow her to see their daughter or reveal where she was . Mary , however , became pregnant again , with Percy Florence , and the group traveled from Rome to Pisa and Florence . En route , they became friends with a couple who helped and inspired them : Lady Mountcashell , who as Margaret King had been an eager pupil of Mary Shelley 's mother , Mary Wollstonecraft ; and George William Tighe , the agricultural theorist for whom she had left her husband and children . Both were poets and , like the Shelleys , were republicans and freethinkers . Lady Mountcashell referred to herself as " Mrs. Mason " after a character from Wollstonecraft 's own children 's story Original Stories from Real Life ( 1788 ) . The couple had two children , Anna Laura Georgiana ( called Laurette ) and Nerina , who quickly became attached to Mary and Claire . 
 After traveling to Florence , Mary Shelley wrote to Lady Mountcashell , praising Laurette 's " simplicity and frankness " . By way of her mother , Laurette inquired after Mary 's health and requested her presence . Mary Shelley invited Laurette to stay with her in Florence two months after the birth of Percy Florence , but the girl 's mother could not bear to part with her . In early 1820 , the group moved to Pisa and Claire became like an elder sister to Laurette , taking her to operas and the Carnival . In the summer , the group moved again , from Pisa to Livorno , and Mary Shelley began researching her historical novel Valperga . Throughout the summer , Claire wrote anxiously to Byron , begging to see Allegra . Believing that the Shelleys were careless parents who were responsible for the deaths of their children and concerned that the children were not receiving proper religious training , he consistently refused to let Claire see their daughter . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 Mary Shelley wrote " Maurice " for Laurette Tighe on 10 August 1820 . Shelley 's journal for that day notes : " Thursday 10 — Write a story for Laurette — Walk on the mountain — Le <unk> delle Fate [ fairy grottoes or caves ] — The weather is warm & delightful " . Claire Clairmont and Laurette had spent Laurette 's birthday together in Pisa and the following day on the coast with Mary Shelley ; this excursion may have inspired the story , which may have been a birthday present . Shelley suggested that her father , philosopher William Godwin , publish Maurice as part of his Juvenile Library , but he refused . He may have thought it was too short or that it too closely resembled a story by Caroline Barnard entitled The Fisher @-@ boy of Weymouth that he had just published in 1819 . In his article on " Maurice " , L. Adam Mekler suggests that Godwin may also have rejected the story because of the " strong biographical parallels " with the history of the Shelleys and the Godwins . 
 The manuscript was lost until Cristina <unk> discovered it in the summer of 1997 in the home of the <unk> family , Casa Cini , in San Marcello <unk> . She was looking through a box of old papers , searching for " something interesting " to add to an exhibit about the winter of 1827 – 28 when the poet Giacomo Leopardi had visited and met Lady Mountcashell and her daughter . Excerpts were first published in an Italian book about Lady Mountcashell by Mario <unk> in 1997 . One year later , Percy Shelley and Mary Wollstonecraft biographer Claire Tomalin published the entire story , along with a lengthy introduction and a typescript of the manuscript . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 In " Part I " , a traveller arrives in Torquay , Devonshire . He sees a funeral procession passing by and notices a beautiful , distressed young boy taking part . The traveller goes to a local inn , where a countryman tells the story of Maurice and the late @-@ dead Old Barnet . Old Barnet was a fisherman married to Dame Barnet . She had died a little over a year ago and Old Barnet was distraught ; he had no wife to come home to . One day , Maurice showed up and volunteered to help him out around the house while he was out fishing . Poor and sickly , Maurice could not perform difficult tasks , but he was diligent . Old Barnet grew to love Maurice , as did the villagers . 
 " Part II " opens with Old Barnet 's brother informing Maurice that he must leave the cottage after one week . Maurice spends his days mourning the fisherman . One day the traveller returns to the village and seeks out Maurice ; he stops at the cottage and asks to stay the night . He and Maurice talk and Maurice tells of his plans to leave the cottage and find work on a farm . He also tells the traveller of his poor family and how he does not want to be a bother to them , revealing that his father used to beat him because he did not believe Maurice was really ill . The traveller and Maurice sit together , enjoying nature , and discuss the pleasures of country life and reading . The traveller offers to care for Maurice and to educate him . 
 The traveller explains in " Part III " how he is the son of an Oxford mathematics professor . When young , he loved to read outdoors and wanted to know how the world worked . He became an architect and travelled throughout Europe . Eventually he married a lovely woman with whom he had a son , Henry . One day the couple left their son with his nurse during an outing and she fell asleep . When they returned , their son was gone , and he could not be found . The traveller spent years searching the countryside for his son ; one day he met the woman , Dame Smithson , who had stolen his son . To please her sailor husband who wanted a child , she lied to him and said she was pregnant . Before his return , she needed a child , so she stole the traveller 's . Unused to the harsh life of a peasant , the child suffered and became sickly . As a result , the woman 's husband disliked him and beat him , believing him to be worthless . Hearing this story , Maurice reveals himself to be the traveller 's son ; he had changed his name to avoid the person he believed to be his cruel father . Overjoyed to be reunited with his son , the traveller buys the cottage for him and they return every once in a while . Maurice is educated , grows up , and travels widely . He returns to see that the cottage has disintegrated ; he builds a new one for another poor fisherman 's family , beside the lot of the old one . 
 = = Style , genre , and themes = = 
 Maurice is divided into three parts , perhaps reflecting the trend for triple @-@ decker novels for adults at the time , and contains multiple narrators . It is written in a melancholy tone , beginning with a funeral and finishing with the decay of the cottage . However , in her review of the Tomalin edition in the New York Times , Marina Warner writes that the story " contains little of the seething originality , moral complexity or sinister Gothic <unk> of Frankenstein " . 
 Mary Shelley was reading the poetry of William Wordsworth while she wrote Maurice . Tomalin has argued that " Wordsworth does seem to preside over Maurice , with its clear , straightforward language , and its setting among simple people and poor labourers , and against elemental backgrounds of rocks and trees , cliffs and seashore " . 
 Maurice 's natural goodness never wavers in the story . Unlike Shelley 's Frankenstein , which suggests that environment determines a person 's morality , Maurice assumes that people can be innately good . Maurice even forgives Dame Smithson , who stole him from his nurse . The story aims to generate sympathy in its readers . In contrast with other children 's stories of its day , it lacks didacticism and draws no clear distinctions between virtue and vice . 
 Despite the appeal to sympathy , loss is the predominant theme of Maurice : parents lose their child ; a mother yearns for a child to the point that she steals one ; and " Maurice " loses his sense of identity . The overarching themes of the story are Romantic , according to Tomalin : " the vulnerability of childhood , and of parenthood ; displacement , loss , pain , death and rehabilitation ; delight in the natural world ; and the power of time both to heal and to destroy " . 
 The loss of children , in particular , may have had autobiographical and biographical resonances . Lady Mountcashell had separated from her husband and been forced to give up her children . A court had ruled Percy Bysshe Shelley unfit to raise the children from his marriage to his deceased first wife and placed them in the care of a court @-@ appointed guardian . A third reference may be to the death of three of Mary and Percy 's children . Literary critic A. A. Markley points out that Shelley wrote other works at this time that engaged with the issue of child @-@ parent separation , most notably her novel Mathilda and the children 's drama Proserpine , both of which she worked on in 1820 . Markley explains that Maurice is a reworking of Mathilda , " in which a long deferred reunion of father and child is orchestrated with happy rather than tragic results " . This theme is also explored in Mary Shelley 's short stories " The Mourner " , " The Evil Eye " , and " The Pilgrims " , as well as her novel Lodore ( 1835 ) . 
 Mekler argues that the story may be a veiled criticism of Mary Shelley 's stepmother , Mary Jane Clairmont . Dame Smithson lies to her husband regarding her children , a possible allusion to the origins of Mary Jane Clairmont 's own first two children and to her " propensity for falsehood " . ( Clairmont represented herself as a widow , with legitimate children , which was not the case . ) Mekler speculates that " in her theft of the first @-@ born son , Dame Smithson replicates in metaphorical fashion Mary Jane 's usurpation of the role as mother of the male heir that had originally belonged to Mary Wollstonecraft " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to Miranda Seymour , author of a biography of Mary Shelley , while the story itself was " no great work ... the public responded to the discovery with an interest not shown , for example , towards recently found letters of [ Percy ] Shelley and Byron " . She explained this occurred because Mary Shelley is now considered a significant Romantic writer , her works have become increasingly accessible to the public , and her authorship of Frankenstein is often mentioned in the popular press . 
 = Concurrent use registration = 
 A concurrent use registration , in United States trademark law , is a federal trademark registration of the same trademark to two or more unrelated parties , with each party having a registration limited to a distinct geographic area . Such a registration is achieved by filing a concurrent use application ( or by converting an existing application to a concurrent use application ) and then prevailing in a concurrent use proceeding before the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board ( " TTAB " ) , which is a judicial body within the United States Patent and Trademark Office ( " USPTO " ) . A concurrent use application may be filed with respect to a trademark which is already registered or otherwise in use by another party , but may be allowed to go forward based on the assertion that the existing use can co @-@ exist with the new registration without causing consumer confusion . 
 The authority for this type of registration is set forth in the Lanham Act , which permits concurrent use registration where the concurrent use applicant made a good @-@ faith adoption of the mark prior to the registrant filing an application for registration . Such registrations are most commonly achieved by agreement of the parties involved , although the USPTO must still determine that no confusion will be caused . 
 = = Statutory basis = = 
 The authority of the USPTO to issue a concurrent use registration is set forth in the Lanham Act , section 2 ( d ) , enacted in 1947 and coded at 15 U.S.C. § 1052 , which states in relevant part : 
 Through these provisions , the Act effectively places three requirements on marks for which a later applicant seeks a concurrent use registration : 
 1 ) the later applicant must have used the mark in commerce prior to the time that the earlier registrant filed its application for registration , unless the senior registrant consents to the junior user 's registration ; 
 2 ) the later applicant 's use in commerce must have been lawful 
 3 ) concurrent use of the marks may not result in a likelihood of confusion . 
 The statute essentially codifies the Tea Rose @-@ <unk> doctrine , established by the United States Supreme Court in two cases decided in 1916 and 1918 . The Court had established in those cases that a junior user of a mark that is geographically remote from the senior user of the mark may establish priority over a senior user 's claim to the mark in the junior user 's area . 
 Any party may voluntarily limit the geographic scope of its application while conceding the rights of another party to a different geographic territory . A concurrent use application may not be filed based on a party 's intent to use a mark , but must rely on actual use in commerce . The concurrent use application must identify all other parties who are entitled to use the mark , and provide the names and addresses of the parties identified . Instead of making the usual assertion that no other party has the right to use the mark , the applicant must assert that no other party " except as specified in the application " has such a right . 
 Where two or more geographically unrestricted applications are pending at the same time , and no registration has yet been issued , the USPTO will proceed with the earliest application , and put all later applications on hold pending a determination on the earliest . 
 = = = Use in commerce prior to an adverse filing for registration = = = 
 By the terms of the Act , the critical dates with respect to concurrent registration are the date of the applicant ’ s first use and the earliest filing date of any other registrant . In other words , as the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board Manual of Procedure ( " <unk> " ) states , " an application seeking concurrent registration through a concurrent use proceeding normally must assert a date of first use in commerce prior to the earliest application filing date of the application ( s ) ... involved in the proceeding . " 
 The Lanham Act requires that an Applicant ’ s use in commerce must have been lawful . The TTAB ( and its predecessor , the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals ( " <unk> " ) ) has read this to mean that the applicant 's use must not have infringed another party 's use at the time that applicant adopted its mark . Therefore , one potential pitfall facing applicant is that " [ g ] <unk> , concurrent rights arise when a party , in good faith , and without knowledge of a prior party ’ s use in another geographic area , adopts and uses the same or similar mark for the same or similar goods or services within its own geographic area . " 
 The mere fact that an applicant 's use was geographically remote from a registrant or other <unk> ’ s use does not establish good faith , as " courts have generally held that the remote use defense ... is unavailable where the junior user adopts a substantially identical mark in a remote geographic area with full knowledge of the senior user ’ s prior use elsewhere . " However , the TTAB has also previously held that " mere knowledge of the existence of the prior user should not , by itself , constitute bad faith . " 
 = = = <unk> of confusion = = = 
 The factors under which the TTAB evaluates the likelihood of confusion were established in In re E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Co . , and are commonly referred to as the " du Pont factors " . 
 The thirteen du Pont factors are : 
 ( 1 ) The similarity or dissimilarity of the marks in their entireties as to appearance , sound , connotation and commercial impression . 
 ( 2 ) The similarity or dissimilarity and nature of the goods or services as described in an application or registration or in connection with which a prior mark is in use . 
 ( 3 ) The similarity or dissimilarity of established , likely @-@ to @-@ continue trade channels . 
 ( 4 ) The conditions under which and buyers to whom sales are made , i.e. " impulse " vs. careful , sophisticated purchasing . 
 ( 5 ) The fame of the prior mark ( sales , advertising , length of use ) . 
 ( 6 ) The number and nature of similar marks in use on similar goods . 
 ( 7 ) The nature and extent of any actual confusion . 
 ( 8 ) The length of time during and conditions under which there has been concurrent use without evidence of actual confusion . 
 ( 9 ) The variety of goods on which a mark is or is not used ( house mark , " family " mark , product mark ) . 
 ( 10 ) The market interface between applicant and the owner of a prior mark : 
 ( a ) a mere " consent " to register or use . 
 ( b ) agreement provisions designed to preclude confusion , i.e. limitations on continued use of the marks by each party . 
 ( c ) assignment of mark , application , registration and good will of the related business . 
 ( d ) laches and estoppel attributable to owner of prior mark and indicative of lack of confusion . 
 ( 11 ) The extent to which applicant has a right to exclude others from use of its mark on its goods . 
 ( 12 ) The extent of potential confusion , i.e. , whether de minimis or substantial . 
 ( 13 ) Any other established fact probative of the effect of use . 
 In many instances , only a few of the categories will be applicable to the facts of the case before the TTAB . 
 = = Procedure to acquire = = 
 The procedures to acquire such a registration are set forth in the <unk> Chapter 1100 . They are initiated when a concurrent use application is submitted to the USPTO , which will initiate a concurrent use proceeding to determine if the applicant is entitled to such registration . An existing application that has been denied registration because of a conflict with an existing mark may be converted into a concurrent use application against that existing mark . In either case , the applicant must assert that its mark was used in commerce before the owner of the existing registration , called the " senior registrant " , had filed its own application for registration . The applicant must also demonstrate that the marks can both be used in their specific geographic areas without causing a likelihood of confusion . 
 The USPTO will contact the senior registrant to inform that party of the claim against their mark . The proceeding in which the respective rights of the parties are determined is like a trial in which the applicant must submit evidence showing that the applicant had adopted the mark in good faith , that the applicant had adopted the mark prior to the senior registrant 's date of registration , and that the confusion is not likely . The senior registrant may present evidence to the contrary , in order to prevent the loss of control over the use of the registered mark in the applicant 's claimed territory . Both parties may take discovery in the form of requests for admission , <unk> , requests for production , and depositions . As with a regular trial , the TTAB may be called upon to resolve disputes over whether discovery requests are overbroad , and whether discovery responses are inadequate . 
 The senior registrant in such a proceeding has ample incentive to oppose the grant of a concurrent use registration , because a registered trademark is presumed to apply throughout the entire United States . Thus , the grant of a concurrent use registration carves out some geographic territory from the senior registrant 's exclusive control . 
 As 15 U.S.C. § 1052 ( d ) indicates , a concurrent use registration may also be issued " when a court of competent jurisdiction has finally determined that more than one person is entitled to use the same or similar marks in commerce . " As a matter of right , the TTAB will issue such a registration pursuant to a court order that an applicant has the right to use its mark in certain geographic area . Where a court has issued such an order , a concurrent use proceeding is not needed , as evidence has already been taken in the court proceeding , and the rights of the parties have already been determined . 
 Most concurrent use proceedings result in a legal settlement between the parties . Frequently , one party will surrender its concurrent use claim and instead receive a trademark license from the other party . In other situations , each party may agree to geographic limitations on its use of the mark at issue , which the TTAB will honor if the settlement stipulates to facts which show that no confusion is likely . A benefit of such an agreement is that the parties can agree to terms beyond the scope of the TTAB 's decision , such as specific restrictions on time and place of advertising , or modifications to the appearance of either mark . However , irrespective of the agreement reached , the TTAB must still make an independent finding that no consumer confusion is likely to result from the concurrent use registration . Even if both parties assert that no confusion is likely , the TTAB may still make findings of fact which demonstrate that confusion is likely , and deny registration to the junior user of the mark . 
 A pivotal factor in assessing the likelihood of confusion in such a circumstance " is whether the parties whose marks are in question have agreed , in some form , to memorialize methods of avoiding confusion . " In that case , the court held that such an agreement " is viewed in light of the parties ’ interests and the prevailing marketplace " , further stating : 
 Furthermore , the issuance of concurrent use registrations need not prevent either party from engaging in advertising or other activities which might result in the incidental publication of one registrant ’ s mark in the territory of the other registrant . In the Amalgamated Bank case , the Federal Circuit found acceptable a term in the agreement that " nothing in this agreement will preclude Amalgamated New York from conducting advertising which might enter in the State of Illinois or from dealing with customers who happen to be located in the State of Illinois . " Courts have similarly held that a concurrent use registration does not curtail either party from advertising over the Internet , particularly where the junior user includes a disclaimer of some form on their website . 
