 = = = Pongamia <unk> in Australia and India = = = 
 Pongamia pinnata is a legume native to Australia , India , Florida ( USA ) and most tropical regions , and is now being invested in as an alternative to Jatropha for areas such as Northern Australia , where Jatropha is classed as a noxious weed . Commonly known as simply ' Pongamia ' , this tree is currently being commercialised in Australia by Pacific Renewable Energy , for use as a Diesel replacement for running in modified Diesel engines or for conversion to Biodiesel using 1st or 2nd Generation Biodiesel techniques , for running in unmodified Diesel engines . 
 = = = Sweet sorghum in India = = = 
 Sweet sorghum overcomes many of the shortcomings of other biofuel crops . With sweet sorghum , only the stalks are used for biofuel production , while the grain is saved for food or livestock feed . It is not in high demand in the global food market , and thus has little impact on food prices and food security . Sweet sorghum is grown on already @-@ farmed <unk> that are low in carbon storage capacity , so concerns about the clearing of rainforest do not apply . Sweet sorghum is easier and cheaper to grow than other biofuel crops in India and does not require irrigation , an important consideration in dry areas . Some of the Indian sweet sorghum varieties are now grown in Uganda for ethanol production . 
 A study by researchers at the International Crops Research Institute for the Semi @-@ Arid Tropics ( ICRISAT ) found that growing sweet sorghum instead of grain sorghum could increase farmers incomes by US $ 40 per hectare per crop because it can provide food , feed and fuel . With grain sorghum currently grown on over 11 million hectares ( ha ) in Asia and on 23 @.@ 4 million ha in Africa , a switch to sweet sorghum could have a considerable economic impact . 
 = = International collaboration on sustainable biofuels = = 
 = = = Roundtable on Sustainable Biofuels = = = 
 Public attitudes and the actions of key stakeholders can play a crucial role in realising the potential of sustainable biofuels . Informed discussion and dialogue , based both on scientific research and an understanding of public and stakeholder views , is important . 
 The Roundtable on Sustainable Biofuels is an international initiative which brings together farmers , companies , governments , non @-@ governmental organizations , and scientists who are interested in the sustainability of biofuels production and distribution . During 2008 , the Roundtable used meetings , teleconferences , and online discussions to develop a series of principles and criteria for sustainable biofuels production . 
 In 2008 , the Roundtable for Sustainable Biofuels released its proposed standards for sustainable biofuels . This includes 12 principles : 
 " Biofuel production shall follow international treaties and national laws regarding such things as air quality , water resources , agricultural practices , labor conditions , and more . 
 Biofuels projects shall be designed and operated in participatory processes that involve all relevant stakeholders in planning and monitoring . 
 Biofuels shall significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions as compared to fossil fuels . The principle seeks to establish a standard methodology for comparing greenhouse gases ( GHG ) benefits . 
 Biofuel production shall not violate human rights or labor rights , and shall ensure decent work and the well @-@ being of workers . 
 Biofuel production shall contribute to the social and economic development of local , rural and indigenous peoples and communities . 
 Biofuel production shall not impair food security . 
 Biofuel production shall avoid negative impacts on biodiversity , ecosystems and areas of high conservation value . 
 Biofuel production shall promote practices that improve soil health and minimize degradation . 
 Surface and groundwater use will be optimized and contamination or depletion of water resources minimized . 
 Air pollution shall be minimized along the supply chain . 
 Biofuels shall be produced in the most cost @-@ effective way , with a commitment to improve production efficiency and social and environmental performance in all stages of the biofuel value chain . 
 Biofuel production shall not violate land rights " . 
 In April 2011 , the Roundtable on Sustainable Biofuels launched a set of comprehensive sustainability criteria - the “ <unk> Certification System . ” Biofuels producers that meet to these criteria are able to show buyers and regulators that their product has been obtained without harming the environment or violating human rights . 
 = = = Sustainable Biofuels Consensus = = = 
 The Sustainable Biofuels Consensus is an international initiative which calls upon governments , the private sector , and other stakeholders to take decisive action to ensure the sustainable trade , production , and use of biofuels . In this way biofuels may play a key role in energy sector transformation , climate stabilization , and resulting worldwide revitalisation of rural areas . 
 The Sustainable Biofuels Consensus envisions a " landscape that provides food , fodder , fiber , and energy , which offers opportunities for rural development ; that <unk> energy supply , restores ecosystems , protects biodiversity , and sequesters carbon " . 
 = = = Better Sugarcane Initiative / Bonsucro = = = 
 In 2008 , a multi @-@ stakeholder process was initiated by the World Wildlife Fund and the International Finance Corporation , the private development arm of the World Bank , bringing together industry , supply chain intermediaries , end @-@ users , farmers and civil society organisations to develop standards for certifying the derivative products of sugar cane , one of which is ethanol fuel . 
 The Bonsucro standard is based around a definition of sustainability which is founded on five principles : 
 Obey the law 
 Respect human rights and labour standards 
 Manage input , production and processing efficiencies to enhance sustainability 
 Actively manage biodiversity and ecosystem services 
 Continuously improve key areas of the business 
 Biofuel producers that wish to sell products marked with the Bonsucro standard must both ensure that they product to the Production Standard , and that their downstream buyers meet the Chain of Custody Standard . In addition , if they wish to sell to the European market and count against the EU Renewable Energy Directive , then they must adhere to the Bonsucro EU standard , which includes specific greenhouse gas calculations following European Commission calculation guidelines . 
 = = Sustainability standards = = 
 Several countries and regions have introduced policies or adopted standards to promote sustainable biofuels production and use , most prominently the European Union and the United States . The 2009 EU Renewable Energy Directive , which requires 10 percent of transportation energy from renewable energy by 2020 , is the most comprehensive mandatory sustainability standard in place as of 2010 . The Directive requires that the lifecycle greenhouse gas emissions of biofuels consumed be at least 50 percent less than the equivalent emissions from gasoline or diesel by 2017 ( and 35 percent less starting in 2011 ) . Also , the feedstocks for biofuels " should not be harvested from lands with high biodiversity value , from carbon @-@ rich or forested land , or from wetlands " . 
 As with the EU , the U.S. Renewable Fuel Standard ( RFS ) and the California Low Carbon Fuel Standard ( LCFS ) both require specific levels of lifecycle greenhouse gas reductions compared to equivalent fossil fuel consumption . The RFS requires that at least half of the biofuels production mandated by 2022 should reduce lifecycle emissions by 50 percent . The LCFS is a performance standard that calls for a minimum of 10 percent emissions reduction per unit of transport energy by 2020 . Both the U.S. and California standards currently address only greenhouse gas emissions , but California plans to " expand its policy to address other sustainability issues associated with liquid biofuels in the future " . 
 In 2009 , Brazil also adopted new sustainability policies for sugarcane ethanol , including " zoning regulation of sugarcane expansion and social protocols " . 
 = = Oil price moderation = = 
 Biofuels offer the prospect of real market competition and oil price moderation . According to the Wall Street Journal , crude oil would be trading 15 per cent higher and gasoline would be as much as 25 per cent more expensive , if it were not for biofuels . A healthy supply of alternative energy sources will help to combat gasoline price spikes . 
 = = Sustainable transport = = 
 Biofuels have a limited ability to replace fossil fuels and should not be regarded as a ‘ silver bullet ’ to deal with transport emissions . Biofuels on their own cannot deliver a sustainable transport system and so must be developed as part of an integrated approach , which promotes other renewable energy options and energy efficiency , as well as reducing the overall energy demand and need for transport . Consideration needs to be given to the development of hybrid and fuel cell vehicles , public transport , and better town and rural planning . 
 In December 2008 an Air New Zealand jet completed the world 's first commercial aviation test flight partially using jatropha @-@ based fuel . More than a dozen performance tests were undertaken in the two @-@ hour test flight which departed from Auckland International Airport . A biofuel blend of 50 : 50 jatropha and Jet A1 fuel was used to power one of the Boeing 747 @-@ 400 's Rolls @-@ Royce RB211 engines . Air New Zealand set several criteria for its jatropha , requiring that " the land it came from was neither forest nor virgin grassland in the previous 20 years , that the soil and climate it came from is not suitable for the majority of food crops and that the farms are rain fed and not mechanically irrigated " . The company has also set general sustainability criteria , saying that such biofuels must not compete with food resources , that they must be as good as traditional jet fuels , and that they should be cost competitive . 
 In January 2009 , Continental Airlines used a sustainable biofuel to power a commercial aircraft for the first time in North America . This demonstration flight marks the first sustainable biofuel demonstration flight by a commercial carrier using a twin @-@ engined aircraft , a Boeing 737 @-@ 800 , powered by CFM International CFM56 @-@ 7B engines . The biofuel blend included components derived from algae and jatropha plants . The algae oil was provided by Sapphire Energy , and the jatropha oil by <unk> Energy . 
 In March 2011 , Yale University research showed significant potential for sustainable aviation fuel based on jatropha @-@ curcas . According to the research , if cultivated properly , " jatropha can deliver many benefits in Latin America and greenhouse gas reductions of up to 60 percent when compared to petroleum @-@ based jet fuel " . Actual farming conditions in Latin America were assessed using sustainability criteria developed by the Roundtable on Sustainable Biofuels . Unlike previous research , which used theoretical inputs , the Yale team conducted many interviews with jatropha farmers and used " field measurements to develop the first comprehensive sustainability analysis of actual projects " . 
 As of June 2011 , revised international aviation fuel standards officially allow commercial airlines to blend conventional jet fuel with up to 50 percent biofuels . The renewable fuels " can be blended with conventional commercial and military jet fuel through requirements in the newly issued edition of ASTM <unk> , Specification for Aviation Turbine Fuel Containing Synthesized Hydrocarbons " . 
 In December 2011 , the FAA awarded $ 7 @.@ 7 million to eight companies to advance the development of commercial aviation biofuels , with a special focus on alcohol to jet fuel . The FAA is assisting in the development of a sustainable fuel ( from alcohols , sugars , biomass , and organic matter such as pyrolysis oils ) that can be “ dropped in ” to aircraft without changing current practices and infrastructure . The research will test how the new fuels affect engine durability and quality control standards . 
 <unk> London , a biofuels plant under construction in 2014 , will take in some 500 @,@ 000 tonnes of municipal rubbish and change the organic component into 60 @,@ 000 tonnes of jet fuel , and 40 megawatts of power . By the end of 2015 , all British Airways flights from London City Airport will be fuelled by waste and rubbish discarded by London residents . 
 = Osmium = 
 Osmium ( from Greek <unk> osme , " smell " ) is a chemical element with symbol Os and atomic number 76 . It is a hard , brittle , bluish @-@ white transition metal in the platinum group that is found as a trace element in alloys , mostly in platinum ores . Osmium is the densest naturally occurring element , with a density of 22 @.@ 59 g / cm3 . Its alloys with platinum , iridium , and other platinum @-@ group metals are employed in fountain pen nibs , electrical contacts , and other applications where extreme durability and hardness are needed . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 Osmium has a blue @-@ gray tint and is the densest stable element , slightly denser than iridium . Calculations of density from the X @-@ ray diffraction data may produce the most reliable data for these elements , giving a value of 22 @.@ 562 ± 0 @.@ 009 g / cm3 for iridium versus 22 @.@ 587 ± 0 @.@ 009 g / cm3 for osmium . 
 Osmium is a hard but brittle metal that remains lustrous even at high temperatures . It has a very low compressibility . Correspondingly , its bulk modulus is extremely high , reported between 395 and 462 GPa , which rivals that of diamond ( 443 GPa ) . The hardness of osmium is moderately high at 4 GPa . Because of its hardness , brittleness , low vapor pressure ( the lowest of the platinum @-@ group metals ) , and very high melting point ( the fourth highest of all elements ) , solid osmium is difficult to machine , form , or work . 
 = = = Chemical properties = = = 
 Osmium forms compounds with oxidation states ranging from − 2 to + 8 . The most common oxidation states are + 2 , + 3 , + 4 , and + 8 . The + 8 oxidation state is notable for being the highest attained by any chemical element aside from iridium 's + 9 and is encountered only in xenon , ruthenium , hassium , iridium , plutonium , and curium ( uncertain ) . The oxidation states − 1 and − 2 represented by the two reactive compounds Na 
 2 [ Os 
 4 ( CO ) 
 13 ] and Na 
 2 [ Os ( CO ) 
 4 ] are used in the synthesis of osmium cluster compounds . 
 The most common compound exhibiting the + 8 oxidation state is osmium tetroxide . This toxic compound is formed when powdered osmium is exposed to air . It is a very volatile , water @-@ soluble , pale yellow , crystalline solid with a strong smell . Osmium powder has the characteristic smell of osmium tetroxide . Osmium tetroxide forms red osmates OsO 
 4 ( OH ) 2 − 
 2 upon reaction with a base . With ammonia , it forms the <unk> @-@ osmates OsO 
 3N − . Osmium tetroxide boils at 130 ° C and is a powerful oxidizing agent . By contrast , osmium dioxide ( <unk> ) is black , non @-@ volatile , and much less reactive and toxic . 
 Only two osmium compounds have major applications : osmium tetroxide for staining tissue in electron microscopy and for the oxidation of alkenes in organic synthesis , and the non @-@ volatile osmates for organic oxidation reactions . 
 Osmium pentafluoride ( <unk> ) is known , but osmium trifluoride ( <unk> ) has not yet been synthesized . The lower oxidation states are stabilized by the larger halogens , so that the trichloride , tribromide , triiodide , and even diiodide are known . The oxidation state + 1 is known only for osmium iodide ( <unk> ) , whereas several carbonyl complexes of osmium , such as <unk> dodecacarbonyl ( Os 
 3 ( CO ) 
 12 ) , represent oxidation state 0 . 
 In general , the lower oxidation states of osmium are stabilized by ligands that are good σ @-@ donors ( such as amines ) and π @-@ acceptors ( <unk> containing nitrogen ) . The higher oxidation states are stabilized by strong <unk> and π @-@ donors , such as O2 − and N3 − . 
 Despite its broad range of compounds in numerous oxidation states , osmium in bulk form at ordinary temperatures and pressures resists attack by all acids and alkalis , including aqua regia . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 Osmium has seven naturally occurring isotopes , six of which are stable : <unk> , 187Os , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and ( most abundant ) <unk> . <unk> undergoes alpha decay with such a long half @-@ life ( ( 2 @.@ 0 ± 1 @.@ 1 ) × 1015 years ) that for practical purposes it can be considered stable . Alpha decay is predicted for all seven naturally occurring isotopes , but it has been observed only for <unk> , presumably due to very long half @-@ lives . It is predicted that <unk> and <unk> can undergo double beta decay but this radioactivity has not been observed yet . 
 187Os is the daughter of 187Re ( half @-@ life 4 @.@ 56 × 1010 years ) and is used extensively in dating terrestrial as well as meteoric rocks ( see rhenium @-@ osmium dating ) . It has also been used to measure the intensity of continental weathering over geologic time and to fix minimum ages for stabilization of the mantle roots of continental cratons . This decay is a reason why rhenium @-@ rich minerals are abnormally rich in 187Os . However , the most notable application of Os isotopes in geology has been in conjunction with the abundance of iridium , to characterise the layer of shocked quartz along the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary that marks the extinction of the dinosaurs 66 million years ago . 
 = = History = = 
 Osmium was discovered in 1803 by Smithson Tennant and William Hyde Wollaston in London , England . The discovery of osmium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group . Platinum reached Europe as platina ( " small silver " ) , first encountered in the late 17th century in silver mines around the Chocó Department , in Colombia . The discovery that this metal was not an alloy , but a distinct new element , was published in 1748 . Chemists who studied platinum dissolved it in aqua regia ( a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids ) to create soluble salts . They always observed a small amount of a dark , insoluble residue . Joseph Louis Proust thought that the residue was graphite . Victor Collet @-@ Descotils , Antoine François , comte de Fourcroy , and Louis Nicolas Vauquelin also observed the black residue in 1803 , but did not obtain enough material for further experiments . 
 In 1803 , Smithson Tennant analyzed the insoluble residue and concluded that it must contain a new metal . Vauquelin treated the powder alternately with alkali and acids and obtained a volatile new oxide , which he believed to be of this new metal — which he named <unk> , from the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) for winged . However , Tennant , who had the advantage of a much larger amount of residue , continued his research and identified two previously undiscovered elements in the black residue , iridium and osmium . He obtained a yellow solution ( probably of cis – [ Os ( OH ) <unk> ] 2 − ) by reactions with sodium hydroxide at red heat . After acidification he was able to distill the formed OsO4 . He named it osmium after Greek osme meaning " a smell " , because of the ashy and smoky smell of the volatile osmium tetroxide . Discovery of the new elements was documented in a letter to the Royal Society on June 21 , 1804 . 
 Uranium and osmium were early successful catalysts in the Haber process , the nitrogen fixation reaction of nitrogen and hydrogen to produce ammonia , giving enough yield to make the process economically successful . At the time , a group at BASF led by Carl Bosch bought most of the world 's supply of osmium to use as a catalyst . Shortly thereafter , in 1908 , cheaper catalysts based on iron and iron oxides were introduced by the same group for the first pilot plants , removing the need for the expensive and rare osmium . 
 Nowadays osmium is obtained primarily from the processing of platinum and nickel ores . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Osmium is the least abundant stable element in Earth 's crust with an average mass fraction of 50 parts per trillion in the continental crust . 
 Osmium is found in nature as an uncombined element or in natural alloys ; especially the iridium – osmium alloys , osmiridium ( osmium rich ) , and <unk> ( iridium rich ) . In nickel and copper deposits , the platinum group metals occur as sulfides ( i.e. , ( Pt , Pd ) S ) ) , tellurides ( e.g. , PtBiTe ) , antimonides ( e.g. , PdSb ) , and arsenides ( e.g. , PtAs2 ) ; in all these compounds platinum is exchanged by a small amount of iridium and osmium . As with all of the platinum group metals , osmium can be found naturally in alloys with nickel or copper . 
 Within Earth 's crust , osmium , like iridium , is found at highest concentrations in three types of geologic structure : igneous deposits ( crustal intrusions from below ) , impact craters , and deposits reworked from one of the former structures . The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld igneous complex in South Africa , though the large copper – nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia , and the Sudbury Basin in Canada are also significant sources of osmium . Smaller reserves can be found in the United States . The alluvial deposits used by pre @-@ Columbian people in the Chocó Department , Colombia are still a source for platinum group metals . The second large alluvial deposit was found in the Ural Mountains , Russia , which is still mined . 
 = = Production = = 
 Osmium is obtained commercially as a by @-@ product from nickel and copper mining and processing . During electrorefining of copper and nickel , noble metals such as silver , gold and the platinum group metals , together with non @-@ metallic elements such as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as anode mud , which forms the starting material for their extraction . In order to separate the metals , they must first be brought into solution . Several methods are available depending on the separation process and the composition of the mixture ; two representative methods are fusion with sodium peroxide followed by dissolution in aqua regia , and dissolution in a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid . Osmium , ruthenium , rhodium and iridium can be separated from platinum , gold and base metals by their insolubility in aqua regia , leaving a solid residue . Rhodium can be separated from the residue by treatment with molten sodium <unk> . The insoluble residue , containing Ru , Os and Ir , is treated with sodium oxide , in which Ir is insoluble , producing water @-@ soluble Ru and Os salts . After oxidation to the volatile oxides , <unk> 
 4 is separated from OsO 
 4 by precipitation of ( NH4 ) <unk> with ammonium chloride . 
 After it is dissolved , osmium is separated from the other platinum group metals by distillation or extraction with organic solvents of the volatile osmium tetroxide . The first method is similar to the procedure used by Tennant and Wollaston . Both methods are suitable for industrial scale production . In either case , the product is reduced using hydrogen , yielding the metal as a powder or sponge that can be treated using powder metallurgy techniques . 
 Neither the producers nor the United States Geological Survey published any production amounts for osmium . Estimations of the United States consumption date published from 1971 , which gives a consumption in the United States of 2000 troy ounces ( 62 kg ) , would suggest that the production is still less than 1 ton per year . In 2012 , the estimated US production of osmium was 75 kg . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Because of the volatility and extreme toxicity of its oxide , osmium is rarely used in its pure state , but is instead often alloyed with other metals . Those alloys are utilized in high @-@ wear applications . Osmium alloys such as osmiridium are very hard and , along with other platinum @-@ group metals , are used in the tips of fountain pens , instrument pivots , and electrical contacts , as they can resist wear from frequent operation . They were also used for the tips of phonograph styli during the late 78 rpm and early " LP " and " 45 " record era , circa 1945 to 1955 . Although very durable compared to steel and chromium needle points , osmium @-@ alloy tips wore out far more rapidly than competing but costlier sapphire and diamond tips and were discontinued . 
 Osmium tetroxide has been used in fingerprint detection and in staining fatty tissue for optical and electron microscopy . As a strong oxidant , it cross @-@ links lipids mainly by reacting with unsaturated carbon – carbon bonds and thereby both fixes biological membranes in place in tissue samples and simultaneously stains them . Because osmium atoms are extremely electron @-@ dense , osmium staining greatly enhances image contrast in transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) studies of biological materials . Those carbon materials have otherwise very weak TEM contrast ( see image ) . Another osmium compound , osmium <unk> ( <unk> ) , exhibits similar fixing and staining action . 
 The tetroxide and a related compound potassium <unk> are important oxidants for chemical synthesis , despite being very poisonous . For the Sharpless asymmetric <unk> , which uses <unk> for the conversion of a double bond into a <unk> diol , Karl Barry Sharpless won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2001 . OsO4 is very expensive for this use , so KMnO4 is often used instead , even though the yields are less for this cheaper chemical reagent . 
 In 1898 an Austrian chemist Auer von Welsbach developed the <unk> with a filament made of osmium , which he introduced commercially in 1902 . After only a few years , osmium was replaced by the more stable metal tungsten . Tungsten has the highest melting point among all metals , and using it in light bulbs increases the luminous efficacy and life of incandescent lamps . 
 The light bulb manufacturer Osram ( founded in 1906 , when three German companies , Auer @-@ Gesellschaft , AEG and Siemens & Halske , combined their lamp production facilities ) derived its name from the elements of osmium and Wolfram ( the latter is German for tungsten ) . 
 Like palladium , powdered osmium effectively absorbs hydrogen atoms . This could make osmium a potential candidate for a metal @-@ hydride battery electrode . However , osmium is expensive and would react with potassium hydroxide , the most common battery electrolyte . 
 Osmium has high reflectivity in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum ; for example , at 600 Å osmium has a reflectivity twice that of gold . This high reflectivity is desirable in space @-@ based UV spectrometers , which have reduced mirror sizes due to space limitations . Osmium @-@ coated mirrors were flown in several space missions aboard the Space Shuttle , but it soon became clear that the oxygen radicals in the low Earth orbit are abundant enough to significantly deteriorate the osmium layer . 
 The only known clinical use of osmium appears to be for <unk> in arthritic patients in Scandinavia . It involves the local administration of osmium tetroxide ( OsO4 ) , which is a highly toxic compound . The lack of reports of long @-@ term side effects suggest that osmium itself can be biocompatible , although this depends on the osmium compound administered . In 2011 , osmium ( VI ) and osmium ( II ) compounds were reported to show anticancer activity in vivo , it indicated a promising future for using osmium compounds as anticancer drugs . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Finely divided metallic osmium is pyrophoric and reacts with oxygen at room temperature , forming volatile osmium tetroxide . Some osmium compounds are also converted to the tetroxide if oxygen is present . This makes osmium tetroxide the main source of contact with the environment . 
 Osmium tetroxide is highly volatile and penetrates skin readily , and is very toxic by inhalation , ingestion , and skin contact . Airborne low concentrations of osmium tetroxide vapor can cause lung congestion and skin or eye damage , and should therefore be used in a fume hood . Osmium tetroxide is rapidly reduced to relatively inert compounds by polyunsaturated vegetable oils , such as corn oil . 
 = = Price = = 
 Osmium is usually sold as a minimum 99 @.@ 9 % pure powder . Like other precious metals , it is measured by troy weight and by grams . Its price in 2012 was about $ 400 per troy ounce ( or about $ 13 @,@ 000 per kilogram ) , depending on the quantity and its supplier . 
 = Siege of Svetigrad ( 1448 ) = 
 The Siege of Svetigrad began on May 14 , 1448 when an Ottoman army , led by Sultan Murad II , besieged the fortress of Svetigrad ( now <unk> ) . After the many failed Ottoman expeditions into Albania against the League of Lezhë , a confederation of Albanian Principalities created in 1444 and headed by Skanderbeg , Murad II decided to march an army into Skanderbeg 's dominions in order to capture the key Albanian fortress of Svetigrad . The fortress lay on an important route between Macedonia and Albania , and thus its occupation would give the Ottomans easy access into Albania . The force prepared by Murad was the largest force with which the Ottomans had ever attacked Skanderbeg . Murad planned to take the fortress , march into the Albanian interior , and capture the main citadel of Krujë , thus crushing the Albanian League . 
 At the same time , Skanderbeg had been at war with Venice . Realizing the magnitude of his challenge , Skanderbeg attempted to relieve the garrison by engaging in skirmishes with the Ottoman army . His forces succeeded in inflicting heavy casualties on the Turkish forces through guerrilla @-@ style attacks . Efforts were made by Skanderbeg to use intelligence forces , operating as far as Constantinople , to gather information on Murad 's plans of action . Meanwhile , near Scutari , he had been able to defeat a Venetian force and managed to considerably weaken the Venetian presence in Albania . Despite these efforts , on July 31 the garrison of Svetigrad surrendered due to a cut @-@ off in the water @-@ supply to Svetigrad . The garrison was spared and a force of Ottoman Janissaries was stationed inside the fortress instead . Two years later , Murad would march against Krujë , only to suffer a heavy defeat . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In 1444 the major princes of the Albanian Principalities , which up to that point had been vassals of the Ottoman Empire , united and formed the League of Lezhë , an anti @-@ Ottoman confederacy under Skanderbeg 's lead . As a result , the Ottoman Empire sought to crush the League and re @-@ establish control over Albania . As of 1448 , all Ottoman expeditions into Albania had failed and Murad II chose lead a force in person into Albanian territory and fragment the League . The sultan decided to capture the fortress of Svetigrad . This fortress served the strategic purpose of protecting the Albanian eastern frontier , while also allowing the Albanians to launch their own assaults on Ottoman territory . In late 1447 , war began between Venice and the League , but had not yet escalated into full @-@ scale conflict . Skanderbeg had declared war on Venice as a result of a diplomatic impasse . This left him open to invasion from the East . 
 Albanian intelligence groups informed Skanderbeg — the main leader of the revolt — that a large Ottoman army was preparing to march into Albania , the number of which was reported by some as being as high as 170 @,@ 000 . This army , however , is likely to have contained no more than 80 @,@ 000 soldiers . Nevertheless , Murad marched his army into Monastir . Skanderbeg urgently called for material aid Venice . The answer , however , was negative . Instead , the only aid received came from the Neapolitans and the Ragusans . Nonetheless , Murad soon marched into Ohrid and Black Drin valley , traveling near Svetigrad . In response , Skanderbeg strengthened the garrisons of Krujë , <unk> , Svetigrad , and Berat by ordering the populations around these fortress to take up arms . 
 Shortly before the Ottoman siege began , Skanderbeg positioned himself , and 4 @,@ 000 cavalry , 7 miles ( 11 km ) from the Turkish camp . The force also included 8 @,@ 000 other soldiers . Skanderbeg ordered that no campfires should be lit in order to keep his position secret . Moisi Arianit Golemi and Muzaka of Angelina were ordered , with thirty horsemen , to dress as peasants and enter the fortress . The plot was discovered , however , and the company was attacked , but the attackers were driven off . Upon returning to the main Ottoman camp , one of the commanding pashas saw that this was one of Skanderbeg 's plots and sent 4 @,@ 000 horsemen to find out where Skanderbeg was camping by following Moisi 's band . Moisi led the Ottoman force into a valley , and Skanderbeg , who was ready for such an enterprise , surrounded the valley with his forces . When the Ottoman force was within distance , the Albanians sprung the ambush and the Ottoman force was annihilated . This happened on May 14 , 1448 , after which Murad ordered the siege to begin . 
 = = Siege = = 
 = = = Ottoman arrival = = = 
 Murad 's force contained approximately 80 @,@ 000 men and two cannons , which could fire 200 pounds ( 91 kg ) balls . His army contained a fresh corps of Janissaries , and 3 @,@ 000 debtors and bankrupts fighting to regain their freedom . The Count of <unk> persuaded Skanderbeg to incorporate a scorched earth strategy , by destroying all supplies that might be used by the Ottoman army . The Ottoman force paraded around the fortress and offered 300 @,@ 000 <unk> ( Turkish currency ) to those who would open the gate and let the Ottoman army in the fortress without a fight . The heralds proposing these offers went into the fortress at night time and the garrison commanders gave them a splendid dinner , so that they would get the impression that the enemy was well prepared for a lengthy siege . After the dinner their offers were rejected and they were sent back to the Sultan . The size of the Ottoman army troubled Skanderbeg because of the effects it could have on the morale of his soldiers and on the local population which supported the princes . Skanderbeg thus moved from village to village , disguised as a common soldier , and invoked the fighting spirit of the population . As a result of this activity , the local chieftains agreed to fight the Ottomans and persuaded Skanderbeg to draw up his plans in concert with theirs . 
 = = = Albanian guerrilla attacks = = = 
 To relieve the garrison of Svetigrad , Skanderbeg continually harassed the Ottoman army . Many of these attacks had been surprise ambushes of isolated Ottoman forces . Hoping to evade Ottoman patrols , Skanderbeg moved towards the Ottoman camp . On June 22 , Skanderbeg led a night attack on the Ottoman camp which disillusioned the Ottoman soldiers who had been expecting a quiet campaign . Soon after , when the besiegers were taking their afternoon naps , Skanderbeg sent Moses with some men , again dressed as peasants , inside the Ottoman camp to reconnoiter for a future assault . Skanderbeg spoke to his troops , encouraging them not to take booty from the camp as this might give the Ottoman forces time to react and launch a counterattack . That night , the Albanians launched their attack , but the noise of the armor and the neighing of the horses inhibited a complete surprise . The periphery of the camp was thrown into confusion , but the bulk of the Turkish troops gathered and organized themselves , pushing the Albanians out of the camp but not before suffering heavy casualties . To prevent further attacks of this sort , Murad detached a contingent of troops under Firuz Pasha to watch the Albanians but it was prone to desertion and thoroughly destroyed with its baggage train being captured . A breach in the walls of Svetigrad was made , but the following infantry assault was repulsed . The Albanians began to hope that the sultan would now be returning to Edirne . 
 = = = Stalemate = = = 
 The fighting had reached a stalemate and Murad contemplated his next move . He was advised to pillage the countryside , but the surrounding fields had already been burned by Skanderbeg . The sultan decided to stop chasing bodies of men into the forests to prevent further casualties . Mehmed , Murad 's son , proposed leaving Svetigrad to strike at Krujë . Murad sternly rejected this , reasoning that the supplies to take Svetigrad would have been wasted and that Krujë would be more strongly defended than Svetigrad . The sultan thus decided to remain at Svetigrad in an attempt to starve the garrison into submission . Meanwhile , the garrison under the leadership of Peter Perlati made several successful sorties against the Ottomans , in order to ease the encirclement and strengthen his soldiers ' morale . 
 = = = Surrender of the fortress = = = 
 While campaigning against Venetian forces , Skanderbeg managed to inflict a serious defeat on July 23 , 1448 , seriously weakening Venetian power in Albania . The siege of Svetigrad continued , however , and Marin Barleti writes that the Ottomans bribed a soldier to throw a dead dog into the well of the fortress , forcing the garrison to refuse to drink out of it . It is more likely , however , that the Ottomans had cut off the water supply and induced the garrison to surrender . Given the circumstance , Perlati promised a surrender if the garrison were allowed a safe passage through the Ottoman lines . Prince Mehmed suggested that the garrison should be promised safe passage and then massacred , but Murad rejected his son 's proposal , in fear that the rebellion would only be intensified through such an act ; he decided to instead return the garrisoning force to Skanderbeg . On July 31 , 1448 the garrison of Svetigrad surrendered . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Once the fortress had been captured , Murad placed his own garrison of Janissaries and ordered his men to repair the walls . Perlati and his soldiers came to Skanderbeg , begging for mercy . Skanderbeg pardoned his soldiers for the surrender and even thanked them for holding out for as long as they did . Skanderbeg continued to shadow the Ottoman army as it headed back home in the hopes of dealing some serious damage , but his forces were not strong enough to risk provoking them . In October of the same year , Murad managed to inflict a serious a defeat on John Hunyadi 's forces in Kosovo . Skanderbeg had planned to join Hunyadi 's offensive with 20 @,@ 000 men , but he was not able to get there in time due to Đurađ Branković blocking the roads to Kosovo . 
 The loss of Svetigrad allowed the Ottomans easy access into Albania from the northeast . They could now launch three coordinated invasions from south , southeast , and northeast into Albania . A few weeks after the siege , Mustafa Pasha led 15 @,@ 000 men into Albania , as requested by Skanderbeg 's Venetian rivals , only to be heavily defeated with Mustafa being captured . Skanderbeg tried to regain Svetigrad the next year , but he did not have the proper artillery to do so . He surrounded the fortress , but he realized that his position was hopeless and lifted the siege . In early 1450 , the Turks would take Berat through a night @-@ time stratagem and later that same year , Murad would besiege Krujë 
 = Ernst Moritz Hess = 
 Ernst Moritz Hess ( 20 March 1890 — 14 September 1983 ) was a baptized German Jew who served in the Imperial German Army during the First World War . He commanded the company of the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 in which Adolf Hitler served during the war . During the inter @-@ war period he served as a judge before being forced out of office after the passing of the Nuremberg Laws by the Nazis in 1935 , as he was classified as a " full @-@ blooded Jew " due to his mother being Jewish , even though he was baptised a Protestant . 
 He emigrated with his family to Bolzano in Italy to escape Nazi persecution but was eventually forced to move back to Germany , though as a former war comrade of Hitler 's he was granted protection and some privileges for a while . However , his privileges were removed in 1941 and he spent the rest of the war as a forced labourer ; his sister died in Auschwitz but his mother managed to escape to Switzerland in 1945 . Following the war he began a new career in railway management and was awarded the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany for his services to the Deutsche <unk> . 
 = = Early life and war service = = 
 Born in Gelsenkirchen in what was then the Rhine Province of the Kingdom of Prussia , Hess lived in Düsseldorf before the First World War . His father Julius was a lawyer and his mother Elisabeth was a member of a Jewish banking family from Wetzlar . Despite his Jewish ancestry on his mother 's side , he was baptised and brought up as a Protestant Christian . 
 On the outbreak of war he enlisted as an officer in the 2nd Royal Bavarian Reserve Infantry and was posted to the front line in Flanders , where he suffered a serious wound in October 1914 . Hitler served as a Gefreiter in the same regiment and in the summer of 1916 , Hess briefly became Hitler 's commanding officer . He sustained another serious wound the following October and was sent to Germany to recuperate . Hess was well regarded as a soldier and was decorated several times , receiving the Iron Cross 1st and 2nd Class as well as the Bavarian Military Order of Merit . In 1918 he was promoted to Lieutenant and in 1934 he was awarded the Honour Cross of the World War 1914 / 1918 . 
 After the war Hess became a judge in Düsseldorf , where he lived with his wife Margarete and daughter Ursula . Hitler 's rise to prominence came as a surprise to Hess and many of his colleagues from the regiment . The future dictator had been something of a non @-@ entity during his time in the army , with no friends within the regiment and little interaction with others . Hess regarded Hitler as " an absolute cypher " and spoke of his surprise that Hitler had been one of his comrades : " What , Hitler ? He was in our unit ? We never even noticed him . " 
 = = Discrimination and exile = = 
 Hitler 's accession to power led to the passage of a series of antisemitic laws banning Jews from the civil service . Although Hess was a Protestant Christian , the laws defined him as a " full @-@ blooded Jew " as he had four Jewish grandparents . In April 1933 , a " Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service " was passed banning many Jews from public service . Hess survived this first purge of Jews owing to the " front @-@ line fighters ' privilege " ( Frontkämpferprivileg ) he was able to invoke as a consequence of his war service . The Frontkämpferprivileg was instituted after Reichspräsident Paul von Hindenburg protested to Hitler that Jewish war veterans were being dismissed from state employment . Those who could prove that they had served on the front lines of the war were allowed to invoke the Frontkämpferprivileg to stay in their jobs . 
 However , in the autumn of 1935 the Nuremberg Laws revoked this privilege and instituted a full ban on Jews in the civil service . Hess had to leave his job as a judge at the start of 1936 and was forced out of Düsseldorf after being beaten up by Nazi supporters outside his house in the autumn of that year . He moved with his family to Wuppertal , then in October 1937 emigrated to Bolzano in the German @-@ speaking South Tyrol region of Italy , where he could continue the education in German of his 11 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . 
 Hess sought to lessen the impact of his racial classification by petitioning Hitler to make an exemption for himself and his daughter , who was classified as a " Mischling ( crossbreed ) 1st degree " . In a letter sent in June 1936 , Hess highlighted his Christian upbringing , patriotic outlook and military service . He wrote : " For us , it is a kind of spiritual death to now be branded as Jews and exposed to general contempt . " He was aided by Fritz Wiedemann , who had been an aide de camp in his regiment 's headquarters and later served as Hitler 's personal adjutant between 1934 – 39 . Wiedemann was able to intercede with Hans Heinrich Lammers , Head of the Reich Chancellery , who was also a war veteran . 
 Although Hitler turned down Hess 's petition , a number of concessions were nonetheless made ; Hess was allowed to continue receiving his pension , although at a reduced rate , he was exempted from the obligation to adopt the middle name " Israel " identifying himself as a Jew , and he was able to acquire a new passport that was not stamped with a red " J " , enabling him to travel abroad — a privilege that Jews no longer possessed by this time . 
 = = Return to Germany = = 
 In October 1939 , Hitler and Mussolini concluded the South Tyrol Option Agreement under which the German @-@ speaking population of South Tyrol was given the choice of complete <unk> — abandoning their German language and even their personal names — or emigrating to Nazi Germany . As a result , Hess and his family were forced to return to Germany . Attempts to emigrate to Switzerland or Brazil failed , so they moved briefly back to Düsseldorf before resettling in <unk> , a small village in the district of <unk> in the far south @-@ east of Bavaria , where his daughter attended the <unk> <unk> , a local gymnasium and boarding school . 
 Wiedemann and Lammers had provided assurances that Hess would not be harmed . In August 1940 , Heinrich Himmler , the Reichsführer of the SS , issued a letter to the Düsseldorf Gestapo ordering that Hess should not be " <unk> in any way whatsoever " . Noting that Hess had been " both in the same company as the Führer and briefly the Führer 's company commander " , Himmler instructed that Hess should be granted " relief and protection as per the Führer 's wishes " and asked that he be informed if Hess should leave Düsseldorf . A follow @-@ up letter was sent by Lammers in November 1940 , informing Hess that " it is , however , the Führer 's wish that you should not be subject to any further restrictions because of your ancestry beyond those required by law . " Lammers expressly informed Hess that he was to use the letter for his protection : " I give you this letter , if necessary , to make use [ for your protection ] " . 
 It is unclear what role Hitler himself played in granting protection to Hess . A case is known of a Jew who enjoyed Hitler 's personal protection — his former family doctor , Eduard Bloch , whom Hitler called an <unk> ( " noble Jew " ) . Hitler is known to have felt very close to the other veterans of his regiment . Thomas Weber , the author of Hitler 's First War : Adolf Hitler , the Men of the List Regiment , and the First World War , has said that it is conceivable that Hitler knew Hess personally because the two men had been wounded in the Battle of the Somme only a day apart , and may have been initially treated in the same place before being transported together to the same hospital in Germany . However , Weber cautions that the letters of protection may have been organised without Hitler 's knowledge by Wiedemann , " because he did the same in other cases involving Jewish soldiers . " The letter from Himmler was not found until 2012 , when it was discovered in surviving Gestapo files on Jewish lawyers and judges in Germany . It was publicised in the July 2012 issue of the quarterly publication Jewish Voice From Germany and was corroborated by Hess 's daughter Ursula . 
 = = Loss of protection and enslavement = = 
 The protection that Hess enjoyed turned out to be only temporary respite from persecution . Hess 's friend Wiedemann was dismissed from his position by Hitler and sent into de facto exile as Consul General to San Francisco . In May 1941 , Hess was informed that the protection order had been revoked and that he was now regarded as being " a Jew like any other " . Petitions to Berlin were unsuccessful , and in June 1941 he was summoned to the " Aryanization Office " in Munich . Lammers ' letter of protection was taken from him and he was sent to <unk> concentration camp near Munich , where he was put to work as a labourer . He was subsequently assigned to the Munich firm of L. <unk> and later to a plumber 's , Georg Grau , where he served as a forced labourer until 20 April 1945 . His wife Margarete remained in <unk> , where she lived with her parents , but his teenage daughter Ursula was forced to work in an electrical firm in Munich . 
 Hess 's Jewish mother Elisabeth and sister Berta believed that the protection that he had received also extended to them . As a result , they did not comply with the restrictions imposed on Jews . However , when their case was reviewed in 1942 , Adolf Eichmann of the Reichssicherheitshauptamt ( Reich Main Security Office ) personally ordered their deportation to the Theresienstadt concentration camp in Czechoslovakia . Berta was subsequently killed at Auschwitz , while Elisabeth managed to escape to Switzerland in February 1945 . She later emigrated to Brazil with her son Paul . Hess himself only survived because of his " privileged <unk> marriage " with Margarete . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 After the fall of the Third Reich , Hess was nominated to serve again as a judge in Düsseldorf but declined , as he did not wish to work alongside former colleagues who had been part of the Nazi judicial system . He started a new career in the railways in 1946 , and from 1949 – 55 served as President of the German Federal Railways Authority in Frankfurt am Main . He was awarded a Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany and was given a plaque of honour by the city of Frankfurt in 1970 . He died there on 14 September 1983 . 
 = Where You Go I Go Too = 
 Where You Go I Go Too is the first studio album by Norwegian electronica artist Hans @-@ Peter Lindstrøm . It was first released in the United Kingdom on August 18 , 2008 and was subsequently released the next day in the United States . The album comprises three tracks , roughly 30 , 10 , and 15 minutes in length . Where You Go I Go Too is usually labeled " space disco " due to its " spacey , psychedelic " feel and four @-@ to @-@ the @-@ floor beats . 
 Production of the album followed the 2006 release of It 's a <unk> Affair , a compilation of singles . Lindstrøm had become dissatisfied with simply producing remixes and average length songs , which led to experimentation with lengthy tracks . The album received positive reviews from critics , who praised its slick production values and epic scope . At the 2009 Spellemannprisen award ceremony in Norway , the record won the award for " best electronica album " . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Following the release of It 's a <unk> Affair in 2006 , Lindstrøm had become tired of producing dance remixes and average length vocal pieces . He began giving the artists and labels mixes with slower tempos . Lindstrøm also felt he was unwisely incorporating musical ideas into remixes instead of original works , which led to experiments with lengthier tracks for an original album . Four to five tracks were originally envisioned for Where You Go I Go Too , but only three were chosen . 
 The title track was a time @-@ consuming project ; Lindstrøm called it a " nightmare to finish . " The song comprised over 70 layers of sound and spanned almost 30 minutes . Around half the sound consisted of live performances , which Lindstrøm found difficult to merge with the electronic portions . After changing the music , he would usually listen to the entire song and evaluate the change . The repeated listens took a toll : " I needed to listen to 30 minutes of music every time I did something , " said Lindstrom " So I 'll never gonna [ sic ] do it again . " Despite this , he enjoyed working with extended songs because it allowed them to evolve and move at a slow pace . 
 The album mixing was delayed during spring 2008 . Typically , Lindstrøm would mix the record himself , but he felt overwhelmed by the album 's scope and decided to seek outside help : " I ’ ve kind of discovered that I ’ m not good at doing everything myself . The problem with involving other people is that sometimes all the progress gets slowed down , but as long as the results are good , I ’ m happy ... Leave the post @-@ production to somebody else . " 
 Though a common theme was not purposefully established for the album , some journalists noted similar feelings of travel and adventure when listening to the record . Lindstrøm has recommended people listen while traveling , and believes his travels may have influenced the album : " I don 't particularly like traveling , but I 've realised that it 's perfect for listening to whole albums ... I 'm sure the way I 'm listening to music now ... has something to do with the music I 'm writing . " The song titles were left " open " so " the listener could make up his own story . " 
 Where You Go I Go Too was released by Smalltown Supersound on August 18 , 2008 in the United Kingdom , and August 19 in the United States . A special edition was issued on December 23 , 2008 . The album featured a bonus disc with edited versions of the original tracks by frequent Lindstrøm collaborator Prins Thomas . Lindstrøm toured in Austria , Germany , Spain , and the United States that fall . 
 = = Musical style and influences = = 
 Where You Go I Go Too comprises three tracks , roughly 30 , 10 , and 15 minutes in duration , which seamlessly flow into each other in transitions that were described as " gradual and subtle " . The songs grow and develop independent musical traits , such as motifs , polyrhythms , and melodies . According to The Guardian , some musical changes are pronounced , such as the introduction of a synthesizer , while others , such as small tempo changes , remain " almost insensible " . Some critics have noted the album conjures the feeling of a journey . 
 The music is a collage of electronic music , characterized by synthesized melodies , layered sounds , live performances , and four @-@ to @-@ the @-@ floor beats . Pitchfork Media editor Dominique Leone described it as a " seamless combination of digital production , analog synthesizers and live instrumentation . " Lindstrøm has been heavily influenced by music from the 1970s and 1980s , particularly disco progenitors Jean @-@ Marc Cerrone and Giorgio Moroder . Where You Go I Go Too is often classified as " space disco " due to these influences and because it possesses a " spacey , psychedelic " sound . Lindstrøm listened to the Beach Boys , the Eagles , and Kirsty MacColl while writing the album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Where You Go I Go Too debuted at No. 11 on the Norwegian music chart . The following week it fell to No. 27 before leaving the list . The record did not chart internationally . In 2009 , Where You Go I Go Too received a Spellemannprisen award for " best electronica album " . The album was well received by critics and received an 82 out of 100 on the aggregate website Metacritic , which signifies " universal acclaim " . 
 AllMusic writer K. Ross Hoffman declared the record an " entirely satisfying display " of Lindstrøm 's talents and positively commented on the textured instrumentation . Hoffman concluded the music was an " expansive , exploratory journey " worth experiencing . Andy Battaglia of the The A.V. Club disagreed , believing the album to be narrow minded and a missed opportunity to exploit the lengthy tracks and deliver more musical depth . Praise was given by Alex Macpherson of The Guardian , who stated " Every aspect of the record seems tailor @-@ made to produce maximum pleasure [ ... ] Where You Go I Go Too would make even the most hellish of journeys seem like a first @-@ class trip . " 
 Jim Brackpool of Yahoo ! Music felt audience reactions would be polarized ; some would find it " sophisticated and lovingly crafted " , while others might be put off by its " unabashed opulence " . No Ripcord writer Sam Draper christened the record " one of the finest pieces of music [ he had ] heard in years . " Pitchfork Media editor Tim Finney believed Where You Go I Go Too showed signs of a masterpiece , but also possessed " bloat , excess , and splendor " reminiscent of disco revivalists . Pitchfork named it one of the best albums of 2008 . 
 The album 's title track was received favorably . Draper displayed particular fondness for the song and was amazed the music could stay fresh for its entire length . Hoffman also spoke highly of it , stating " [ It ] contains only as many discernible musical ideas as your average five- to seven @-@ minute techno track [ ... ] but its luxurious length lets those ideas stretch out gloriously [ ... ] allowing a slow , fluid evolution that gestures towards a cosmic infinity . " Finney praised the title track for its " shimmering , strobing synthesizer melodies " and ability to expand and surprise . A favorable comparison to Kraftwerk 's similarly lengthy song " Autobahn " was made by Jason Newman of URB . 
 Reviews of the other two tracks were generally positive . Brackpool wrote favorably about " Grand Ideas " and made comparisons to Vangelis and Tangerine Dream , while Hoffman named it the most danceable track on the album . Though Battaglia felt the song kept repeating the same chord progression , he believed the " accents and shifts in pitch " strengthened it . Jeff <unk> writing for Tiny Mix Tapes thought " The Long Way Home " sounded silly . Brackpool agreed , writing " [ If ] isolated from the rest of the album [ The Long Way Home ] could easily pass for generic library music ... " While Draper considered it a solid song , he decided it was a " little too saccharine for its own good " . Hoffman enjoyed the song and wrote " the vibe is rangy and exultant [ ... ] as blissful and bemused as the vehemently unpretentious [ cover ] shot of Lindstrøm . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Hans @-@ Peter Lindstrøm except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Hans @-@ Peter Lindstrøm – writing , producing , performing , mixing 
 Knut <unk> – mixing 
 Chris Sansom – mastering 
 Kim <unk> – photography 
 = = Charts = = 
 = When I Grow Up ( The Pussycat Dolls song ) = 
 " When I Grow Up " is a song by American girl group The Pussycat Dolls from their second and final studio album Doll Domination ( 2008 ) . It was released by Interscope Records on June 3 , 2008 , as the lead single from the album . " When I Grow Up " was their first single following the departure of the group 's longest @-@ standing member Carmit Bachar . It was first recorded for Nicole Scherzinger 's planned solo project , Her Name Is Nicole , but after its cancellation and Scherzinger 's return to the group , she felt that the song was better suited for the group . It was written by Theron Thomas , Timothy Thomas and Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , who also produced the song . It is an uptempo electropop song with elements of the 1966 song , " He 's Always There " by British rock band The Yardbirds . " When I Grow Up " speaks about the desire to be famous , and was described as being " autobiographical " by Scherzinger . 
 The single was received favorably by contemporary music critics , many of whom highlighted it as a stand @-@ out . It peaked at number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the group 's highest charting single since " Buttons " ( 2006 ) . The song has sold over two million digital copies in the United States , making the Pussycat Dolls the first female group in digital history to have three singles pass the two million mark in digital sales . The song reached the top @-@ five in countries such as Australia , Canada , France , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , and the top @-@ ten in Austria , Denmark , Germany and Switzerland . 
 The song 's accompanying music video premiered on June 13 , 2008 . Directed by Joseph Khan , it portrays the Pussycat Dolls in a traffic jam on Hollywood Boulevard . It was complimented for its dance breakdown , and was nominated in five categories at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , the most of that ceremony , and went on to win Best Dance Video . The Pussycat Dolls performed the song on television shows including Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and So You Think You Can Dance , as well several award shows including the 2008 American Music Awards , and throughout their Doll Domination Tour ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the commercial success of PCD ( 2005 ) , and over the course of two years ( 2005 – 07 ) , Scherzinger recorded 75 @-@ 100 songs for Her Name Is Nicole , her planned solo debut album . Her work as lead singer furthered Scherzinger 's popularity as she began work on her own music . She stated that she enjoyed collaborating with many different artists , and that although she had been writing songs for over ten years , she felt as if she was at a different level while working with such A @-@ list writers and producers . Following the moderate success of " Baby Love " , the complete lack of success of the singles such as " Whatever U Like " and numerous push backs , Scherzinger decided to put the release of the on hold . She then returned her focus back on the Pussycat Dolls , and recording commenced for their second studio album . Scherzinger cited that she felt as if the songs were more suited as a Pussycat Dolls song than her own . 
 " When I Grow Up " was written by Theron and Timothy Thomas , along with Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , who also produced the song . The Yardbirds ' drummer Jim McCarty and bassist Paul Samwell @-@ Smith both received co @-@ writing credits for the song , for its sample of " He 's Always There " ( 1966 ) . The song was recorded by Paul Foley , Mike " Handz " Donaldson and Roberto " Tito " Vazquez at 2nd Floor Studios in Orlando and Chalice Studios in Los Angeles , and was mixed by Spike Stent and Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins at Chalice Studios in Los Angeles . " When I Grow Up " made its world premiere online on May 16 , 2008 , and was issued as a digital download in North America on May 27 . It was later serviced to contemporary hit radio in the United States on June 1 , 2008 . The release of " When I Grow Up " came after the departure of member Carmit Bachar . It was officially confirmed , after months of speculation , on March 4 , 2008 that Bahar had left the group to follow " other performance interests " . At the time of her departure , she had been the longest member of the group , joining in 1995 when they were a burlesque act . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " When I Grow Up " is an uptempo R & B and electropop song that lasts four minutes and five seconds . Built around " bouncy synth lines " and a " thudding " bassline , the song features a heavy use of sirens , handclaps and pitch @-@ shifted vocals . Scherzinger was cited as adopting Britney Spears ' breathiness against the song 's sirens , shouts and " pumping beat " . Jaime Gill from Yahoo Music UK described " When I Grow Up " as a " dark , dissonant club banger " , while Rudy Klapper from Sputnikmusic compared the song 's composition to that of Basement Jaxx 's 2003 track " Plug It In " . " When I Grow Up " contains a sample of the main riff of " He 's Always There " by British rock band The Yardbirds , from their third studio album Roger the Engineer ( 1996 ) . The song 's writers , Jim McCarty and Paul Samwell @-@ Smith , were honored for their contributions to the song at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) . 
 According to the sheet music published by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " When I Grow Up " is set in common time with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E minor , with Scherzinger 's vocal range spanning from low @-@ note of E3 to the high @-@ note of G5 . Lyrically , the song is centered around the desire to be famous when one grows up . Using satirical and autobiographical lines , Scherzinger begins the song 's first verse with : " Now I 've got a confession / When I was young I wanted attention " . The " repetitive and catchy chorus " follows , where she sings the lines : " When I grow up / I wanna be famous / I wanna be a star / I wanna be in movies " . MTV News commented that the song contains a theme that is " getting plenty of traction these days – beware the high cost of fame . " Meanwhile , group member Melody Thornton said of the song 's concept : " If you strive for higher and bigger things – along with that – comes hard work and dealing with a lot of stuff that you 'd never assume you 'd have to . So yeah , while the song is meant to be playful , it still does have that little warning twist to it " . Bill Lamb from About.com named " When I Grow Up " a possible answer song to Pink 's " Stupid Girls " ( 2006 ) . Music critics were initially confused by the line " I wanna have groupies " in the chorus ; mistaking the line as saying " I wanna have boobies " . American comedian Ellen DeGeneres also pointed this out when they performed the song on her talk show on September 23 , 2008 . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 A number of remixes were commissioned by Interscope Records to accompany the song . On July 23 , 2008 a remix of " When I Grow Up " featuring a rap verse from American rapper Eve was released . Later that same day , a second remix was released online . Entitled the " Darkchild Remix " , it features an entirely different beat than the original , with added vocals from American rappers Diddy , Lil Wayne and Fatman Scoop , as well as the song 's producer Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins . Elements of Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " ( 1984 ) were heavily sampled throughout the remix , most noticeably in the song 's introduction . Lil Wayne 's verse was later removed and replaced by a new verse by the song 's composers , Rock City , due to issues with it being cleared in time for its commercial release as a B @-@ side to " Whatcha Think About That " , the second single from Doll Domination . For unknown reasons , the remix was never released . Additional " club " and " dub " remixes of " When I Grow Up " by DJs Dave Audé , Digital Dog , Dirty South and Ralphi Rosario , and the electronic band Wideboys were also released in a series of Compact Disc single and digital download releases . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , the song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 76 on the issue dated June 14 , 2008 . On its second week , the song sold 34 @,@ 000 digital downloads and ascended to number 31 . In its fourth week , it reached its peak position of number nine , becoming the group 's highest charting single since " Buttons " which peaked at number three in 2006 . The song topped the Hot Dance Club Play chart , the issue dated August 2 , 2008 . The song has sold over 2 @.@ 18 million digital downloads in the United States to date , according to Nielsen Soundscan , making the Pussycat Dolls the first all @-@ female group in digital history to have three singles — along with " Don 't Cha " and " Buttons " — pass the two million mark in digital sales . In Canada , the song debuted at number fifteen on the Canadian Hot 100 . On the chart dated September 6 , 2008 , " When I Grow Up " ascended and peaked at number three . 
 In Australia , the song debuted at number 45 , on June 22 , 2008 . In its sixth week , the song peaked at number two and stayed there for three consecutive weeks . " When I Grow Up " was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the song debuted on the chart at number 33 . It reached number five a few weeks <unk> and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for selling over 7 @,@ 500 copies . In the United Kingdom " When I Grow Up " debuted and peaked at number three on the UK Singles Chart with sales of 29 @,@ 688 . On the Billboard European Hot 100 Singles the song peaked at number three , and also peaked at number nine in Germany . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " When I Grow Up " received acclaim from music critics . Bill Lamb from About.com listed " When I Grow Up " among the top tracks on Doll Domination , stating that the song " bursts out of the blocks " , and that it was of no surprise that it " landed in the pop top 10 with ease " . On a separate review , Lamb gave the song three out of five stars . He noted that the " anonymous nature " of the group 's vocals and " sexual lyrical tease " is starting to wear thin , stating : " This is more of the same , not a step forward " . Lamb , however , did compliment the song as being a " catchy dance workout " , and stated that the song carries their " usual sassiness " and " pounding dance beats " . Nick Levine from Digital Spy echoed Lamb 's comments , noting that the song is a " bolshy , hyperactive pop stomper that works just as well in the aerobics class as it does on the dance @-@ floor . " He continued : " If they keep releasing singles as infectious as this , they could last longer than we 'd think . " August Brown from Los Angeles Times called the song as the " ideological centerpiece " of Doll Domination . " 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described the song as a " catchy , full @-@ throttle club track " and commented that it is " a perfectly concocted blend of camp and vamp for the famous burlesque troupe " . Steve Perkins from BBC Music awarded the song four out of five stars writing : " It 's good to see that the dynamics of the group remain fundamentally unchanged " and that the song was a strong comeback . He also noted that : " The whole song seems to be centred around the desire to be famous when you grow up , which while not my favourite of all messages to give out to The Kids " . He ended his review writing " but in all fairness : who cares ? It 's hella catchy , and really , who 's the bigger fool here – the Pussycat Dolls lyricist who wrote some vaguely nonsensical lyrics , or the reviewer who expected anything different ? " Dan Cairns from The Times said that " if every song here were as batty and brilliant as this , Doll Domination would be one of the great pop records of 2008 . " However , Nic Oliver from MusicOMH , in a review of Doll Domination , did not favor the song , saying that the song would embarrass Paris Hilton , but " sets the template for the rest of the album . " 
 = = = Parodies and cover versions = = = 
 The song has been parodied on the video sharing website YouTube including a spoof called " I Wanna Be a Pussycat Mom " posted by The Momma Mary Show on September 9 , 2013 . On June 3 , 2008 the song was parodied by YouTube superstar Britney Houston as she recreated herself as part of the " <unk> Dolls " and commented , " When I do these things , I [ usually ] try to give a twist to the choreography . But [ the Pussycat Dolls have ] a signature move , and I just had to put it in there intact . " It was posted on MTV.com. " When I Grow Up " was later performed by Simone Battle while auditioning for The X Factor in 2011 . It has also been covered by Mayday Parade on the compilation album Punk Goes Pop 2 in 2009 , and The Glee Project in 2012 . 
 = = = Use in media = = = 
 The song was featured in the 2008 comedy film The House Bunny , and the 2010 video game Just Dance 2 . The song and its video were also featured briefly on the pilot for the Nickelodeon series Big Time Rush . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video was shot from May 23 to 24 , 2008 on Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles , with director Joseph Khan . American recording artist Britney Spears filmed a cameo appearance for the video on June 4 at the Warner Bros. lot in Los Angeles . An on set " insider " said that Spears ' scene was short , only consisting of her driving in a passing car and waving to the other girls . On June 12 , 2008 it was announced by MTV News that the cameo had been cut from the final video . Scherzinger was asked why Spears got cut from the video . She said : " I honestly am not so sure . You shoot a lot of things when you do a video . Some things stay in but other things don 't make the cut and Britney just didn 't make it . I 've seen a little clip of her performance and she looked adorable so I really wish she was in it ! Hopefully we 'll work together in the future . " A short clip of the music video was released online on June 12 , 2008 ; a day before the video 's premiere on June 13 , 2008 on FNMTV . 
 In the video the Pussycat Dolls are shown sitting in a car in the middle of a traffic jam , where Scherzinger flashes a ring that says " famous " . They sing the introduction of the song in the car before jumping out . When the chorus kicks in , the women leave the car and stand on the roofs of the other cars and start dancing a routine . Then they walk down a street of Hollywood stars with bubbles floating all around them . As they walk down the street , they also stop to sing on a bench . As the second chorus starts , the Dolls climb scaffolding and begin to dance . During Scherzinger 's solo , she stands in a small area with the Pussycat Dolls logo to the left and a mirror to the right , with lights flashing . The Dolls then dance in the breakdown section with the logo behind them and the camera zooms out to reveal filming equipment and playback screens . 
 Nick Levine from Digital Spy , wrote that : " The Pussycat Dolls have a novel way of amusing themselves during traffic jams " and described the dance breakdown as " entertaining " and " nostalgic " . In Australia , the video was criticized for the video being too raunchy . On August 17 , 2008 , it was announced that the video was nominated for Video of the Year , Best Dance Video , Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , and Best Choreography at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , having the most VMA nominations of that year . The ceremony was held on September 7 , 2008 , and the video won the award for the Best Dancing . The music video was the fifteenth @-@ most streamed video on MTV.com in 2008 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " When I Grow Up " was debuted live on American talk show Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on May 20 , 2008 . On May 27 , 2008 MTV News reported that the Pussycat Dolls were among many set to perform at the 2008 MTV Movie Awards on June 1 , 2008 . Scherzinger talked about the performance saying : " This is a big deal for us . We just want to kill it . It 's all about the Dolls right now , and we 're coming strong . " The girls performed wearing spandex @-@ and @-@ leather getups , while a backdrop was displayed in the background with images of flashbulbs , tabloid headlines and diamonds . They were joined by America 's Best Dance Crew winners the Jabbawockeez who descended from the ceiling wearing matching red T @-@ shirts with stark @-@ white masks covering their faces , and baseball caps perched at 45 @-@ degree angles atop their heads . Of the performance , Geoff Boucher from the Los Angeles Times commented : " the Pussycat Dolls ' set climaxed with a powerful pyro display that left celebs in the first few rows feeling a bit roasted " . MTV Buzzworthy described the performance as " sexy " and " sultry " . However , Tod Martens , in another review for the Los Angeles Times , criticized their performance . He commented : " [ They appeared ] onstage looking like they had escaped a taping for a sexed @-@ up <unk> video . " He also wrote that Scherzinger never commanded the song except on " the cut 's final seconds when she turned her vocals up to a growl " and noted <unk> 's appearance as " annoy [ ing ] " . 
 " When I Grow Up " was also performed at So You Think You Can Dance on June 13 , 2008 . On August 2 , 2008 the Dolls performed the song and presented at the MTV Asia Awards 2008 in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia , along with " Buttons " ( 2005 ) . The group then performed the song at the Walmart Soundcheck , along with " I Hate This Part " , " Takin ' Over the World " , " Buttons " and " Don 't Cha " . On November 21 , they performed a medley of " I Hate This Part " and " When I Grow Up " at the 2008 American Music Awards . The performance included stripper poles , and the girls donned all @-@ rubber outfits . The Pussycat Dolls also performed " When I Grow Up " at the Doll Domination Tour ( 2009 ) . Maureen Ellis of the Evening Times said that the " high @-@ energy encore of ' Don 't Cha ' and ' When I Grow Up ' ensured the Dolls reigned supreme . " 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Adapted from the Doll Domination liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded at : 2nd Floor Studios , Orlando and Chalice Studios , Los Angeles . 
 Contains elements of the composition : " He 's Always There " , written by Jim McCarty and Paul Samwell @-@ Smith . 
 Personnel 
 Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins – songwriting , producer , additional vocals , audio mixing 
 Rock City ( Theron and Timothy Thomas ) – songwriting , additional vocals 
 Jim McCarty – songwriting 
 Paul Samwell @-@ Smith – songwriting 
 Paul Foley – recording 
 Mike " Handz " Donaldson – recording 
 Roberto " Tito " Vazquez – recording 
 Spike Stent – audio mixing 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications and sales = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Nimrod ( computing ) = 
 The Nimrod , built in the United Kingdom by Ferranti for the 1951 Festival of Britain , was an early computer custom @-@ built to play a computer game , one of the first games developed in the early history of video games . The twelve @-@ by @-@ nine @-@ by @-@ five @-@ foot computer , designed by John Bennett and built by engineer Raymond Stuart @-@ Williams , allowed exhibition attendees to play a game of Nim against an artificial intelligence . The player pressed buttons on a raised panel corresponding with lights on the machine to select their moves , and the Nimrod moved afterwards , with its calculations represented by more lights . The speed of the Nimrod 's calculations could be slowed down to allow the presenter to demonstrate exactly what the computer was doing , with more lights showing the state of the calculations . The Nimrod was intended to demonstrate Ferranti 's computer design and programming skills rather than to entertain , though Festival attendees were more interested in playing the game than the logic behind it . After its initial exhibition in May , the Nimrod was shown for three weeks in October 1951 at the Berlin Industrial Show before being dismantled . 
 The game of Nim running on the Nimrod is a candidate for one of the first video games , as it was one of the first computer games to have any sort of visual display of the game . It appeared only four years after the 1947 invention of the cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device , the earliest known interactive electronic game to use an electronic display , and one year after Bertie the Brain , a computer similar to the Nimrod which played tic @-@ tac @-@ toe at the 1950 Canadian National Exhibition . The Nimrod 's use of lightbulbs rather than a screen with real @-@ time visual graphics , however , much less moving graphics , does not meet some definitions of a video game . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the summer of 1951 , the United Kingdom held the Festival of Britain , a national exhibition held throughout the UK to promote the British contribution to science , technology , industrial design , architecture , and the arts and to commemorate the centenary of the 1851 Great Exhibition . British engineering firm and nascent computer developer Ferranti promised to develop an exhibit for the Festival . In late 1950 , John Bennett , an Australian employee of the firm and recent PhD graduate from the University of Cambridge , proposed that the company create a computer that could play the game of Nim . In Nim , players take turns removing at least one object from a set of objects , with the goal of being the player who removes the last object ; gameplay options can be modeled mathematically . Bennett 's suggestion was supposedly inspired by an earlier Nim @-@ playing machine , " Nimatron " , which had been displayed in 1940 at the New York World 's Fair . The Nimatron machine had been designed by Edward Condon and constructed by Westinghouse Electric from electromechanical relays , and had weighed over a ton . Although Bennett 's suggestion was a game , his goal was to show off the computer 's ability to do mathematical calculations , as Nim is based on mathematical principles , and thus showcase Ferranti 's computer design and programming skills rather than to entertain . 
 Ferranti began work on building the computer on 1 December 1950 , with engineer Raymond Stuart @-@ Williams adapting the design by Bennett into a working machine . Development was completed by 12 April 1951 , resulting in a device twelve feet wide , nine feet deep , and five feet tall . The majority of the volume was taken up by vacuum tubes and the lightbulbs that displayed the state of the game , with the actual computer taking up no more than two percent of the total volume of the machine . The Nimrod took the form of a large box with panels of lights , with a raised stand in front of it with buttons corresponding with the lights , which in turn represented the objects the player could remove . 
 The player would sit at the stand and press the buttons to make their moves , while one panel of lights showed the state of the game , and another showed the computer 's calculations during its move . The computer could be set to make its calculations at various speeds , slowing down so that the demonstrator could describe exactly what the computer was doing in real time . A visual guide attached to the Nimrod explained what the computer was doing during its turn , as well as showing possible game states and how they would be represented by the lights . Signs stating which player 's turn it was and whether one or the other had won would light up as appropriate during gameplay . 
 = = Presentation = = 
 On 5 May 1951 , the Nimrod computer was presented at the Festival as the Nimrod Digital Computer , advertised as " faster than thought " and an " electronic brain " . It exclusively played the game of Nim ; moves were made by players seated at the raised stand , with the demonstrator sitting on the other side between the stand and the computer . Nimrod could play either the traditional or " reverse " form of the game . A short guidebook was sold to visitors for one shilling and sixpence explaining how computers worked , how the Nimrod worked , and advertising Ferranti 's other developments . It explained that the use of a game to demonstrate the power of the machine did not mean that it was meant for entertainment and compared the mathematical underpinnings of Nim with modeling the economics of countries . Players of the Nimrod during the Festival included computer science pioneer Alan Turing . 
 Although it was intended as a technology demonstration , most of the onlookers at the Festival of Britain were more interested in playing the game than in the programming and engineering logic behind it . Bennett claimed that " most of the public were quite happy to gawk at the flashing lights and be impressed . " BBC Radio journalist Paul Jennings claimed that all of the festival attendees " came to a standstill " upon reaching the " frightful " " tremendous gray refrigerator " . 
 After the Festival , the Nimrod was showcased for three weeks in October at the Berlin Industrial Show , where it also drew crowds , including the West Germany economics minister Ludwig Erhard . Afterwards , however , as it had served its purpose the Nimrod was dismantled . As the Nimrod was not intended as an entertainment product , it was not followed up by any future games , and Ferranti continued its work on designing general purpose computers . 
 The Nimrod was created only four years after the 1947 invention of the cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device , the earliest known interactive electronic game , and one year after a similar purpose built game @-@ playing machine , Bertie the Brain , the first computer @-@ based game to feature a visual display of any sort . The Nimrod is considered under some definitions one of the first video games , possibly the second . While definitions vary , the prior cathode @-@ ray tube amusement device was a purely analog electrical game , and while the Nimrod and Bertie did not feature an electronic screen they both had a game running on a computer . The software @-@ based tic @-@ tac @-@ toe game OXO and a draughts program by Christopher Strachey were programmed a year later in 1952 and were the first computer games to display visuals on an electronic screen rather than through light bulbs . 
 = Jane Austen = 
 Jane Austen ( / <unk> <unk> / ; 16 December 1775 – 18 July 1817 ) was an English novelist known primarily for her six major novels which interpret , critique and comment upon the life of the British landed gentry at the end of the 18th century . Her most highly praised novel during her lifetime was Pride and Prejudice , her second published novel . Austen 's plots often explore the dependence of women on marriage in the pursuit of favorable social standing and economic security . 
 The author 's major novels are rarely out of print today , although they were first published anonymously and brought her little fame and brief reviews during her lifetime . A significant transition in her posthumous reputation as an author occurred in 1869 , fifty @-@ two years after her death , when her nephew 's publication of A Memoir of Jane Austen introduced her to a wider audience . Austen 's most successful novel during her lifetime was Pride and Prejudice , which went through two editions at the time . Her third published novel was Mansfield Park , which ( despite being largely overlooked by reviewers ) was successful during her lifetime . 
 All of Austen 's major novels were first published between 1811 and 1818 . From 1811 to 1816 , with the publication of Sense and Sensibility ( 1811 ) , Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) , Mansfield Park ( 1814 ) and Emma ( 1815 ) , she achieved success as a published author . Austen wrote two additional novels ( Northanger Abbey and Persuasion , both published posthumously in 1818 ) and began another , eventually titled Sanditon , before her death . 
 During the twentieth and twenty @-@ first centuries Austen 's writings have inspired a large number of critical essays and literary anthologies , establishing her as a British author of international fame . Her novels have inspired films , from 1940 's Pride and Prejudice starring Laurence Olivier to more recent productions : Emma Thompson in Sense and Sensibility ( 1995 ) and Kate Beckinsale in Love & Friendship ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Information about Austen is " famously scarce " , according to one biographer . Only some personal and family letters remain ( by one estimate , only 160 of Austen 's 3 @,@ 000 letters are extant ) , and her sister Cassandra — to whom most of the letters were addressed — burned " the greater part " of them and censored those she did not destroy . Other letters were destroyed by the heirs of Admiral Sir Francis Austen , Jane 's brother . Most of the biographical material produced for fifty years after Austen 's death was written by her relatives and reflected the family 's bias in favour of " good quiet Aunt Jane " ; scholars have unearthed little information since . Austen wrote during the period of British Romanticism leading to British Idealism . She admired a number of British Romantic poets , including William Wordsworth ( 1770 – 1850 ) , Samuel Coleridge ( 1772 – 1834 ) and Lord Byron ( 1788 – 1824 ) , whose influence on her novels has been studied . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Austen 's parents , George ( 1731 – 1805 ) , an Anglican rector , and his wife Cassandra ( 1739 – 1827 ) , shared a gentry background . George was descended from wool manufacturers who had risen to the lower ranks of the landed gentry , and Cassandra was a member of the aristocratic Leigh family . They married on 26 April 1764 at Walcot Church in Bath . From 1765 to 1801 ( for much of Jane 's life ) , George was a rector of Anglican parishes in Steventon , Hampshire , and a nearby village . From 1773 to 1796 , he supplemented his income by farming and teaching three or four boys at a time ( who boarded at his home ) . 
 Austen 's immediate family was large — six brothers : James ( 1765 – 1819 ) , George ( 1766 – 1838 ) , Edward ( 1768 – 1852 ) , Henry Thomas ( 1771 – 1850 ) , Francis William ( Frank ) ( 1774 – 1865 ) and Charles John ( 1779 – 1852 ) and one sister , Cassandra Elizabeth ( Steventon , Hampshire , 9 January 1773 – 1845 ) who , like Jane , did not marry . Cassandra was Austen 's closest friend and confidante throughout her life . 
 Of her brothers Austen felt closest to Henry , who became a banker and ( after his bank failed ) an Anglican clergyman . His sister 's literary agent , Henry 's large circle of friends and acquaintances in London included bankers , merchants , publishers , painters and actors and he provided Austen with a view of social worlds not normally visible from a small parish in rural Hampshire . He married their first cousin ( and Jane 's close friend ) , Eliza de <unk> . 
 George was sent to live with a local family at a young age because , according to Austen biographer Le Faye , he was " mentally abnormal and subject to fits " ; he may also have been deaf and mute . Charles and Frank served in the navy , both rising to the rank of admiral . Edward was adopted by his fourth cousin , Thomas Knight , inheriting Knight 's estate and taking his name in 1812 . 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Austen was born on 16 December 1775 at the Steventon rectory , and baptised on 5 April 1776 . After several months at home her mother placed her with Elizabeth Littlewood , a woman living nearby who nursed and raised her for twelve to eighteen months . In 1783 , according to family tradition , Jane and Cassandra were sent to Oxford to be educated by Ann Cawley and moved with her to Southampton later in the year . Both girls became ill with typhus , and Jane nearly died . Austen was then educated at home until she and Cassandra left for boarding school in early 1785 . The school curriculum probably included French , spelling , needlework , dancing and music , and may have included drama . By December 1786 , Jane and Cassandra had returned home because the Austens could not afford to send both daughters to school . 
 Austen acquired the remainder of her education by reading books , guided by her father and brothers James and Henry . She apparently had unfettered access to her father 's library and that of family friend Warren Hastings , which made up a large and varied collection . Her father was tolerant of Austen 's sometimes @-@ risqué experiments in writing , and provided the sisters with expensive paper and other materials for writing and drawing . According to biographer Park Honan , life in the Austen home was lived in " an open , amused , easy intellectual atmosphere " where the ideas of those with whom the Austens disagreed ( politically or socially ) were discussed . After returning from school in 1786 , Austen " never again lived anywhere beyond the bounds of her immediate family environment " . 
 Private theatricals were also a part of the author 's education . Beginning when Austin was seven years old and continuing until she was thirteen , her family and close friends staged a series of plays including Richard Sheridan 's The Rivals ( 1775 ) and David Garrick 's Bon Ton . Although the details are unknown , she would have joined in these activities as a spectator and ( later ) a participant . Most of the plays were comedies , suggesting a source for Austen 's comedic and satirical gifts . 
 = = = Juvenilia = = = 
 Perhaps as early as 1787 , Austen began to write poems , stories and plays for her and her family 's amusement . She later compiled " fair copies " of 29 of these early works into three bound notebooks , now known as the Juvenilia , with pieces written from 1787 to 1793 . Manuscript evidence exists that Austen continued to work on these pieces as late as 1809 – 1811 and her niece and nephew , Anna and James Edward Austen , made further additions as late as 1814 . Among the pieces are Love and Freindship [ sic ] , a satirical epistolary novel in which she mocked popular novels of sensibility , and The History of England , a 34 @-@ page manuscript accompanied by 13 watercolour miniatures by Cassandra . 
 Austen 's History parodied popular historical writing , particularly Oliver Goldsmith 's 1764 History of England . Austen wrote , " Henry the 4th ascended the throne of England much to his own satisfaction in the year 1399 , after having prevailed on his cousin & predecessor Richard the 2nd , to resign it to him , & to retire for the rest of his Life to Pomfret Castle , where he happened to be murdered . " According to scholar Richard Jenkyns , Austen 's Juvenilia are often " boisterous " and " anarchic " ; he compares them to Monty Python and the work of 18th @-@ century novelist Laurence Sterne . 
 = = = Adulthood = = = 
 Austen continued to live in the family home , engaged in activities typical of women of her age and social standing ; she practised the fortepiano , assisted her sister and mother with the supervision of servants and attended relatives during childbirth and on their <unk> . She sent short pieces of writing to her newborn nieces , Fanny Catherine and Jane Anna Elizabeth . Austen was particularly proud of her accomplishments as a seamstress . She attended church regularly , socialized frequently with friends and neighbours and read novels ( often her own ) aloud to her family in the evenings . <unk> with neighbours often meant dancing — impromptu in someone 's home after supper or at balls , held regularly in the town hall assembly rooms . According to her brother Henry , " Jane was fond of dancing , and excelled in it " . 
 In 1793 Austen began and abandoned a short play later titled Sir Charles Grandison , or , The happy man : a comedy in five acts which she completed around 1800 . The play parodied school @-@ textbook abridgments of her favourite contemporary novel , The History of Sir Charles Grandison ( 1753 ) by Samuel Richardson . According to Park Honan , soon after writing Love and Freindship in 1789 Austen decided to " write for profit , to make stories her central effort " and began writing longer , more sophisticated works around 1793 . 
 Between 1793 and 1795 Austen wrote Lady Susan , considered her most ambitious and sophisticated early novel . It is unlike Austen 's other work ; biographer Claire Tomalin describes the novella 's heroine as a sexual predator who uses her intelligence and charm to manipulate , betray and abuse lovers , friends and family : 
 Told in letters , it is as neatly plotted as a play , and as cynical in tone as any of the most outrageous of the Restoration dramatists who may have provided some of her inspiration ... It stands alone in Austen 's work as a study of an adult woman whose intelligence and force of character are greater than those of anyone she encounters . 
 = = = Early novels = = = 
 After finishing Lady Susan , Austen began her first full @-@ length novel : Elinor and Marianne . Cassandra later remembered that the epistolary novel was read to the family " before 1796 " . Without surviving original manuscripts , there is no way to know how much of the original draft survived in the novel published anonymously in 1811 as Sense and Sensibility . 
 When Austen was twenty years old , Tom Lefroy ( a nephew of neighbours ) visited Steventon from December 1795 to January 1796 . Lefroy had just completed his university education and was moving to London for training as a barrister . Lefroy and Austen would have been introduced at a ball or other neighbourhood social gathering , and it is clear from her letters to Cassandra that they spent considerable time together : " I am almost afraid to tell you how my Irish friend and I behaved . Imagine to yourself everything most profligate and shocking in the way of dancing and sitting down together . " The Lefroy family intervened , sending him away at the end of January . Marriage was impractical , as both Lefroy and Austen must have known ; neither had any money , and he was dependent on a great @-@ uncle in Ireland to finance his education and establish his legal career . If Lefroy later visited Hampshire he was carefully kept from the Austens , and Jane never saw him again . 
 She began work on a second novel , First Impressions , in 1796 . Austen completed the initial draft in August 1797 , when she was 21 , and it later became Pride and Prejudice . Like all of her novels , she read it aloud to her family as she was working on it and it became an " established favourite " . At this time , her father made the first attempt to publish one of her novels . In November 1797 , George wrote to London publisher Thomas Cadell asking if he would consider publishing " a Manuscript Novel , comprised in three <unk> about the length of Miss Burney 's Evelina " ( First Impressions ) at the author 's financial risk . Cadell quickly returned the letter , marked " Declined by Return of Post " , and Austen may not have known about her father 's efforts . After finishing First Impressions , she returned to Elinor and Marianne from November 1797 to mid @-@ 1798 , revising it heavily , replacing the epistolary format with third @-@ person narration and producing something close to Sense and Sensibility . 
 In mid @-@ 1798 , after revising Elinor and Marianne , she began writing a third novel with the working title Susan — later Northanger Abbey — a satire on the popular Gothic novel ; she finished it about a year later . In early 1803 Henry Austen offered Susan to the London publisher Benjamin Crosby , who paid £ 10 for the copyright . Although Crosby promised early publication and advertised the book as being " in the press " , he did nothing more and retained the unpublished manuscript until Austen bought back the copyright in 1816 . 
 = = = Bath and Southampton = = = 
 In December 1800 , George Austen unexpectedly announced his decision to retire from the ministry , leave Steventon and move the family to Bath . Although retirement and travel were good for the elder Austens , Jane was shocked to hear that she was moving from the only home she had ever known . An indication of her state of mind is her lack of productivity when she lived in Bath . She made some revisions to Susan and began — and abandoned — a new novel ( The Watsons ) , but there was nothing like the productivity of 1795 – 1799 . Tomalin suggests that this reflects a deep depression , disabling her as a writer ; Honan disagrees , arguing that Austen wrote ( or revised ) her manuscripts throughout her life except for a few months after her father died . 
 In December 1802 , Austen received her only known proposal of marriage . She and her sister visited Alethea and Catherine Bigg , old friends who lived at <unk> Park near Basingstoke . Their younger brother , Harris Bigg @-@ Wither , had recently finished his education at Oxford and was at home . Bigg @-@ Wither proposed , and Austen accepted . As described by Caroline Austen ( Jane 's niece ) and Reginald Bigg @-@ Wither ( a descendant ) , Harris was unattractive — a large , plain @-@ looking man who spoke little , stuttered , was aggressive in conversation and almost completely tactless . However , Austen had known him since they were young and the marriage offered many practical advantages to her and her family ; he was heir to extensive family estates in the area where the sisters had grown up . With these resources Austen could provide her parents a comfortable old age , give Cassandra a permanent home and , perhaps , assist her brothers in their careers . By the next morning , Austen decided that she had made a mistake and withdrew her acceptance . No contemporary letters or diaries describe how she felt about the proposal . In 1814 Austen wrote a letter to her niece , Fanny Knight , who asked for advice about a serious relationship : " Having written so much on one side of the question , I shall now turn around & entreat you not to commit yourself farther , & not to think of accepting him unless you really do like him . Anything is to be preferred or endured rather than marrying without Affection " . 
 In 1804 , while living in Bath , Austen began an unfinished novel , The Watsons . The story centres on an invalid clergyman with little money and four unmarried daughters . Sutherland describes the novel as " a study in the harsh economic realities of dependent women 's lives " . Honan suggests ( and Tomalin agrees ) that Austen stopped working on the novel after her father died on 21 January 1805 and her personal circumstances resembled those of her characters too closely for comfort . 
 Her father 's final illness struck suddenly , leaving him ( as Austen reported to her brother Francis ) " quite insensible of his own state " and he died quickly . Jane , Cassandra and their mother were left in a precarious financial situation and Edward , James , Henry and Francis Austen pledged to make annual contributions to support their mother and sisters . For the next four years , the family 's living arrangements reflected their financial insecurity ; they lived part @-@ time in rented quarters in Bath before leaving the city in June 1805 for a family visit to Steventon and Godmersham . They spent the autumn of 1805 in the newly fashionable seaside resort of Worthing on the Sussex coast , at Stanford Cottage . It was here that Austen is thought to have written her fair copy of Lady Susan and added its " Conclusion " . Her observations of early Worthing helped inspire her final ( unfinished ) novel , Sanditon , the story of an up @-@ and @-@ coming seaside resort in Sussex . In 1806 the family moved to Southampton , where they shared a house with Frank Austen and his new wife and visited branches of the family . 
 On 5 April 1809 ( about three months before the family 's move to Chawton ) , Austen wrote an angry letter to Richard Crosby offering him a new manuscript of Susan if that was needed to secure immediate publication of her novel and otherwise requesting the return of the original so she could find another publisher . Crosby replied he had not agreed to publish the book by any particular time ( or at all ) ; Austen could repurchase the manuscript for the £ 10 he had paid her , and find another publisher . She did not have the money to repurchase the book , but she did eventually repurchase the manuscript in 1816 . 
 = = = Chawton = = = 
 In early 1809 , Austen 's brother Edward offered his mother and sisters a more settled life : the use of a large cottage in Chawton which was part of Edward 's nearby estate , Chawton House . Jane , Cassandra and their mother moved into the cottage on 7 July 1809 . In Chawton , life was quieter than it had been since the family 's move to Bath in 1800 . The Austens did not socialise with the neighbouring gentry , entertaining only when family visited . Austen 's niece , Anna , described the family 's life in Chawton : " It was a very quiet life , according to our ideas , but they were great readers , and besides the housekeeping our aunts occupied themselves in working with the poor and in teaching some girl or boy to read or write . " Austen wrote almost daily , and was apparently relieved of some household responsibilities to give her more opportunity to write . In this setting , she could be productive once more . 
 = = = First publication = = = 
 At Chawton , Austen published four novels which were generally well received . Through her brother Henry , Thomas Egerton agreed to publish Sense and Sensibility , which appeared in October 1811 . Reviews were favourable ; the novel became fashionable among opinion @-@ makers , and the edition sold out by mid @-@ 1813 . Austen 's earnings from Sense and Sensibility gave her some financial and psychological independence . Egerton then published Pride and Prejudice , a revision of First Impressions , in January 1813 . He advertised the book and it was an immediate success , receiving three favourable reviews and selling well ; by October 1813 , Egerton began selling a second edition . Mansfield Park was published by Egerton in May 1814 . Although the novel was ignored by reviewers , it was a popular success . All copies were sold within six months , and Austen 's earnings for this novel were larger than for any of her others . 
 The author learned that the Prince Regent admired her novels and kept a set at each of his residences . In November 1815 the Prince Regent 's librarian , James Stanier Clarke , invited Austen to visit the prince 's London residence and hinted that she should dedicate the forthcoming Emma to the prince . Although Austen disliked the prince , she could not refuse the request . She later wrote Plan of a Novel , according to Hints from Various Quarters , a satirical outline of the " perfect novel " based on the librarian 's many suggestions for a future Austen novel . 
 In mid @-@ 1815 Austen moved from Egerton to John Murray , a better @-@ known London publisher , who published Emma in December 1815 and a second edition of Mansfield Park in February 1816 . Although Emma sold well , the new edition of Mansfield Park did poorly and this offset most of her profit on Emma . They were the last novels published during her lifetime . 
 While Murray prepared Emma for publication , Austen began a new novel she called The Elliots ( later published as Persuasion ) . She completed its first draft in July 1816 . Shortly after the publication of Emma , Henry Austen repurchased the copyright for Susan from Crosby . Austen was forced to postpone publishing both completed novels by family financial trouble . Henry Austen 's bank failed in March 1816 , depriving him of his assets , leaving him deeply in debt and costing Edward , James and Frank Austen large sums ; Henry and Frank could no longer afford to support their mother and sisters . 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 Early in 1816 , Austen began to feel unwell . She ignored her illness at first , continuing to work and participate in the usual round of family activities . By midyear her decline was unmistakable to her and to her family , and she began a long , slow and irregular deterioration which ended in her death the following year . Although most Austen biographers rely on Dr. Vincent Cope 's tentative 1964 retrospective diagnosis and list her cause of death as Addison 's disease , her final illness has also been described as consistent with Hodgkin 's lymphoma . Katherine White of Britain 's Addison 's Disease Self Help Group suggests that Austen probably died of bovine tuberculosis , a disease now commonly associated with drinking unpasteurized milk . A contributing factor to Austen 's death , discovered by Linda Robinson Walker and described online in the winter 2010 issue of Persuasions , might have been Brill – Zinsser disease ( a recurrent form of typhus , which she had had as a child ) . Brill – Zinsser disease is to typhus as shingles is to chicken pox ; when a person who has had typhus is subjected to abnormal physiological stress ( such as malnutrition or another infection ) , it can resurface as Brill – Zinsser disease . 
 Despite her illness , Austen continued to work . She was dissatisfied with the ending of The Elliots and rewrote the final two chapters , finishing them on 6 August 1816 . In January 1817 she began a new novel she called The Brothers ( entitled Sanditon when it was first published in 1925 ) and completed twelve chapters before stopping in mid @-@ March , probably due to illness . Although she made light of her condition to others , describing it as " bile " and rheumatism , as her disease progressed she experienced increasing difficulty in walking and other activities . By mid @-@ April , Austen was bedridden . The following month Cassandra and Henry brought her to Winchester for medical treatment , but she died there on 18 July 1817 at age 41 . Through his clerical connections , Henry arranged for his sister to be buried in the north aisle of the nave of Winchester Cathedral . The epitaph composed by her brother James praises Austen 's personal qualities – including the " extraordinary endowments of her mind " – and expresses hope for her religious salvation , but does not mention her achievements as a writer . 
 = = = Posthumous publication = = = 
 After Austen 's death , Cassandra and Henry arranged with John Murray for the publication of Persuasion and Northanger Abbey as a set in December 1817 . Henry contributed a biographical note which Claire Tomalin calls " a loving and polished eulogy " , identifying his sister for the first time as the author of the novels . Sales were good for a year ( only 321 copies remained unsold at the end of 1818 ) before they declined ; Murray disposed of the remaining copies in 1820 , and Austen 's novels were out of print for twelve years . In 1832 publisher Richard Bentley purchased the remaining copyrights to her novels and , beginning in December 1832 or January 1833 , published them in five illustrated volumes as part of his Standard Novels series . In October 1833 , he published the first collected edition of Austen 's works . Since then , her novels have been continuously in print . 
 = = Novels = = 
 Although Austen 's novels had always been popular , they were disparaged by academics of English literature until her work was reassessed by F. R. Leavis , Ian Watt and others during the mid @-@ 20th century . They recognised Austen 's importance to the development of the English novel after Henry Fielding ( 1707 – 1754 ) and Samuel Richardson ( 1689 – 1761 ) and before Charles Dickens . They agreed that she combined Fielding and Richardson 's " qualities of interiority and irony , realism and satire to form an author superior to both " . Austen 's six main novels , in order of publication , are Sense and Sensibility , Pride and Prejudice , Mansfield Park , Emma and the posthumous Persuasion and Northanger Abbey . 
 = = = Sense and Sensibility = = = 
 Sense and Sensibility was originally written as an epistolary novel around 1795 , when Austen was about 19 years old , and was entitled Elinor and Marianne . Austen later changed its form to narrative and its title to Sense and Sensibility . In the novel , " sense " means good judgment or prudence and " sensibility " means sensitivity or emotion . " Sense " is personified by the character of Elinor , and " sensibility " by Marianne . By changing the novel 's title , Austen added " philosophical depth " to what began as a sketch of two characters . Its title and that of her next published novel , Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) , may allude to the political conflicts of the 1790s . Austen drew inspiration for Sense and Sensibility from other 1790s novels which explored similar themes . These included Adam Stevenson 's autobiographical 1785 essay " Life and Love " ( in which Stevenson described an unfortunate relationship ) and Jane West 's A Gossip 's Story ( 1796 ) , which features two sisters — one rational and the other romantic and emotional . West 's romantic sister @-@ heroine shares a first name ( Marianne ) with Austen 's character , and other textual similarities are described in a recent edition of West 's novel . According to Austen biographer Claire Tomalin , Sense and Sensibility has a " wobble in its approach " ; Austen , while writing the novel , gradually became uncertain whether sense or sensibility should prevail . She paints Marianne as sweet , with attractive qualities : intelligence , musical talent , frankness and the capacity to love deeply . The author also acknowledges that Willoughby , with all his faults , continues to love and ( to some degree ) appreciate Marianne . For these reasons , some readers find Marianne 's ultimate marriage to Colonel Brandon unsatisfactory . 
 = = = Pride and Prejudice = = = 
 Pride and Prejudice ( the author 's second published novel ) featured a memorable portrayal of the main character , Elizabeth Bennet . Austen began writing the novel after staying at <unk> Park in Kent with her brother , Edward , and his wife in 1796 . Originally entitled First Impressions , it was written between October 1796 and August 1797 . On 1 November 1797 , Austen 's father sent a letter to the London bookseller Thomas Cadell asking if he was interested in seeing the manuscript ; the offer was declined by return of post . Austen significantly revised the manuscript of First Impressions between 1811 and 1812 , and the original manuscript is lost . Because of the large number of letters in the final novel , First Impressions was probably an epistolary novel . Austen later renamed the novel Pride and Prejudice ; she probably had in mind the " sufferings and oppositions " summarised in the final chapter of Fanny Burney 's Cecilia , " Pride and Prejudice " , in which the phrase appears three times in block capitals . The title of First Impressions may have been changed to avoid confusion with other works . During the years between the completion of First Impressions and its revision into Pride and Prejudice , two other First Impressions had been published : a novel by Margaret Holford and a comedy by Horace Smith . Austen sold the novel 's copyright to Thomas Egerton of Whitehall for £ 110 , after requesting £ 150 . It was a costly decision ; Austen had published Sense and Sensibility on a commission basis , <unk> the publisher against losses and receiving any profits ( less costs and the publisher 's commission ) . Not knowing that Sense and Sensibility would sell out its edition ( earning her £ 140 ) , she sold the copyright to Egerton for a lump sum ; all its profits would be his . According to Jan Fergus , Egerton earned about £ 450 from the novel 's first two editions alone . He published the first edition of Pride and Prejudice , in three hardcover volumes , on 27 January 1813 . It was advertised in the Morning Chronicle at a price of 18 shillings . Receiving favourable reviews , the edition sold out ; a second edition was published in November , and a third in 1817 . 
 = = = Mansfield Park = = = 
 Mansfield Park , Austen 's third published novel , is the most controversial of her major works . Although Regency critics praised its wholesome morality , many modern readers find Fanny 's timidity and disapproval of the theatricals difficult to relate to and reject the notion ( explicit in the final chapter ) that she is a better person for her childhood privations . Austen 's mother thought Fanny " insipid " , and other readers have found her priggish and unlikable . Critics point out that she is a complex personality , perceptive but given to wishful thinking , and demonstrates courage and greater self @-@ esteem during the latter part of the story . According to Austen biographer Claire Tomalin ( who is generally critical of Fanny ) , " It is in rejecting obedience in favour of the higher dictate of remaining true to her own conscience that Fanny rises to her moment of heroism " . Tomalin reflects the ambivalence many readers feel towards the character : " More is made of Fanny Price 's faith , which gives her the courage to resist what she thinks is wrong ; it also makes her intolerant of sinners , whom she is ready to cast aside . " 
 Austen 's life during the Regency era enmeshed her in the debate about slavery . She omits any mention of the Slave Trade Act 1807 , which abolished the slave trade ( not slavery itself ) in the British Empire . The act ( passed four years before Austen began the novel ) was the culmination of a long campaign by abolitionists , notably William Wilberforce . Slavery was not abolished in the empire until 1833 ; the death rate on the Caribbean plantations was high due to yellow fever and malaria , and abolitionists thought that abolishing the slave trade would end slavery in the West Indies ( since plantation owners would be unable to import slaves from Africa ) . Literary theoretician Edward Said implicated Mansfield Park in the acceptance by Western culture of the benefits of slavery and imperialism ( a connection also made by Vladimir Nabokov in his Lectures on Literature , delivered in the 1940s but unpublished until 1980 ) , citing Austen 's failure to note that the Mansfield Park estate was possible only with slave labour . Said depicted Austen as a racist supporter of slavery whose books should be condemned , not celebrated . His thesis that she wrote Mansfield Park to glorify slavery received wide attention ; the editor of a Penguin edition of the novel wrote in its introduction that Said had called Mansfield Park " part of the structure of an expanding imperialist venture " . Literary critics ( including Gabrielle White ) have rejected Said 's condemnation of Austen and Western culture , maintaining that she and other writers — including Samuel Johnson and Edmund Burke — opposed slavery and helped make its eventual abolition possible . Tomalin writes that the usually timid Fanny questions her uncle about the slave trade and receives no answer , suggesting that Fanny 's perception of its immorality is clearer than his . 
 = = = Emma = = = 
 Emma is the fourth and last of Austen 's novels published during her lifetime . Emma Woodhouse is the first Austen heroine with no financial concerns , which ( she tells naïve Miss Smith ) is why she has no inducement to marry . This is a departure from Austen 's other novels , where the quests for marriage and financial security are important themes . Emma 's financial resources place her in a more privileged position than the heroines of Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice ; Jane Fairfax 's prospects , in contrast , are bleak . By comparison to other Austen heroines , Emma seems immune to romantic attraction . Unlike Marianne Dashwood , who is attracted to the wrong man before she settles on the right one , Emma shows no romantic interest in the men she meets . She is surprised — and somewhat dismayed — when the parson Elton declares his love for her , similar to Elizabeth Bennet 's reaction to the obsequious Mr Collins ( who is also a parson ) . Emma 's fancy for Frank Churchill is more a romantic plot complication for Austen than a pursuit of Emma 's genuine affections . At the beginning of Chapter XIII , Emma has " no doubt of her being in love " ; however , it quickly becomes clear ( although she spends time " forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress and close of their attachment " ) that " the conclusion of every imaginary declaration on his side was that she refused him " . 
 = = = Persuasion = = = 
 Persuasion , Austen 's last novel , was unpublished at the time of her death , although it appeared before the end of 1818 . It was first published in a four @-@ volume edition ; the first two volumes included the first publication of her early novel , Northanger Abbey , and the last two included Persuasion . Although readers might conclude that Austen intended " persuasion " to be the story 's unifying theme , the novel was named by her brother Henry after her death . The idea of persuasion runs through the story , with vignettes as variations on the theme . There is no known documentation of what Austen intended to call the novel . Whatever her intentions may have been , according to family tradition she referred to it as The Elliots and some critics believe that it was her intended title . Henry probably chose the title for Northanger Abbey as well . According to literary scholar Gillian Beer , Austen was deeply concerned about the level and application of " persuasion " in society ( particularly the pressures and choices facing young women ) . Beer writes that for Austen and her readers , persuasion was indeed " fraught with moral dangers " ; Austen was appalled by what she came to regard as her misguided advice to niece Fanny Knight on whether to accept a particular suitor , despite the prospect of a long engagement : " Jane Austen 's anxieties about persuasion and responsibility are here passionately expressed . She refuses to become part of the machinery with which Fanny is manoeuvering herself into forming the engagement . To be the stand @-@ in motive for another 's actions frightens her . Yet Jane Austen cannot avoid the part of <unk> , even as <unk> . " Fanny ultimately rejects her suitor and , after her aunt 's death , marries someone else . Beer says that Austen was keenly aware that persuasion — to persuade or be persuaded , rightly or wrongly — is fundamental to human communication ; in the novel , " Jane Austen gradually draws out the implications of discriminating ' just ' and ' unjust ' persuasion . " The story winds through a number of situations in which people are influencing , or attempting to influence , other people ( or themselves ) . Beer notes " the novel 's entire brooding on the power pressures , the seductions , and also the new pathways opened by persuasion " . 
 = = = Northanger Abbey = = = 
 Northanger Abbey was written when Austen was relatively young ( before 1800 ) , well before the 1812 publication of Sense and Sensibility . Although it was written over a decade before Persuasion and left unpublished at that time , the two novels were posthumously co @-@ published in 1818 by her family . In Northanger Abbey , an early parody of Gothic fiction , Austen upends eighteenth @-@ century fictional conventions by making her heroine a plain , undistinguished girl from a middle @-@ class family , allowing her to fall in love with the hero before he gives her a thought and exposing her romantic fears and curiosity as groundless . According to Claire Tomalin , Austen may have begun the novel ( more comic than her other works , with literary allusions her parents and siblings would have enjoyed ) as family entertainment to be read aloud by the fireside . Joan Aiken writes , " We can guess that Susan [ the original title of Northanger Abbey ] , in its first outline , was written very much for family entertainment , addressed to a family audience , like all Jane Austen 's juvenile works , with their asides to the reader , and absurd dedications ; some of the juvenilia , we know , were specifically addressed to her brothers Charles and Frank ; all were designed to be circulated and read by a large network of relations . " Austen addresses the reader directly at times — particularly at the end of the fifth chapter , where she expresses at length her opinion of the value of novels and the contemporary social prejudice against them in favour of historical works and newspapers . Through discussions by Isabella , the Thorpe sisters , Eleanor and Henry , and when Catherine <unk> the general 's library and her mother 's instructional books on behaviour , the reader gains an insight into Austen 's perspective on novels in general compared with other popular contemporary literature ( especially Gothic novels ) . Eleanor enjoys history books , despite Catherine 's pointing out the obvious fiction of speeches given to important historical characters . The directness with which Austen addresses the reader ( particularly at the end of the novel ) provides unique insight into Austen 's thoughts well before the publication of Sense and Sensibility ; this is particularly valuable because a large portion of Austen 's letters were burned , at her request , by her sister at Jane 's death . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The themes and literary theory applied to the analysis of Austen 's novels have varied and expanded with generations of readers and scholars who approach her writings . The reins of criticism and analysis of the major themes in Austen 's novels were first taken up by Walter Scott and theologian Richard Whately . After the disposition of her estate , by 1821 a second period of literary analysis and criticism of her writings began ; it lasted for about a half @-@ century , until 1870 . This was followed by several decades of Austen scholarship after the international reception of her novels , which were translated into a number of foreign languages during the late 19th century . The modern period of scholarship and analysis of her literary themes , from about 1930 to the present , defends her as one of the most accomplished internationally known British authors . 
 = = = Regency period = = = 
 While Austen was alive and during the years immediately following her death , critiques of her literary themes were written by historical novelist Walter Scott and theologian Richard Whately . Asked by publisher John Murray to review Emma , Scott wrote a long , thoughtful piece which was published anonymously in the March 1816 Quarterly Review . Using the review as a platform from which to defend the then @-@ disreputable genre of the novel , he praised Austen 's ability to copy " from nature as she really exists in the common walks of life , and presenting to the reader ... a correct and striking representation of that which is daily taking place around him " . According to 21st @-@ century Austen scholar William <unk> , " Unlike some of Austen 's lay readers , who recognized her divergence from realistic practice as it had been prescribed and defined at the time , Walter Scott may well have been the first to install Austen as the realist par excellence " . Scott wrote in his journal in 1826 what later became a widely quoted comparison : " Also read again and for the third time at least Miss Austen 's very finely written novel of Pride and Prejudice . That young lady had a talent for describing the involvement and feelings and characters of ordinary life which is to me the most wonderful I ever met with . " 
 In the Quarterly Review in 1821 , English writer and theologian Richard Whately published the most serious and enthusiastic early posthumous review of Austen 's work . Whately drew favourable comparisons between Austen , Homer and Shakespeare , praising her dramatic narrative qualities . He affirmed the legitimacy of the novel as a genre , arguing that imaginative literature ( particularly narrative literature ) was more valuable than history or biography . When properly done ( as Austen had ) , Whately said , imaginative literature concerned itself with generalised human experience from which the reader could gain important insights into human nature ; it was moral . Whately also analysed Austen as a female writer : " We suspect one of Miss Austin 's [ sic ] great merits in our eyes to be , the insight she gives us into the peculiarities of female characters ... Her heroines are what one knows women must be , though one never can get them to acknowledge it . " No other significant , original Austen criticism was published until the late 19th century ; Whately and Scott had set the tone for the Victorian era 's view of the author . 
 = = = Victorian period = = = 
 For several decades after 1821 and the disposition of Austen 's literary estate , Victorian critics and audiences were drawn to authors such as Charles Dickens and George Eliot ; her novels seemed provincial and quiet by comparison . Although Austen 's works began to be republished in late 1832 or early 1833 by Richard Bentley in his Standard Novels series and remained in print continuously thereafter , they were not best @-@ sellers . Brian C. Southam describes her " reading public between 1821 and 1870 " as " minute beside the known audience for Dickens and his contemporaries " . Those who read Austen saw themselves as a discriminating , cultured few ( a common theme of Austen criticism during the 19th and early 20th centuries ) . Philosopher and literary critic George Henry Lewes articulated this view in a series of enthusiastic articles in the 1840s and 1850s . In " The Novels of Jane Austen " , published anonymously in Blackwood 's Magazine in 1859 , Lewes praised Austen 's novels for " the economy of art ... the easy adaptation of means to ends , with no aid from superfluous elements " and compared her to Shakespeare . Acknowledging her weak plot construction , he appreciated Austen 's dramatisation : " The reader 's pulse never throbs , his curiosity is never intense ; but his interest never wanes for a moment . The action begins ; the people speak , feel , and act ; everything that is said , felt , or done tends towards the entanglement or disentanglement of the plot ; and we are almost made actors as well as spectators of the little drama . " Responding to Lewes 's essays and his communications with her , novelist Charlotte Brontë admired Austen 's fidelity to everyday life but described her as " only shrewd and observant " and criticised the absence of overt passion in her work . To Brontë , Austen 's work appeared formal and constrained : " a carefully fenced , highly cultivated garden , with neat borders and delicate flowers ; but no glance of bright vivid physiognomy , no open country , no fresh air , no blue hill , no bonny beck " . 
 = = = Edwardian period = = = 
 The six decades from around 1870 to 1930 saw a redoubling of Austen 's international renown , with translations of her works into other languages ( including French , German , Danish and Swedish ) and three biographical studies and analyses of her literary themes . In 1869 the first significant Austen biography ( A Memoir of Jane Austen by her nephew , James Edward Austen @-@ Leigh ) was published , and her popularity and critical standing increased dramatically . Readers of the Memoir were presented with the myth of an amateur novelist who wrote masterpieces ; it fixed in the public mind a sentimental image of Austen as a quiet , middle @-@ aged maiden aunt whose work was appropriate for a respectable Victorian family . Austen @-@ Leigh commissioned a portrait of Austen , based on an earlier watercolour , which softened her image for the Victorian public . Richard Bentley 's engraving , the Memoir 's frontispiece , is based on this idealised image . The Memoir sparked a revival of Austen 's novels . The first popular editions ( an economical , sixpenny series published by Routledge ) were published in 1883 . This was followed by elaborate illustrated editions , collectors ' sets and scholarly editions . Contemporary critics continued to assert that Austen 's works were sophisticated , capable of enjoyment only by those who could plumb their depths . However , more criticism of Austen 's novels was published in the two years following the Memoir than had appeared in the previous fifty . Austen descendants William Austen @-@ Leigh and Richard Arthur Austen @-@ Leigh published the definitive family biography , Jane Austen : Her Life and Letters — A Family Record , in 1913 . Based primarily on family papers and letters , it was described by Austen biographer Park Honan as " accurate , staid , reliable , and at times vivid and suggestive " . The authors distanced themselves from the Memoir 's sentimental tone , making little effort to go beyond immediately available family records and traditions , and their book offers facts with little interpretation . 
 During the last quarter of the 19th century , the first critical analyses of Austen 's works were published . Goldwin Smith 's 1890 Life of Jane Austen began a " fresh phase in the critical heritage " , in which Austen reviewers became critics . This launched " formal criticism " , focusing on Austen as writer and analysing what made her writing unique . According to Brian C. Southam , Austen criticism increased in quantity and ( to some degree ) quality after 1870 but was infused with " a certain uniformity " . Notable critics included Richard Simpson , Margaret Oliphant and Leslie Stephen . In a review of the Memoir , Simpson described Austen as a serious @-@ but @-@ ironic critic of English society . He introduced two interpretative themes which became the basis for modern literary criticism of her works : humour as social critique and irony as a means of moral evaluation . According to Simpson , Austen " began by being an ironical critic ; she manifested her judgment ... not by direct censure , but by the indirect method of imitating and exaggerating the faults of her models ... Criticism , humour , irony , the judgment not of one that gives sentence but of the mimic who quizzes while he mocks , are her characteristics . " Simpson 's essay , obscure for many years , became influential when Lionel Trilling quoted from it in 1957 . 
 Another prominent writer whose Austen criticism was ignored , novelist Margaret Oliphant , described her in quasi @-@ feminist terms as " armed with a ' fine vein of feminine cynicism , ' ' full of subtle power , keenness , finesse , and self @-@ restraint , ' blessed with an ' exquisite sense ' of the ' ridiculous , ' ' a fine stinging yet soft @-@ voiced contempt , ' whose novels are ' so calm and cold and keen ' " . This view was explored during the 1970s rise of feminist literary criticism . Although abridged editions of Austen 's novels had been published in the United States since 1832 , a distinct American response to Austen was not heard before 1870 . According to Southam , " For American literary nationalists Jane Austen 's cultivated scene was too pallid , too constrained , too refined , too downright unheroic " . Austen was not a democratic author , and her canvas did not extend to the frontier themes which had come to define American literature . By the turn of the 20th century , the American response was represented by a debate between American novelist and critic William Dean Howells and writer and humourist Mark Twain . In a series of essays , Howells painted Austen as a canonical popular figure ; Twain used her as an argument against anglophilia , demonstrating the distinctiveness of American literature by disparaging that from England . In his book , Following the Equator , Twain described his ship 's library : " Jane Austen 's books ... are absent from this library . Just that one omission alone would make a fairly good library out of a library that hadn 't a book in it . " 
 Members of the literary elite , who had appropriated an appreciation of Austen as a mark of culture , reacted against the popularisation of her work around 1900 . They called themselves " Janeites " , distinguishing themselves from the masses who ( in their view ) did not properly understand Austen . American novelist Henry James , part of this group , ranked Austen with Shakespeare , Cervantes and Henry Fielding as one of " the fine painters of life " . James considered her an " unconscious " artist , describing her as " instinctive and charming " . In 1905 , however , he responded to what he described as " a beguiled infatuation " with Austen — a rising tide of public interest which exceeded her " intrinsic merit and interest " . James attributed the groundswell principally to " the stiff breeze of the commercial , ... the special bookselling spirits . ... the body of publishers , editors , illustrators , producers of the pleasant twaddle of magazines ; who have found their ' dear , ' our dear , everybody 's dear , Jane so infinitely to their material purpose , so amenable to pretty reproduction in every variety of what is called tasteful , and in what seemingly proves to be salable , form . " 
 = = = Modern period = = = 
 Austen 's place among internationally known British authors appeared secure by the early twentieth century . Important early works included Oxford Shakespearean scholar A. C. Bradley 's 1911 essay , " generally regarded as the starting @-@ point for the serious academic approach to Jane Austen " . Bradley emphasised Austen 's ties to 18th @-@ century critic and writer Samuel Johnson , calling her a moralist as well as a humourist ; in this , according to Southam , he was " totally original " . Bradley divided Austen 's works into " early " and " late " novels , categories still used by scholars today . The second groundbreaking early @-@ 20th @-@ century critic of Austen was R. W. Chapman , whose collection of Austen 's works was the first scholarly edition of any English novelist ; the Chapman texts have remained the basis for subsequent editions of her works . In a burst of mid @-@ century revisionism , scholars approached Austen more sceptically . D. W. Harding , following and expanding upon Farrer , argued in his essay " Regulated Hatred : An Aspect of the Work of Jane Austen " that her novels subverted ( rather than supported ) the status quo . Her irony , more caustic than humorous , intended to undermine the assumptions of the society she portrayed . With this irony , Austen attempted to protect her integrity as an artist and a person in the face of attitudes and practices she rejected . Critic Q. D. Leavis wrote in " Critical Theory of Jane Austen 's Writing " , published in Scrutiny in the early 1940s , that Austen was a professional ( not an amateur ) writer . Harding 's and Leavis ' articles were followed by another revisionist treatment by Marvin Mudrick in Jane Austen : Irony as Defense and Discovery ( 1952 ) . Mudrick portrayed Austen as isolated , defensive and critical of her society , describing in detail the relationship he saw between her attitude toward contemporary literature and her use of irony to contrast the realities of her society with what she felt they should be . These revisionist views , with critic F. R. Leavis ' view in The Great Tradition ( 1948 ) that Austen was one of the great writers of English fiction ( a belief shared by Ian Watt , who helped shape scholarly debate about the novel as a genre ) , cemented Austen 's academic reputation . 
 Late @-@ 20th @-@ century literary critic Harold Bloom has continued F. R. Leavis ' tradition , comparing Austen to Shakespeare on the strength of the portrayal of the inner lives of her major characters . For Bloom , Austen 's " genius " is comparable to Murasaki Shikibu ( author of The Tale of Genji ) , Alexander Pope , John Donne and Jonathan Swift . Vladimir Nabokov was less enthusiastic about Austen in his comparison with Nikolai Gogol ( one of his favourite authors ) . To Nabokov , Gogol 's craftsmanship exceeded Austen 's . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary response = = = 
 Since Austen 's works were published anonymously , they brought her little personal renown . Although her novels quickly became fashionable among opinion @-@ makers such as Princess Charlotte Augusta ( daughter of George IV ) , only a few reviews were published . Most were short , favourable , superficial and cautious , focusing on the novels ' moral lessons . Walter Scott , a leading novelist of the day , provided an anonymous review . Using it as a platform from which to defend the then @-@ disreputable genre of the novel , he praised Austen 's realism . The other important early review of Austen 's works was attributed to Richard Whately in 1821 . Whately denied writing the review , which drew favourable comparisons between Austen , Homer and Shakespeare and praised the dramatic quality of her storytelling . Scott and Whately set the tone for nearly all subsequent 19th @-@ century Austen criticism . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Because Austen 's novels failed to conform to romantic and Victorian expectations that " powerful emotion [ be ] authenticated by an egregious display of sound and colour in the writing " , 19th @-@ century critics and audiences generally preferred Charles Dickens and George Eliot . Although her novels were republished in Britain beginning in the 1830s and sold steadily , they were not bestsellers . 
 Austen had many 19th @-@ century admirers who considered themselves part of a literary elite , viewing their appreciation of her work as a mark of cultural taste . Philosopher and literary critic George Henry Lewes expressed this view in a series of enthusiastic articles published in the 1840s and 1850s . Later in the century , novelist Henry James ranked Austen with Shakespeare , Cervantes and Henry Fielding ( author of Tom Jones ) as among " the fine painters of life " . 
 The 1869 publication of James Edward Austen @-@ Leigh 's A Memoir of Jane Austen introduced her to a wider public as " dear aunt Jane " , a respectable maiden aunt . Publication of the Memoir sparked a revival of Austen 's novels ; the first popular editions appeared in 1883 , and illustrated editions and collectors ' sets quickly followed . Author and critic Leslie Stephen called Austen 's great popularity during the 1880s " <unk> " . Around the turn of the 20th century , members of the literary elite reacted against the popularization of Austen . They called themselves " Janeites " , distinguishing themselves from the masses who did not fully understand her works . Henry James began criticising what he called " a beguiled infatuation " with Austen , a rising tide of public interest which exceeded her " intrinsic merit and interest " . During the last quarter of the century , the first criticism of Austen was published ; after the Memoir , more criticism of Austen appeared in two years than in the previous half @-@ century . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Several works paved the way for an academic focus on Austen 's novels . The first , a 1911 essay by Oxford Shakespearean scholar A. C. Bradley , is " generally regarded as the starting @-@ point for the serious academic approach to Jane Austen " . Bradley categorised her novels as " early " and " late " novels , a distinction still used by scholars . The second was R. W. Chapman 's 1923 edition of Austen 's collected works , her first scholarly edition and the first of any English novelist . The Chapman text is the basis for all subsequent published editions of Austen 's works . With the 1939 publication of Mary Lascelles 's Jane Austen and Her Art , academic study of the author took hold . Lascelles ' work included an analysis of the books Austen read and the effect of her reading on her work and an extensive analysis of Austen 's style and " narrative art " . Concern arose that Austen criticism was becoming increasingly academic and esoteric , a concern which continues . 
 During a period of 1940s revisionism , scholars called Austen a subversive writer . These views , with F. R. Leavis ' and Ian Watt 's belief that Austen was one of the great writers of English fiction , cemented her academic reputation . They agreed that she " combined [ Henry Fielding 's and Samuel Richardson 's ] qualities of interiority and irony , realism and satire to form an author superior to both " . The post @-@ World War II period has seen increased scholarship on Austen using a variety of critical approaches , with anthologies published by Cambridge University Press , Chelsea House and Prentice Hall . However , the gap between academic and popular appreciation of Austen has widened . 
 Sequels , prequels and adaptations , from soft @-@ core pornography to fantasy , have been based on Austen 's novels . During the mid @-@ 19th century , Austen family members began publishing conclusions to her incomplete novels ; by 2000 , there were over 100 printed adaptations . Austen 's first film adaptation was the 1940 MGM production of Pride and Prejudice , starring Laurence Olivier and Greer Garson . BBC television dramatisations , first produced during the 1970s , attempted to adhere meticulously to Austen 's plots , characterisation and settings . In 1995 , two Austen adaptations appeared : Ang Lee 's film version of Sense and Sensibility ( for which screenwriter and star Emma Thompson won an Academy Award ) and the BBC 's popular TV mini @-@ series Pride and Prejudice , starring Jennifer Ehle and Colin Firth . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 A 2005 British production of Pride and Prejudice was directed by Joe Wright . The film , a period piece which accurately depicts the five sisters as they deal with marriage , morality and misconceptions , is set in the late 18th century ( slightly earlier than the novel ) . Keira Knightley starred as Elizabeth Bennet and Matthew Macfadyen played her romantic interest , Fitzwilliam Darcy . Produced by Working Title Films and StudioCanal , it was released on 16 September 2005 in the United Kingdom and Ireland and on 11 November in the United States . 
 That year , Julia Day reported in The Guardian that ITV drama head Nick Elliott had ordered adaptations of Mansfield Park , Northanger Abbey and Persuasion . According to Elliot , they would be " important remakes for the new generation ... About every 10 years , all the great stories need retelling . These films will be very much 2007 films ... We 've asked and pushed the production team to make them young . Her stories always make great TV drama and our Jane Austen season will feature the absolute cream of British acting talent " . In January 2016 a film version of Lady Susan , directed by Whit Stillman and starring Kate Beckinsale and Chloe Sevigny , premiered at the Sundance Film Festival as Love & Friendship ( adapting its title from Austen 's youthful story , Love and Freindship [ sic ] ) . 
 In 2007 , Anne Hathaway starred in the biographical film Becoming Jane . 
 = = List of works = = 
 Novels 
 Sense and Sensibility ( 1811 ) 
 Pride and Prejudice ( 1813 ) 
 Mansfield Park ( 1814 ) 
 Emma ( 1815 ) 
 Northanger Abbey ( 1818 , posthumous ) 
 Persuasion ( 1818 , posthumous ) 
 Short fiction 
 Lady Susan ( 1794 , 1805 ) 
 Unfinished fiction 
 The Watsons ( 1804 ) 
 Sanditon ( 1817 ) 
 Other works 
 Sir Charles Grandison ( adapted play , 1793 , 1800 ) 
 Plan of a Novel ( 1815 ) 
 Poems ( 1796 – 1817 ) 
 Prayers ( 1796 – 1817 ) 
 Letters ( 1796 – 1817 ) 
 = = Critical editions = = 
 An authoritative , contemporary six @-@ volume critical edition of Austen 's major novels was begun in 2010 by Harvard University Press as part of their Belknap Press imprint . Other " complete " editions of Austen 's novels are available , although most lack annotations or period illustrations . The series ' final volume , Mansfield Park , is scheduled for publication in fall 2016 . 
 Pride and Prejudice . Hardcover : 446 pages Publisher : Belknap Press ; 1st edition ( October 31 , 2010 ) . ASIN : <unk> . 
 Persuasion . Hardcover : 360 pages . Publisher : Belknap Press ; Annotated edition ( November 7 , 2011 ) . ISBN <unk> . 
 Emma . Hardcover : 576 pages . Publisher : Belknap Press ; Annotated edition ( September 17 , 2012 ) . ISBN <unk> . 
 Sense and Sensibility . Hardcover : 448 pages . Publisher : Belknap Press ; Annotated edition ( October 1 , 2013 ) . ISBN <unk> . 
 Northanger Abbey . Hardcover : 384 pages Publisher : Belknap Press ; Annotated edition ( April 28 , 2014 ) . ISBN <unk> . 
 Mansfield Park . Hardcover : 490 pages . Publisher : Belknap Press ; Annotated edition ( October 24 , 2016 ) . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = Family trees = = 
 = Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo Tales = 
 Final Fantasy Fables : Chocobo Tales , released in Japan as Chocobo to Mahō no Ehon ( <unk> , lit . " Chocobo and the Magic Picture Book " ) is a Nintendo DS adventure game developed by h.a.n.d. and published by Square Enix . It was released in Japan on December 14 , 2006 , in North America on April 3 , 2007 , and in the PAL region in May 2007 . 
 Final Fantasy Fables is a Final Fantasy spinoff starring a Chocobo in a setting which features common elements and creatures of the series . Music from the rest of the series is also reused . The game is composed of a number of minigames woven into a main adventure . The game was received positively by critics , who appreciated the originality and light @-@ hearted nature of the title . 
 A sequel , Chocobo to Mahō no Ehon : <unk> to Shōjo to <unk> no Yūsha ( <unk> <unk> , lit . " Chocobo and the Magic Picture Book : The Witch , the Girl , and the Five Heroes " ) was released in Japan on December 11 , 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Chocobo Tales features a mix of three different types of gameplay ; role @-@ playing video game , exploration , and card battles . Players explore a 3D environment to find picture books . Upon finding them the player is transported into pop @-@ up picture books to complete minigames and open the path to the next part of the story . The picture books take the form of Aesop 's Fables and Grimm 's Fairy Tales with the player character often taking the main role . Other Final Fantasy characters take up roles within the stories . More simplistic minigames , known as microgames , are also scattered throughout the world . Unlike minigames , these are not located within pop @-@ up books , do not affect the game @-@ world and are not required to progress in the game . 
 Throughout the course of the story , the player will participate in combat that is referred to as " pop @-@ up duels " . Battles utilize a deck constructed from cards they have collected from story events , minigames , microgames , or other characters . These decks are used to battle game 's bosses in card battle games . Chocobo Tales features online multiplayer capabilities as well . Players can compete against each other in either pop @-@ up duels or minigames . Both modes can connect either through local wireless or Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi . Multiplayer includes playing the card battles in multi @-@ card and online play by using Nintendo Wi @-@ Fi , and the mini @-@ games are multi @-@ card and single @-@ card download multiplayer as well . 2 @-@ 4 players may team up for battles , or to participate in mini @-@ games . 
 = = Story = = 
 The cast of characters includes such recurring characters as Chocobo , a White Mage named <unk> , a Black Mage named Croma , and others including Irma , the leader of the villains whose plan is to free <unk> <unk> , the primary antagonist sealed inside Croma 's book , <unk> and Peekaboo , a pair consisting of a skinny blue Chocobo and fat pink Chocobo , Jail Birds , a group of black Chocobos acting and dressed as stereotypical crooks ( black ski masks and black and white striped shirts ) , and <unk> , a black Chocobo who works alongside <unk> and Peekaboo . 
 The story is set in a fairly similar setting of Final Fantasy games such as Final Fantasy I and Final Fantasy V ; a medieval setting despite having things such as airships . Throughout the course of the game , Chocobo must enter magical picture books which are taken from popular existing fairy tales and folk stories , adapted to suit the Final Fantasy universe and often starring a Chocobo as the main character . There are eight storybooks to discover , each comprising two volumes , and the separate volumes often reference separate stories . 
 = = Development = = 
 Chocobo Tales was announced in the Summer of 2006 . Initial details revolved around the main character , Chocobo , the opening sequence of the story and the picture book worlds . Further details included the pop @-@ up duels and more information pertaining to the story . The game was produced by Yuki Yokoyama and took 20 staff members a year to create . The first decision made was to create a game about chocobos , market research showed that the characters are most popular with younger players , thus the game was designed for the Nintendo DS system , a popular system with that age group . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Much of the music in the game has been " borrowed " from other Final Fantasy games , newly rendered . The music played during card battles is the battle theme from Final Fantasy I , just as the theme played when traversing Mount Magma is the same as the theme of <unk> Volcano from the same game . The victory theme is the classic jingle , with the pre @-@ VII <unk> . There are many other examples , such as the chocobo racing theme from FFVII , the Boss theme being borrowed from Final Fantasy VI , Irma 's house is a rendition of the Final Fantasy IV sorrow music , and the end credits feature the airship theme from Final Fantasy VIII . Music from Final Fantasy III has also been borrowed , such as the crystal room theme and <unk> theme . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chocobo Tales sold over 78 @,@ 000 copies in Japan by the end of 2006 , just over two weeks after release . It sold 100 @,@ 000 copies in Europe and 70 @,@ 000 copies in North America by November 2007 . Chocobo Tales met with overall positive reviews . RPGamer commented " Final Fantasy Fables is quite unique , offering a wide variety of gaming options . While building on the massive world of the Final Fantasy series , it takes a new spin in an attempt at something fresh . " Edge magazine referred to the game as a " decent effort " . They complemented the visuals , but stated " the execution and appeal is limited " . IGN called Chocobo Tales a " surprisingly fun and engaging experience . " GameSpot stated " it might look like just another kid 's game , but there is a lot of quality gaming buried under the saccharine visuals . " 
 The gameplay of the minigames and pop @-@ up duels were well received . IGN called the mini @-@ games " clever and fun " and stated the card battle " actually offers something simple yet challenging . " GameSpy praised the minigames and card battles . RPGamer praised the amount of minigames and called the card battling system " impressive . " GameSpot also praised the minigames and card battles , but commented some minigames were frustrating . The story received mix reviews . Some critics enjoyed it while other referred to it as childish . GameSpy commented the story was predictable and clichéd . RPGamer referred to it as a " light @-@ hearted story " . IGN stated the story is not huge or elaborate , but the game is surprisingly enjoyable for the older crowd . IGN also listed the game as the number eight Mini @-@ game collections on the Nintendo Wii or DS . 
 = Geography of Newfoundland and Labrador = 
 Newfoundland and Labrador is the easternmost province in Canada . The Strait of Belle Isle separates the province into two geographical divisions , Labrador and the island of Newfoundland . The province also includes over seven thousand small islands . 
 Labrador is the easternmost part of the Canadian Shield , a vast area of ancient metamorphic rock comprising much of northeastern North America . Colliding tectonic plates have shaped much of the geology of Newfoundland . Gros Morne National Park has a reputation of being an outstanding example of tectonics at work , and as such has been designated a World Heritage Site . The Long Range Mountains on Newfoundland 's west coast are the northeasternmost extension of the Appalachian Mountains . 
 The fauna of Labrador is typical of that of similar areas of North America while the island of Newfoundland has considerably fewer mammals and no native amphibians . 
 The north @-@ south extent of the province ( 46 ° <unk> to 60 ° <unk> ) , prevalent westerly winds , cold ocean currents and local factors such as mountains and coastline combine to create the various climates of the province . Northern Labrador is classified as a polar tundra climate , southern Labrador is considered to be a subarctic climate while most of Newfoundland would be considered to be a cool summer subtype of a humid continental climate . 
 The provincial capital is St. John 's , located at the extreme eastern edge of the island on the Avalon Peninsula . About half of the province 's economy is based on its abundant natural resources , notably petroleum , minerals , forestry and the fishery . 
 = = Physical geography = = 
 Newfoundland is roughly triangular , with each side being approximately 500 kilometers ( 310 mi ) , and having an area of 108 @,@ 860 square kilometers ( 42 @,@ 030 sq mi ) . Newfoundland and its associated small islands have a total area of 111 @,@ 390 square kilometers ( 43 @,@ 010 sq mi ) . Newfoundland extends between latitudes 46 ° <unk> and 51 ° <unk> . 
 Labrador is an irregular shape : the western part of its border with Quebec is the drainage divide for the Labrador Peninsula . Lands drained by rivers that flow into the Atlantic Ocean are part of Labrador , the rest belongs to Quebec . Labrador ’ s extreme northern tip , at 60 ° <unk> , shares a short border with Nunavut on <unk> Island . Labrador ’ s area ( including associated small islands ) is 294 @,@ 330 square kilometers ( 113 @,@ 640 sq mi ) . Together , Newfoundland and Labrador make up 4 @.@ 06 % of Canada ’ s area . 
 The island of Newfoundland is separated from Labrador by the Strait of Belle Isle , which is 125 kilometres ( 78 mi ) long and from 60 to 15 kilometres ( 37 @.@ 3 to 9 @.@ 3 mi ) wide . In addition to the island of Newfoundland , the province is made up of 12 larger islands with a total area of 2 @,@ 505 square kilometres ( 967 sq mi ) and 7 @,@ 170 smaller islands with a total area of 3 @,@ 598 square kilometres ( 1 @,@ 389 sq mi ) . 
 = = Geology = = 
 A large part of the island of Newfoundland is an extension of the Appalachian system . Major bays , peninsulas , river systems and mountain ranges are typically oriented southwest to northeast , parallel to the Appalachians . 
 The eastern part of the island , ( the Avalon Peninsula and Burin Peninsula ) , is mostly folded sedimentary rocks with some intrusions of igneous rock and was part of southwestern Europe or Northern Africa about 250 million years ago . The oldest rocks are Precambrian . Small remnants of Cambrian and Ordovician rocks occur along the coast . Bell Island in Conception Bay is a good example of gently sloping Ordovician sedimentary rock . The plateau in the Avalon Peninsula averages 250 metres ( 820 ft ) above sea level . 
 The rest of the island is composed of a great variety of Paleozoic rocks of sedimentary , igneous and metamorphic origin . Along the west coast lie the Long Range Mountains , which are formed by an elongated block of the Earth 's crust ( a horst ) which rises to about 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) above sea level . This part of the island was once part of the eastern margin of continental North America . The island 's highest points , the Lewis Hills and Gros Morne are located within this mountain range . To the east is a depression or graben about 30 kilometers ( 19 mi ) wide , which is occupied by Deer Lake and Grand Lake . The main plateau of the central part of the island , which was once the sea bottom of the ancient Iapetus Ocean , has been heavily eroded by water and ice . Steep , solitary rock knobs , called " <unk> " in Newfoundland ( elsewhere known as inselbergs or <unk> ) , which jut 100 metres ( 330 ft ) or more above the generally flat terrain are the remnants of a former higher landscape level . Glaciers which helped shape these <unk> left other evidence around Newfoundland . Large blocks of stone called glacial erratics have been left scattered across much of the landscape . The long narrow lakes of the west coast , notably those in Gros Morne National Park resulted from glacial erosion . The lack of good soil on most parts of the island is a result of the scouring effect of glaciers during the most recent ice age . Newfoundland 's nickname , " The Rock " , is partially a result of the ice ages . 
 One of the most noteworthy aspects of Newfoundland geology is a result of the constant movement of tectonic plates . Approximately 500 million years ago the action of these plates forced parts of the oceanic crust beneath the Iapetus Ocean up and over the eastern margin of the North American plate . Sections of oceanic crust which overlie continental crust are known as <unk> . Gros Morne National Park was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site because it is one of the best places in the world to see the effects of plate tectonics and one of the few places where rocks formed at the <unk> Discontinuity between the crust and the upper mantle of the Earth can be seen . 
 Another notable geology site is at Mistaken Point , where rocks containing probably the oldest metazoan fossils in North America and the most ancient deep @-@ water marine fossils in the world are found preserved in layers of volcanic ash . 
 Labrador is the easternmost part of the Canadian Shield and is composed of ancient Precambrian igneous and metamorphic rocks . The interior is averages about 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) above sea level and is cut by large , east @-@ flowing rivers , such as the Churchill River and its tributaries . The northern coast is largely mountainous . The Torngat Mountains , <unk> Mountains and <unk> Mountains dominate this area with the highest peak being Mount <unk> at 1 @,@ 652 metres ( 5 @,@ 420 ft ) . Torngat Mountains National Park Reserve was created in 2005 to preserve part of this area . 
 = = Biosphere = = 
 The biosphere is subdivided into distinct geographical regions called biomes . Newfoundland and Labrador are divided into two biomes : tundra and taiga . Northern Labrador is part of the tundra , while southern Labrador is part of the taiga . Newfoundland is not typical of either biome , as it lacks much of the plant and animal life that are characteristic to these biomes . During the last ice age the island of Newfoundland was completely covered by glaciers and swept clean of life . Only those species which were able to recolonize the island after the glaciers retreated about 18 @,@ 000 years ago are considered " native " . Similarly , only freshwater @-@ fish capable of surviving seawater swam to the island . Labrador has 42 native mammals , Newfoundland is home only to 14 , with no snakes , raccoons , skunks or <unk> large herds of Woodland caribou can be found in the barren interior regions of the island . Two animals formerly resident in Newfoundland have been declared extinct : the Great auk , a flightless seabird , and the Newfoundland wolf , a subspecies of the Gray wolf . The Labrador duck , believed to have nested in Labrador , was one of the first North American bird species to be recorded as becoming extinct . 
 Many rare herbaceous plants and insects occur on the island . The west coast of the island supports over 200 plant species . Rare species such as Long ’ s braya ( <unk> <unk> ) and Fernald ’ s braya ( B. <unk> ) , are endemic to Newfoundland . <unk> are small perennial herbs of the <unk> family . They are only found on a narrow strip of land extending approximately 150 kilometers ( 93 mi ) on the extreme western portion of the Great Northern Peninsula , a limestones barrens habitat . The braya population is low due to habitat loss from gravel quarrying . Researchers have only found three populations of Long 's braya , and 14 or 15 populations of Fernald 's <unk> . Researchers have focused on how various types of disturbances affect the long @-@ term viability of these populations . The Province of Newfoundland and Labrador , with many partners , is studying the rare plant flora of the island of Newfoundland and in 2002 announced a recovery plan for the braya species . 
 Many plants and animals have been introduced to Newfoundland , either by chance or deliberately . Moose , snowshoe hare , American red squirrel , eastern chipmunk , and masked shrew , and others , were brought to the island through specific wildlife mandates . Moose were introduced in 1904 and are now the dominant ungulate on the island . An unusual experiment conducted in 1964 involved relocating a small herd of bison onto Brunette Island in Fortune Bay . The last of these animals is thought to have died by 1994 . Rats and mice were unintentionally introduced while mink escaped from fur farms . Coyotes are a very recent addition to the fauna of Newfoundland . How coyotes got onto the island is still debated by wildlife officials , but it is probable that they crossed the ice from Cape Breton Island in the 1980s . Newfoundland has no native amphibians , but frogs were introduced onto the island in the 1860s and toads almost a century later . 
 The marine waters around the province are considered boreal , or sub @-@ Arctic , in nature . A great deal of the coastline is rock @-@ strewn , allowing an extensive variety of plant and animal life to thrive . The leading plants of the shoreline are the large brown seaweeds , such as bladder , forked and knotted <unk> , and winged and sugar kelps , though there are also a number of red and green seaweeds present . Common animals of the seashore region include barnacles , tortoiseshell limpet , common periwinkle , blue mussels , sea anemones , sea slugs , sea urchins , starfish , and rock crabs . The deeper waters are home to a variety of fish , such as Atlantic cod , sculpins and <unk> , halibut , haddock , sharks , and marine mammals , such as dolphins , porpoises , and whales . Whales seen off Newfoundland include Pilot whales , minkes , sei whales , fin whales and humpbacks . Harp and hooded seals are usually found in the spring , giving birth to their young on coastal ice floes . 
 The tundra is a sub @-@ Arctic zone with long , cold winters and short , warm summers . Precipitation is low . Soil a meter below ground and deeper is permanently frozen ( permafrost ) , which does not allow water to drain easily through the soil , so it collects in shallow pools . Trees and shrubs are stunted since their roots cannot grow into the permafrost . Low shrubs , lichens , mosses , and small herbaceous plants are found instead . The most common mammals on the tundra are the barren @-@ ground caribou , Arctic wolf , Arctic fox , Arctic hare , lemmings , and voles . Occasional sightings of muskoxen have been made near Cape <unk> , Labrador 's most northerly point . The polar bear is the dominant carnivore of the tundra , but is an occasional visitor to coastal Newfoundland , especially in the spring . Many birds migrate to Labrador in spring to lay their eggs and raise their young before returning south for the winter , including the common eider , harlequin duck , Common redpoll and American pipit . The Labrador tundra is also permanent home to ptarmigan . 
 Southern Labrador is mostly taiga . It is characterized by low winter temperatures , a longer growing season , and more precipitation than the tundra . Soils are typically lacking important nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus . The taiga is dominated by coniferous trees , notably balsam fir and black spruce , though the deciduous white birch , trembling aspen and mountain ash are also present . The most common animals are the moose , American black bear , Canada lynx , red fox , pine marten , short @-@ tailed weasel , and American mink . Beavers , muskrats , and river otters thrive in the many rivers , streams , and wetlands . Willow ptarmigan , common raven , and blackpoll warbler inhabit the forests of southern Labrador while golden eagles , rough @-@ legged hawks and peregrine falcons nest on steep cliffs . 
 = = Climate = = 
 The province has been divided into seven climate types , but in broader terms Newfoundland is considered to be a cool summer subtype of a humid continental climate , which is greatly influenced by the sea since no part of the island is more than 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) from the ocean . Northern Labrador is classified as a polar tundra climate , southern Labrador is considered to have a subarctic climate . 
 Monthly average temperatures , rainfall and snowfall for four communities are shown in the attached graphs . St. John 's represents the east coast , Gander the interior of the island , Corner Brook the west coast of the island and Wabush the interior of Labrador . The detailed information and information for 73 communities in the province is available from a government website . The data used in making the graphs is the average taken over thirty years . Error bars on the temperature graph indicate the range of daytime highs and night time lows . Snowfall is the total amount which fell during the month , not the amount accumulated on the ground . This distinction is particularly important for St. John 's where a heavy snowfall can be followed by rain so that no snow remains on the ground . 
 Surface water temperatures on the Atlantic side reaches a summer average of 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) inshore and 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) offshore to winter lows of − 1 ° C ( 30 ° F ) inshore and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) offshore . Sea temperatures on the west coast are warmer than Atlantic side by 1 to 3 ° C ( approximately 2 to 5 ° F ) . The sea keeps winter temperatures slightly higher and summer temperatures a little lower on the coast than at places inland . The maritime climate produces more variable weather , ample precipitation in a variety of forms , greater humidity , lower visibility , more clouds , less sunshine , and higher winds than a continental climate . Some of these effects can be seen in the graphs . Labrador 's climate differs from that of the island not only because it is further north , but also because the interior does not see the moderating effects of the ocean . 
 Weather systems affecting Newfoundland usually originate from the west , over mainland Canada , or from the southwest , from the east coast of the United States . Cyclonic storms consist of an area of low atmospheric pressure characterized by inward spiraling winds that rotate counter clockwise in the northern hemisphere . Such storms passing to the south of the island bring strong northeasterly winds sweeping in off the open North Atlantic Ocean . These storms are sometimes referred to as Nor 'easters and are responsible for the worst of Newfoundland 's weather . High winds sweeping over a large surface of ocean can build up very large waves . The frequency and severity of storms is greatest between November and March , although they may occur at any time of the year . 
 One of these storms was the " Independence Hurricane " , which struck eastern Newfoundland on September 9 , 1775 . About 4000 sailors , mostly from the British Isles , were reported to have been drowned . 
 During a violent storm on February 15 , 1982 , the drilling rig Ocean Ranger capsized and sank on the Grand Banks , 300 kilometers ( 190 mi ) east of St. John 's . The entire 84 @-@ man crew perished , making it the worst Canadian marine disaster in decades . 
 Newfoundland and Labrador has the strongest winds of any of the provinces , with most places having average annual wind speeds over 20 kilometers per hour ( 12 mph ) . 
 Freezing rain is common in Newfoundland where it is known as " silver thaw " . Freezing drizzle or freezing rain occurs on average of 150 hours each winter , most commonly in March . One such storm struck St. John 's on April 11 , 1984 and lasted three days . Ice almost 15 centimeters ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick disrupted electrical power to 200 @,@ 000 people on the Avalon Peninsula for days . 
 Newfoundland receives less than 1600 hours of sunshine per year , much lower than the Canadian average of 1925 hours . Summer months average 187 hours of sun while the December average is 60 hours . 
 Newfoundland is also known for its fog which occurs most often in the spring and early summer because of the contrast between sea and air temperatures . Argentia has 206 days of fog per year . Fog in Newfoundland is frequently accompanied by strong onshore winds ; while usually winds disperse fog , here the fog is too widespread for this to occur . 
 = = = St. John 's weather extremes = = = 
 Of all the major Canadian cities , St. John 's is the foggiest ( 124 days , next to Halifax 's 122 ) , snowiest ( 359 centimeters ( 141 in ) , next to Quebec City 's 343 centimeters ( 135 in ) ) , wettest ( 1514 millimeters ( 59 @.@ 6 in ) , next to Halifax 's 1491 millimeters ( 58 @.@ 7 in ) ) , windiest ( 24 @.@ 3 km / h ( 15 @.@ 1 mph ) average speed , next to Regina 's 20 @.@ 7 km / h ( 12 @.@ 9 mph ) ) , and cloudiest ( 1 @,@ 497 hours of sunshine , next to Charlottetown 's 1 @,@ 818 hours ) . St. John 's has one of the mildest winters in Canada ( third mildest city next to Victoria and Vancouver ) , yet has the most freezing rain days of any major Canadian city . 
 = = Hydrography = = 
 = = = Fresh water = = = 
 Shallow soil and bedrock deeply scored by glaciers are responsible for the numerous lakes and ponds , and short , swift flowing rivers scattered across Newfoundland and Labrador . The area of freshwater in Newfoundland and Labrador is 31 @,@ 340 square kilometers ( 12 @,@ 100 sq mi ) , covering 7 @.@ 7 % of the total surface of area of the province and accounting for 3 @.@ 5 % of the freshwater area of Canada . 
 = = = Ocean = = = 
 The west coast of Newfoundland borders on the Gulf of St. Lawrence while all other coasts face the Atlantic Ocean . Labrador 's coast borders the Labrador Sea , a part of the Atlantic Ocean . The Strait of Belle Isle connects the Gulf of St. Lawrence with the Labrador Sea and is the narrowest channel separating Newfoundland from mainland Canada . The Cabot Strait separates Newfoundland from Cape Breton Island , Nova Scotia . 
 The continental shelf off Newfoundland is known as the Grand Banks . The cold Labrador Current and the warm Gulf Stream meet on the Grand Banks , making the area not only one of the richest fishing grounds in the world , but also one of the foggiest areas . The Grand Banks are an area of significant petroleum production with Hibernia , White Rose and Terra Nova oil fields all located there . 
 = = = Icebergs and pack ice = = = 
 Approximately 90 % of icebergs in the North Atlantic come from about 100 iceberg @-@ producing glaciers on the Greenland coast . Once detached from the glaciers , icebergs are transported southward through the Davis Strait by the Labrador Current . 
 Approximately 40 @,@ 000 medium to large icebergs annually calve from Greenland glaciers , and depending on wind , and air and water temperature , between 400 and 800 of these go as far south as 48 ° north latitude ( St. John 's ) . Icebergs are most commonly seen in the waters off Newfoundland in the spring and early summer . Despite their size , the icebergs of Newfoundland move an average of 17 kilometers ( 11 mi ) a day . The average mass of icebergs in the Grand Banks area is between one and two hundred thousand tonnes . These icebergs represent a significant threat to shipping and off @-@ shore oil platforms and the hazard is aggravated by dense fog in this area . 
 During the first half of each year the waters off Newfoundland may become covered with floes of sea ice or " pack ice " . While icebergs are composed of fresh water , pack ice is frozen sea water . The severity of ice varies considerably , depending on the strength and direction of the wind and air temperature . Most of the pack ice off Newfoundland 's northern and eastern shores originates off Labrador . While some of the pack ice off the west coast also comes from the sea off Labrador via the Strait of Belle Isle , most of it originates in the Gulf of St. Lawrence . Beginning in January the pack ice begins to advance south , borne by the Labrador Current until ( usually ) in April the rate of melting overtakes the rate of advance and the ice retreats northward . The leading edge of the pack ice is known as " The Front " and is important to the annual seal hunt off Newfoundland 's north coast . 
 = = Time zones = = 
 Newfoundland is located in a unique time zone in North America . It is a half an hour ahead of Atlantic Time , one and a half hours ahead of Central Canada and 4 ½ hours ahead of the west coast of the country . Labrador operates on Atlantic Time , except for the coast between L 'Anse au Clair and Norman 's Bay , which is on Newfoundland time . 
 = = Natural resources = = 
 All currency is in Canadian dollars . 
 Exploitation of natural resources is a major part of the economic geography of Newfoundland and Labrador . In 2005 the gross domestic product ( GDP ) of Newfoundland and Labrador was approximately fourteen billion dollars . Service industries accounted for over $ 8 billion and resource @-@ based activities such as mining , oil production , fishery and forest @-@ based industries ( sawmills and paper mills ) accounted for the remainder . 
 = = = Minerals and petroleum = = = 
 Mines in Labrador , the iron ore mine at Wabush / Labrador City , and the new nickel mine in <unk> 's Bay produced a total of $ 2 @.@ 5 billion worth of ore in 2006 . A new mine at Duck Pond ( 30 kilometers ( 18 mi ) south of the now @-@ closed mine at Buchans ) , started producing copper , zinc , silver and gold in 2007 and prospecting for new ore bodies continues . Mining accounted for 3 @.@ 5 % of the provincial GDP in 2006 . The province produces 55 % of Canada ’ s total iron ore . Quarries producing dimension stone such as slate and granite , account for less than $ 10 million worth of material per year . 
 Oil production from offshore oil platforms on Hibernia , White Rose and Terra Nova oil fields on the Grand Banks was 110 million barrels ( 17 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) which contributed 15 % of the provinces GDP in 2006 . Total production from the Hibernia field from 1997 to 2006 was 733 million barrels ( 116 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 m3 ) with an estimated value of $ 36 billion . Remaining reserves are estimated at almost 2 billion barrels ( 320 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) as of December 31 , 2006 . Exploration for new reserves is ongoing . 
 = = = Fishing and aquaculture = = = 
 The fishing industry remains an important part of the provincial economy , employing 26 @,@ 000 and contributing over $ 440 million to the GDP . The combined harvest of fish such as cod , haddock , halibut , herring and mackerel was 150 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 165 @,@ 000 tons ) valued at about $ 130 million in 2006 . Shellfish , such as crab , shrimp and clams , accounted for 195 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 215 @,@ 000 tons ) with a value of $ 316 million in the same year . The value of products from the seal hunt was $ 55 million . 
 Aquaculture is a new industry for the province , which in 2006 produced over 10 @,@ 000 tonnes of Atlantic Salmon , mussels and Steelhead Trout worth over $ 50 million . 
 = = = Forestry = = = 
 Newsprint is produced by the paper mill in Corner Brook , ( capacity of 420 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 462 @,@ 000 tons ) per year ) . Until March 31 , 2009 there was a second <unk> located in Grand Falls , but due to the 2008 / 2009 economic crisis the mill shut down . The value of newsprint exports varies greatly from year to year , depending on the global market price . Lumber is produced by numerous mills in Newfoundland . 
 = = = Agriculture = = = 
 Agriculture in Newfoundland in limited to areas south of St. John 's , near Deer Lake and in the <unk> Valley . Elsewhere the soil is mostly unsuitable for farming . Potatoes , rutabagas , known locally as " turnips " , carrots and cabbage are grown for local consumption . Wild blueberries , partridge berries and <unk> are harvested commercially and used in jams and wine making . 
 = = Human geography = = 
 Newfoundland and Labrador had a population of 505 @,@ 469 ( 2005 estimate ) and a population density of 1 @.@ 27 per km2 ( 3 @.@ 1 per sq mi ) . The provincial capital is St. John 's , which had a population of 181 @,@ 113 in 2005 ) . St John 's is located at the extreme eastern edge of the island on the Avalon Peninsula . The other cities are Mount Pearl and Corner Brook . 
 Human inhabitation in Newfoundland and Labrador can be traced back over 9 @,@ 000 years to the people of the Maritime Archaic Tradition . They were gradually displaced by people of the Dorset Culture and finally by the Innu and Inuit in Labrador and the Beothuks on the island . The oldest known European contact was made over a thousand years ago when the Vikings briefly settled in L 'Anse aux Meadows . Five hundred years later , European explorers ( John Cabot , Gaspar Corte @-@ Real , Jacques Cartier and others ) , fishermen from England , Portugal , France and Spain and Basque whalers ( the remains of several whaling stations have been found at Red Bay , Newfoundland and Labrador ) began exploration and exploitation of the area . 
 Early European ( primarily from England , Ireland and France ) settlement in Newfoundland was confined to the coast . The rich cod fishery on the Grand Banks and along the shore of the island was the primary reason for these settlements . The rugged shoreline provided many small , but isolated , harbors ( <unk> ) from which to conduct the fishery . The Avalon Peninsula was , and is , the most populous part of the island , and as such had the best developed system of early roads and trails . Transportation between communities on other parts of the coast , especially the south coast between Fortune Bay and Port aux Basques , was exclusively by boat . Almost all communities are now accessible by roads which are part of the provincial road system . The now @-@ defunct Newfoundland Railway , built in the latter part of the 19th century , and the development of the lead , zinc and copper mine at Buchans and the paper mill in Grand Falls in the early 20th century marked the beginning of the settlement of the interior of the island . Despite these developments the majority of the population is still found along the coast . 
 Settlement of Labrador followed a similar pattern , with the interior being settled only in the latter part of the 20th century with the development of the iron ore mines at Wabush , hydroelectric generation at Churchill Falls and the military base at Goose Bay . 
 Aboriginal peoples include the Innu , Inuit and Métis of Labrador and the Mi 'kmaq in Newfoundland . One aboriginal group , the Beothuks became extinct in the early 19th century . 
 = New York State Route 178 = 
 New York State Route 178 ( NY 178 ) is an east – west state highway in Jefferson County , New York , in the United States . It extends for 10 @.@ 23 miles ( 16 @.@ 46 km ) from an intersection with NY 3 by <unk> Corners in the town of Henderson to a junction with U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) in the village of Adams . NY 178 meets Interstate 81 ( I @-@ 81 ) at exit 41 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) west of its junction with US 11 . When NY 178 was assigned in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it continued east along modern County Route 189 ( CR 189 ) to NY 177 in Rodman . This extension was eliminated in 1979 . From the early 1930s to the late 1960s , NY 178 also continued west toward Lake Ontario on what is now County Route 178 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = CR 178 = = = 
 CR 178 begins at an intersection with Snowshoe Road and Military Road near the shores of Lake Ontario . The highway progresses to the southeast along farmlands heading through Cedar Cove Road and Harmony Harbor . A short distance later , CR 178 enters the community of Hungerford Corners , where the right @-@ of @-@ way merges with Lighthouse Road . The highway continues eastward , crossing over a tributary of Lake Ontario as Military Road . The route passes to the south of Henderson Harbor , where it intersects with CR 123 . A short distance later , CR 178 intersects with NY 3 , where maintenance of the highway turns over to the New York State Department of Transportation and CR 178 becomes NY 178 . 
 = = = NY 178 = = = 
 NY 178 continues eastward from NY 3 , passing through a small populated region before entering the hamlet of Henderson . There , the route intersects with the southern terminus of CR 72 ( Penney Road ) . NY 178 turns to the south along CR 72 's right @-@ of @-@ way ( now with the moniker of Adams Road ) , turns to the southeast , and leaves the hamlet of Henderson . After intersecting with Town Barn Road , the highway continues southeastward , passing Henderson Pond and curving to the east at an intersection with CR 78 ( Clark Road ) . NY 178 curves back to the southeast and intersects with CR 152 ( Smith Road ) , where the right @-@ of @-@ ways merge . From there , NY 178 begins an eastward progression through the North Country , entering the community of Roberts Corner at an intersection with CR 75 ( <unk> Road ) . After crossing through the rural community , the highway turns to the southeast and intersects with the northern terminus of NY 289 in the community of Taylor Settlement . 
 After intersecting with NY 289 , NY 178 progresses northeastward , intersecting with the western terminus of CR 84 in the community of Thomas Settlement . After leaving Thomas Settlement , NY 178 intersects with CR 77 and turning to the southeast through a rural region before entering the village of Adams at an intersection with <unk> Road . There , the surroundings become further residential , before the highway connects to I @-@ 81 at exit 41 . After the interchange , NY 178 becomes known as Church Street West , crosses over a railroad line and enters the downtown portion of Adams . After the intersection with Clay Street , NY 178 intersects with US 11 ( Main Street ) , where the NY 178 designation ends . The right @-@ of @-@ way continues eastward as Church Street East , which becomes CR 69 at the east village line . 
 = = History = = 
 When NY 178 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it began at NY 3C ( later NY 3 ) south of the hamlet ( then village ) of Henderson and ended at NY 177 west of Barnes Corners . In between , NY 178 passed through the village of Adams , where it had a short overlap with US 11 . NY 178 was extended northwestward c . 1932 along then @-@ NY 3D and Military Road to a new terminus at Snowshoe Road northwest of Henderson . By the following year , NY 3D was moved onto the current alignment of NY 3 in the vicinity of Henderson , eliminating its overlap with NY 178 . 
 NY 178 was truncated eastward in the late 1960s to begin at NY 3 west of Henderson . It was truncated westward to US 11 in Adams on August 1 , 1979 , after ownership and maintenance of NY 178 between US 11 and NY 177 was transferred from the state of New York to Jefferson County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The former routing of NY 178 between Snowshoe Road and NY 3 in the town of Henderson is now maintained by Jefferson County as CR 178 while the section of old NY 178 from US 11 to NY 177 is designated as CR 189 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Jefferson County . 
 = Enamorada de Ti ( song ) = 
 " Enamorada de Ti " ( English : " In Love With You " ) is a song recorded by American Tejano recording artist Selena and originally written for her second studio album , Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) . The song was written by Selena y Los Dinos band member Pete Astudillo and her brother , A.B. Quintanilla III , and produced by Quintanilla . " Enamorada de Ti " is a freestyle song , a musical genre popular during the late 1980s . The recording was remixed by Juan Magan for the eponymous album in 2012 , a project headed by Humberto Gatica . Although the song was moderately successful during the early 1990s , it was exposed to a wider audience in the remix album Enamorada de Ti . Because of this , the song peaked at number 17 on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart that year . In 1997 , the posthumously @-@ released single " Is It the Beat ? " adopted the rap verse found in " Enamorada de Ti " . 
 In the lyrics the protagonist sings to her love interest about his departure , which has saddened her ; without him she cannot function normally , because she is in love with him . Selena performed the song during her Ven Conmigo Tour ( 1990 – 92 ) and at the 1990 Tejano Music Awards , where she received the Female Vocalist of the Year award . During the first season of Telemundo 's La Voz Kids , a Spanish @-@ language version of the US singing competition The Voice , <unk> Garcia performed " Enamorada de Ti " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In 1989 , Selena was signed to EMI Latin and released her self @-@ titled debut album that year . Around that time her brother , A.B. Quintanilla III , began producing and writing most of her songs . According to Quintanilla III in the 20 Years of Music series , his father ( and band manager ) Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. originated the idea of recording a " hip @-@ hop " -type song for Ven Conmigo . He said that Quintanilla Jr was told by Jose Behar , president of EMI Latin , that several pop @-@ music executive producers were going to attend an upcoming performance by Selena and her band . The idea was that Quintanilla III could write a song which could attract a crossover deal from EMI Records . During the interview , Quintanilla III said that the writing for " Enamorada de Ti " began in an Albuquerque , New Mexico Motel 6 with fellow band members Pete Astudillo and keyboardist Ricky Vela . In the same interview Selena 's sister ( and drummer ) Suzette Quintanilla called the recording a " Top 40 song " and " fun , that was definitely one of the fun songs on the album " , with the recording " bringing out Selena 's soul side " . 
 The recording is a freestyle dance @-@ pop song in common time at a tempo of 112 beats per minute . In the lyrics , the singer is saddened and bewildered by the departure of her love interest . She tells him how much she is in love with him , and cannot live without him . The remix version featured on Enamorada de Ti ( 2012 ) is a merengue duet with Spanish singer Juan Magan . 
 At the 1990 Tejano Music Awards Selena performed " Enamorada de Ti " with three backup dancers , emulating dance moves popularized by Michael and Janet Jackson . She won the Tejano Music Award for Female Vocalist of The Year . During the first season of Telemundo 's La Voz Kids , a Spanish @-@ language version of the US singing competition show The Voice , <unk> Garcia performed " Enamorada de Ti " . 
 = = Critical reception and legacy = = 
 Federico Martinez of La Prensa called " Enamorada de Ti " a " popular title track " . In his review of the remix album Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic wrote that all its songs were " rooted in the ' 90s and sound that way " , and altering the recordings to " update it " was unfeasible . Carlos Quintana , a Latin @-@ music writer for About.com , called " Enamorada de Ti " one of the best tracks on the remix album . Enrique Lopetegui of the San Antonio Current called it a " crowd @-@ pleasing " song with an " unbearable " merengue . Nilan Lovelace of Reporter Magazine Archives noted that although the original recording of " Enamorada de Ti " was a " slow tempo love song " , the remix version had a " lively , tropical tone " . 
 " Enamorada de Ti " has been featured on several compilation albums since its debut on Ven Conmigo in 1990 . A club @-@ mix version of the song was featured on All My Hits / Todos Mis Exitos Vol . 2 ( 2000 ) , and the original version was added to La Leyenda ( 2010 ) . In 1997 , " Is It the Beat ? " was released posthumously on the soundtrack for Selena 's biographical film and as a single ; the recording included a rap verse taken directly from " Enamorada de Ti " . The single also included two versions of " Enamorada de Ti " : a Spanish version of " Is It the Beat ? " and a Spanish club mix . In 2012 , Humberto Gatica headed the production of Enamorada de Ti with the goal of rejuvenating several of Selena 's songs in popular genres . Spanish singer Juan Magan remixed and sang a small part in " Enamorada de Ti " for the album . The recording peaked at number 17 on the US Billboard Regional Mexican Digital Songs chart that same year . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits from the album 's liner notes : 
 Selena – vocals 
 Ricky Vela – keyboards 
 Suzette Quintanilla – drums 
 A.B. Quintanilla III – writer / producer 
 Pete Astudillo - writer 
 Juan Magan - remixed / producer / arranger ( remix version ) 
 = Move ( Third Day album ) = 
 Move is the tenth studio album by Christian rock band Third Day . Released on October 19 , 2010 , the album was the band 's first after guitarist Brad Avery left Third Day . The band wanted the album to be a departure from the modern rock stylings of Revelation ( 2008 ) , intending to show more of their southern rock roots . Third Day chose to work with producer Paul Moak on the album and recorded it at their own studio , feeling it offered them more creative freedom . Primarily a southern rock album , Move also has significant influence from gospel music . 
 Move received positive reviews from music critics , many of whom praised the album 's southern rock sound . It was nominated for multiple awards at the 42nd GMA Dove Awards , winning in the Recorded Music Packaging of the Year category . It sold 37 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , debuting at number nine on the Billboard 200 , number one on the Billboard Christian Albums chart , and number three on the Billboard Rock Albums chart . In the United States , it ranked as the twenty @-@ third best @-@ selling Christian Album of 2010 and the fifth best @-@ selling Christian Album of 2011 . The album 's four singles met with varying success at Christian radio , all of them appearing on the Billboard Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Move was Third Day 's first record without guitarist Brad Avery , who left the band after the recording of their previous album ( Revelation ) . After he left the group , the band felt they were at a musical crossroads ; although they considered replacing Avery , they ultimately decided not to . After playing a few concerts without Avery , Third Day felt they needed to step it up musically . The band 's induction into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame also served as inspiration for the record . Although the band felt that they had previously reined in sounds that were too southern rock in sound , they decided to show more of their southern roots in the record . Bassist Tai Anderson said that although Third Day felt Revelation was a " career record " for them , they felt they " just couldn 't just make ' Revelation Part II . ' It needed to feel different " . The band chose to record the album in their own studio , which they felt offered more creative freedom than their previous recording process in Los Angeles . The also opted to work with producer Paul Moak , whom the band ultimately developed a good chemistry with . All the songs on Move were either written or co @-@ written by Mac Powell . 
 Move was produced by Paul Moak , who also handled programming and some engineering . The album was recorded at The Quarry in Kennesaw , Georgia and The Smokestack in Nashville , Tennessee . It was mastered by Chris Athens and mixed by F. Reid Shippen and Erik " Keller " <unk> . Along with Paul Moak , Andy Hunt and Justin March also handled engineering on the album . 
 = = Composition = = 
 A southern rock album , Move is also influenced by gospel music . As opposed to the modern rock bent and introspective lyrics of Revelation , lead vocalist Mac Powell felt the end result of Move was a " down @-@ home , American grassroots record with a lot more gospel elements than [ Third Day have ] ever had before " . Although some songs are set from the perspective of someone outside the Christian church , Powell felt the record 's lyrics were a call to put faith into action . " Lift Up Your Face " , a southern rock song , displays influences from gospel and blues music . Gospel group The Blind Boys of Alabama provide backing vocals in the song , while the lyrics offer a message of encouragement . " Make Your Move " , which depicts evangelism from the perspective of a non @-@ believer , has a grunge @-@ influenced half time chorus . " Children of God " incorporates a children 's choir into what is an otherwise rock arrangement . " Surrender " is led by a dobro and has an acoustic rock sound , eventually building up to a climax of guitars and strings . " Follow Me There " has heavy gospel influence combined with a " rootsy rock " sound . " Gone " , which features vocals from Bear Rinehart of Needtobreathe , has an acoustic rock sound . " What Have You Got to Lose " , a ballad , offers the plea : " Sin and shame , guilt and pain , pride and your conceit / Here and now lay them down at the Savior 's feet " . " I 'll Be Your Miracle " has a country rock sound and features instrumentation from banjo and pedal steel guitar . " Sound of Your Voice " , a worship song , features vocals from guest vocalist Kerrie Roberts . " Don 't Give Up Hope " has " Allman Brothers @-@ style interplay " between the slide guitar and piano instruments . 
 = = Critical reception and accolades = = 
 Move received mostly positive reviews upon its release , with many critics praising the album 's overall sound . Andree Farias of Allmusic gave the album three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , saying " After a number of career moves attempting to position themselves as the next big thing in rock , Third Day appear resigned to their place as one of the biggest rockers in Christian music : nothing more , nothing less . Move ... reveals that much , as it finds the group embracing , hopefully definitively , that midpoint between spiritual fervor and Southern rock passion that suits them so well " . Chris Carpenter of <unk> gave it four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , opining that " The charismatic [ Mac ] Powell , along with guitarist Mark Lee , bassist Tai Anderson , and drummer David Carr , have crafted a project that is as musically stimulating as it is lyrically diverse ... It 's raw , passionate , and track after track is filled with uncompromising truth " . Andy Argyrakis of CCM Magazine gave Move three out of five stars , noting an overall southern rock sound to the album and saying that it " recalls 1999 's treasured Time " . C. E 'Jon Moore of The Christian Manifesto gave the album three out of five stars , saying " In the end , Move is a good album . It ’ s not a great album ... Some will feel it ’ s a progression , but I really feel as if this is more of the same from a band who has proven that they are capable of giving us more than the status quo " . Andrew Greer of Christianity Today gave the album four out of five stars , praising it as " <unk> marrying deep soul with melodic rock throughout the entire twelve @-@ track list " and saying that it " is yet another attractive release in an illustrious discography certain to be celebrated for years to come " . 
 Peter Timmis of Cross Rhythms gave Move nine stars out of ten squares , commenting that " If you like your rock soulful and gospel @-@ tinged then ' Move ' is an album you 'll want to check out " . Glenn McCarty of Crosswalk.com said that " As always , Third Day plays to its strength ... to craft accessible , interesting country rock . When it clicks , the result is arm @-@ hair @-@ raising good . Move , unfortunately , doesn 't produce that reaction often enough ... Move feels a little too safe , or , said another way , a little too static " . Lindsay Williams of Gospel Music Channel said that " Move may not be Third Day ’ s best effort in their large discography , but it ’ s certainly a treasure trove of hooky rock . After more than 15 years , this band still has something to say , and they say it well " . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout gave the album four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , opining " Move showcases some of the best Third Day has to offer . Whether it 's better than Revelation or some of their other previous installments ( like Wire or Conspiracy No. 5 ) is something to leave up to the listener to decide , but it does feel safe enough to say that Third Day 's Move is a dozen tracks of southern rock goodness " . Brian Mansfield of USA Today gave the album two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars , saying " Whether accompanied by sharp @-@ edged electric or slippery resonator guitars , a kids choir or the Blind Boys of Alabama , Third Day 's Southern rock remains grounded in the band 's faith " . 
 Move won the award for Recorded Music Packaging of the Year at the 42nd GMA Dove Awards . Move was also nominated for Rock / Contemporary Album of the Year , although it did not win in that category . " Lift Up Your Face " was nominated for Rock / Contemporary Song of the Year at the 42nd GMA Dove Awards . 
 = = Release and sales = = 
 Move sold 37 @,@ 000 units in its first week , debuting at number nine on the Billboard 200 . It was their third top ten album on that chart . It also debuted at number one on the Christian Albums chart , number three on the Rock Albums chart , and number ten on the Digital Albums chart . It spent two consecutive weeks atop the Christian Albums chart following its release and spent an additional week atop the chart in February 2012 . Move spent one week on the Catalog Albums chart in 2012 , debuting and peaking at number nineteen . 
 In the United States , Move ranked as the twenty @-@ third best @-@ selling Christian album of 2010 . It was also ranked as the fifth best @-@ selling Christian album of 2011 and the forty @-@ first best @-@ selling rock album of 2011 . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Four singles were released from Move . Lead single " Lift Up Your Face " was released to Christian AC and Christian CHR radio on July 11 , 2010 . It peaked at number twelve on the Billboard Christian Songs chart and at number two on the Billboard Christian CHR chart . The album 's second single , " Children of God " was released to Christian AC radio on January 4 , 2011 and peaked at number four on the Christian Songs chart . " Make Your Move " was released to Christian CHR radio on January 30 , 2011 . It peaked at number twelve on the Christian CHR chart and number forty @-@ three on the Christian Songs chart . The final single from Move , " Trust in Jesus " , was released to Christian AC and Christian CHR radio on June 11 , 2011 . It peaked at number ten on the Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits lifted from the album liner notes of the Deluxe Edition of Move . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = = Single charts = = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = Claudius of Turin = 
 Claudius of Turin ( or Claude ) ( fl . 810 – 827 ) was the Catholic bishop of Turin from 817 until his death . He was a courtier of Louis the Pious and was a writer during the Carolingian Renaissance . He is most noted for teaching iconoclasm , a radical idea at that time in Latin Church , and for some teachings that prefigured those of the Protestant Reformation . He was attacked as a heretic in written works by Saint Dungal and Jonas of Orléans . 
 = = Early career and the imperial court ( until 817 ) = = 
 Claudius is thought to have been from Spain . This belief may have its origins in the accusations of Jonas of Orléans , who claimed Claudius was a disciple of Felix of <unk> . Felix was a bishop in the foothills of the Spanish Pyrenees whom Claudius may have known personally . The bishop had been condemned by Alcuin at the Council of Frankfurt in 794 for teaching <unk> . It is now certain that Claudius was not a disciple of Felix . If he was from Spain , it is uncertain whether or not he received his education there or in Lyon under the archbishop <unk> . It was probably <unk> and , as Claudius himself tells it , his schoolmates and the future emperor Louis the Pious who convinced Claudius to study exegesis and concentrate on certain portions of Scripture . Claudius also studied the Church Fathers . 
 When Louis the Pious was still King of Aquitaine , he called Claudius to his court at <unk> sometime before 811 . In 813 , Emperor Charlemagne called Louis , his only surviving legitimate son , to his court . There he crowned him as his heir . The following year , Charlemagne died and Louis was made ruler of the Holy Roman Empire . He brought Claudius to Aachen , the empire 's capital city . There Claudius gave exegetical lectures to the emperor and the court and was even urged to put his lectures in writing by the emperor himself . Claudius was a member of an elite circle of secular and ecclesiastic politicians and authorities and a <unk> della corte di <unk> ( " creature of the court of Aachen " ) . In 817 , he was sent by Louis to Turin to act as bishop . It has been suggested that the appointment of a theologian and scholar to a post such as Turin , which had attendant military duties due to the threat of Saracen raids , was largely based on the need for an imperial supporter in Italy in light of the rebellion of Bernard . Bernard was the illegitimate son of King Pepin , the third son of Charlemagne . Louis gave Italy to his eldest son Lothair when the empire was partitioned among his three sons in 817 . Bernard rebelled against his uncle with the support of Bishop <unk> of Orléans . The rebellion was put down , but the event reduced the emperor 's prestige amongst the Frankish nobility and it became important that the bishop of Turin be a man who was loyal to the emperor . 
 = = Episcopate ( 817 – 827 ) = = 
 As bishop of Turin , Claudius found that men were often directed to go on pilgrimage to Rome for penance and that worshippers were accustomed to venerate Christ and the saints by bowing before images and relics . Claudius , coming from an educated background , was not greatly exposed to such provincial modes of worship . He made attacks on the use of images , relics , and crosses , he opposed pilgrimages to obtain absolution , and he had little regard for the authority of the pope due to his belief that all bishops were equal . 
 Claudius was a heretic in the view of Dungal and Jonas of Orléans , who later wrote to refute some of his teachings at the request of the emperor . The last recorded act of Claudius is in a charter of the monastery of St Peter at <unk> in May 827 . He was dead by the time Dungal finished his Responsa contra <unk> Claudii <unk> episcopi <unk> late in 827 , so it can be presumed that he died that year . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Claudius was both an author and a copyist . Although most of his extant works are simple biblical commentaries , his writings are very personal . He had a penchant for divulging detail in an age when brevity and anonymity were more common . Around 811 , Claudius prepared an exhaustive and encyclopaedic commentary on the Book of Genesis at the request of the emperor . This commentary was edited by Johann Alexander <unk> in Vienna before it was first printed in Basel by Hieronymus Froben in 1531 . 
 Claudius also wrote commentaries on the books of Leviticus , the historical books of the Old Testament , the Gospel of Matthew , and all Pauline epistles , of which the commentary on the Epistle to Galatians shows some of his views prefigure those expressed by both the Waldensians and Protestants centuries later . It was once thought that he had in fact founded the Waldensians , however this was disproved in the 19th century . His epistles on 1 and 2 Corinthians , however , dedicated to Theodemir , Abbot of Psalmody , and a possible student of his , were sent to Aachen by the dedicatee to be condemned by the assembled bishops of the realm . The Corinthian commentaries were unpublished , though it was these commentaries that sparked the controversy concerning icons and pilgrimages . 
 Claudius introduced the " organic metaphor " of the state in his commentary on 1 Corinthians . He proposed that , as the church was the body of Christ , so the state was the body of the emperor . The imperial court would have been familiar with the work because Claudius later wrote that it had been well – received despite the attempts of his former friend , Theodemir of <unk> , to have it condemned as heretical . None of Claudius ' works were ever condemned and he tried unsuccessfully to regain Theodemir 's approval , but eventually had to pen a well known apology directed against Theodemir 's persistent attacks . 
 In 1950 , Claudius was identified by P. <unk> as the author of some works previously attributed to Pseudo @-@ <unk> . 
 = Staggered tuning = 
 Staggered tuning is a technique used in the design of multi @-@ stage tuned amplifiers whereby each stage is tuned to a slightly different frequency . In comparison to synchronous tuning ( where each stage is tuned identically ) it produces a wider bandwidth at the expense of reduced gain . It also produces a sharper transition from the passband to the stopband . Both staggered tuning and synchronous tuning circuits are easier to tune and manufacture than many other filter types . 
 The function of stagger @-@ tuned circuits can be expressed as a rational function and hence they can be designed to any of the major filter responses such as Butterworth and Chebyshev . The poles of the circuit are easy to manipulate to achieve the desired response because of the amplifier buffering between stages . 
 Applications include television IF amplifiers ( mostly 20th century receivers ) and wireless LAN . 
 = = Rationale = = 
 Staggered tuning improves the bandwidth of a multi @-@ stage tuned amplifier at the expense of the overall gain . Staggered tuning also increases the steepness of passband skirts and hence improves selectivity . 
 The value of staggered tuning is best explained by first looking at the shortcomings of tuning every stage identically . This method is called synchronous tuning . Each stage of the amplifier will reduce the bandwidth . In an amplifier with multiple identical stages , the 3 dB points of the response after the first stage will become the 6 dB points of the second stage . Each successive stage will add a further 3 dB to what was the band edge of the first stage . Thus the 3 dB bandwidth becomes progressively narrower with each additional stage . 
 As an example , a four @-@ stage amplifier will have its 3 dB points at the 0 @.@ 75 dB points of an individual stage . The fractional bandwidth of an LC circuit is given by , 
 <formula> 
 where m is the power ratio of the power at resonance to that at the band edge frequency ( equal to 2 for the 3 dB point and 1 @.@ 19 for the 0 @.@ 75 dB point ) and Q is the quality factor . 
 The bandwidth is thus reduced by a factor of <formula> . In terms of the number of stages <formula> . Thus , the four stage synchronously tuned amplifier will have a bandwidth of only 19 % of a single stage . Even in a two @-@ stage amplifier the bandwidth is reduced to 41 % of the original . Staggered tuning allows the bandwidth to be widened at the expense of overall gain . The overall gain is reduced because when any one stage is at resonance ( and thus maximum gain ) the others are not , unlike synchronous tuning where all stages are at maximum gain at the same frequency . A two @-@ stage stagger @-@ tuned amplifier will have a gain 3 dB less than a synchronously tuned amplifier . 
 Even in a design that is intended to be synchronously tuned , some staggered tuning effect is inevitable because of the practical impossibility of keeping all tuned circuits perfectly in step and because of feedback effects . This can be a problem in very narrow band applications where essentially only one spot frequency is of interest , such as a local oscillator feed or a wave trap . The overall gain of a synchronously tuned amplifier will always be less than the theoretical maximum because of this . 
 Both synchronously tuned and stagger @-@ tuned schemes have a number of advantages over schemes that place all the tuning components in a single aggregated filter circuit separate from the amplifier such as ladder networks or coupled resonators . One advantage is that they are easy to tune . Each resonator is buffered from the others by the amplifier stages so have little effect on each other . The resonators in aggregated circuits , on the other hand , will all interact with each other , particularly their nearest neighbours . Another advantage is that the components need not be close to ideal . Every LC resonator is directly working into a resistor which lowers the Q anyway so any losses in the L and C components can be absorbed into this resistor in the design . <unk> designs usually require high Q resonators . Also , stagger @-@ tuned circuits have resonator components with values that are quite close to each other and in synchronously tuned circuits they can be identical . The spread of component values is thus less in stagger @-@ tuned circuits than in aggregated circuits . 
 = = Design = = 
 Tuned amplifiers such as the one illustrated at the beginning of this article can be more generically depicted as a chain of transconductance amplifiers each loaded with a tuned circuit . 
 where for each stage ( omitting the suffixes ) 
 <unk> is the amplifier transconductance 
 C is the tuned circuit capacitance 
 L is the tuned circuit inductance 
 G is the sum of the amplifier output conductance and the input conductance of the next amplifier . 
 = = = Stage gain = = = 
 The gain A ( s ) , of one stage of this amplifier is given by ; 
 <formula> 
 where s is the complex frequency operator . 
 This can be written in a more generic form , that is , not assuming that the resonators are the LC type , with the following substitutions , 
 <formula> ( the resonant frequency ) 
 <formula> ( the gain at resonance ) 
 <formula> ( the stage quality factor ) 
 Resulting in , 
 <formula> 
 = = = Stage bandwidth = = = 
 The gain expression can be given as a function of ( angular ) frequency by making the substitution s = iω where i is the imaginary unit and ω is the angular frequency 
 <formula> 
 The frequency at the band edges , ωc , can be found from this expression by equating the value of the gain at the band edge to the magnitude of the expression , 
 <formula> 
 where m is defined as above and equal to two if the 3 dB points are desired . 
 Solving this for ωc and taking the difference between the two positive solutions finds the bandwidth <unk> , 
 <formula> 
 and the fractional bandwidth B , 
 <formula> 
 = = = Overall response = = = 
 The overall response of the amplifier is given by the product of the individual stages , 
 <formula> 
 It is desirable to be able to design the filter from a standard low @-@ pass prototype filter of the required specification . Frequently , a smooth Butterworth response will be chosen but other polynomial functions can be used that allow ripple in the response . A popular choice for a polynomial with ripple is the Chebyshev response for its steep skirt . For the purpose of transformation , the stage gain expression can be rewritten in the more suggestive form , 
 <formula> 
 This can be transformed into a low @-@ pass prototype filter with the transform 
 <formula> 
 where ω 'c is the cutoff frequency of the low @-@ pass prototype . 
 This can be done straightforwardly for the complete filter in the case of synchronously tuned amplifiers where every stage has the same ω0 but for a stagger @-@ tuned amplifier there is no simple analytical solution to the transform . Stagger @-@ tuned designs can be approached instead by calculating the poles of a low @-@ pass prototype of the desired form ( e.g. Butterworth ) and then transforming those poles to a band @-@ pass response . The poles so calculated can then be used to define the tuned circuits of the individual stages . 
 = = = Poles = = = 
 The stage gain can be rewritten in terms of the poles by <unk> the denominator ; 
 <formula> 
 where p , p * are a complex conjugate pair of poles 
 and the overall response is , 
 <formula> 
 where the ak = <unk> / <unk> 
 From the band @-@ pass to low @-@ pass transform given above , an expression can be found for the poles in terms of the poles of the low @-@ pass prototype , qk , 
 <formula> 
 where <unk> is the desired band @-@ pass centre frequency and <unk> is the effective Q of the overall circuit . 
 Each pole in the prototype transforms to a complex conjugate pair of poles in the band @-@ pass and corresponds to one stage of the amplifier . This expression is greatly simplified if the cutoff frequency of the prototype , ω 'c , is set to the final filter bandwidth <unk> / <unk> . 
 <formula> 
 In the case of a narrowband design ω0 <unk> q which can be used to make a further simplification with the approximation , 
 <formula> 
 These poles can be inserted into the stage gain expression in terms of poles . By comparing with the stage gain expression in terms of component values , those component values can then be calculated . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Staggered tuning is of most benefit in wideband applications . It was formerly commonly used in television receiver IF amplifiers . However , SAW filters are more likely to be used in that role nowadays . Staggered tuning has advantages in VLSI for radio applications such as wireless LAN . The low spread of component values make it much easier to implement in integrated circuits than traditional ladder networks . 
 = Shawn Michaels = 
 Michael Shawn Hickenbottom ( born July 22 , 1965 ) , better known by his ring name Shawn Michaels , is an American professional wrestling personality , television presenter and retired professional wrestler . He has been signed to WWE , as an ambassador and occasional non @-@ wrestling performer , since December 2010 . Michaels wrestled consistently for WWE , formerly the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) , from 1988 until his first retirement in 1998 . He held non @-@ wrestling roles from 1998 to 2000 and resumed wrestling in 2002 until retiring ceremoniously in 2010 . 
 In the WWF / E , Michaels headlined major pay @-@ per @-@ view events between 1989 and 2010 , closing the company 's flagship annual event , WrestleMania , five times . He was the co @-@ founder and original leader of the successful stable , D @-@ Generation X. He also wrestled in the American Wrestling Association ( AWA ) , where he founded The Midnight Rockers with Marty Jannetty in 1985 . After winning the AWA Tag Team Championship twice , the team continued to the WWF as The Rockers , and had a high @-@ profile breakup in January 1992 . Within the year , Michaels would twice challenge for the WWF Championship and win his first WWF Intercontinental Championship , heralding his arrival as one of the industry 's premier singles stars . 
 Michaels is a four @-@ time world champion : a three @-@ time WWF Champion and a one @-@ time World Heavyweight Champion . He is also a two @-@ time Royal Rumble winner , the first WWF Grand Slam Champion and the fourth WWF Triple Crown Champion , as well as a 2011 WWE Hall of Fame inductee . Michaels won the Pro Wrestling Illustrated " Match of the Year " reader vote a record eleven times . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hickenbottom was born on July 22 , 1965 , in Chandler , Arizona . The last of four children – Randy , Scott , and Shari are his older siblings – he was raised in a military family and spent a brief part of his early years in Reading , Berkshire , England , but grew up in San Antonio , Texas . As a child , Hickenbottom disliked the name Michael , so his family and friends just called him Shawn . Ever since , he has been referred to as Shawn . Additionally , Hickenbottom moved around frequently since his father was in the military . 
 He knew he wanted to become a professional wrestler at the age of twelve and said he performed a wrestling routine in his high school 's talent show , complete with fake blood . Hickenbottom was already an athlete ; his career began at the age of six when he started playing football . He was a stand @-@ out linebacker at Randolph High School on Randolph Air Force Base and eventually became captain of the football team . After graduating , Hickenbottom attended Southwest Texas State University in San Marcos , Texas , but soon realized that college life was not for him . He then began pursuing a career in professional wrestling . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = National Wrestling Alliance ( 1984 – 1985 ) = = = 
 Hickenbottom began to train under Mexican professional wrestler Jose Lothario . During his training , Hickenbottom adopted the ring name , " Shawn Michaels " . After his training with Lothario , he debuted as Shawn Michaels with the National Wrestling Alliance 's ( NWA ) Mid @-@ South Wrestling on October 16 , 1984 , against Art Crews , losing to Crews via swinging neckbreaker . Michaels ' performance in his debut match impressed many veterans , including Terry Taylor . 
 In January 1985 , he debuted for World Class Championship Wrestling ( <unk> ) , the NWA territory in Dallas , Texas . In April 1985 , Michaels went to work for another NWA territory in Kansas City called Central States Wrestling . There , he and tag team partner Marty Jannetty defeated The Batten Twins for the NWA Central States Tag Team Championship , later losing it back to the <unk> . 
 = = = Texas All @-@ Star Wrestling ( 1985 – 1986 ) = = = 
 After leaving Kansas City , he returned to Texas to wrestle for Texas All @-@ Star Wrestling ( TASW ) . During his time with TASW , Michaels replaced Nick Kiniski in the American Breed tag team , teaming with Paul Diamond . Michaels and Diamond were awarded the TASW Tag Team Championship by Chavo Guerrero Sr. The team was later renamed American Force . While in TASW , Michaels and Diamond feuded with Japanese Force . 
 = = = American Wrestling Association ( 1986 – 1987 ) = = = 
 Michaels made his national @-@ level debut , as Sean Michaels , at the age of 20 in the American Wrestling Association ( AWA ) , in a victory over <unk> on ESPN . He was once again teamed with Marty Jannetty , billed as The Midnight Rockers . The Midnight Rockers won the AWA World Tag Team Championship , defeating Doug Somers and Buddy Rose . 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation ( 1987 – 1988 ) = = = 
 In 1987 , The Rockers were signed by a competing promotion : the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) . They were fired from WWF two weeks later , for a bar incident ( a misunderstanding , according to Michaels ' autobiography ) . They then returned to AWA , but were re @-@ signed by WWF a year later . 
 = = = Return to WWF = = = 
 = = = = The Rockers ( 1988 – 1991 ) = = = = 
 The Rockers <unk> at a WWF live event on July 7 , 1988 . Due to WWF chairman Vince McMahon 's desire to have his performers carry WWF @-@ exclusive ring names , Michaels and Jannetty were renamed , as simply " The Rockers . " The team proved popular with both children and women , and was a mid @-@ card stalwart of television and pay @-@ per @-@ view shows for the next two years ; during this time , Michaels headlined his first pay @-@ per @-@ view for the WWF when The Rockers were involved in the 4 @-@ on @-@ 4 Survivor Series match main event of the 1989 Survivor Series . 
 On October 30 , 1990 , The Rockers unofficially won the WWF Tag Team Championship from The Hart Foundation ( Bret Hart and Jim Neidhart ) , as Neidhart , half of the championship team , was in the process of negotiating his release from the company . The match was taped with The Rockers winning the title , but soon after , Neidhart came to an agreement with management and was rehired . The championship was returned to the Hart Foundation , while the title change was never broadcast or even acknowledged on television ( though The Rockers did actually have a successful title defence on November 3 , 1990 , against Power and Glory ( Hercules and Paul Roma ) before the title was returned to the Hart Foundation ) . When news spread , WWF explained that the original result was void due to a collapsed turnbuckle in the ring during the bout . A buckle had indeed broke , but not to a noticeable or dangerous extent during the match . The Rockers continued their partnership , eventually splitting on December 2 , 1991 during an incident on Brutus Beefcake 's televised Barber Shop talk show promotional segment . Michaels superkicked Jannetty and threw him through a glass window on the set of Beefcake 's talk show . Jannetty returned to the WWF the following year and enjoyed moderate success before leaving the company in 1994 , while Michaels became a prominent villain of the early to mid @-@ 1990s as " The Boy Toy " . 
 = = = = The Heartbreak Kid ( 1992 – 1995 ) = = = = 
 At the suggestion of Curt Hennig , Michaels adopted the nickname " The Heartbreak Kid " . Along with his new name came a new gimmick as a vain , cocky villain . He was put together with mirror @-@ carrying manager , Sensational Sherri , who , according to the storyline , had become infatuated with him . Sherri even sang the first version of his new theme music , " Sexy Boy " . During that period , after Michaels had wrestled his scheduled match at live events , his departure was announced with " Shawn Michaels has left the building " , alluding to the phrase " Elvis has left the building " . 
 At WrestleMania VIII , in his first pay @-@ per @-@ view singles match , Michaels defeated Tito Santana : both men had simultaneously eliminated each other from that year 's Royal Rumble . He subsequently became a contender to the promotion 's singles titles . Michaels failed to win the WWF Championship from champion Randy Savage in his first opportunity to compete for that title at British event UK Rampage , held on April 19 at the Sheffield Arena and broadcast on Sky Movies Plus ( the match later aired in the US on the June 15 edition of Prime Time Wrestling ) . He was unable to win the WWF Intercontinental Championship from Bret Hart in the WWF 's first @-@ ever ladder match at a Wrestling Challenge taping on July 21 , which would subsequently be made available on multiple Coliseum / WWE Home Video releases . He , however , won the title from The British Bulldog on the October 27 , 1992 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event , which aired on November 14 . Shortly thereafter , he faced Hart for the WWF Championship in the main event of the 1992 Survivor Series , but lost the match . Originally the secondary main event , Michaels and Hart became the primary main event after The Ultimate Warrior was unable to compete , and was replaced by Mr. Perfect in the tag team match that involved Randy Savage against the team of Ric Flair and Razor Ramon . During this time , Michaels and Sherri split and he engaged himself in a feud with former tag team partner Marty Jannetty . Michaels lost the Intercontinental Championship to Jannetty on Monday Night Raw on May 17 , 1993 . He then regained it on June 6 with the help of his debuting " bodyguard " ( and off @-@ air friend ) Diesel . 
 In September 1993 , Michaels was suspended for testing positive for steroids – a charge he never admitted . On WWF programs , his suspension was explained by his having neglected to defend the title often enough . After turning down World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) ' s advances , Michaels returned to the WWF and made several appearances in the United States Wrestling Association ( USWA ) during a WWF / USWA cross @-@ promotion . He returned to WWF television in November at the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view , substituting for Jerry Lawler , who was dealing with legal issues , in a match pitting himself and three of Lawler 's " Knights " against the Hart brothers , Bret , Bruce , Keith and Owen . 
 He soon entered a staged rivalry with Razor Ramon , who had won the Intercontinental Championship , which had been vacated during Michaels ' absence . Since Michaels had never been defeated in the ring for the title , he claimed to be the rightful champion and even carried around his old title belt . This feud culminated in a ladder match between the two at WrestleMania X. Michaels lost the match , which featured both his and Ramon 's belts suspended above a ladder in the ring . This match was voted by fans as " Match of the Year " by Pro Wrestling Illustrated . It also received a 5 @-@ star rating from Wrestling Observer Newsletter member Dave Meltzer , one of five WWF / WWE matches to do so . Over the next few months , Michaels battled various injuries and launched the Heartbreak Hotel television talk show segment , mainly shown on WWF Superstars . 
 On August 28 , 1994 , Michaels and Diesel captured the Tag Team Championship from The Headshrinkers ( Samu and Fatu ) . The next day , at SummerSlam , Diesel lost the Intercontinental Championship to Ramon when Michaels accidentally superkicked Diesel . This triggered a split between Michaels and Diesel , a storyline that was drawn out until Survivor Series that November . Michaels went on to win the Royal Rumble in 1995 , which set up a championship grudge match at WrestleMania XI against Diesel ( who had gone on to win the WWF Championship from Bob Backlund ) . As part of the storyline , Michaels recruited Sid as his bodyguard for the build @-@ up , lost the match , and was attacked by Sid the following night . After this , Michaels took time off , because Vince McMahon wanted Michaels to become a fan favorite . 
 = = = = Formation of The Kliq ( 1995 ) = = = = 
 Michaels returned to the ring , as a fan favorite , in May 1995 and he went on to defeat Jeff Jarrett to win his third Intercontinental Championship in July at the In Your House pay @-@ per @-@ view event . This led to a title defense against Razor Ramon at SummerSlam , in a ladder match , which Michaels won . Around this time Michaels became the leader of a backstage group known as The Kliq . Critics perceive the group to have sufficient clout with WWF owner Vince McMahon , becoming dominant wrestling figures in the WWF for several years in the mid @-@ 1990s , causing friction with other wrestlers . Michaels disputes the perception , saying that McMahon pushed only deserving wrestlers . Michaels ' fan base was later nicknamed " The Kliq " as an inside reference to the real " Kliq " . In October 1995 , Michaels was the victim of a legit assault outside a bar in Syracuse , New York . Due to not being able to compete , Michaels was forced to forfeit the Intercontinental Championship to his original opponent Dean Douglas at the In Your House : Great White North pay @-@ per @-@ view , who in turn Douglas lost the championship Razor Ramon , another member of the Kliq . This event has been cited as an example of the Kliq holding others down . The next month , during a match with Owen Hart on an episode of Monday Night Raw , Owen performed an enzuigiri that struck the back of Michaels ' head . They continued the match , but Michaels collapsed in the ring , supposedly because he had suffered a concussion . The concussion was scripted , which was kept from most fans at the time . A retirement angle was written so that Michaels could take some time off , after he came back from an injury too soon . 
 = = = = WWF Champion ( 1996 – 1998 ) = = = = 
 After teasing a retirement , Michaels returned to the WWF at the Royal Rumble match in 1996 , which he wound up winning for a second year in a row , to receive a WWF Championship match in the main event at WrestleMania XII . Around this time , Jose Lothario became Michaels ' on @-@ screen manager . At WrestleMania XII , Michaels defeated WWF Champion Bret Hart in the overtime of their sixty @-@ minute Iron Man match , which had ended in a scoreless tie . On May 19 , 1996 , Michaels and his fellow Kliq members were involved in the incident known as " Curtain Call " . Diesel and Razor Ramon were about to leave WWF to company rival WCW . After Michaels won a match against Diesel , Ramon and Hunter Hearst Helmsley came to the ring and joined Michaels and Diesel in a group @-@ hug . As Diesel and Helmsley were seen as villains at the time , in contrast to Michaels and Ramon , this constituted a breach of " kayfabe " , as acting out of character , which was rare and controversial at the time . As WCW gained momentum due to the signings of Hall and Nash , Michaels held the championship for most of the year . Michaels ' championship reign ended at the 1996 Survivor Series event , where he lost to Sycho Sid , his former bodyguard . Michaels recaptured the championship from Sid in January 1997 at the Royal Rumble . 
 On a special episode of Raw dubbed Thursday Raw Thursday , Michaels vacated the WWF Championship ; he explained to fans that he was informed by doctors that he had conjured a knee injury , and that he had to retire . His speech was regarded as controversial , as Michaels was allegedly unwilling to lose to Bret Hart at WrestleMania 13 ( since it was noted that he was going to have a rematch with Hart at WrestleMania ) . Michaels contemplated thoughts of retirement and stated that he " had to find his smile again , " which he had " lost " somewhere down the line . After knee surgery by Dr. James Andrews , Michaels returned a few months later , briefly teaming with Steve Austin to win the WWF Tag Team Championship . In his autobiography , Michaels reveals about his real @-@ life feud with Bret Hart , claiming that Bret did interviews on live television claiming that he [ Michaels ] was faking his whole injury . 
 By spring of 1997 , the real @-@ life backstage conflict between Shawn Michaels and Bret Hart were reaching its heights . Both men were going out on television and frequently making personal , true to heart remarks about one another . Shawn Michaels briefly left the WWF in June of that year after a real backstage fight with Bret Hart , just hours before a Raw is War show , which allegedly resulted from Michaels making an on @-@ air remark , known as the " Sunny Days " comment , implying that Bret ( who was married at the time ) was having an affair with WWF Diva Sunny . Shawn Michaels and Steve Austin were still WWF Tag Team Champions at the time during an ongoing feud with The Hart Foundation and a tournament was made to decide new Tag Champions . Michaels would eventually return that summer in July . At SummerSlam , Michaels officiated the WWF Championship match between WWF Champion The Undertaker and Bret Hart . The match ended in controversial fashion , with Michaels hitting Undertaker with a chair ( unintentionally , as he was aiming for Bret after he spat in his face ) . Michaels was then forced to award the championship to his nemesis , Bret Hart . The next night on Raw , signs of a heel turn started to show as Michaels told the WWF fans what happened at SummerSlam was an accident and that he would deal with the Undertaker when the time came . At WWF One Night Only , held in Birmingham , England in September , Michaels defeated The British Bulldog to capture the WWF European Championship . The fans at the event were so appalled at the result of the match they booed Michaels out of the building , to the extent that they littered the ring with garbage , cementing his second heel turn . With this win , Michaels became the first Grand Slam Champion . At the October pay @-@ per @-@ view event , In Your House : Badd Blood , Michaels and Undertaker participated in the first Hell in a Cell match . During the match , it saw Michaels fall off the side of the 15 @-@ foot ( 5 m ) high structure through a table and saw him as the winner in the match after the debuting Kane <unk> his victory bound half @-@ brother , The Undertaker . The match received a 5 @-@ star rating from Dave Meltzer . 
 In the fall , Michaels joined forces with real @-@ life friend Hunter Hearst Helmsley ( Triple H ) , Hunter 's then @-@ girlfriend Chyna , and Rick Rude to form the stable D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) . Michaels continued his rivalry with Bret Hart and his reformed Hart Foundation , which was now a pro @-@ Canada stable . Michaels taunted the group and Canada by engaging in acts such as blowing his nose with and humping the Canadian Flag . Michaels later claimed the flag desecration was Bret 's idea . Michaels ' feud with the Hart Foundation culminated in a championship match at Survivor Series in 1997 against Bret Hart . Michaels came out of this match , dubbed by fans the " Montreal Screwjob " , as the WWF Champion . Michaels now held both the WWF and European championship at the same time . Michaels dropped the European Championship to D @-@ Generation X member Hunter Hearst Hemsley in a farcical match . 
 = = = = First retirement ( 1998 ) = = = = 
 At the 1998 Royal Rumble , Michaels received a serious back injury in a Casket match against The Undertaker . Michaels took a back body drop to the outside of the ring and hit his lower back on the casket , causing him to herniate two discs and crush one completely . This rendered Michaels unable to compete in the main event of the following month 's No Way Out of Texas : In Your House as advertised , and forced him into retirement after losing the WWF Championship to Steve Austin at WrestleMania XIV . 
 = = = = WWF Commissioner ( 1998 − 2000 ) = = = = 
 After being away for nearly four months , Shawn Michaels would make a surprise return to the WWF as a guest commentator on the July 13th episode of Raw is War . Michaels would continue to make non @-@ wrestling appearances on WWF programming , and on November 23 , 1998 , replaced Sgt. Slaughter as the WWF Commissioner , a portrayed match maker and rules enforcer , eventually joining Vince McMahon 's group of wrestlers called the Corporation as a villain . Throughout late 1998 and early 1999 , Michaels made regular television appearances on Raw , in which he scheduled matches , throwing around his authority , and sometimes even deciding the outcome of matches . On January 4 , 1999 on Raw , Michaels re @-@ joined DX as a fan favorite , but disappeared from WWF television for a few weeks to have back surgery , and by the time he returned , DX was on the way of dissolving within the next couple of months . 
 Michaels made occasional appearances as the WWF Commissioner during the spring and summer of 1999 , but remained absent from television after August until May 15 , 2000 , when he returned on Raw to declare himself the special guest referee for The Rock and Triple H 's Iron Man match at Judgment Day . One month later , Michaels briefly reappeared on Raw to hand over the role of Commissioner to Mick Foley and after another appearance in October , he did not make any in @-@ ring appearances until mid @-@ 2002 , although he appeared briefly on television to make a speech at WWF New York during Armageddon 2000 . Michaels also had no part at all in the Invasion storyline . 
 = = = = Post WWE ( 2000 − 2002 ) = = = = 
 Believing that his wrestling career was over , Michaels was interested in training individuals who wanted to become professional wrestlers . He saw potential in using his name and opened the Shawn Michaels Wrestling Academy in 1999 , after his lawyer Skip McCormick suggested the idea . Michaels left the academy in 2002 , giving co @-@ founder Rudy Boy Gonzalez sole responsibility due to Michaels ' new contract with WWE . Michaels was also a sportscaster for San Antonio 's local news for a short period during his retirement . 
 On November 23 , 1999 , Michaels made a special appearance at <unk> 's Yokohama Arena show as the guest referee for the H ( Hayabusa ) vs. fake Hayabusa ( Mr. <unk> ) main event . He got himself involved in the match when fake Hayabusa delivered a low blow on him and he responded later on with Sweet Chin Music . 
 Michaels was still contracted to the WWE during this period . 
 = = = Second return to WWE = = = 
 = = = = Comeback & Feud with Triple H ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = = 
 In 2002 , Michaels returned to WWE television after 18 months of absence . On the June 3 episode of Raw , Kevin Nash announced him as a new member of the recently reformed New World Order ( nWo ) . Michaels was the only nWo member to have never worked in WCW . After the nWo had disbanded , Triple H appeared to make amends with Michaels . This was solidified when Michaels pleaded Triple H to return to Raw . Later on , they came down to the ring sporting their DX music and attire . When the pair was about to perform their trademark " Suck It " taunt , Triple H turned on Michaels by performing a Pedigree on him . Continuing the angle , a week later , Triple H attacked Michaels from behind in a parking lot and put his head through a car window , in storyline . In response , Michaels challenged Triple H to " a fight " ( a non @-@ sanctioned match ) at SummerSlam , which Triple H accepted , laying the foundation for a rivalry that would last for several years . In his first official wrestling match since WrestleMania XIV , Michaels won at SummerSlam , but was attacked by Triple H with a sledgehammer after the match . At Survivor Series , Michaels won the World Heavyweight Championship from Triple H in the first @-@ ever Elimination Chamber match . Michaels ' reign as champion came to an end a month later when he lost the championship to Triple H in a Three Stages of Hell match , a series of three matches in which wrestlers attempt to win the majority of matches , at Armageddon . 
 Michaels then began a rivalry with Chris Jericho , after Jericho claimed that he was the next Shawn Michaels . On January 13 , 2003 , after Jericho won a battle royal to select his entry number for the Royal Rumble , choosing number two in order to start the match with Michaels , who had already been named number one . At the Royal Rumble , Jericho , with the help of Christian , eliminated Michaels . Michaels defeated Jericho at WrestleMania XIX . Despite this , Michaels was low @-@ blowed after hugging with Chris Jericho . On the final episode of Raw of 2003 , Michaels would defeat Triple H after a Sweet Chin Music for the World Heavyweight title in his hometown of San Antonio , Texas with Eric Bischoff as the special guest referee ( Earl Hebner originally refereed the match , only to be knocked out by Triple H in the middle of the match ) . However , Bischoff reversed the decision due to both men 's shoulders being on the mat . Angered by this , Michaels attacked Ric Flair and Bischoff . Because of Michaels putting his hands on Bischoff , Bischoff then fired him . However , Michaels would be rehired by Steve Austin . 
 As a part of an ongoing feud with Triple H , the two competed alongside Chris Benoit in the main event match at WrestleMania XX for the World Heavyweight Championship . The former DX partners both came up short in the match , however , as Benoit won the championship . The night before this , Shawn Michaels inducted Tito Santana in the WWE Hall of Fame . At Bad Blood in June , Michaels lost to Triple H in a Hell in a Cell match . Four months later , he lost a World Heavyweight championship match against Triple H , after Edge interfered at Taboo Tuesday , when the fans voted for him ahead of Edge and Chris Benoit to face Triple H one more time . Following this , Michaels was out of action for a few months with a legit torn meniscus . 
 = = = = D @-@ Generation X reunion ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 At the Royal Rumble in 2005 , Michaels competed in the Rumble match and eliminated Kurt Angle . In seeking revenge , Angle re @-@ entered the ring and eliminated Michaels , and thus placed him in an ankle lock submission hold , outside the ring . Michaels issued a challenge to Angle for a match at WrestleMania 21 , which Angle accepted when he appeared on Raw to attack Michaels . The following week on Raw , Marty Jannetty and Michaels had a one time reunion as The Rockers and defeated La Résistance ( Robért Conway and Sylvain Grenier ) . Three days later on SmackDown ! , Angle defeated Jannetty , after Angle made Jannetty submit to the ankle lock . To send a " message " to Michaels , Angle also humiliated Michaels ' former manager , Sensational Sherri , when he applied the ankle lock hold on her . At WrestleMania 21 in April , Angle defeated Michaels by submission , again with an ankle lock . Two months later , at a WrestleMania 21 rematch , Michaels defeated Angle at the Vengeance pay @-@ per @-@ view event . 
 Following the events of WrestleMania 21 , the next night on Raw , Muhammad Hassan and Daivari came out to confront and assault Michaels . On the April 11 episode of Raw , Michaels approached authority figure Eric Bischoff , in which he demanded a handicap match with Hassan and Daivari , a match consisting of one wrestler or team of wrestlers facing off against a team of wrestlers with numerical superiority such as two against one , or three against two . Bischoff refused to schedule the match , but informed Michaels to find a partner and he would grant him the match . Michaels then made a plea for Hulk Hogan to come back and team with him . On the April 18 episode of Raw , Hassan again led an attack on Michaels until Hogan appeared to save Michaels and accept his offer . At Backlash , Hassan and Daivari lost to Hogan and Michaels when Daivari was pinned . On the July 4 episode of Raw , Michaels and Hulk Hogan had a tag team match , which they won . During the post @-@ match pose , Michaels hit Hogan with his superkick , knocking Hogan to the ground and making Michaels a villain for the first time since returning in 2002 . The following week on Raw , Michaels appeared on Piper 's Pit where he superkicked Roddy Piper and then challenged Hogan to a match at SummerSlam . Hogan defeated Michaels at SummerSlam , and after the match Michaels extended his hand to him , saying " I needed to know , and I found out " and he and Hogan shook hands . Michaels left the ring to allow Hogan to celebrate with the crowd , and Michaels once again became a fan favorite . 
 On the December 26 , 2005 , episode of Raw , Vince McMahon lauded Michaels for his part in the " Montreal Screwjob " . Michaels said he was only being loyal to his company , he had moved on , and McMahon should move on as well . McMahon then began setting unusual stipulations for Michaels ' matches and interfering on behalf of Michaels ' opponents . During the Royal Rumble , McMahon made his way to the ring , and as Michaels stared at McMahon , Shane McMahon made a surprising appearance , eliminating Michaels from the match . On the February 13 episode of Raw , McMahon tried unsuccessfully to force Michaels to sign retirement papers . The following week , Michaels won a handicap match against the Spirit Squad ( Kenny , Johnny , Mitch , Nicky and Mikey ) and after the match , Michaels ' former partner , Marty Jannetty , came down to help Michaels from the assault by the Spirit Squad . After the two reunited , McMahon offered Jannetty a contract if he " kissed his ass . " The following week , Jannetty refused McMahon 's offer and instead took Chris Masters ' " Masterlock challenge . " Michaels tried to help Jannetty , which ultimately resulted in Shane attacking Michaels and forcing him to kiss his father 's behind . At Saturday Night 's Main Event , Shane defeated Michaels in a Street Fight , a match without disqualifications and where scoring conditions can occur anywhere , after he applied a sharpshooter on Michaels , which led to McMahon immediately ordering for the bell to be rung , even though Michaels did not submit , which was an allusion to the " Montreal Screwjob " . Despite interference from the Spirit Squad and Shane , Michaels defeated McMahon at WrestleMania 22 in a No Holds Barred match , a match where there are no disqualifications . At Backlash , The McMahons ( Vince and Shane ) defeated Michaels and " God " in a tag team match , with help from the Spirit Squad in a no disqualification match . On the May 22 episode of Raw , the Squad was scripted to injure Michaels ' knee . This was angle was written so that Michaels could have surgery on his knee , which had been <unk> injured for some time . 
 In 2006 , a series of events took place which suggested a reunion of Michaels and Triple H as DX . They began at WrestleMania 22 , where both Michaels and Triple H performed the crotch chop , during their matches . On Raw , the two continued to deliver chops , as Michaels feuded with Vince McMahon and Triple H went for the WWE Championship , repeatedly butting heads with Vince McMahon in the process . On the June 12 episode of Raw , DX officially reunited . During Triple H 's gauntlet match , which had him compete against the Spirit Squad . Michaels came in to help Triple H , and the two did the DX " crotch chops . " At Vengeance , DX defeated the Spirit Squad in a 5 – on – 2 handicap match . They also defeated the Spirit Squad at Saturday Night 's Main Event in a 5 @-@ on @-@ 2 elimination match and defeated The McMahons at SummerSlam . At Unforgiven , DX once again defeated the McMahons and ECW World Champion The Big Show in a Hell in a Cell match , finally ending the nine @-@ month long feud . 
 At Cyber Sunday , DX took on Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) . The fan @-@ selected referee Eric Bischoff allowed the illegal use of a steel chair to give Rated @-@ RKO the ill @-@ gotten win and the plaudit of being the first tag team to defeat DX in a tag team match since their reformation in June 2006 . At Survivor Series , however , Team DX emerged victorious against Team Rated @-@ RKO in a clean sweep victory . At New Year 's Revolution , Triple H suffered a legit torn right quadriceps during their match with Rated @-@ RKO . Rated @-@ RKO claimed victory over DX , citing Triple H 's injury , as the " end " of DX . On January 15 , Michaels lived up to his word of " dealing " with Rated @-@ RKO , from his comments the previous week before , when he took out Randy Orton with a con @-@ chair @-@ to after a handicap match against Edge and Orton . 
 = = = = Various feuds ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 On the January 29 episode of Raw , Michaels captured the World Tag Team Championship with WWE Champion John Cena after defeating Rated @-@ RKO . He then defeated both Edge and Orton in a Triple Threat number one contender 's match on another episode of Raw to earn a shot at the WWE Championship . At WrestleMania 23 , Cena retained the championship , after he made Michaels submit to the STFU . The next night on Raw , Michaels and Cena competed in two back @-@ to @-@ back ten team battle royals , winning the first and losing the titles in the second to The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) when Michaels threw Cena over the top rope . Michaels ' feud with Cena continued and he faced off with Cena , Edge and Randy Orton in a Fatal Four @-@ Way Match at Backlash for the WWE Championship . Cena retained the championship when Michaels performed Sweet Chin Music on Cena causing him to fall on Orton , which gained Cena the pinfall . 
 Michaels then entered a feud with Randy Orton when Orton claimed that he could beat Michaels . The week before their scheduled match at Judgment Day , after Michaels won a match against Edge , Orton interfered , punting Michaels in the head . Orton assaulted Michaels again , just prior to their match at Judgment Day , interrupting Michaels ' interview segment . Michaels collapsed during the course of their match , causing Orton to win by referee stoppage . Afterwards , Orton continued the beating , when he performed an RKO to a fallen Michaels . Michaels was then removed out of the ring in a stretcher . During the feud , Michaels conjured a storyline concussion . This injury was used to keep Michaels out of action , as he required surgery for his knee . Michaels made his return on the October 8 episode of Raw , performing a superkick to newly crowned WWE Champion , Randy Orton , during his title ceremony at the end of the show and then celebrating over the knocked @-@ out champion as Vince McMahon watched . At Cyber Sunday , Michaels was voted by the fans to face Orton for the WWE Championship ; though he won via disqualification when Orton hit Michaels with a low blow , which resulted in Orton retaining the championship . Michaels got another opportunity at the WWE Championship , when he was granted his rematch against Orton at Survivor Series . In their match , Michaels was banned from using Sweet Chin Music upon request by Orton , referring to as Michaels <unk> Orton week after week . Michaels lost the match , when Orton performed an RKO for the win . 
 As part of the storyline involving Ric Flair , Michaels faced Flair in a Career Threatening match at WrestleMania XXIV , in which he won by performing Sweet Chin Music and thus ending Flair 's career . Afterwards , Batista confronted Michaels about his actions at WrestleMania , calling him selfish and egotistical . The two faced off at Backlash with Chris Jericho as the guest referee . Michaels won after faking a knee injury and performing Sweet Chin Music . Jericho then confronted Michaels on this matter , in which Michaels admitted to faking the injury in order to defeat Batista . Michaels then defeated Jericho at Judgment Day . At One Night Stand , Michaels lost to Batista in a stretcher match , thus ending their feud . On the June 9 episode of Raw , Michaels was attacked by Chris Jericho during his talk show segment , The Highlight Reel , being thrown directly through a television screen . The following week , it was revealed that , within the context of the storyline , Michaels had suffered a detached retina . At The Great American Bash , a match between Michaels and Jericho was scheduled , in which Jericho assaulted Michaels ' eye , which caused Jericho to win by referee stoppage . 
 A month later at SummerSlam , Michaels announced his retirement from professional wrestling . That night , Jericho punched Michaels ' wife in the face . On the next Raw , Michaels renounced his retirement and challenged Jericho to an unsanctioned match at Unforgiven , which Jericho accepted . The next week , they had an in @-@ ring contract signing for the unsanctioned match . During this , they started to fight , causing a legit small triceps tear for Michaels . He was medically cleared to compete at Unforgiven , and beat Jericho so severely that the referee called the match . Later that night , Jericho replaced CM Punk in the World Heavyweight Championship scramble match , and won the title . The next <unk> at No Mercy , Michaels lost a championship ladder match to Jericho . 
 In December 2008 , Michaels , having lost his family 's savings due to the global recession , grudgingly accepted a one @-@ year general employment contract from John Bradshaw Layfield ( JBL ) . After failing to help JBL win the World Heavyweight Championship from John Cena at the Royal Rumble , and being derided for it , Michaels agreed to face JBL in " All or Nothing " match at No Way Out in February . Michaels won the match , letting him out of his contract early , while still receiving full payment . 
 On the March 2 Raw , Michaels became the first person to defeat Vladimir Kozlov , and so earned a match with The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXV in April . The Undertaker defeated Michaels in a highly acclaimed match to extend his WrestleMania winning streak to 17 – 0 . After WrestleMania , Michaels took a hiatus from WWE . 
 = = = = Final matches and retirement ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 Michaels returned to WWE programming in a series of segments that aired on the August 10 , 2009 episode of Raw , where he had , in storyline , left the WWE . Triple H met with Michaels at an office cafeteria in Texas where he was working as a chef ; throughout the segments , Triple H would try to convince Michaels to return to WWE and reform DX . After several incidents during the segments , Michaels agreed to team with Triple H to face The Legacy ( Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase ) at SummerSlam . At the pay @-@ per @-@ view event , DX defeated Legacy . The two teams would exchange victories , with their feud concluding in October . Two months later , at TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs , DX defeated Chris Jericho and Big Show to win the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship in a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match ( TLC ) . On the January 4 , 2010 episode of Raw , Michaels buried the hatchet with long @-@ time rival Bret Hart , as they shook hands and hugged in the ring . In contrast to the storylines featured on the show , this was in fact a real @-@ life reconciliation which laid to rest animosities surrounding the Montreal Screwjob . While some cast doubts on its sincerity , both men have confirmed that it was indeed genuine . DX lost the Unified Tag Team Championship in a Triple Threat match to the team of The Miz and Big Show on the February 8 episode of Raw , the match also included The Straight Edge Society ( CM Punk and Luke Gallows ) . At the Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view , Michaels cost The Undertaker the World Heavyweight Championship in the main event . At WrestleMania XXVI , Michaels lost to The Undertaker and , as a result , he was forced to retire due to the match stipulation , the same way HBK ended Ric Flair 's career . The following night , on the March 29 episode of Raw , Michaels gave an emotional farewell speech , departing with the familiar sentence , " Shawn Michaels has left the building . " 
 In an interview with Bill Simmons of ESPN.com shortly after his retirement , Michaels stated that his decision to retire came a month before WrestleMania XXV , when a backstage employee asked about his son Cameron , and , in response to Shawn telling the employee that he 'd just turned nine , the employee said that he was " halfway gone " ; meaning that he was halfway to his eighteenth birthday , and after that , he 'd be " gone . " According to Michaels , the statement affected him deeply ; he did not want be absent when his son left home , so he decided that year would be his last year as an active wrestler . 
 = = = = WWE ambassador ( 2010 – present ) = = = = 
 On the December 14 Raw , Michaels won the Slammy Award for Moment of the Year for his match against The Undertaker at WrestleMania XXVI . Michaels accepted the award via satellite . Three days later , he announced a long @-@ term deal with WWE , where he will serve in an ambassadorial role . He made his in @-@ person TV return at the December 11 Tribute to the Troops taping , where he and Triple H had a one @-@ night only DX reunion . 
 He appeared on the January 10 , 2011 Raw , where he was announced as a WWE Hall of Fame inductee . After being ridiculed by Alberto Del Rio later that night , Michaels hit him with Sweet Chin Music . On the March 28 Raw , Michaels addressed Triple H and The Undertaker about their match at WrestleMania XXVII . Michaels was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame on April 2 by Triple H. They were also joined by fellow Kliq members Kevin Nash ( who had returned to WWE for the Royal Rumble ) and Sean Waltman . He returned on the June 27 Raw , where he was confronted by CM Punk , and superkicked David Otunga and Michael McGillicutty . Later that night , when Diamond Dallas Page 's special appearance was interrupted by Drew McIntyre , he superkicked McIntyre . 
 In June 2011 , Jim Ross , Michaels and Hart announced that the three were working on a DVD chronicling the careers of Hart and Michaels that the WWE was planning to release in October 2011 . The subject of the DVD would be their on @-@ screen rivalry and real @-@ life conflicts , with a particular focus on the Montreal screwjob . In his tweet , Hart described working on the DVD as a " cathartic " experience , and Ross asserted that both Hart and Michaels had been very honest and emotional in their interviews . The DVD , Shawn Michaels vs Bret Hart : WWE 's Greatest Rivalries , was released in November 2011 . 
 On February 13 , 2012 , he confronted Triple H about accepting The Undertaker 's challenge for a Hell in a Cell at Wrestlemania XXVIII , and announced he 'd be the special guest referee for it . August 6 was " Shawn Michaels Appreciation Night " . He appeared on Raw , where he was confronted by Brock Lesnar , then again after the broadcast for the Appreciation Night ceremonies . 
 On the January 24 NXT , he announced a tournament to crown the inaugural NXT Tag Team Champions . On the April 1 , 2013 Raw , Michaels returned to offer to corner Triple H in his match with Lesnar at WrestleMania 29 . During that match , Michaels superkicked an interfering Paul Heyman , helping Triple H win and keep his job . He returned on the May 27 Raw in a backstage segment with John Cena , and again on the SummerSlam pre @-@ show . 
 In October 2013 , Michaels won a fan poll to become special guest referee for the Hell in a Cell match between Daniel Bryan and Randy Orton for the vacant WWE Championship . There , he superkicked Bryan , allowing Orton to pick up the win . The next night on Raw , he explained that he was upset with Bryan for attacking Triple H during the match . He degraded Bryan for not showing him respect , turning heel for the first time since 2005 . Bryan put him in his " Yes ! " Lock finisher to end the segment . On December 9 , he presented Bryan with the award for Superstar of the Year . Later that night , Bryan hit Michaels with a running knee after Michaels had super @-@ kicked CM Punk . 
 On the August 25 , 2014 episode of Raw , Michaels returned along with fellow legends Hulk Hogan and Ric Flair in a legends panel segment , where he predicted Bray Wyatt to win the rumble . All three legends then became involved in an altercation with Big Show . Michaels would appear at WrestleMania 31 , interfering as a member of DX in the Sting vs. Triple H match , delivering Sweet Chin Music to Sting . At a WWE tour in Australia Michaels was confronted by Bo Dallas and was called a has @-@ been and got a Sweet Chin Music for his troubles turning face again in the process . Michaels appeared on the October 19 , 2015 episode of Raw , confronting Seth Rollins who was cutting a promo on relieving Kane of his duties as Director of Operations . 
 At WrestleMania 32 , Michaels made an appearance during the event in his in @-@ ring attire , confronting The League of Nations alongside Mick Foley and Stone Cold Steve Austin where Michaels delivered Sweet Chin Music to Alberto Del Rio and King Barrett before celebrating with Foley , Austin and The New Day . 
