 Hip dysplasia is an abnormality of the hip joint which can cause crippling lameness and arthritis . The cats most commonly affected with hip dysplasia tend to be males of the larger , big @-@ boned breeds such as Persians and Maine Coons . This is similar to the situation with dogs , but the relatively smaller size and weight of cats frequently results in symptoms that are less pronounced . X @-@ rays submitted to the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals ( OFA ) between 1974 and 2011 indicates that 24 @.@ 3 % of Maine Coons in the database were dysplastic . The Maine Coon is the only cat breed listed in the database . 
 Polycystic kidney disease ( PKD ) is a slowly progressive disease affecting Persian and Persian @-@ related breeds , in which fluid @-@ filled cysts expand within the kidneys , destroying functional tissue . While renal cysts are observed with a low incidence in Maine Coons , PKD appears to be a misnomer in this particular breed . In a recent study spanning 8 years , renal cysts were documented by ultrasound in 7 of 187 healthy Maine Coons enrolled in a pre @-@ breeding screening programme . The cysts were mostly single and unilateral ( 6 / 7 , 85 @.@ 7 % ) small ( mean 3 @.@ 6 mm in diameter ) and located at <unk> junction ( 4 / 6 , 66 @.@ 7 % ) , thus different in size , numbers and location from those observed in Persian @-@ related breeds . In the same study , not only did all six Maine Coon cats with renal cysts test negative for the <unk> mutation , proving the disease in these cats to be unrelated to the PKD observed in Persians and related breeds , but gene sequencing of these cats failed to demonstrate any common genetic sequences . The presence of renal cysts , in the absence of other changes , does not appear to negatively impact the patients ' quality of life , as those for which follow @-@ up was available were reported alive and well in adulthood . Although the exact nature and clinical relevance of renal cysts in Maine Coons is currently unknown , its screening is still recommended for pre @-@ breeding assessment . Ultrasonography is currently the only valid diagnostic method for its detection in this breed . 
 = Joseph W. Tkach = 
 Joseph W. Tkach ( / <unk> / ; March 16 , 1927 – September 23 , 1995 ) was the appointed successor of Herbert W. Armstrong , founder of the Worldwide Church of God . Tkach became President and Pastor General of the church upon the death of Armstrong in 1986 . Tkach spearheaded a major doctrinal transformation of the Worldwide Church of God , abandoning Armstrong 's unconventional doctrines and bringing the church into accord with mainstream evangelical Christianity . His son , Joseph Tkach Jr . , continued his work and in 1997 the Worldwide Church of God became a member of the National Association of Evangelicals . 
 During Tkach 's tenure , the changes that he implemented stirred much controversy and significant dissent among those who continued to follow Armstrong 's theology . The dissenters labeled the changes as heresy and many left to form new church organizations . Within the mainstream Christian community , some have hailed Tkach 's reforms , which brought a church from the fringe to orthodoxy , as unprecedented . 
 = = Background = = 
 He was born March 16 , 1927 , in Chicago , the youngest of five children and the only son of <unk> and Mary Tkach . The name Tkach / <unk> / is of Carpatho @-@ <unk> ( Ukrainian ) origin , but his parents were originally from Czechoslovakia . The neighborhood where he grew up was composed mainly of blue @-@ collar working people of Russian origin . He graduated from Tilden High School in southwest Chicago . He then served a short term in the U.S. Navy near the end of World War II and afterward returned to his native Chicago . On March 31 , 1951 , Tkach married Elaine Apostolos ; they had three children : Joseph Jr . , Tanya , and Jennifer . 
 Tkach grew up in the Russian Orthodox faith , but eventually his family , including his parents , became interested in the Radio Church of God through the radio broadcast of Herbert W. Armstrong , the founder of the church . The Radio Church of God would eventually change its name in 1968 to the Worldwide Church of God ( WCG ) , the church that Tkach would lead . It was a church characterized by the strong influence of its founder and his unique doctrines based on his own interpretation of the Bible . Initially , Tkach was the only member of his family who was not interested in listening to the radio broadcasts . However , a purportedly miraculous event was to change him . At the time , Tkach suffered from severe ulcers and was required to stay on a special diet . His wife then suggested that God would heal him if he were to become a minister in Armstrong 's church . Although skeptical , he accepted the suggestion of becoming a minister and he found himself cured , never again to suffer from the ulcers . He was baptized by Radio Church of God minister , Dean Blackwell , on March 1 , 1957 . On June 7 , 1961 , Blackwell ordained him a deacon in the Chicago congregation , and on June 3 , 1963 , Roderick C. Meredith , who would eventually lead a breakaway church from the WCG , ordained him as an elder . 
 In 1966 Tkach moved his family to Pasadena , California , where he enrolled in classes at Ambassador College , a state @-@ approved , but not regionally accredited , college that was sponsored by the WCG . In 1974 , he was ordained to the rank of preaching elder . Armstrong taught that the Bible endorsed " ranks " in the ministry , and elders could progress up the ladder from local elder to preaching elder to pastor to evangelist . The highest rank , apostle , was reserved for the leader of the church . 
 In the late 1970s a period of financial and leadership disputes occurred within the church hierarchy , with church treasurer , Stanley Rader , at the center of many of the disputes . The gravest incident was the church <unk> placed in financial receivership by the Attorney General of California , George Deukmejian , an action that was later disallowed in court . Tkach took an active role in the defense of Armstrong , Rader , and the church headquarters ' operations . He rallied the WCG membership to take action against the court proceedings . Armstrong recognized his effectiveness and subsequently ordained him to the rank of evangelist on September 27 , 1979 . See Evangelists of the Worldwide Church of God . In March 1981 Armstrong appointed him to the WCG 's advisory council of elders , and eventually , Armstrong named him Director of Church Administration , one of the most prominent administrative positions other than Armstrong himself . 
 = = Selection by Armstrong = = 
 Armstrong had recovered from severe heart problems in the late 1970s , but by the mid @-@ 1980s he was experiencing rapidly declining health . By 1985 this was common knowledge among church members as the 93 @-@ year @-@ old preacher had not been seen in public for several months . According to The Worldwide News , the official church newsletter , Armstrong told his advisory council on January 7 , 1986 , of his decision to appoint Tkach to succeed him in the event of his death . It was also announced by Armstrong in a letter to members of the church . Armstrong died on January 16 , 1986 , only nine days after naming his successor . 
 Initially there were few visible changes within the church . Tkach continued Armstrong 's tradition of traveling abroad , although his emphasis was more on visiting church members and operations than on Armstrong 's agenda of visiting world leaders to attempt to witness to them . The church entered a period of rapid growth during the early years of Tkach 's administration . In fact , the membership peaked during his tenure at 126 @,@ 800 members in 1988 . The finances were stable , largely due to the church 's teaching that members should tithe , giving a tenth of their gross income to the church . The church magazine , The Plain Truth , continued to serialize the final and most controversial book by Armstrong , Mystery of the Ages . Tkach also continued , at least in public , to promote the church 's unique doctrines . 
 Tkach did not have the charismatic personality of his predecessor . Unlike Armstrong , who kept a strong hold of the reins , Tkach delegated many tasks , including the presentation of the church @-@ supported television broadcast , The World Tomorrow and the authoring of articles and booklets produced by the church . Although Tkach was not known as a theologian , and made no claims as such , eventually he was to have profound impact on the theological foundations of the WCG . 
 = = Doctrinal changes = = 
 The first major change under Tkach 's tenure was the WCG 's doctrine on healing . Previously the church taught that true believers were healed by faith in God and not by doctors . Tkach asked the church leadership to study the question . Once Tkach was satisfied with the results of the study , he officially softened the church 's teaching on the matter , encouraging members to seek proper treatment while retaining faith in God as a healer . 
 Another officially published doctrinal change was that women in the church would be allowed to wear makeup . In the earliest years of the denomination , Armstrong announced the prohibition of makeup for women . In the 1970s that prohibition was lifted , but in 1981 Armstrong reinstituted the teaching . In 1988 Tkach lifted the ban for good . 
 The first major sign of dissent occurred in 1989 when a WCG minister , Gerald <unk> , published a manuscript outlining what he and others believed were disturbing trends in the work , including the beginnings of the doctrinal departure from what had been established by Armstrong . <unk> and another minister , John Amos , were disfellowshipped and went on to form the Philadelphia Church of God ( PCG ) . The PCG began an alternative radio program and magazine , and over the next several years a few thousand WCG members left to join the PCG . Despite this , Tkach continued to implement additional changes in thinking including : the shift in emphasis away from observing world events primarily through the lens of prophetic interpretation ; the removal of the prohibition of interracial marriage ; the allowance of work on the Sabbath ; the acceptance of the trinitarian doctrine ; and the acceptance of the validity of other Christian denominations , among many other changes . Older Armstrong publications that supported the church 's once unique doctrines were allowed to go out @-@ of @-@ print . 
 As these reforms were being carried out , questions arose as to whether the decisions were truly made by Tkach himself or by others in the church leadership . The church leadership at that time included Mike Feazell , executive assistant and editorial advisor to Tkach , Greg Albrecht , editor of The Plain Truth , and Joseph Tkach , Jr . , the son of Joseph W. Tkach , and church administration director . One conspiracy theory stated that the decisions did not come from Tkach himself but from the church leadership . Another stated that the ideas did originate from Tkach but he formed them early in his career , kept them hidden from Armstrong , and only allowed the ideas to come to fruition after Armstrong 's death . Feazell claims that the reforms were initially driven by a re @-@ examination of church literature that was mainly spurred by questions posed by church ministers and members . These examinations were done by Tkach and Feazell , but the final decisions and approval of materials for publication were made by Tkach . By 1990 , Tkach authorized the formation of a " Doctrinal Manual Group " , consisting of thirteen ministers and Ambassador College faculty members with the mission of assuring doctrinal consistency , refinement , and advice to the Pastor General . Tkach reviewed and made the final decisions on all recommendations made by the group . 
 The church 's traditions of following the Sabbath , the Old Testament holy days , and tithing were initially retained . But some WCG ministers and members continued to express alarm over the doctrinal revisions Tkach had already made , and from time to time some would leave to create dissident branches . They included Tkach 's one @-@ time mentor , Roderick C. Meredith , who formed the Global Church of God in 1992 . As various breakaway groups were established , additional clusters of church members followed . 
 = = Christmas Eve sermon = = 
 The doctrinal changes in the church occurred gradually , but by 1994 , most of the concepts of <unk> had been largely modified or discontinued . However , the major bombshell was dropped during what is now called the Christmas Eve Sermon . Tapes of Tkach 's sermon ( dated January 7 , 1995 ) were delivered to local congregations for viewing . In this sermon , he publicly declared that the Worldwide Church of God was a New Covenant church and , therefore , not bound by the terms of the Old Covenant . Christian theology defines the Old Covenant as the Mosaic Law embodied in the Torah . Hence , by making this statement , Tkach officially dropped all doctrines based on Mosaic Law ( i.e. , the keeping of the Sabbath , the Holy Days , and the dietary laws ) , making observance of such practices an individual choice . He also dropped the requirement of tithing , declaring that giving as taught in the New Testament was voluntary . The last change had a significant and rather immediate impact on church finances . 
 These and other major changes brought about major defections among ministers and members , which in turn contributed to a further drop in church revenue . In order to bring the finances in order , major changes in the church infrastructure were implemented . The World Tomorrow , which had seen record numbers of viewers in the early years of the Tkach administration , was stopped . The Plain Truth publication runs were reduced . Staff at the church headquarters were laid off . The famous , church @-@ subsidized Ambassador Auditorium concert series was canceled and offers were sought for the purchase of the Ambassador College Pasadena campus . 
 = = Final days = = 
 The Christmas Eve sermon only accelerated the departure of church members . A new branch , the United Church of God , was created in 1995 by a conference of departing ministers and named Tkach 's one @-@ time associate and former The World Tomorrow presenter , David Hulme , as president . It eventually became the largest of the groups to break away from the WCG during this period . Although revenues continued to drop , Tkach remained steadfastly committed to the changes that he had implemented . 
 On May 12 , 1995 Tkach had surgery to remove his gall bladder . Shortly thereafter , he was readmitted to the hospital because of severe intestine and back pain . Surgeons then removed a grapefruit @-@ size tumor from his intestines and discovered he had colon cancer . In a letter to ministers , dated September 6 , Tkach announced that he was also diagnosed with bone cancer . He elected not to undertake radiation treatments . As Armstrong had done before him , Tkach named a successor to become pastor general in the event of his death . In that case , it was Tkach 's son , Joseph Tkach Jr . 
 Tkach died on September 23 , 1995 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The impact of Tkach ’ s tenure as the head of the WCG was notable . Church income dropped from a high of over $ 200 million in 1990 to $ 50 million by 1996 . By then the church could only count 49 @,@ 000 as members , less than half from its peak . The circulation of The Plain Truth , distributed free by subscription and via newsstand distribution around the globe , fell from a peak of 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to less than 100 @,@ 000 before it switched to a paid subscription status . Eventually the magazine was spun off into a separate , independent , evangelical ministry . The number of employees at the church headquarters fell from 1 @,@ 000 to about 50 . Ambassador University , as the college had become after earning regional accreditation in Texas , ceased operations in 1997 as the church could no longer provide its annual operating subsidy . The Pasadena campus was finally sold in 2004 . 
 In assessing the work of Tkach , there are two points of view . The critics of Tkach , especially those who formed the splinter churches , see Tkach as the key person responsible for the collapse of the WCG . They believe that the changes he brought were a turn against God and say his rejection of Armstrong 's unique doctrines were , at best , without biblical foundation . 
 Tkach ’ s supporters , including those in the leadership of the WCG , see events differently . The WCG describes Tkach ’ s tenure as " A Decade of Painful Change " and that the end result of his work was the reconciliation of the church with mainstream Christianity . Ruth Tucker , an evangelical leader and an early supporter of the changes which occurred in the WCG , wrote in an article in Christianity Today that 
 The " changes " — as they are referred to by insiders — are truly historic . Never before in the history of Christianity has there been such a complete move to orthodox Christianity by an unorthodox fringe church . 
 Vern Bullough , a secular humanist and senior editor of Free Inquiry , commented on the significance of the changes noting : 
 The shedding of almost every doctrine the Worldwide Church of God once clung to is a story almost without parallel in American religious history . 
 After his death , the WCG reiterated its full acceptance of the doctrinal changes implemented by Tkach and published an apology to current and former members of the church for the impact previous doctrines had had on members . As evidence that Tkach 's work was instrumental in the move toward mainstream Christianity , the WCG was accepted into the membership of the National Association of Evangelicals within two years of his death . 
 = Machinima = 
 Machinima ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is the use of real @-@ time computer graphics engines to create a cinematic production . Most often video games are used to generate the computer animation . Machinima @-@ based artists , sometimes called <unk> or <unk> , are often fan laborers , by virtue of their re @-@ use of copyrighted materials ( see below ) . Machinima offers to provide an archive of gaming performance and access to the look and feel of software and hardware that may already have become unavailable or even obsolete ; for game studies , " machinima ’ s gestures grant access to gaming ’ s historical conditions of possibility and how machinima offers links to a comparative horizon that informs , changes , and fully participates in videogame culture . " 
 The practice of using graphics engines from video games arose from the animated software introductions of the 1980s demoscene , Disney Interactive Studios ' 1992 video game Stunt Island , and 1990s recordings of gameplay in first @-@ person shooter ( FPS ) video games , such as id Software 's Doom and Quake . Originally , these recordings documented speedruns — attempts to complete a level as quickly as possible — and multiplayer matches . The addition of storylines to these films created " Quake movies " . The more general term machinima , a portmanteau of machine cinema , arose when the concept spread beyond the Quake series to other games and software . After this generalization , machinima appeared in mainstream media , including television series and advertisements . 
 Machinima has advantages and disadvantages when compared to other styles of filmmaking . Its relative simplicity over traditional frame @-@ based animation limits control and range of expression . Its real @-@ time nature favors speed , cost saving , and flexibility over the higher quality of pre @-@ rendered computer animation . Virtual acting is less expensive , dangerous , and physically restricted than live action . Machinima can be filmed by relying on in @-@ game artificial intelligence ( AI ) or by controlling characters and cameras through digital puppetry . Scenes can be precisely scripted , and can be manipulated during post @-@ production using video editing techniques . Editing , custom software , and creative cinematography may address technical limitations . Game companies have provided software for and have encouraged machinima , but the widespread use of digital assets from copyrighted games has resulted in complex , unresolved legal issues . 
 Machinima productions can remain close to their gaming roots and feature stunts or other portrayals of gameplay . Popular genres include dance videos , comedy , and drama . Alternatively , some filmmakers attempt to stretch the boundaries of the rendering engines or to mask the original 3 @-@ D context . The Academy of Machinima Arts & Sciences ( AMAS ) , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to promoting machinima , recognizes exemplary productions through Mackie awards given at its annual Machinima Film Festival . Some general film festivals accept machinima , and game companies , such as Epic Games , Blizzard Entertainment and <unk> , have sponsored contests involving it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precedent = = = 
 1980s software crackers added custom introductory credits sequences ( intros ) to programs whose copy protection they had removed . Increasing computing power allowed for more complex intros , and the demoscene formed when focus shifted to the intros instead of the cracks . The goal became to create the best 3 @-@ D demos in real @-@ time with the least amount of software code . Disk storage was too slow for this ; graphics had to be calculated on the fly and without a pre @-@ existing game engine . 
 In Disney Interactive Studios ' 1992 computer game Stunt Island , users could stage , record , and play back stunts ; as Nitsche stated , the game 's goal was " not ... a high score but a spectacle . " Released the following year , id Software 's Doom included the ability to record gameplay as sequences of events that the game engine could later replay in real @-@ time . Because events and not video frames were saved , the resulting game demo files were small and easily shared among players . A culture of recording gameplay developed , as Henry Lowood of Stanford University called it , " a context for spectatorship .... The result was nothing less than a metamorphosis of the player into a performer . " Another important feature of Doom was that it allowed players to create their own modifications , maps , and software for the game , thus expanding the concept of game authorship . In machinima , there is a dual register of gestures : the trained motions of the player determine the in @-@ game images of expressive motion . 
 In parallel of the video game approach , in the media art field , Maurice Benayoun ’ s Virtual Reality artwork The Tunnel under the Atlantic ( 1995 ) , often compared to video games , introduced a virtual film director , fully autonomous intelligent agent , to shoot and edit in real time a full video from the digging performance in the Pompidou Center in Paris and the Museum of Contemporary art in Montreal . The full movie , Inside the Tunnel under the Atlantic , 21h long , was followed in 1997 by Inside the Paris New @-@ Delhi Tunnel ( 13h long ) . Only short excerpts where presented to the public . The complex behavior of the Tunnel ’ s virtual director makes it a significant precursor of later application to video games based <unk> . 
 Doom 's 1996 successor , Quake , offered new opportunities for both gameplay and customization , while retaining the ability to record demos . Multiplayer games became popular , almost a sport ; demos of matches between teams of players ( clans ) were recorded and studied . Paul Marino , executive director of the AMAS , stated that deathmatches , a type of multiplayer game , became more " cinematic " . At this point , however , they still documented gameplay without a narrative . 
 = = = Quake movies = = = 
 On October 26 , 1996 , a well @-@ known gaming clan , the Rangers , surprised the Quake community with Diary of a Camper , the first widely known machinima film . This short , 100 @-@ second demo file contained the action and gore of many others , but in the context of a brief story , rather than the usual deathmatch . An example of transformative or emergent gameplay , this shift from competition to theater required both expertise in and subversion of the game 's mechanics . The Ranger demo emphasized this transformation by retaining specific gameplay references in its story . 
 Diary of a Camper inspired many other " Quake movies , " as these films were then called . A community of game modifiers ( modders ) , artists , expert players , and film fans began to form around them . The works were distributed and reviewed on websites such as The Cineplex , <unk> 's Popcorn Jungle , and the Quake Movie Library ( QML ) . Production was supported by dedicated demo @-@ processing software , such as Uwe <unk> 's Little Movie Processing Center ( <unk> ) and David " <unk> " Wright 's non @-@ linear editor Keygrip ; the latter became known as " Adobe Premiere for Quake demo files " . Among the notable films were Clan Phantasm 's Devil 's Covenant , the first feature @-@ length Quake movie ; Avatar and Wendigo 's <unk> , which the QML awarded seven Quake Movie Oscars ; and Clan Undead 's Operation <unk> , which introduced simulated lip synchronization and featured customized digital assets . 
 Released in December 1997 , id Software 's Quake II improved support for user @-@ created 3 @-@ D models . However , without compatible editing software , filmmakers continued to create works based on the original Quake ; these included the ILL Clan 's Apartment <unk> ' and the Quake done Quick group 's Scourge Done Slick . Quake II demo editors became available in 1998 ; in particular , Keygrip 2 @.@ 0 introduced " recamming " , the ability to adjust camera locations after recording . Paul Marino called the addition of this feature " a defining moment for [ m ] <unk> " . With Quake II filming now feasible , Strange Company 's 1999 production <unk> : Nightfall was the first work to feature entirely custom @-@ made character models . 
 The December 1999 release of id 's Quake III Arena posed a problem to the Quake movie community . The game 's demo file included information needed for computer networking ; however , to prevent cheating , id warned of legal action for dissemination of the file format . Thus , it was impractical to enhance software to work with Quake III . Concurrently , the novelty of Quake movies was waning . New productions appeared less frequently , and , according to Marino , the community needed to " reinvent itself " to offset this development . 
 Borg War , a 90 @-@ minute animated Star Trek fan film , was produced using Elite Force 2 ( a Quake III variant ) and Starfleet Command 3 , repurposing the games ' voiceover clips to create a new plot . Borg War was nominated for two " Mackie " awards by the Academy of Machinima Arts & Sciences . An August 2007 screening at a Star Trek convention in Las Vegas was the first time that CBS / Paramount had approved the screening of a non @-@ parody fan film at a licensed convention . 
 = = = Generalization = = = 
 In January 2000 , Hugh Hancock , the founder of Strange Company , launched a new website , <unk> The new name surprised the community ; a misspelled contraction of machine cinema ( <unk> ) , the term machinima was intended to dissociate in @-@ game filming from a specific engine . The misspelling stuck because it also referenced anime . The new site featured tutorials , interviews , articles , and the exclusive release of <unk> Films ' Quad God . The first film made with Quake III Arena , Quad God was also the first to be distributed as recorded video frames , not game @-@ specific instructions . This change was initially controversial among machinima producers who preferred the smaller size of demo files . However , demo files required a copy of the game to view . The more accessible traditional video format broadened Quad God 's viewership , and the work was distributed on CDs bundled with magazines . Thus , id 's decision to protect Quake III 's code inadvertently caused machinima creators to use more general solutions and thus widen their audience . Within a few years , machinima films were almost exclusively distributed in common video file formats . 
 Machinima began to receive mainstream notice . Roger Ebert discussed it in a June 2000 article and praised Strange Company 's machinima setting of Percy Bysshe Shelley 's sonnet " Ozymandias " . At Showtime Network 's 2001 Alternative Media Festival , the ILL Clan 's 2000 machinima film Hardly Workin ' won the Best Experimental and Best in SHO awards . Steven Spielberg used Unreal Tournament to test special effects while working on his 2001 film Artificial Intelligence : A.I. Eventually , interest spread to game developers . In July 2001 , Epic Games announced that its upcoming game Unreal Tournament 2003 would include Matinee , a machinima production software utility . As involvement increased , filmmakers released fewer new productions to focus on quality . 
 At the March 2002 Game Developers Conference , five machinima makers — Anthony Bailey , Hugh Hancock , Katherine Anna Kang , Paul Marino , and Matthew Ross — founded the AMAS , a non @-@ profit organization dedicated to promoting machinima . At QuakeCon in August , the new organization held the first Machinima Film Festival , which received mainstream media coverage . Anachronox : The Movie , by Jake Hughes and Tom Hall , won three awards , including Best Picture . The next year , " In the Waiting Line " , directed by Tommy <unk> and animated by Randy Cole , utilizing Fountainhead Entertainment 's <unk> tools , it became the first machinima music video to air on MTV . As graphics technology improved , machinima filmmakers used other video games and consumer @-@ grade video editing software . Using Bungie 's 2001 game Halo : Combat Evolved , Rooster Teeth Productions created a popular comedy series Red vs. Blue : The Blood Gulch Chronicles . The series ' second season premiered at the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in 2004 . 
 = = = Mainstream appearances = = = 
 Machinima has appeared on television , starting with G4 's series Portal . In the BBC series Time Commanders , players re @-@ enacted historic battles using Creative Assembly 's real @-@ time game Rome : Total War . MTV2 's Video Mods re @-@ creates music videos using characters from video games such as The Sims 2 , <unk> , and Tribes . Blizzard Entertainment helped to set part of " Make Love , Not Warcraft " , an Emmy Award – winning 2006 episode of the comedy series South Park , in its massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game ( MMORPG ) World of Warcraft . By purchasing broadcast rights to Douglas <unk> 's machinima documentary Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator in September 2007 , HBO became the first television network to buy a work created completely in a virtual world . In December 2008 , <unk> signed fifteen experienced television comedy writers — including Patric <unk> , Bill Oakley , and Mike Rowe — to produce episodes for the site . 
 Commercial use of machinima has <unk> Teeth sells DVDs of their Red vs. Blue series and , under sponsorship from Electronic Arts , helped to promote The Sims 2 by using the game to make a machinima series , The Strangerhood . Volvo Cars sponsored the creation of a 2004 advertisement , Game : On , the first film to combine machinima and live action . Later , Electronic Arts commissioned Rooster Teeth to promote their Madden NFL 07 video game . Blockhouse TV uses <unk> 's machinima software to produce its pre @-@ school educational DVD series Jack and Holly 
 Game developers have continued to increase support for machinima . Products such as Lionhead Studios ' 2005 business simulation game The Movies , Linden Research 's virtual world Second Life , and Bungie 's 2007 first @-@ person shooter Halo 3 encourage the creation of user content by including machinima software tools . Using The Movies , Alex Chan , a French resident with no previous filmmaking experience , took four days to create The French Democracy , a short political film about the 2005 civil unrest in France . Third @-@ party mods like Garry 's Mod usually offer the ability to manipulate characters and take advantage of custom or migrated content , allowing for the creation of works like Counter @-@ Strike For Kids that can be filmed using multiple games . 
 In a 2010 interview with PC Magazine , Valve Corporation CEO and co @-@ founder Gabe Newell said that they wanted to make a Half @-@ Life feature film themselves , rather than hand it off to a big @-@ name director like Sam Raimi , and that their recent Team Fortress 2 " Meet The Team " machinima shorts were experiments in doing just that . Two years later , Valve released their proprietary non @-@ linear machinima software , Source Filmmaker . 
 Machinima has also been used for music video clips . Second Life virtual artist Bryn Oh created a work for Australian performer Megan Bernard 's song " Clean Up Your Life " , released in 2016 . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Comparison to film techniques = = = 
 The AMAS defines machinima as " animated filmmaking within a real @-@ time virtual 3 @-@ D environment " . In other 3 @-@ D animation methods , creators can control every frame and nuance of their characters but , in turn , must consider issues such as key frames and inbetweening . Machinima creators leave many rendering details to their host environments , but may thus inherit those environments ' limitations . Second Life Machinima film maker , <unk> King , provided a detailed account of the process by which the artists at <unk> Magazine produce their videos . " Organizing for a photo shoot is similar to organizing for a film production . Once you find the actors / models , you have to scout locations , find clothes and props for the models and type up a shooting script . The more organized you are the less time it takes to shoot the scene . " Because game animations focus on dramatic rather than casual actions , the range of character emotions is often limited . However , Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd state that a small range of emotions is often sufficient , as in successful Japanese anime television series . 
 Another difference is that machinima is created in real time , but other animation is pre @-@ rendered . Real @-@ time engines need to trade quality for speed and use simpler algorithms and models . In the 2001 animated film Final Fantasy : The Spirits Within , every strand of hair on a character 's head was independent ; real @-@ time needs would likely force them to be treated as a single unit . Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd argue that improvement in consumer @-@ grade graphics technology will allow more realism ; similarly , Paul Marino connects machinima to the increasing computing power predicted by Moore 's law . For cut scenes in video games , issues other than visual fidelity arise . Pre @-@ rendered scenes can require more digital storage space , weaken suspension of disbelief through contrast with real @-@ time animation of normal gameplay , and limit interaction . 
 Like live action , machinima is recorded in real @-@ time , and real people can act and control the camera . Filmmakers are often encouraged to follow traditional cinematic conventions , such as avoiding wide fields of view , the overuse of slow motion , and errors in visual continuity . Unlike live action , machinima involves less expensive , digital special effects and sets , possibly with a science @-@ fiction or historical theme . Explosions and stunts can be tried and repeated without monetary cost and risk of injury , and the host environment may allow unrealistic physical constraints . University of Cambridge experiments in 2002 and 2003 attempted to use machinima to re @-@ create a scene from the 1942 live @-@ action film Casablanca . Machinima filming differed from traditional cinematography in that character expression was limited , but camera movements were more flexible and improvised . Nitsche compared this experiment to an unpredictable Dogme 95 production . 
 Berkeley sees machinima as " a strangely hybrid form , looking forwards and backwards , cutting edge and conservative at the same time " . Machinima is a digital medium based on 3 @-@ D computer games , but most works have a linear narrative structure . Some , such as Red vs. Blue and The Strangerhood , follow narrative conventions of television situational comedy . Nitsche agrees that pre @-@ recorded ( " reel " ) machinima tends to be linear and offers limited interactive storytelling ; he sees more opportunities in machinima performed live and with audience interaction . In creating their improvisational comedy series On the Campaign Trail with Larry & Lenny Lumberjack and talk show <unk> with ILL Will , the ILL Clan blended real and virtual performance by creating the works on @-@ stage and interacting with a live audience . In another combination of real and virtual worlds , Chris Burke 's talk show This Spartan Life takes place in Halo 2 's open multiplayer environment . There , others playing in earnest may attack the host or his interviewee . Although other virtual theatrical performances have taken place in chat rooms and multi @-@ user dungeons , machinima adds " cinematic camera work " . Previously , such virtual cinematic performances with live audience interaction were confined to research labs equipped with powerful computers . 
 Machinima can be less expensive than other forms of filmmaking . Strange Company produced its feature @-@ length machinima film <unk> for less than £ 10 @,@ 000 . Before using machinima , Burnie Burns and Matt <unk> of Rooster Teeth Productions spent US $ 9 @,@ 000 to produce a live @-@ action independent film ; in contrast , the four Xbox game consoles used to make Red vs. Blue in 2005 cost $ 600 . The low cost caused a product manager for Electronic Arts to compare machinima to the low @-@ budget independent film The Blair Witch Project , without the need for cameras and actors . Because these are seen as low barriers to entry , machinima has been called a " democratization of filmmaking " . Berkeley weighs increased participation and a blurred line between producer and consumer against concerns that game copyrights limit commercialization and growth of machinima . 
 Comparatively , <unk> using pre @-@ made virtual platforms like Second Life have indicated that their productions can be made quite successfully with no cost at all . Creators like Dutch director Chantal Harvey , producer of the 48 Hour Film Project Machinima sector , have created upwards of 200 films using the platform . Harvey 's advocacy of the genre has resulted in the involvement of film director Peter Greenaway who served as a juror for the Machinima category and gave a keynote speech during the event . 
 = = = Character and camera control = = = 
 Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd list four main methods of creating machinima . From simple to advanced , these are : relying on the game 's AI to control most actions , digital puppetry , recamming , and precise scripting of actions . Although simple to produce , AI @-@ dependent results are unpredictable , thus complicating the realization of a preconceived film script . For example , when Rooster Teeth produced The Strangerhood using The Sims 2 , a game that encourages the use of its AI , the group had to create multiple instances of each character to accommodate different moods . Individual instances were selected at different times to produce appropriate actions . 
 In digital puppetry , machinima creators become virtual actors ; each crew member controls a character in real @-@ time , as in a multiplayer game . The director can use built @-@ in camera controls , if available . Otherwise , video is captured from the perspectives of one or more puppeteers who serve as camera operators . Puppetry allows for improvisation and offers controls familiar to gamers , but requires more personnel than the other methods and is less precise than scripted recordings . However , some games , such as the Halo series , ( except for Halo PC and Custom Edition , which allow AI and custom objects and characters ) , allow filming only through puppetry . According to Marino , other disadvantages are the possibility of disruption when filming in an open multi @-@ user environment and the temptation for puppeteers to play the game in earnest , littering the set with blood and dead bodies . However , Chris Burke intentionally hosts This Spartan Life in these unpredictable conditions , which are fundamental to the show . Other works filmed using puppetry are the ILL Clan 's improvisational comedy series On the Campaign Trail with Larry & Lenny Lumberjack and Rooster Teeth Productions ' Red vs. Blue . In recamming , which builds on puppetry , actions are first recorded to a game engine 's demo file format , not directly as video frames . Without re @-@ enacting scenes , artists can then manipulate the demo files to add cameras , tweak timing and lighting , and change the surroundings . This technique is limited to the few engines and software tools that support it . 
 A technique common in cut scenes of video games , scripting consists of giving precise directions to the game engine . A filmmaker can work alone this way , as J. Thaddeus " Mindcrime " <unk> did in creating the nearly four @-@ hour The Seal of <unk> ( 2000 ) , the longest work of machinima at the time . However , perfecting scripts can be time @-@ consuming . Unless what @-@ you @-@ see @-@ is @-@ what @-@ you @-@ get ( <unk> ) editing is available , as in Vampire : The Masquerade – Redemption , changes may need to be verified in additional runs , and non @-@ linear editing may be difficult . In this respect , Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd compare scripting to stop @-@ motion animation . Another disadvantage is that , depending on the game , scripting capabilities may be limited or unavailable . Matinee , a machinima software tool included with Unreal Tournament 2004 , popularized scripting in machinima . 
 = = = Limitations and solutions = = = 
 When Diary of a Camper was created , no software tools existed to edit demo files into films . Rangers clan member Eric " ArchV " Fowler wrote his own programs to reposition the camera and to splice footage from the Quake demo file . Quake movie editing software later appeared , but the use of conventional non @-@ linear video editing software is now common . For example , Phil South inserted single , completely white frames into his work No Licence to enhance the visual impact of explosions . In the post @-@ production of Red vs. Blue : The Blood Gulch Chronicles , Rooster Teeth Productions added <unk> with Adobe Premiere Pro to hide the camera player 's head @-@ up display . 
 Machinima creators have used different methods to handle limited character expression . The most typical ways that amateur @-@ style machinima gets around limitations of expression include taking advantage of speech bubbles seen above players ' heads when speaking , relying on the visual matching between a character 's voice and appearance , and finding methods available within the game itself . Garry 's Mod and Source Filmmaker include the ability to manipulate characters and objects in real @-@ time , though the former relies on community <unk> to take advantage of certain engine features , and the latter renders scenes using non @-@ real @-@ time effects . In the Halo video game series , helmets completely cover the characters ' faces . To prevent confusion , Rooster Teeth 's characters move slightly when speaking , a convention shared with anime . Some machinima creators use custom software . For example , Strange Company uses Take Over GL Face Skins to add more facial expressions to their characters filmed in BioWare 's 2002 role @-@ playing video game Neverwinter Nights . Similarly , <unk> Simon used a " library of faces " for characters in The Battle of Xerxes . In some cases , some game companies may provide such software ; examples include Epic Games ' <unk> for Unreal Tournament 2004 and Valve Corporation 's <unk> for Source games . Another solution is to blend in non @-@ machinima elements , as <unk> did by inserting painted characters with more expressive faces into its 1999 film Berlin Assassins . It may be possible to point the camera elsewhere or employ other creative cinematography or acting . For example , Tristan Pope combined creative character and camera positioning with video editing to suggest sexual actions in his controversial film Not Just Another Love Story . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 New machinima filmmakers often want to use game @-@ provided digital assets , but doing so raises legal issues . As derivative works , their films could violate copyright or be controlled by the assets ' copyright holder , an arrangement that can be complicated by separate publishing and licensing rights . The software license agreement for The Movies stipulates that Activision , the game 's publisher , owns " any and all content within ... Game Movies that was either supplied with the Program or otherwise made available ... by Activision or its licensors ... " Some game companies provide software to modify their own games , and machinima makers often cite fair use as a defense , but the issue has never been tested in court . A potential problem with this defense is that many works , such as Red vs. Blue , focus more on satire , which is not as explicitly protected by fair use as parody . Berkeley adds that , even if machinima artists use their own assets , their works could be ruled derivative if filmed in a proprietary engine . The risk inherent in a fair @-@ use defense would cause most machinima artists simply to yield to a cease @-@ and @-@ desist order . The AMAS has attempted to negotiate solutions with video game companies , arguing that an open @-@ source or reasonably priced alternative would emerge from an unfavorable situation . Unlike The Movies , some dedicated machinima software programs , such as <unk> 's <unk> , have licenses that avoid claiming ownership of users ' films featuring bundled assets . 
 Generally , companies want to retain creative control over their intellectual properties and are wary of fan @-@ created works , like fan fiction . However , because machinima provides free marketing , they have avoided a response demanding strict copyright enforcement . In 2003 , Linden Lab was praised for changing license terms to allow users to retain ownership of works created in its virtual world Second Life . Rooster Teeth initially tried to release Red vs. Blue unnoticed by Halo 's owners because they feared that any communication would force them to end the project . However , Microsoft , Bungie 's parent company at the time , contacted the group shortly after episode 2 , and allowed them to continue without paying licensing fees . 
 A case in which developer control was asserted involved Blizzard Entertainment 's action against Tristan Pope 's Not Just Another Love Story . Blizzard 's community managers encouraged users to post game movies and screenshots , but viewers complained that Pope 's suggestion of sexual actions through creative camera and character positioning was pornographic . Citing the user license agreement , Blizzard closed discussion threads about the film and prohibited links to it . Although Pope accepted Blizzard 's right to some control , he remained concerned about censorship of material that already existed in @-@ game in some form . Discussion ensued about boundaries between MMORPG player and developer control . Lowood asserted that this controversy demonstrated that machinima could be a medium of negotiation for players . 
 = = = Microsoft and Blizzard = = = 
 In August 2007 , Microsoft issued its Game Content Usage Rules , a license intended to address the legal status of machinima based on its games , including the Halo series . Microsoft intended the rules to be " flexible " , and , because it was unilateral , the license was legally unable to reduce rights . However , machinima artists , such as <unk> Entertainment , protested the prohibitions on extending Microsoft 's fictional universes ( a common component of fan fiction ) and on selling anything from sites hosting derivative works . Compounding the reaction was the license 's statement , " If you do any of these things , you can expect to hear from Microsoft 's lawyers who will tell you that you have to stop distributing your items right away . " 
 Surprised by the negative feedback , Microsoft revised and reissued the license after discussion with Hugh Hancock and an attorney for the Electronic Frontier Foundation . The rules allow noncommercial use and distribution of works derived from Microsoft @-@ owned game content , except audio effects and soundtracks . The license prohibits reverse engineering and material that is pornographic or otherwise " objectionable " . On distribution , derivative works that elaborate on a game 's fictional universe or story are automatically licensed to Microsoft and its business partners . This prevents legal problems if a fan and Microsoft independently conceive similar plots . 
 A few weeks later , Blizzard Entertainment posted on <unk> their " Letter to the <unk> of the World " , a license for noncommercial use of game content . It differs from Microsoft 's declaration in that it addresses machinima specifically instead of general game @-@ derived content , allows use of game audio if Blizzard can legally license it , requires derivative material to meet the Entertainment Software Rating Board 's Teen content rating guideline , defines noncommercial use differently , and does not address extensions of fictional universes . 
 Hayes states that , although licensees ' benefits are limited , the licenses reduce reliance on fair use regarding machinima . In turn , this recognition may reduce film festivals ' concerns about copyright clearance ; in an earlier analogous situation , festivals were concerned about documentary films until best practices for them were developed . According to Hayes , Microsoft and Blizzard helped themselves through their licenses because fan creations provide free publicity and are unlikely to harm sales . If the companies had instead sued for copyright infringement , defendants could have claimed estoppel or implied license because machinima had been unaddressed for a long time . Thus , these licenses secured their issuers ' legal rights . Even though other companies , such as Electronic Arts , have encouraged machinima , they have avoided licensing it . Because of the involved legal complexity , they may prefer to under @-@ enforce copyrights . Hayes believes that this legal uncertainty is a suboptimal solution and that , though limited and " idiosyncratic " , the Microsoft and Blizzard licenses move towards an ideal video gaming industry standard for handling derivative works . 
 = = <unk> mode = = 
 Just as machinima can be the cause of legal dispute in copyright ownership and illegal use , it makes heavy use of intertextuality and raises the question of authorship . Machinima takes copyrighted property ( such as characters in a game engine ) and repurposes it to tell a story , but another common practice in machinima @-@ making is to retell an existing story from a different medium in that engine . 
 This re @-@ appropriation of established texts , resources , and artistic properties to tell a story or make a statement is an example of a semiotic phenomenon known as intertextuality or resemiosis . A more common term for this phenomenon is “ parody ” , but not all of these intertextual productions are intended for humor or satire , as demonstrated by the Few Good G @-@ Men video . Furthermore , the argument of how well @-@ protected machinima is under the guise of parody or satire is still highly debated ; a piece of machinima may be reliant upon a protected property , but may not necessarily be making a statement about that property . Therefore , it is more accurate to refer to it simply as resemiosis , because it takes an artistic work and presents it in a new way , form , or medium . This resemiosis can be manifested in a number of ways . The machinima @-@ maker can be considered an author who restructures the story and / or the world that the chosen game engine is built around . In the popular web series Red vs. Blue , most of the storyline takes place within the game engine of Halo : Combat Evolved and its subsequent sequels . Halo : Combat Evolved has an extensive storyline already , but Red vs. Blue only ever makes mention of this storyline once in the first episode . Even after over 200 episodes of the show being broadcast onto the Internet since 2003 , the only real similarities that can be drawn between Red vs. Blue and the game @-@ world it takes place in are the character models , props , vehicles , and settings . Yet Burnie Burns and the machinima team at Rooster Teeth created an extensive storyline of their own using these game resources . 
 The ability to re @-@ appropriate a game engine to film a video demonstrates intertextuality because it is an obvious example of art being a product of creation @-@ through @-@ manipulation rather than creation per se . The art historian Ernst Gombrich likened art to the " manipulation of a vocabulary " and this can be demonstrated in the creation of machinima . When using a game world to create a story , the author is influenced by the engine . For example , since so many video games are built around the concept of war , a significant portion of machinima films also take place in war @-@ like environments . 
 Intertextuality is further demonstrated in machinima not only in the re @-@ appropriation of content but in artistic and <unk> techniques . Machinima by definition is a form of puppetry , and thus this new form of digital puppetry employs age @-@ old techniques from the traditional artform . It is also , however , a form of filmmaking , and must employ filmmaking techniques such as camera angles and proper lighting . Some machinima takes place in online environments with participants , actors , and " puppeteers " working together from thousands of miles apart . This means other techniques born from long @-@ distance communication must also be employed . Thus , techniques and practices that would normally never be used in conjunction with one another in the creation of an artistic work end up being used <unk> in the creation of machinima . 
 Another way that machinima demonstrates intertextuality is in its tendency to make frequent references to texts , works , and other media just like TV ads or humorous cartoons such as The Simpsons might do . For example , the machinima series Freeman 's Mind , created by Ross Scott is filmed by taking a recording of Scott playing through the game Half Life as a player normally would and combining it with a voiceover ( also recorded by Scott ) to emulate an inner monologue of the normally voiceless protagonist Gordon Freeman . Scott portrays Freeman as a snarky , sociopathic character who makes frequent references to works and texts including science fiction , horror films , action movies , American history , and renowned novels such as Moby Dick . These references to works outside the game , often triggered by events within the game , are prime examples of the densely intertextual nature of machinima . 
 = = Common genres = = 
 Nitsche and Lowood describe two methods of approaching machinima : starting from a video game and seeking a medium for expression or for documenting gameplay ( " inside @-@ out " ) , and starting outside a game and using it merely as animation tool ( " outside @-@ in " ) . Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd similarly distinguish between works that retain noticeable connections to games , and those closer to traditional animation . Belonging to the former category , gameplay and stunt machinima began in 1997 with Quake done Quick . Although not the first speedrunners , its creators used external software to manipulate camera positions after recording , which , according to Lowood , elevated speedrunning " from <unk> to making movies " . Stunt machinima remains popular . Kelland , Morris , and Lloyd state that Halo : Combat Evolved stunt videos offer a new way to look at the game , and compare Battlefield 1942 machinima creators to the Harlem Globetrotters . Built @-@ in features for video editing and post @-@ recording camera positioning in Halo 3 were expected to facilitate gameplay @-@ based machinima . MMORPGs and other virtual worlds have been captured in documentary films , such as Miss Galaxies 2004 , a beauty pageant that took place in the virtual world of Star Wars Galaxies . Footage was distributed in the cover disc of the August 2004 issue of PC Gamer . Douglas <unk> 's Molotov Alva and His Search for the Creator documents the title character 's interactions in Second Life . 
 Gaming @-@ related comedy offers another possible entry point for new machinima producers . Presented as five @-@ minute sketches , many machinima comedies are analogous to Internet Flash animations . After Clan Undead 's 1997 work Operation <unk> built on the earliest Quake movies by introducing narrative conventions of linear media and sketch comedy reminiscent of the television show Saturday Night Live , the New @-@ York @-@ based ILL Clan further developed the genre in machinima through works including Apartment <unk> ' and Hardly Workin ' . Red vs. Blue : The Blood Gulch Chronicles chronicles a futile civil war over five seasons and 100 episodes . Marino wrote that although the series ' humor was rooted in video games , strong writing and characters caused the series to " transcend the typical gamer " . An example of a comedy film that targets a more general audience is Strange Company 's Tum Raider , produced for the BBC in 2004 . 
 Machinima has been used in music videos , of which the first documented example is Ken Thain 's 2002 " Rebel vs. Thug " , made in collaboration with Chuck D. For this , Thain used <unk> , a modification of Quake II that provided cel @-@ shaded animation . The following year , Tommy <unk> directed " In the Waiting Line " for the British group Zero 7 . He told Computer Graphics World , " It probably would have been quicker to do the film in a 3D animated program . But now , we can reuse the assets in an improvisational way . " Scenes of the game Postal 2 can be seen in the music video of the Black Eyed Peas single " Where Is the Love ? " . In television , MTV features video game characters on its show Video Mods . Among World of Warcraft players , dance and music videos became popular after dancing animations were discovered in the game . 
 Others use machinima in drama ; these works may or may not retain signs of their video game provenance . Unreal Tournament is often used for science fiction and Battlefield 1942 for war , but some artists subvert their chosen game 's setting or completely detach their work from it . In 1999 , Strange Company used Quake II in <unk> : Nightfall , a horror film based on the work of H. P. Lovecraft . A later example is Damien Valentine 's series <unk> , made using BioWare 's 2002 computer game Neverwinter Nights and based on the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer . Another genre consists of experimental works that attempt to push the boundaries of game engines . One example , Fountainhead 's Anna , is a short film that focuses on the cycle of life and is reminiscent of Fantasia . Other productions go farther and completely eschew a 3 @-@ D appearance . Friedrich Kirschner 's The Tournament and The Journey deliberately appear hand @-@ drawn , and Dead on Que 's Fake Science resembles two @-@ dimensional Eastern European modernist animation from the 1970s . 
 Another derivative genre termed <unk> verite , from cinéma vérité , seeks to add a documentary and additional realism to the machinima piece . L.M. Sabo 's <unk> achieves a machinima verite style through displaying and recapturing the machinima video with a low resolution black and white hand @-@ held video camera to produce a shaky camera effect . Other element of cinéma vérité , such as longer takes , sweeping camera transitions , and jump cuts may be included to complete the effect . 
 Some have used machinima to make political statements , often from left @-@ wing perspectives . Alex Chan 's take on the 2005 civil unrest in France , The French Democracy , attained mainstream attention and inspired other machinima commentaries on American and British society . <unk> deemed <unk> Nguyen 's 2006 An Unfair War , a criticism of the Iraq war , similar in its attempt " to speak for those who cannot " . Joshua Garrison mimicked Chan 's " political pseudo @-@ documentary style " in his Virginia Tech Massacre , a controversial Halo 3 – based re @-@ enactment and explanation of the eponymous real @-@ life events . More recently , War of Internet Addiction addressed internet censorship in China using World of Warcraft . 
 = = Competitions = = 
 After the QML 's Quake Movie Oscars , dedicated machinima awards did not reappear until the AMAS created the <unk> for its first Machinima Film Festival in 2002 . The annual festival has become an important one for machinima creators . Ho Chee Yue , a founder of the marketing company <unk> , helped to organize the first festival for the Asia chapter of the AMAS in 2006 . In 2007 , the AMAS supported the first machinima festival held in Europe . In addition to these smaller ceremonies , Hugh Hancock of Strange Company worked to add an award for machinima to the more general <unk> Festival in 2003 . Other general festivals that allow machinima include the Sundance Film Festival , the Florida Film Festival , and the New Media Film Festival . The Ottawa International Animation Festival opened a machinima category in 2004 , but , citing the need for " a certain level of excellence " , declined to award anything to the category 's four entries that year . 
 Machinima has been showcased in contests sponsored by game companies . Epic Games ' popular Make Something Unreal contest included machinima that impressed event organizer Jeff Morris because of " the quality of entries that really push the technology , that accomplish things that Epic never envisioned " . In December 2005 , Blizzard Entertainment and <unk> , a gaming @-@ focused instant messaging service , jointly sponsored a World of Warcraft machinima contest . 
 = Kangana Ranaut = 
 Kangana Ranaut ( pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 23 March 1986 ) is an Indian film actress . She has established a career in Bollywood and is one of the highest @-@ paid actresses in India . Ranaut is particularly known in the media for expressing her honest opinions in public and is frequently credited as one of the most fashionable Indian celebrities . She is the recipient of several awards , including three National Film Awards and Filmfare Awards in four categories . 
 Born in Bhambla , a small town in Himachal Pradesh , Ranaut initially aspired to become a doctor at the insistence of her parents . Determined to build her own career path , she relocated to Delhi at age sixteen , where she briefly became a model . After training under the theatre director Arvind Gaur , Ranaut made her feature film debut in the 2006 thriller Gangster , for which she was awarded the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut . She received praise for portraying emotionally intense characters in the dramas Woh Lamhe ( 2006 ) , Life in a ... Metro ( 2007 ) and Fashion ( 2008 ) . For the last of these , she won the National Film Award for Best Supporting Actress and a Filmfare Award in the same category . 
 Ranaut featured in the commercially successful films Raaz : The Mystery Continues ( 2009 ) and Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai ( 2010 ) , though she was criticised for being typecast in neurotic roles . A comic role opposite R. Madhavan in the 2011 box office hit Tanu Weds Manu was well @-@ received , though this was followed by a series of brief , glamorous roles in films that failed to propel her career forward . She then played a mutant opposite Hrithik Roshan in the science fiction film Krrish 3 ( 2013 ) , one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films , and won the Filmfare and National Film Award for Best Actress for her performance in the comedy @-@ drama Queen ( 2014 ) . In 2015 , Ranaut portrayed dual roles in Tanu Weds Manu Returns , the most successful Bollywood film featuring a female protagonist , for which she won a Filmfare Critics Award and a second consecutive National Film Award for Best Actress . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Ranaut was born on 23 March 1986 at Bhambla ( now <unk> ) , a small town in the Mandi district of Himachal Pradesh , into a Rajput family . Her mother , Asha Ranaut , is a school teacher , and her father , <unk> Ranaut , is a businessman . She has an elder sister , Rangoli , who as of 2014 works as her manager and a younger brother , <unk> . Her great @-@ grandfather , <unk> Singh Ranaut , was a Member of the Legislative Assembly and her grandfather was an officer for the Indian Administrative Service . She grew up in a joint family at their ancestral haveli ( mansion ) in Bhambla , and described her childhood as " simple and happy " . 
 According to Ranaut , she was " stubborn and rebellious " while growing up : " If my father would gift my brother a plastic gun and get a doll for me , I would not accept that . I questioned the discrimination . " She did not subscribe to the stereotypes that were expected of her and experimented with fashion from a young age , often pairing up accessories and clothes that would seem " bizarre " to her neighbours . Ranaut was educated at the <unk> School in Chandigarh , where she pursued science as her core subject , remarking that she was " very studious " and " always paranoid about [ ... ] results " . She initially intended to become a doctor on the insistence of her parents . However , a failed unit test in chemistry during her twelfth grade led Ranaut to reconsider her career prospects and despite preparing for the All India Pre Medical Test , she did not turn up for the exam . Determined to find her " space and freedom " , she relocated to Delhi at the age of sixteen . Her decision not to pursue medicine led to constant feuding with her parents and her father refused to sponsor a pursuit he considered to be aimless . 
 In Delhi , Ranaut was unsure which career to choose ; the Elite Modelling Agency were impressed by her looks and suggested that she model for them . She took on a few modelling assignments , but generally disliked the career as she found " no scope for creativity " . Ranaut decided to shift focus towards acting and joined the <unk> Theatre Group , where she trained under the theatre director Arvind Gaur . She participated in Gaur 's theatre workshop at the India Habitat Centre , acting in several of his plays , including the Girish Karnad @-@ scripted <unk> . During a performance , when one of the male actors went missing , Ranaut played his part along with her original role of a woman . A positive reaction from the audience prompted her to relocate to Mumbai to pursue a career in film and she enrolled herself for a four @-@ month acting course in Asha Chandra 's drama school . 
 Ranaut struggled with her meager earnings during this period , eating only " bread and <unk> ( pickle ) " . Refusing her father 's financial assistance led to a rift in their relationship which she later regretted . Her relatives were unhappy with her decision to enter the film @-@ making industry , and they did not correspond with her for several years . She reconciled with them after the release of Life in a ... Metro in 2007 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 2004 – 08 : Film debut and critical acclaim = = = 
 In 2004 , the producers Ramesh Sharma and <unk> <unk> announced that Ranaut would make her film debut with the Deepak Shivdasani @-@ directed I Love You Boss . The following year , an agent took her to the office of the producer Mahesh Bhatt , where she interacted with the director Anurag Basu and auditioned for the lead role in the romantic thriller Gangster . Bhatt felt that she was too young for the role and signed Chitrangada Singh instead . However , Singh was later unavailable to do the film and Ranaut was contracted as a replacement for Gangster , opting out of I Love You Boss . She was cast in the central role of Simran , an alcoholic woman caught in a romantic triangle between a notorious gangster ( played by <unk> Ahuja ) and a sympathetic friend ( played by Emraan Hashmi ) . Ranaut was only seventeen while filming and said that she " had difficulty first in understanding and then unwinding from the character " , describing her craft as " raw and immature " . Released in 2006 , Gangster emerged as a critical and commercial success and her performance was praised . Raja Sen of Rediff.com said that " Kangana is a remarkable find , the actress coming across with great conviction . Hers is the pivotal character and an extremely difficult role to essay , but she manages it well [ ... ] Kangana 's nuances [ of an alcoholic character ] are disconcertingly realistic . " She won the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut , along with various other debut awards . 
 Ranaut 's next role was in the Mohit Suri @-@ directed drama Woh Lamhe ( 2006 ) , a semi @-@ biographical film based on the schizophrenic actress Parveen Babi and her relationship with the director Mahesh Bhatt . She said that portraying Babi had left her emotionally drained , as she had begun to " feel her desolation and loneliness . " Film critic Subhash K. Jha wrote that Ranaut " is the first female performer of Bollywood since Smita and Shabana who isn 't scared to strip her soul naked for the camera " , adding that she is a " hugely expressive actress with a phenomenal ability to convey torment , hurt and incredulity through the eyes " . Despite positive reviews , the film underperformed at the box office . 
 The following year , Ranaut portrayed an aspiring musician in <unk> Darshan 's musical thriller <unk> Boom Boom , alongside Bobby Deol , <unk> Patel and Celina <unk> . The film 's production was marred by a dispute between Ranaut and Darshan ; she objected to her voice being dubbed by another artist , but he insisted that he needed a particular " twang and accent " for her character . India Today described the film as an " amateur mess " and the film proved to be a box office flop . She next reunited with Anurag Basu for the ensemble drama Life in a ... Metro , playing the supporting role of Neha , a shrewd socialite engaged in an affair with her married boss ( played by Kay Kay Menon ) . Despite a poor initial run at the box office , the film emerged as a profitable venture . Khalid Mohamed of Hindustan Times was critical of the film , noting its lack of originality and realism . In a more positive review , Raja Sen wrote that Ranaut " is refreshing [ ... ] and manages to herd her emotions well , playing a complex role but hardly ever overreaching " , but criticised her delivery of English lines . For her role , Ranaut was awarded the Stardust Award for Breakthrough Performance – Female . 
 Ranaut next portrayed a village girl in <unk> Dhoom ( 2008 ) , a Tamil romantic thriller , opposite Jayam Ravi . Production on the film was temporarily halted when the director , Jeeva , died of cardiac arrest and the film was completed by the crew members . A review carried by Post wrote that Ranaut had " little scope " in a role that did not suit her . India Today described her next film , the Madhur Bhandarkar @-@ directed drama Fashion ( 2008 ) , as a " landmark " in her career . Set against the backdrop of the Indian fashion industry , the film co @-@ starred Priyanka Chopra and <unk> Godse and featured Ranaut as Shonali <unk> , a substance abusing supermodel struggling to cope with her foundering career . Because the media speculated that her role was based on the former model <unk> Nagpal ( which both Ranaut and Bhandarkar denied ) , the Delhi Commission for Women ( DCW ) , ordered a stay on the film 's release , approving it only after a script narration . With a worldwide revenue of 600 million Indian rupees ( ₹ ) , approximately US $ 10 million , Fashion emerged as a commercial success , and was listed by Subhash K. Jha as one of the best films of the decade with women protagonists . Ranaut 's performance drew unanimous critical acclaim . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama praised her confident portrayal of the character and believed that she was the real star of the film , and Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India added that she " does an exquisite metamorphosis from a wispy , high @-@ strung , nervous child @-@ woman to a stunning ramp diva . " Ranaut 's portrayal earned her several awards , including the National Film Award and Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress . 
 = = = 2009 – 12 : Career fluctuations = = = 
 The supernatural horror film Raaz : The Mystery Continues from director Mohit Suri was Ranaut 's first film release of 2009 , in which she played a successful model who is possessed by a ghost . The film co @-@ starred Emraan Hashmi and <unk> Suman and proved to be a financial success . Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express noted that Ranaut was becoming stereotyped in roles that required her to be " hysterical " , adding that she needed a " radical change of image " . Also that year , she played the leading lady in the drama <unk> Raha and the Telugu action film Ek Niranjan , neither of which were particularly notable . 
 In a brief role in Anurag Basu 's romantic thriller Kites ( 2010 ) , Ranaut portrayed the fiancée of Hrithik Roshan 's character . She said that she felt " cheated " after watching the film , as her role proved to be much smaller than what she had initially signed on for . She then portrayed fictional film actress <unk> in the Milan Luthria @-@ directed gangster film Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai . Also starring Ajay Devgn , Emraan Hashmi and Prachi Desai , the film chronicles the rise and subsequent fall of an underworld don ( played by Devgn ) in the 1970s . Ranaut said that her character was " a mix " of the actress Madhubala and the gangster Haji <unk> 's wife and that to prepare she observed the work of the actresses Zeenat Aman and Parveen Babi . The film was one of the most successful releases of the year and garnered positive reviews from critics . Sudish Kamath of The Hindu labelled her a " delight " and Mid Day 's Sarita Tanwar praised her for being " totally convincing " in the role . After playing a television reporter in the thriller Knock Out , Ranaut actively looked for a comedy and found the role in Anees Bazmee 's No Problem , but both films failed to propel her career forward . 
 According to Bollywood Hungama , after establishing a reputation for portraying neurotic characters , Ranaut was seeking projects that would be " less emotionally exhausting " for her . Her first release of 2011 was Anand L. Rai 's Tanu Weds Manu , a romantic comedy opposite R. Madhavan , which Ranaut considers a " game changer " for her . Rai stated that he cast her for the role to illustrate that the actress was capable of playing other roles and that her character in the film was unlike any of those that she had played previously . Critical reaction to the film was mixed , though Ranaut 's performance was praised . Rajeev Masand wrote , " Kangana Ranaut is a pleasant surprise in a cheery , upbeat part that we haven 't seen her take on before . She rises to the challenge , only hampered occasionally by her mangled dialogue delivery . " Ranaut received Best Actress nominations at several award ceremonies , including Screen and Zee Cine . 
 Ranaut followed the success of Tanu Weds Manu by starring in a series of brief , glamorous roles in four other films of 2011 : Game , Double Dhamaal , Rascals and Miley Naa Miley Hum . With the exception of Double Dhamaal , none of these films performed well . In a review for Rascals , the critic Gaurav Malani wrote : " Kangana Ranaut is ill at ease in comedy . She struggles to hold her own and emerges as a bimbo in her act . " Ranaut later said that she did some of these films due to a dearth of film offers . The following year , Ranaut portrayed a supporting role opposite Ajay Devgn in Priyadarshan 's action thriller <unk> , another box office flop . 
 = = = 2013 – present : Established actress = = = 
 The director Sanjay Gupta cast Ranaut in a brief role opposite John Abraham in the crime thriller Shootout at Wadala ( 2013 ) due to her ability to stand out in a predominantly male @-@ centric film . The Daily News and Analysis ' Tushar Joshi wrote that her role was written " to provide the sex quotient " and critic Vinayak Chakravorty opined that she " does not get much scope [ ... ] beyond the steamy lovemaking grind " . Commercially , the film performed moderately well . 
 Ranaut achieved success later in 2013 for her portrayal of Kaya , a shapeshifting mutant , in Rakesh Roshan 's science fiction film Krrish 3 , alongside Hrithik Roshan , Priyanka Chopra and Vivek Oberoi . When Rakesh Roshan first offered the role to her , she declined it due a disappointing prior association with him on Kites , in which Roshan had served as producer . Following Ranaut 's rejection , other actresses also turned down the role . Roshan approached her again and after assuring her that the role would not be a minuscule one , Ranaut accepted the part . Critics thought that Krrish 3 was entertaining but lacking in originality , though Ranaut 's performance garnered praise . The critic Sarita Tanwar of Daily News and Analysis said : " Kangana Ranaut is delightful as an alien making the weird hair and clothes work for her . She even manages to make you feel her pain . Quite an accomplishment that ! " With global ticket sales of ₹ 3 billion ( US $ 45 million ) , the film emerged as one of the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood films of all time , becoming Ranaut 's most financially profitable venture . Also that year , Ranaut played the eponymous lead in the musical drama Rajjo . The film was a critical and commercial failure and Ranaut 's portrayal of a nautch girl was largely criticised . Paloma Sharma of Rediff.com commented that " Kangana Ranaut struggles with her <unk> dialogues and is not as graceful in the dance sequences as one would have expected . " 
 In 2014 , Ranaut established herself in Hindi cinema when she featured alongside Rajkummar Rao and Lisa Haydon in the coming @-@ of @-@ age dramedy Queen ; she also co @-@ wrote the dialogues with Anvita Dutt <unk> . The film tells the story of Rani , a naive girl who embarks on her honeymoon alone after her fiancé calls off their wedding . Ranaut , who describes herself as " independent and confident " , reflected that the role was one of the toughest she had played , as the character 's personality traits contrasted with her own . The film and Ranaut 's performance received unanimous acclaim from critics . Devesh Sharma of Filmfare wrote that the fact that she " flits from one aspect of her character to another without breaking stride shows her maturity as an actor . Her efforts make you clap for Rani 's small and big victories , you root for her character to come up trumps and are glad about the glorious transformation at the end . " With a worldwide total of ₹ 970 million ( US $ 14 million ) , the film also emerged as a box office hit . She won both the Filmfare Award and the National Film Award for Best Actress for the film . Ranaut followed Queen by playing an aggressive politician in the black comedy Revolver Rani and a medical intern in the political drama <unk> ( both 2014 ) . 
 The following year , Ranaut starred in Tanu Weds Manu Returns ( 2015 ) , a sequel to Tanu Weds Manu , in which she portrayed dual roles — she reprised the character of Tanuja from the original and also portrayed an aspiring athlete in it . In preparation for the latter role , she interacted with students of the University of Delhi in disguise ; in addition , she attended workshops to learn the Haryanvi language and trained in the sport of triple jump . The film received positive reviews from critics and Ranaut 's performance was considered its prime asset . Sweta Kaushal of Hindustan Times praised her for perfecting the body languages and accents of the two women , and Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV wrote that she " fleshes out this pair of distinct individuals with such energy and finesse that it becomes difficult at times to tell that it is the same actress playing the two roles " . Tanu Weds Manu Returns earned over ₹ 2 @.@ 4 billion ( US $ 36 million ) worldwide , becoming the highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film featuring a female protagonist . Ranaut won a Filmfare Critics Award and a second consecutive National Film Award for Best Actress , and received an additional Best Actress nomination at Filmfare . 
 Also in 2015 , Ranaut appeared in the romantic comedies I Love NY ( a production delayed since 2013 ) and Nikhil Advani 's <unk> <unk> , both of which failed at the box office . The latter saw her play opposite Imran Khan as a cancer patient , a role that critic Uday Bhatia of Mint thought " lack [ ed ] the sort of definition she ’ s had in her last few roles " . 
 = = = = Upcoming projects = = = = 
 As of May 2016 , Ranaut has completed filming for the part of an actress in Vishal Bhardwaj 's Rangoon , a romantic drama set during World War II , co @-@ starring Saif Ali Khan and Shahid Kapoor . In addition , Ranaut is committed to star in Simran , a drama from the director Hansal Mehta , in which she will play a Gujarati immigrant in America involved in criminal activities , and in Ketan Mehta 's biopic on Rani <unk> . Ranaut will also be making her production and directorial debut with an English language short film entitled The Touch , dealing with the relationship between a four @-@ year @-@ old boy and a dog ; she co @-@ wrote the screenplay with an Australian writer and completed principal photography in America . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Ranaut has stated that her initial years in the film industry were marred with difficulties as she was unprepared to be an actress . She was conscious of her poor command of the English language and struggled to " fit in " . In a 2013 interview with Daily News and Analysis , Ranaut recollected : 
 " People in the industry treated me like I didn 't deserve to be spoken to and I was some unwanted object . I couldn 't speak English fluently and people made fun of me for that . So dealing with rejection became a part of life . ... All that has taken a toll , I guess . I find it hard to deal with praise . Today , when people say that I have made it and made it on my own , I feel like locking up myself somewhere ... It scares me . " 
 During the struggle , Ranaut found support in the actor Aditya Pancholi and his wife Zarina Wahab and considered them her " family away from home " . She became embroiled in a well publicised scandal when the media speculated on the nature of her relationship with Pancholi . She declined to speak about it openly , although she made several public appearances with him . In 2007 it was reported that Ranaut had filed a police complaint against Pancholi for physically assaulting her under the influence of alcohol . The following year Pancholi confirmed the affair in an interview , saying that he had been cohabiting with Ranaut in the past and accused her of owing him ₹ 2 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 37 @,@ 000 ) . In response , Ranaut 's spokesperson said that " after physically assaulting her in the middle of a road , he has no right to expect anything from her " , adding that she had " already given ₹ 5 million ( US $ 74 @,@ 000 ) to [ him ] as a goodwill gesture " . Ranaut later said that the incident had left her " physically and mentally " damaged . 
 While filming Raaz : The Mystery Continues in 2008 , Ranaut began a romantic relationship with co @-@ star <unk> Suman . On Suman 's insistence that he focus on his professional career , the couple separated the following year . From 2010 to 2012 , Ranaut was involved in a long @-@ distance romance with Nicholas Lafferty , an English doctor ; she described the relationship as " the most normal " she ever had , but the couple split amicably as she was not ready for marriage . She has since maintained that she will never get married , and has expressed a desire to not be bound by a relationship . In 2016 , Hrithik Roshan , her co @-@ star from Krrish 3 , filed a lawsuit against Ranaut accusing her of cyber stalking and harassment . Denying the charges , Ranaut filed a counter @-@ charge against Roshan , claiming that his lawsuit was an attempt to cover @-@ up their affair for the benefit of his divorce proceedings . 
 Ranaut lives in Mumbai with her sister Rangoli , who was the victim of an acid attack in 2006 . She makes yearly visits to her hometown of Bhambla . A practicing Hindu , Ranaut follows the teachings of the spiritual leader Swami Vivekananda and considers meditation to be " the highest form of worshipping God " . She practices vegetarianism and was listed as " India 's hottest vegetarian " in a poll conducted by PETA in 2013 . Since 2009 Ranaut has been studying the dance form of kathak from the <unk> <unk> Kala Mandir . She has said that the technical process of filmmaking is of tremendous interest to her , and to better her understanding of it Ranaut enrolled in a two @-@ month screenplay writing course at the New York Film Academy in 2014 . In an interview with Filmfare she said that despite her stardom , she wants to lead a normal life : " I don 't want to lose my rights as a common person to learn and grow " . 
 = = In the media = = 
 In the book Acting Smart : Your Ticket to Showbiz , Tisca Chopra describes Ranaut as a " free @-@ spirited , original creative " person " who cannot really be slotted in a particular mould " . Ranaut is particularly known for her forthrightness in expressing her opinions in public on issues ranging from film to feminism . A televised interview hosted by Anupama Chopra in which Ranaut spoke out against gender bias and nepotism in Bollywood went viral online , which led Sunaina Kumar of Tehelka to write : " In this age of cookie @-@ cutter heroines with stock responses , Kangana Ranaut is refreshingly real and honest . " 
 Analysing Ranaut 's career , the journalist <unk> <unk> , in 2014 , noted that she " loves to challenge herself with tricky roles and manages to add a different dimension to her character every time . " A reviewer for Rediff.com described her as a " director 's actress " who is susceptible to both " shine and crumble under the right / wrong guidance " . Anand L Rai ( the director of Tanu Weds Manu ) says that Ranaut actively pursues roles in which she can " work in her own space and not become a mere prop in the male @-@ dominated Bollywood " . Alongside actress Vidya Balan , Ranaut has been credited for spearheading a movement that breaks stereotypes of a Hindi film heroine by playing the protagonist in films not starring a well @-@ known male star . Following the success of Queen and Tanu Weds Manu Returns , Deccan Chronicle labelled her as " one of the most bankable actresses in the industry " , and Daily News and Analysis reported that she had emerged as one of the highest @-@ paid actresses in Bollywood . 
 Ranaut is considered a sex symbol and a style icon in India . Analysing Ranaut 's off @-@ screen persona , Hindustan Times published that she was initially written off by Indian journalists due to her " funny accent " and the negative publicity generated by her troubled relationships ; however , her defining fashion choices and her unconventional film roles eventually established her as a star . Ranaut has frequently featured in listings of the most attractive and stylish celebrities in India . She ranked among the top 10 on The Times of India 's listing of the " Most Desirable Woman " in 2010 , 2011 , 2013 and 2015 . Ranaut was featured on Verve 's listing of the most powerful women of 2010 and in 2012 she was named the " Best Dressed Personality " by the Indian edition of People magazine . In 2013 , Ranaut featured as one of the best @-@ dressed women celebrities by Vogue India . The journalist <unk> <unk> Joy credits the actress for her " quirky , almost non @-@ Bollywood take on personal style " , adding that she " likes to shock and awe with her choices " . She has collaborated with the fashion brand Vero Moda to launch two clothing lines for the company , named Marquee and Venice Cruise , in 2015 and 2016 , respectively . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Ranaut has been the recipient of three National Film Awards : Best Supporting Actress for Fashion ( 2008 ) and Best Actress for Queen ( 2014 ) and Tanu Weds Manu Returns ( 2015 ) . She has also won four Filmfare Awards : Best Female Debut for Gangster ( 2006 ) , Best Supporting Actress for Fashion ( 2008 ) , Best Actress for Queen ( 2014 ) , and Best Actress - Critics for Tanu Weds Manu Returns ( 2015 ) . 
 = Ulm Campaign = 
 The Ulm Campaign consisted of a series of French and Bavarian military maneuvers and battles to outflank and capture an Austrian army in 1805 during the War of the Third Coalition . It took place in the vicinity of and inside the Swabian ( then Bavarian ) city of Ulm . The French Grande Armée , led by Napoleon Bonaparte , comprised 210 @,@ 000 troops organized into seven corps , and hoped to knock out the Austrian army in the Danube before Russian reinforcements could arrive . Through rapid marching , Napoleon conducted a large wheeling maneuver that captured an Austrian army of 23 @,@ 000 under General Mack on 20 October at Ulm , bringing the total number of Austrian prisoners in the campaign to 60 @,@ 000 . The campaign is generally regarded as a strategic masterpiece and was influential in the development of the Schlieffen Plan in the late 19th century . 
 The victory at Ulm did not end the war , since a large Russian army under Kutuzov was still near Vienna . The Russians withdrew to the northeast to await reinforcements and to link up with surviving Austrian units . The French followed and captured Vienna on 12 November . On 2 December the decisive French victory at Austerlitz removed Austria from the war . The resulting Treaty of Pressburg in late December brought the Third Coalition to an end and left Napoleonic France as the major power in Central Europe , leading to the War of the Fourth Coalition with Prussia and Russia the following year . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Europe had been by then embroiled in the French Revolutionary Wars since 1792 . After five years of war , the French Republic subdued the First Coalition in 1797 . A Second Coalition was formed in 1798 but this too was defeated by 1801 . Britain remained the only opponent for the new French Consulate . In March 1802 , France and Britain agreed to end hostilities under the Treaty of Amiens . For the first time in ten years , all of Europe was at peace . There were many problems between the two sides and implementing the agreements they had reached at Amiens seemed to be a growing challenge . Britain resented having to turn over all colonial conquests since 1793 and France was angry that British troops had not evacuated the island of Malta . The tense situation only worsened when Napoleon sent an expeditionary force to crush the Haitian Revolution . In May 1803 , Britain declared war on France . 
 = = = Third Coalition = = = 
 In December 1804 , an Anglo @-@ Swedish agreement led to the creation of the Third Coalition . British Prime Minister William Pitt spent 1804 and 1805 in a flurry of diplomatic activity to form a new coalition against France . Mutual suspicion between the British and the Russians eased in the face of several French political mistakes and by April 1805 the two had signed a treaty of alliance . Having been defeated twice in recent memory by France and keen on revenge , Austria also joined the coalition a few months later . 
 = = = French military preparations = = = 
 Prior to the formation of the Third Coalition , Napoleon had assembled the " Army of England , " an invasion force meant to strike at the British Isles , around six camps at Boulogne in Northern France . Although they never set foot on British soil , Napoleon 's troops received careful and invaluable training for any possible military operation . Although boredom quickly set in among the troops , Napoleon paid many visits to conduct lavish parades to maintain their morale . 
 The men at Boulogne formed the core for what Napoleon would later call " La Grande Armée " ( The Great Army ) . At the start , the French army had about 200 @,@ 000 men organized into seven corps , which were large field units , each containing about 36 to 40 cannon each and capable of independent action until other corps could arrive . On top , Napoleon created a cavalry reserve of 22 @,@ 000 troopers organized into two cuirassier divisions , four mounted dragoon divisions and two divisions of dismounted dragoons and light cavalry , all supported by 24 artillery pieces . By 1805 , La Grande Armée had grown to a force of 350 @,@ 000 , was equipped and trained . <unk> a competent officer class where almost all from sergeants to marshals had experience in the recent Revolutionary Wars . 
 = = = Austrian military preparations = = = 
 Archduke Charles , brother of the Austrian Emperor , had started to reform the Austrian army in 1801 by taking away power from the Hofkriegsrat ( Aulic Council ) , the military @-@ political council responsible for decisionmaking in the Austrian armed forces . Charles was Austria 's best field commander , but he was unpopular with the royal court and lost much influence when , against his advice , Austria decided to go to war with France . 
 Karl Mack became the new main commander in Austria 's army , instituting reforms on the infantry on the eve of war that called for a regiment to be composed of four battalions of four companies rather than the older three battalions of six companies . The sudden change came with no corresponding officer training ; new units were led by commanders who had not been given sufficient tactical training in using their units . 
 Austrian cavalry forces were regarded as the best in Europe , but the detachment of many cavalry units to various infantry formations precluded the hitting power of their massed French counterparts , who could , at the orders of Napoleon , amass a whole corps of cavalry to influence the battle . 
 = = Campaign = = 
 The Ulm Campaign lasted for nearly a month and saw the French army under Napoleon deliver blow after blow to the confused Austrians . It culminated on 20 October with the loss of an entire Austrian army . 
 = = = Austrian Plans & Preparations = = = 
 General Mack thought that Austrian security relied on sealing off the gaps through the mountainous Black Forest area in Southern Germany that had witnessed much fighting during the campaigns of the French Revolutionary Wars . Mack believed that there would be no action in Central Germany . Mack decided to make the city of Ulm the centerpiece of his defensive strategy , which called for a containment of the French until the Russians under Kutuzov could arrive and alter the odds against Napoleon . Ulm was protected by the heavily fortified Michelsberg heights , giving Mack the impression that the city was virtually impregnable from outside attack . 
 Fatally , the Aulic Council decided to make Northern Italy the main theater of operations for the Habsburgs . Archduke Charles was assigned 95 @,@ 000 troops and directed to cross the Adige River with Mantua , Peschiera , and Milan as the initial objectives . The Austrians based an army of 72 @,@ 000 men on Ulm . Nominally commanded by Archduke Ferdinand , the army 's real authority was Mack . Austrian strategy required that Archduke John with 23 @,@ 000 troops secure the Tyrol and provide the link between his brother Charles 's army and his cousin Ferdinand 's army . The Austrians also detached individual corps to serve with the Swedish in Pomerania and the British in Naples , though these were designed to confuse the French and divert their resources . 
 = = = French Plans & Preparations = = = 
 In both the campaigns of 1796 and 1800 , Napoleon had envisaged the Danube theater as the central focus of French efforts , but in both instances the Italian theater became the most important . The Aulic Council thought Napoleon would strike in Italy again . Napoleon had other intentions : 210 @,@ 000 French troops would be launched eastwards from the camps of Boulogne and would envelop General Mack 's exposed Austrian army if it kept marching towards the Black Forest . Meanwhile , Marshal Murat would conduct cavalry screens across the Black Forest to fool the Austrians into thinking that the French were advancing on a direct west @-@ east axis . The main attack in Germany would be supported by French assaults in other theaters : Marshal Masséna would confront Charles in Italy with 50 @,@ 000 men of the Armée d 'Italie , St. Cyr would march to Naples with 20 @,@ 000 men , and Marshal Brune would patrol Boulogne with 30 @,@ 000 troops against a possible British invasion . 
 Murat and Bertrand conducted reconnaissance between the area bordering the Tyrol and the Main as Savary , chief of the planning staff , drew up detailed road surveys of the areas between the Rhine and the Danube . The left wing of the Grande Armée would move from Hanover in northern Germany and Utrecht in the Netherland to fall on Württemberg ; the right and center , troops from the Channel coast , would concentrate along the Middle Rhine around cities like Mannheim and Strasbourg . While Murat was making demonstrations across the Black Forest , other French forces would then invade the German heartland and swing towards the southeast by capturing Augsburg , a move that was supposed to isolate Mack and interrupt the Austrian lines of communication . 
 = = = The French invasion = = = 
 On 22 September Mack decided to hold the Iller line anchored on Ulm . In the last three days of September , the French began the furious marches that would place them at the Austrian rear . Mack believed that the French would not violate Prussian territory , but when he heard that Bernadotte 's I Corps had marched through Prussian Ansbach , he made the critical decision to stay and defend Ulm rather than retreat to the south , which would have offered a reasonable opportunity at saving the bulk of his forces . Napoleon had little accurate information about Mack 's intentions or maneuvers ; he knew that Kienmayer 's Corps was sent to Ingolstadt east of the French positions , but his agents greatly exaggerated its size . On 5 October Napoleon ordered Ney to join Lannes , Soult , and Murat in concentrating and crossing the Danube at Donauwörth . The French encirclement , however , was not deep enough to prevent Kienmayer 's escape : the French corps did not all arrive at the same place – they instead deployed on a long west @-@ east axis – and the early arrival of Soult and Davout at Donauwörth incited Kienmayer to exercise caution and evasion . Napoleon gradually became more convinced that the Austrians were massed at Ulm and ordered sizeable portions of the French army to concentrate around Donauwörth ; on 6 October three French infantry and cavalry corps headed to Donauwörth to seal off Mack 's escape route . 
 Realizing the danger of his position , Mack decided to go on the offensive . On 8 October he commanded the army to concentrate around Günzburg and hoped to strike at Napoleon 's lines of communication . Mack instructed Kienmayer to draw Napoleon further east towards Munich and Augsburg . Napoleon did not seriously consider the possibility that Mack would cross the Danube and move away from his central base , but he did realize that seizing the bridges at Günzburg would yield a large strategic advantage . To accomplish this objective , Napoleon sent Ney 's Corps to Günzburg , completely unaware that the bulk of the Austrian army was heading to the same destination . On 8 October , however , the campaign witnessed its first serious battle at Wertingen between Auffenburg 's troops and those of Murat and Lannes . 
 = = = Battle of Wertingen = = = 
 For reasons not entirely clear , on 7 October Mack ordered Franz Xavier Auffenburg to take his division of 5 @,@ 000 infantry and 400 cavalry from Günzburg to Wertingen in preparation for the main Austrian advance out of Ulm . Uncertain of what to do and having little hope for reinforcements , Auffenburg was in a dangerous position . The first French forces to arrive were Murat 's cavalry divisions – Louis Klein 's 1st Dragoon Division , Marc Antoine de Beaumont 's 3rd Dragoon Division , and Nansouty 's 1st Cuirassier Division . They began to assault the Austrian positions and were soon joined by Nicolas Oudinot 's grenadiers , who were hoping to outflank the Austrians from the northeast . Auffenburg attempted a retreat to the southwest , but he was not quick enough : the Austrians lost nearly their entire force , 1 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 000 of which were taken prisoner . The Battle of Wertingen had been an easy French victory . 
 The action at Wertingen convinced Mack to operate on the left ( north ) bank of the Danube instead of making a direct eastwards retreat on the right bank . This would require the Austrian army to cross to the north at Günzburg . On 8 October Ney was operating under Louis Alexandre Berthier 's directions that called for a direct attack on Ulm the following day . Ney sent in Jean @-@ Pierre Firmin Malher 's 3rd Division to capture the Günzburg bridges over the Danube . In the Battle of Günzburg , a column of this division ran into some Tyrolean <unk> and captured 200 of them , including their commander Konstantin <unk> Karl d 'Aspré , along with two cannons . The Austrians noticed these developments and reinforced their positions around Günzburg with three infantry battalions and 20 cannons . Malher 's division conducted several heroic attacks against the Austrian positions , but all failed . Mack then sent in Ignaz Gyulai with seven infantry battalions and fourteen cavalry squadrons to repair the destroyed bridges , but this force was charged and swept away by the delayed French 59th Infantry Regiment . Fierce fighting ensued and the French finally managed to establish a foothold on the right ( south ) bank of the Danube . While the Battle of Günzburg was being fought , Ney sent Louis Henri Loison 's 2nd Division to capture the Danube bridges at Elchingen , which were lightly defended by the Austrians . Having lost most of the Danube bridges , Mack marched his army back to Ulm . By 10 October Ney 's corps had made significant progress : Malher 's 3rd division had crossed to the right ( south ) bank , Loison 's 2nd division held Elchingen , and Pierre Dupont de l 'Étang 's 1st Division was heading towards Ulm . 
 = = = Haslach @-@ Jungingen and Elchingen = = = 
 The demoralized Austrian army arrived at Ulm in the early hours of 10 October . Mack was deliberating his course of action and the Austrian army remained inactive at Ulm until the 11th . Meanwhile , Napoleon was operating under flawed assumptions : he believed the Austrians were moving to the east or southeast and that Ulm was lightly guarded . Ney sensed this misapprehension and wrote to Berthier that Ulm was , in fact , more heavily defended than the French originally thought . During this time , the Russian threat to the east began to preoccupy Napoleon so much that Murat was given command of the right wing of the army , consisting of Ney 's and Lannes 's corps . The French were separated in two massive wings at this point : the forces of Ney , Lannes , and Murat to the west were containing Mack while those of Soult , Davout , Bernadotte , and Auguste Marmont to the east were charged with guarding against any possible Russian and Austrian incursions . On 11 October Ney made a renewed push on Ulm ; the 2nd and 3rd divisions were to march to the city along the right bank of the Danube while Dupont 's division , supported by one dragoon division , was to march directly for Ulm and seize the entire city . The orders were hopeless because Ney still did not know that the entire Austrian army was stationed at Ulm . 
 The 32nd Infantry Regiment in Dupont 's division marched from Haslach towards Ulm and ran into four Austrian regiments holding <unk> . The 32nd carried out several ferocious attacks , but the Austrians held firm and repulsed every one . The Austrians flooded the battle with more cavalry and infantry regiments to Ulm @-@ Jungingen hoping to score a knockout blow against Ney 's corps by enveloping Dupont 's force . Dupont sensed what was happening and preempted the Austrians by launching a surprise attack on Jungingen , during which he took as prisoner at least 1 @,@ 000 of the Austrians . Renewed Austrian attacks drove these forces back to Haslach , which the French managed to hold . Dupont was eventually forced to fall back on Albeck , where he joined Louis Baraguey d 'Hilliers 's foot dragoons division . The effects of the Battle of Haslach @-@ Jungingen on Napoleon 's plans are not fully clear , but the Emperor may have finally ascertained that the majority of the Austrian army was concentrated at Ulm . Accordingly , Napoleon sent the corps of Soult and Marmont towards the Iller , meaning he now had four infantry and one cavalry corps to deal with Mack ; Davout , Bernadotte , and the Bavarians were still guarding the region around Munich . Napoleon did not intend to fight a battle across rivers and ordered his marshals to capture the important bridges around Ulm . He also began shifting his forces to the north of Ulm because he expected a battle in that region rather than an encirclement of the city itself . These dispositions and actions would lead to a confrontation at Elchingen on the 14th as Ney 's forces advanced on Albeck . 
 At this point in the campaign , the Austrian command staff was in full confusion . Ferdinand began to openly oppose Mack 's command style and decisions , charging that the latter spent his days writing contradictory orders that left the Austrian army marching back and forth . On 13 October Mack sent two columns out of Ulm in preparation for a breakout to the north : one under Johann Sigismund Riesch headed towards Elchingen to secure the bridge there and the other under Franz von Werneck went north with most of the heavy artillery . Ney hurried his corps forward to reestablish contact with Dupont , who was still north of the Danube . Ney led Loison 's division to the south of Elchingen on the right bank of the Danube to begin the attack . Malher 's division crossed the river farther east and moved west toward Riesch 's position . The field was a partially wooded flood plain , rising steeply to the hill town of Elchingen , which had a wide field of view . The French cleared the Austrian pickets from a bridge , then a regiment boldly attacked and captured the abbey at the top of the hill at bayonet point . During the Battle of Elchingen , the Austrian cavalry was also defeated and Reisch 's infantry fled toward Ulm . Ney was given the title Duke of Elchingen for his impressive victory . 
 = = = Battle of Ulm = = = 
 On 13 October Soult 's IV Corps fell on Memmingen from the east . After a minor clash that resulted in 16 French casualties , General @-@ Major Karl <unk> von <unk> surrendered 4 @,@ 600 soldiers , eight guns , and nine colors . The Austrians were low on ammunition , cut off from Ulm , and completely demoralized by the confusion reigning at army headquarters . 
 More actions took place on the 14th . Murat 's forces joined Dupont at Albeck just in time to drive off an Austrian attack from Werneck ; together Murat and Dupont beat the Austrians to the north in the direction of Heidenheim . By night on the 14th , two French corps were stationed in the vicinity of the Austrian encampments at Michelsberg , right outside of Ulm . Mack was now in a dangerous situation : there was no longer any hope of escaping along the north bank , Marmont and the Imperial Guard were hovering at the outskirts of Ulm to the south of the river , and Soult was moving north from Memmingen to prevent the Austrians escaping south to the Tyrol . Troubles continued with the Austrian command as Ferdinand overrode the objections of Mack and ordered the evacuation of all cavalry from Ulm , a total of 6 @,@ 000 troopers . Murat 's pursuit was so effective , however , that only eleven squadrons joined Werneck at Heidenheim . Murat continued his harassment of Werneck and forced him to surrender with 8 @,@ 000 men at <unk> on 19 October ; Murat also took an entire Austrian field park of 500 vehicles , then swept on towards Neustadt an der Donau and captured 12 @,@ 000 Austrians . 
 Events at Ulm were now reaching a conclusion . On 15 October Ney 's troops successfully charged the Michelsberg encampments and on the 16th the French began to bombard Ulm itself . Austrian morale was at a low point and Mack began to realize that there was little hope of rescue . On 17 October Napoleon 's emissary , Ségur , signed a convention with Mack in which the Austrians agreed to surrender on 25 October if no aid came by that date . Gradually , however , Mack heard of the capitulations at Heidenheim and Neresheim and agreed to surrender five days before schedule on 20 October . Fifteen hundred troops from the Austrian garrison managed to escape , but the vast majority of the Austrian force marched out on 21 October and laid down their arms without incident , all with the Grande Armée drawn up in a vast semicircle observing the capitulation ( see infobox picture ) . The officers were permitted to leave , pending their signatures on a parole in which they agreed not to take up arms against France until they were exchanged . More than ten general officers were included in this agreement , including Mack , Johann von Klenau , Maximilian Anton Karl , Count Baillet de Latour , Prince Liechtenstein , and Ignaz Gyulai . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As the Austrians were marching out of Ulm to surrender , a combined Franco @-@ Spanish fleet was being destroyed at the Battle of Trafalgar . This decisive British victory ended the naval threat from France and ensured British naval domination until World War I. Despite this setback , the Ulm Campaign had been a spectacular victory and had witnessed the elimination of an entire Austrian army at very little cost for the French . The 8th bulletin of the Grande Armée described the scale of the achievement : 
 Marshal Augereau 's arrival from Brest with the newly formed VII Corps gave the French one more piece of good news . In the Capitulation of <unk> on 13 November , Franjo Jelačić 's division was cornered and forced to surrender . The Russians withdrew to the northeast after Mack 's capitulation and Vienna fell on 12 November . The Allies were thoroughly defeated at the Battle of Austerlitz in December and Austria was permanently knocked out of the Third Coalition a few weeks later . The French victory highlighted the effectiveness of la manoeuvre sur les <unk> , a special type of strategic envelopment first used by Napoleon in his Italian campaign in 1796 . The maneuver called for a pinning force that would occupy a broad front of the enemy line while other supporting units positioned themselves at a specific location in the enemy 's flank or rear . As the enemy became more embroiled with the pinning force , the flanking troops would attack at a critical spot and seal the victory . In the Ulm Campaign , Murat 's cavalry served as the pinning force that fooled the Austrians into thinking the main French attack would come from the Black Forest . As Murat lulled the Austrians towards Ulm , the main French forces crashed through Central Germany and separated Mack 's army from the other theaters of the war . 
 = = = Significance = = = 
 The Ulm Campaign is considered to be one of the greatest historical examples of a strategic turning movement . Historians often analyze the campaign on a wide strategic level that does not include tactical confrontations , even though these were common and relevant . The decisive victory at Ulm is also believed to be a product of the long training and preparation the Grande Armée received at the camps of Boulogne . The Grande Armée carried little baggage , invaded enemy territory at harvest time , and marched far faster than the Austrians had expected . The campaign highlighted the utility of the Corps d 'Armée system ; corps went on to become the fundamental strategic building block for the major wars in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . A typical corps might have three infantry divisions , a light cavalry brigade for reconnaissance , and reserve artillery batteries in addition to those attached to each division ; their increased size allowed them to fight without support for long periods of time , as Ney did , and their durability permitted them to spread out and subsist by requisitioning local food . The French needed about one eighth the transport used by contemporary armies , giving them a level of mobility and flexibility unseen at that time : invasions of South Germany by Marlborough or Moreau covered a narrow front , but the Grande Armée invaded in 1805 on a front that was 100 miles ( 161 km ) wide , an action that took the Austrians by complete surprise and caused them to underestimate the gravity of the situation . 
 = Hard Target = 
 Hard Target is a 1993 American action film directed by Hong Kong film director John Woo in his American directorial debut . The film stars Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme as Chance Boudreaux , an out @-@ of @-@ work Cajun merchant seaman who saves a young woman , named Natasha Binder ( Yancy Butler ) , from a gang of thugs in New Orleans . Chance learns that Binder is searching for her missing father ( Chuck Pfarrer ) , and agrees to aid Binder in her search . Boudreaux and Binder soon learn that Binder 's father has died at the hands of wealthy sportsman Emil Fouchon ( Lance Henriksen ) who hunts homeless men as a form of recreation . The screenplay was written by Chuck Pfarrer and is based on the 1932 film adaptation of Richard Connell 's 1924 short story , The Most Dangerous Game . 
 Hard Target was Woo 's first American film and was also the first major Hollywood film made by a Chinese director . Universal Pictures was nervous about having Woo direct a feature , and sent in director Sam Raimi to look over the film 's production and to take Woo 's place as director if he were to fail . Woo went through several scripts finding mostly martial arts films with which he was not interested . After deciding on Chuck Pfarrer 's script for Hard Target , Woo wanted to have actor Kurt Russell in the lead role , but found Russell too busy with other projects . Woo then went with Universal 's initial choice of having Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme star . Woo got along with Van Damme during filming and raised the amount of action in the film as he knew that Van Damme was up for it . 
 After 65 days of filming in New Orleans , Woo had trouble with the Motion Picture Association of America to secure the R rating that Universal wanted . Woo made dozens of cuts to the film until the MPAA allowed it an R rating . On its initial release , Hard Target was a financial success but received mixed reviews from film critics . Critics found Hard Target to have good action scenes but noted the weak script and poor quality acting from Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In New Orleans , a homeless veteran named Douglas Binder ( Chuck Pfarrer ) is the target of a hunt . He is given a belt containing $ 10 @,@ 000 and told that he must reach the other side of town where he would then win the money and his life . Hunting him is the hunt organizer Emil Fouchon ( Lance Henriksen ) , his lieutenant Pik Van Cleef ( Arnold Vosloo ) , a businessman named Mr. <unk> who has paid $ 500 @,@ 000 for the opportunity to hunt a human , and mercenaries including Stephan ( Sven @-@ Ole Thorsen ) and Peterson ( Jules Sylvester ) . Binder fails to reach his destination and is shot by three crossbow bolts . Van Cleef retrieves the money belt . 
 While searching for her father , Binder 's long @-@ estranged daughter Natasha ( Yancy Butler ) is attacked by a group of thugs who saw that she had a lot of money earlier . She is saved by a homeless man with exceptional martial arts skills named Chance Boudreaux ( Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme ) , a former Marine Force Recon . Chance is initially hesitant to involve himself with her mission , but as his merchant seaman union dues are in arrears he reluctantly allows Natasha to hire him as her guide and bodyguard during her search . Meanwhile , Chance 's homeless friend Elijah Roper ( Willie C. Carpenter ) is the next to participate in Fouchon 's hunt , and is also killed . 
 Natasha discovers that her father distributed fliers for a seedy recruiter named Randal Poe ( Eliott Keener ) who has been secretly supplying Fouchon with homeless men with war experience and no family ties . Natasha questions Randal about her father 's death , but they are discovered by an eavesdropping Van Cleef . Fouchon and Van Cleef beat Randal to punish him for sending them a man with an interested family . New Orleans detective Mitchell ( Kasi Lemmons ) is reluctant to investigate Binder 's disappearance until his charred body is discovered in the ashes of a derelict building . The death is ruled accidental , but Chance searches the ruins and finds Binder 's dog tag , which was pierced by one of the crossbow bolts . Van Cleef 's thugs suddenly ambush Chance and beat him unconscious to scare him and Natasha out of town . When he recovers , he offers Mitchell the dog tag as evidence that Binder was murdered . With the investigation getting closer , Van Cleef and Fouchon decide to relocate their hunting business and begin eliminating " loose ends " . The medical examiner who had been hiding evidence of the hunt and Randal are both executed . Mitchell , Natasha and Chance arrive moments later at Randal 's office and are ambushed by Van Cleef and several of his men . During the shootout Mitchell is shot in the chest and killed . Chance kills a handful of the mercenaries and escapes with Natasha . Fouchon and Van Cleef assemble their mercenary team and five paid @-@ for hunters to continue the chase . 
 Chance leads Natasha to his uncle Douvee 's ( Wilford Brimley ) house deep in the bayou , and enlists his help in defeating the men . Chance , Natasha , and Douvee lead the hunting party to a warehouse of old Mardi Gras floats , and kill Fouchon 's men one by one . Van Cleef is finally shot to death by Chance in a shoot out . In the end only Fouchon is left , but he holds Chance at bay by taking Natasha hostage and stabbing Douvee in the chest with an arrow . Chance charges him , attacking with a flurry of blows , and then drops a grenade in his pants . Fouchon attempts to dismantle the grenade , but fails and dies in the explosion . Chance , Natasha , and Douvee now make their way out of the warehouse . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme as Chance Boudreaux , an out @-@ of @-@ work Cajun United States Marine Corps veteran . After Boudreaux saves Natasha Binder , he is hired by her to help search for her missing father . 
 Lance Henriksen as Emil Fouchon , a wealthy sportsman who hunts homeless former soldiers for sport . After finding that he is being investigated by Chance and Natasha , Fouchon sends out his gang led by Pik Van <unk> to ambush them . 
 Arnold Vosloo as Pik Van Cleef , a collaborator of Fouchon who takes part in his sport of hunting men . He leads the crew of men who are sent out to murder Chance and Natasha . Van <unk> 's surname is a reference to actor Lee Van Cleef . 
 Yancy Butler as Natasha " Nat " Binder , a young woman who comes to New Orleans to search for her father , whom she has not seen since she was seven years old . When Natasha is attacked by thugs , she is saved by Chance Boudreaux who agrees to help her find her father . 
 Kasi Lemmons as May Mitchell , a police detective who works in the office while the police are on strike . Mitchell helps Natasha by ordering another autopsy when they show her the pierced dog tags that her father had . 
 Chuck Pfarrer as Douglas Binder , Natasha 's father who has moved to New Orleans . After Natasha finds that three weeks have passed since she has heard from her father , she goes to New Orleans to find that he has been homeless and has been murdered by Emil Fouchon 's crew . 
 Willie C. Carpenter as Elijah Roper , Chance Boudreaux 's friend who is also homeless . 
 Wilford Brimley as Uncle Douvee , Chance Boudreaux 's uncle who lives deep in the Bayou . Chance and Natasha take shelter at his home as well as have him help during the film 's final shoot out . 
 Sven @-@ Ole Thorsen and Jules Sylvester as Stephan and Peterson , Fouchon 's mercenaries . 
 Eliott Keener as Randal Poe 
 Robert <unk> as Mr. <unk> 
 Douglas Forsythe Rye and Mike <unk> as Frick and <unk> 
 Marco St. John as Dr. Morton 
 Joe Warfield as <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After making Hard Boiled in Hong Kong , director John Woo decided to take an offer to work in the United States , where he would find himself happier as a filmmaker with a preferable work pace and working with more reasonable hours . Woo was first offered this job in the United States by Universal Pictures chairman Tom Pollock after he had seen Woo 's film The Killer . Universal was not eager to have Woo direct an entire feature and only agreed after what producer James Jacks called a " difficult period of convincing " . Universal was worried about having an Asian director on set who had limited command of English on a large scale project . They hired American director Sam Raimi to oversee the film 's production and to have him on standby if Woo was not able to fulfill his role as a director . Raimi was very excited to work with Woo as he was fan of his Hong Kong films . Raimi was also confident in Woo 's directorial skills , stating that " Woo at 70 % is still going to blow away most American action directors working at 100 % . " 
 On his arrival in the United States , Woo went through several scripts before deciding on Hard Target . Describing the scripts he received , Woo stated that " Some of them were good — some of them were very good — but the rest were simply martial @-@ arts movies and I told producers that I had no interest in doing those kinds of films anymore . I 'd done a lot of them already . " One of the scripts offered to Woo at this period was for Face / Off , which he turned down at the time , turned off by the science fiction aspect of the story . The script for Hard Target was written by Chuck Pfarrer . Director Andrew Davis was interested in the script , but ultimately turned it down . Woo read Pfarrer 's script for Hard Target appreciating that it was a " simple but powerful story , with a lot of feeling underneath . For a good action film you need a solid structure . Chuck gave me that " . Woo also stated that the story is " less John Woo " but the visual aspect would be " very John Woo " . Pfarrer wrote the script originally basing it on the film The Naked Prey . After the script did not turn out Pfarrer worked on a script influenced by the film Aliens that became the basis for his comic Virus . The final attempt was a script based on The Most Dangerous Game . Pfarrer had the story take place in New Orleans to give an explanation of Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme 's accent . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Before any director was attached to Hard Target , Universal Pictures saw the film as a potential vehicle for actor Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . Van Damme had already been a huge fan of Woo 's films and arranged to meet with him in Hong Kong where the two got along despite both Woo and Van Damme 's difficulty with their English . Woo originally wanted actor Kurt Russell for the lead role , but found Russell to be booked for two years with other film projects . On working with Van Damme , Woo stated that he was " sure of [ my own ] abilities and I know how to make an actor look good on screen , make him look like a hero . I thought I could do the same for Van Damme " . Despite early misgivings of working with Van Damme , Woo changed many action scenes in the film to make them more spectacular on finding that Van Damme was up for it . While working with Van Damme , Woo stated that Van Damme had " a pretty big ego , but he 's still professional and always tries to do a good job . " Woo had some control over the film 's casting including casting minor characters and finding a cinematographer . Actress Yancy Butler was cast as Natasha Binder in her feature film debut . The role led Butler to other starring roles in action films such as Drop Zone and Fast Money . Actor Lance Henriksen accepted the role of Emil Fouchon stating he was great fan of Woo , noting that his earlier films " were so creative , so balletic , and had this incredible philosophy in them . The violence was only a container for the philosophy " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Hard Target had 74 days of production time and was shot on location in New Orleans , including sequences shot in the French Quarter . Hard Target was put on a tight schedule by Universal that allowed only 65 days of shooting time . This put a lot of pressure on Woo . Woo was also pressured by Universal to tone @-@ down the violence and body count that they had seen in his Hong Kong films . As Woo had not mastered the English language yet , it took time for the cast and crew to get used to working with him . When Woo could not explain what he wanted with a shot to cinematographer Russell Carpenter , he would resort to simple statements such as " this will be the Sam Peckinpah shot " to get his message across to Carpenter . Actor Lance Henriksen recalled that it was a gradual process that led everyone involved to start seeing the film as a John Woo film rather than a Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme film . Producer James Jacks recalled that Woo was not " the most powerful person on the set but as far as I was concerned , he was certainly the most respected " . 
 The weapon fire on the set was considered dangerous , which led the crew to build a new bulletproof plexiglas shield that could be bolted to the camera . This shield was useful particularly for one sequence in Hard Target where Van Damme empties a magazine of ammo into the camera . These camera dollies were nicknamed by the crew as " the Woo @-@ Woo Choo @-@ Choo " . Russell Carpenter found difficulty in filming the huge gunfight scenes . Carpenter specifically noted the Mardi Gras parade warehouse by recollecting that " just the lighting for a space like that , with all those strange shapes and shadows was difficult enough , but John then added the further complication of wanting the scene shot from several angles at once — often with more than one of the cameras moving " . Producer James Jacks supported this style of filming finding it the most economical way to shoot these types of action scenes . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The film was edited by Bob Murawski on the set using a then state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art computerized editing unit that allows the user to edit the film as the movie was being shot . The film was then scored by Graeme Revell who utilized Kodo drummers from Japan . Woo was contractually obligated to release a R rating by Universal Pictures . When submitting the film to the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) , it was judged as too violent and intense for an R rating and received an NC @-@ 17 rating . Woo re @-@ edited the film six times for the MPAA as they never indicated what specific scenes they found objectionable . During this editing period , Van Damme went with his own editor to make his own edit of the film . Van Damme 's version excises whole characters to insert more scenes and close @-@ ups of his character Chance . When asked about this edit , Van Damme replied that " People pay their money to see me , not to see Lance Henriksen " . The MPAA accepted the film after Woo had made 20 cuts to the film . Scenes cut include the opening chase sequence and the Mardi Gras warehouse sequence . A non @-@ action scene that is cut from the film is a romantic scene between Chance and Natasha . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical run = = = 
 Hard Target was tentatively scheduled to open in July 1993 . Hard Target was released August 20 , 1993 in the United States making it the first film by an Asian director to be released by a Hollywood studio . 
 Hard Target did well in the box office , being the second highest grossing film release of the week at the American box office on its initial release . Hard Target also became the 49th highest grossing film in the United States in 1993 . Hard Target made domestic ticket sales of $ 32 @,@ 589 @,@ 677 ( worldwide sales were $ 74 @,@ 189 @,@ 677 ) . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Hard Target was released on Laserdisc and VHS in 1994 . In the United States , the film was the 14th highest selling laserdisc and the 46th most rented VHS film of 1994 . Hard Target was released on DVD for Region 1 on July 1 , 1998 . A Region 2 DVD of the film was released on March 20 , 2000 . The American DVD has also been released with DVD bundle packs , that include other films starring Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . These DVDs included Hard Target , as well as <unk> , Street Fighter , Lionheart , Sudden Death and The Quest . 
 A longer 116 @-@ minute copy of the film has not been released officially , but has been found as a bootleg . This copy is a poor @-@ quality videocassette dub and has a burned @-@ in time code in the corner indicating that the film was not meant for public viewing . However , the European , Japanese and Australian DVD releases restore three minutes of the violent footage missing from the Region 1 DVD ( that was cut for an R rating ) , making them the versions closest to Woo 's original cut . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Hard Target received mixed reviews on its initial release praising the film 's action scenes but noting the poor story and Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme 's acting abilities . On the film review television show Siskel & Ebert , Roger Ebert stated that Hard Target is " not very smart and it 's not very original , but it is well made on a technical level . The stunts are impressive ... as an action picture , it 's well made , but it never becomes more than competent action and I just can 't recommend it for that " . Gene Siskel also gave the film a thumbs down on the show stating that " John Woo is a good filmmaker ... Van Damme is pretty wooden ... You notice the style in the film because there is not much substance " . Janet Maslin of the New York Times wrote that " Van Damme has still not broken the habit of his own blank @-@ faced posturing , although Mr. Woo films him in the most aggrandizing style imaginable " . In Variety , Emanuel Levy wrote that Hard Target was " a briskly vigorous , occasionally brilliant actioner starring Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme . However , hampered by a B @-@ script with flat , standard characters , and subjected to repeated editing of the violent sequences to win an R rating , pic doesn 't bear the unique vision on display in Woo 's recent " The Killer " and " Hard @-@ Boiled . " Van Damme and the director 's reputation should ensure initial commercial kick on the way to solid if not spectacular box office " . Desson Thompson of The Washington Post wrote that " When Van Damme isn 't duking it out with the English language , scriptwriter Chuck Pfarrer is filling Henriksen 's mouth with villainous pseudo @-@ <unk> . Even in a second @-@ rate action picture like this , and despite Henriksen 's commendable efforts , they 're painful to listen to ... Woo 's creative presence is practically stifled . There are some flashes of his deliriously wild style — a slow @-@ motion moment here , a well @-@ chosen freeze @-@ frame there . He also introduces American audiences to his taste for unique motorcycle stunts and very , very loud car explosions . But these <unk> are disappointingly minimal " . Lance Henriksen received a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Emil Fouchon in the film . In 1997 , Woo looked back on Hard Target stating that it was " in some ways , quite a troublesome movie to make , but I 'm rather happy with the way the action scenes turned out " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film premiered in cinemas on August 20 , 1993 in wide release throughout the U.S .. During its opening weekend , the film opened in second place grossing $ 10 @,@ 106 @,@ 500 in business showing at 1 @,@ 972 locations . The film The Fugitive , came in first place during that weekend grossing $ 18 @,@ 148 @,@ 331 . Hard Target ' s revenue dropped by 50 % in its second week of release , earning $ 5 @,@ 027 @,@ 485 . For that weekend , the film fell to third place , even with an increased screening count of 1 @,@ 999 theaters . The Fugitive , remained unchallenged in first place grossing $ 14 @,@ 502 @,@ 865 in box office revenue . During its final week in release , Hard Target opened in a distant eleventh place with $ 1 @,@ 270 @,@ 945 in revenue . For that particular weekend , Striking Distance starring Bruce Willis made its debut , opening in first place with $ 8 @,@ 705 @,@ 808 in revenue . The film went on to top out domestically at $ 32 @,@ 589 @,@ 677 in total ticket sales through a 5 @-@ week theatrical run . Internationally , the film took in an additional $ 41 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 in box office business for a combined worldwide total of $ 74 @,@ 189 @,@ 677 . For 1993 as a whole , the film worldwide would cumulatively rank at a box office performance position of 23 . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Scott Adkins finished shooting a sequel to the film in December 2015 . The sequel will also star Robert Knepper , Rhona Mitra , Ann Truong , Temuera Morrison , Adam Saunders , Jamie <unk> , Peter Hardy , Troy <unk> , Sean Keenan and <unk> <unk> . 
 = Fuller Houses = 
 The Fuller Houses are two historic homes at 339 @-@ 341 and 343 @-@ 345 Broadway in Pawtucket , Rhode Island . Constructed in 1896 @-@ 1897 , the two Queen Anne @-@ styled homes were constructed as rental properties for the Fuller family and are believed to have originally been identical in construction . The two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half story houses are marked by an octagonal bay which contains the front staircase and a large two @-@ story porch projecting almost completely from the house itself . For the National Register of Historic Places nomination only a single unit was examined , but the identical unit below is believed to have undergone minimal alterations . The other house , 343 @-@ 345 Broadway , was not surveyed , but has been more seriously modified to allow for four apartment units . The Fuller Houses are architecturally significant as well @-@ preserved and well @-@ detailed Queen Anne @-@ styled apartment flats . The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Fuller Houses were constructed in 1896 @-@ 1897 for Susan E. Fuller . Fuller 's husband , Charles H. Fuller , operated a successful jewelry findings firm . The <unk> owned the houses until 1915 , and intended to use them as rental properties . The only member of the Fuller family to reside in one of the houses , specifically 341 Broadway , was Alice G. Fuller beginning in either 1911 or 1912 . The houses are positioned to be prominently viewed from their location on the east side of U.S Route 1 and from northbound traffic on Interstate 95 . Though not originally placed in a location of such prominence , the construction through the heart of Pawtucket greatly increased the visibility of these " I @-@ 95 landmarks " . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Fuller Houses are originally believed to have been constructed as identical two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half story Queen Anne @-@ styled homes with both having their gable @-@ ends facing the street . The southern flank of the building is visually broken up by a two @-@ story bay window with a gabled peak . A semi @-@ octagonal bay on the northern corner of the houses indicates the position of the front staircase . A single @-@ story porch with a shed @-@ roof overhangs the front doorways . A striking feature of the Fuller Houses is the two @-@ story circular porch on the southwest side . The porches are almost removed from the building and topped with a conical roof and ornamented with Queen Anne @-@ style spindle . The exterior walls of the houses are clapboarded and the tops of the gables have simple metal finials . 
 For the National Register of Historic Places nomination , only the interior of one of the four units was surveyed , the second floor interior of 341 Broadway . This unit is accessed from a spiral staircase leading from the first floor to the attic . The second floor landing has a short foyer before opening to two parlors . The front parlor is said to have had a water fountain which was removed , but the plumbing is said to exist within the floor . The back parlor has a Queen Anne mantel and leads to the dining room with large floor @-@ to @-@ ceiling china closets . Located on the east side of the apartment is the kitchen , pantry and rear staircase . The north part of the apartment contains two bedrooms and a bath . The NRHP nomination states that the alterations to the unit were minimal and it is likely that the same would have been done for the first floor unit . The northern Fuller House , containing 343 @-@ 345 Broadway , has been more seriously modified because it has been split into four units . In 2013 , real estate information for 343 Broadway suggests the expanse of the modifications to the house by listing the property as having 20 rooms , with 8 bedrooms and 5 baths . According to <unk> the house was sold in 2010 for $ 140 @,@ 000 and still in the four unit configuration . A three bay stuccoed garage dating from the 1920s or 1930 is used by 339 @-@ 341 Broadway . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Fuller Houses are architecturally significant as a pair of two well @-@ preserved and well @-@ detailed two @-@ family Queen Anne @-@ style apartment " flat " houses . The Queen Anne @-@ style spindle @-@ work porches are descriptive in the NRHP nomination as the most impressive examples remaining in Pawtucket . The two houses represent an important step in the development of Pawtucket 's architectural development and contribute to the city 's visual character . The Fuller Houses were added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1983 . 
 = Codex Basilensis A. N. IV . 2 = 
 Codex Basilensis A. N. IV . 2 , Minuscule 1 ( on the list of Gregory @-@ Aland ) , δ 254 ( in von Soden 's numbering ) and formerly designated by <unk> to distinguish it from minuscule <unk> ( which previously used number 1 ) is a Greek minuscule manuscript of the New Testament , usually dated palaeographically to the 12th century AD . It is written on 297 parchment leaves and contains the entire New Testament except the Book of Revelation . 
 The codex was prepared for liturgical use with marginalia ( text 's division ) , and has almost completely survived ; it was used by Erasmus for his Novum Instrumentum omne . The text of the manuscript has been cited in all critical editions of the Greek New Testament ; in this codex , the text of the Gospels is more highly esteemed by scholars than that of the remaining New Testament books . The codex is housed at the Basel University Library , with shelf number A. N. IV , 2 ( earlier B. VI . 27 ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The codex contains the entire New Testament ( except of Book of Revelation ) in the following order : the Gospels , the Acts of the Apostles and the General and Pauline epistles ( Hebrews is the last book in Paul ) . The text is written in one column per page , 38 lines per page , on 297 parchment leaves ( 18 @.@ 5 cm by 11 @.@ 5 cm ) . It was originally accompanied by miniatures , which were stolen before 1860 – 1862 ( except one before the Gospel of John , which remains ) . 
 The dimensions of the text are 13 @.@ 6 cm by 6 @.@ 8 cm . It was written on parchment continuously and without separation in elegant minuscule , furnished with breathings ( spiritus asper and spiritus lenis ) and accents , in Iota <unk> . The initial letters are gilt , and on the first page of each Gospel the full stop is a large gilt ball . 
 The text is divided according to chapters ( κεφαλαια ) whose numbers are given at the margin , with their titles ( τιτλοι ) at the top of the page . The text of the Gospels is divided according to the smaller Ammonian Sections ( in Matthew 352 , in Mark 236 with last numbered section in 16 : 12 , in Luke 340 , in John 227 ) , but references to the Eusebian Canons are absent . The Book of Acts and the epistles have the Euthalian Apparatus . 
 It contains prolegomena , <unk> ( a list of saints ) , two types of lectionary markings at the margin ( for liturgical reading ) and pictures ( e.g. a portrait of John the Evangelist and <unk> ) . The later type of liturgical notes , so called αναγνωσεις ( only for Gospels ) were added by a later hand ( in red ) . The Gospel of Matthew has 116 αναγνωσεις , the Gospel of Mark – 70 , the Gospel of Luke – 114 , and the Gospel of John – 67 αναγνωσεις . In the 15th century , the later hand added Prolegomena . 
 The codex contains a scholion questioning the authenticity of Mark 16 : 9 @-@ 20 . The Pericope Adulterae ( John 7 : 53 @-@ 8 : 11 ) is placed after John 21 : 25 . 
 = = Text = = 
 In Aland 's Profile , Kurt and Barbara Aland placed the codex 's Gospels in Category III , meaning it has historical importance , with the profile of 1191 , 802 , 601 / 2 , <unk> . This means the text of the codex agrees with the Byzantine standard text 119 times , with the original text against the Byzantine 80 times , and with both the Byzantine and original text 60 times . There are 69 independent or distinctive readings in the Gospels . While the Gospels are a representative of the Caesarean text @-@ type , the remainder of the books of the New Testament in this codex is a representative of the Byzantine text @-@ type and falls into Category V , the lowest and least important in Aland 's Profile . 
 It belongs to the textual Family 1 with manuscripts 118 , 131 and 209 . Classification in this textual family was supported by the Claremont Profile Method , but it examined with this method only in Luke 1 , Luke 10 and Luke 20 . 
 Johann Jakob Griesbach was the first who noted its similarities to the text of Origen 's commentary to the Gospel of Matthew . According to Hort , its text preceded the byzantine text @-@ type . 
 Kirsopp Lake compared the text of the codex with the text of Stephanus and showed that in the sections comprising Matthew 1 @-@ 10 ; Matthew 22 – Mark 14 ; Luke 4 @-@ 23 ; John 1 @-@ 13 and 18 , in this codex there are <unk> variants from the Textus Receptus . 
 In Matthew 27 : 16 , it has the well @-@ known textual variant " <unk> τον <unk> " ( Jesus Barabbas ) . This variant also appears in the Codex <unk> , Minuscule 700 and other members of the group f1 . 
 = = History = = 
 Textual critics and <unk> like Johann Jakob Wettstein , Constantin von Tischendorf , Frederick Henry Ambrose Scrivener and Caspar René Gregory dated the manuscript to the 10th century . Henri <unk> and Kirsopp Lake dated it to the 12th century , and Dean Burgon to the 12th or 13th century . It is dated by the Institute for New Testament Textual Research to the 12th century because the frequent occurrence of enlarged letters , rounded breathing marks , flourishes and ligatures seem to eliminate earlier dates . 
 The manuscript was presented to the monastery of the Preaching Friars by Cardinal <unk> ( 1380 – 1443 ) , general of the Dominicans . It was used by Desiderius Erasmus in the first edition of his Novum Testamentum ( 1516 ) ; as a result , some of its readings are found in the Textus Receptus . Erasmus used this codex very little , because its text was different from other manuscripts with which he was acquainted . Oecolampadius and <unk> ( Erasmus 's sub @-@ editors ) insisted that he use more readings from this codex in his third edition ; however , according to Erasmus the text of this codex was altered from the Latin manuscripts and had secondary value . Since 1559 , it has been kept at the University of Basel , along with Codex Basilensis and minuscule 2 ( GA ) . 
 Johann Albrecht <unk> used several extracts from the codex , and Wettstein was the first who thoroughly examined it . According to him , in the Gospels its text agrees with the most ancient codices and patristic quotations ; therefore , he called it number one . In 1751 he changed his high opinion ( Novum Testamentum <unk> ) , dating the codex to the 10th century . Wettstein collated this manuscript twice , with many errors ; according to Samuel Prideaux Tregelles , his collation was incorrect in more than 1 @,@ 200 readings . Leonard Hug supported Wettstein 's last opinion that the codex was <unk> . Tregelles and Roth again collated the text of this codex , and Tregelles noticed that this codex is textually close to minuscule 118 . Dean Burgon noticed that codices 131 and 209 are also textually similar . This entire group was examined by Kirsopp Lake in 1902 , and it was called " the Lake Group " ( or Family 1 ) . The text of the family was established on the basis of minuscule 1 ( collates codex 1 with <unk> 118 , 131 , and 209 ) . 
 F. H. A. Scrivener ( 1813 – 1891 ) demonstrated that at least 22 verses of Erasmian text were derived from minuscule 1 : 
 Matthew 22 : 28 ; 23 : 25 ; 27 : 52 ; 28 : 3 @.@ 4 @.@ 19 @.@ 20 
 Mark 7 : 18 @.@ 19 @.@ 26 ; 10 : 1 ; 12 : 22 ; 15 : 46 
 Luke 1 : 16 @.@ 61 ; 2 : 43 ; 9 : 1 @.@ 15 ; 11 : 49 
 John 1 : 28 ; 10 : 8 ; 13 : 20 
 The manuscript has been cited in all critical editions of the Greek New Testament and systematically cited in the third and fourth editions edited by United Bible Societies ( UBS3 and UBS4 ) and Nestle @-@ Aland 's 26th and 27th editions ( NA26 and NA27 ) . In NA27 , the codex is cited as a witness of the first order . 
 = National symbols of the Philippines = 
 The national symbols of the Philippines consist of symbols that represent Philippine traditions and ideals and convey the principles of sovereignty and national solidarity of the Filipino people . Some of these symbols are stated in the Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines , which is also known as Republic Act 8491 . The national language of the Philippines is Filipino as stated in the Constitution of the Philippines . Aside from those stated symbols in the Constitution and in Republic Act 8491 , there are only five official national symbols of the Philippines enacted through law , namely sampaguita as national flower , narra as national tree , the Philippine eagle as national bird , Philippine pearl as national gem and arnis as national martial art and sport . 
 There are symbols such as the carabao ( national animal ) , mango ( national fruit ) and <unk> ( national leaf ) that are widely known as national symbols but have no laws recognizing them as official national symbols . Even Jose Rizal , who is widely considered as a national hero , has not been declared officially as a national hero in any existing Philippine law according to historical experts . Although in 2003 , Benigno Aquino , Jr. was officially declared by the President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo as a national hero by an executive order . A National Artist of the Philippines is a rank or a title given to a Filipino citizen in recognition to the recipient 's contributions to Philippine arts and letters and they are not considered as a national symbol that represents traditions and ideals . 
 On 17 February 2014 , Bohol First District Representative Rene Relampagos filed a bill at the Philippine House of Representatives that seeks to declare or re @-@ declare and to recognize a number of national symbols . The proposed bill , House Bill 3926 or the " Philippine National Symbols Act of 2014 " , aims also to encourage nationalism and unity ; to guarantee respect , preservation and promotion of national symbols ; and to correct the " unofficial " status of the symbols . Among the proposed national symbols listed in the measure are Jose Rizal as the only historical Filipino to be recognized as national hero , adobo as national food and jeepney as national vehicle . It also includes the previous ten official national symbols . The bill is still pending to become a law and once the bill turned into law , all the symbols stated in the bill would be official national symbols of the Philippines . 
 = = Development of the symbols = = 
 Republic Act 8491 , known also as Flag and Heraldic Code of the Philippines , stipulates the code for national flag , anthem , motto , coat @-@ of @-@ arms and other heraldic items and devices of the Philippines . According to Article XIV Section 6 of the Constitution of the Philippines , the national language of the Philippines is Filipino . Apart from RA 8491 and the Constitution , the Philippines has only five official national symbols enacted either through a proclamation by the executive department or through a Republic Act by the legislative department , namely sampaguita , narra , the Philippine eagle , the Philippine pearl and arnis . In 1934 , during the Commonwealth era , Governor @-@ General Frank Murphy declared sampaguita and narra as national flower and national tree , respectively , through Proclamation No. 652 . Philippine President Fidel Ramos proclaimed the Philippine eagle as the national bird in 1995 through Proclamation No. 615 . Ramos also declared the South Sea Pearl or Philippine Pearl as the national gem in 1996 through Proclamation No. 905 . In 2009 , President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo declared arnis as the national sport and martial art through Republic Act <unk> . 
 In February 2013 , the Philippine Senate passed a bill declaring waling @-@ waling ( Vanda <unk> ) as the national flower alongside <unk> . A similar bill in the House of Representatives had already been passed in 2012 . Normally , the bill would become law after being signed by the President . However , it was vetoed by President Benigno Aquino III . The veto did not grant the waling @-@ waling as the second national flower due to the confusion that it would create . 
 A year later , on 17 February 2014 , Representative Rene Relampagos , a congressman from the First District of Bohol , proposed a measure at the Philippine House of Representatives that seeks to declare or re @-@ declare and to recognize a number of national symbols . The bill dubbed as House Bill 3926 or the " Philippine National Symbols Act of 2014 " , aims also to encourage nationalism and unity ; to guarantee respect , preservation and promotion of national symbols ; and to correct the " unofficial " status of the symbols . It lists 26 symbols including the previous ten official national symbols . 
 In February 2016 , the House of Representatives approved on final reading the House Bill <unk> , which declares the ancient boat <unk> at the national boat of the Philippines . The bill is not yet a law , therefore , the symbol is not yet official . For the <unk> to become a national boat , there should be a senate concurrence and the President of the Philippines must sign the bill . 
 = = = Making a national symbol official = = = 
 A Philippine national symbol will be considered official once it is declared through a law or a proclamation . National symbols such as the <unk> , carabao , <unk> ( milkfish ) , and <unk> ( footstool palm ) that are circulating through various sources have no official status and have not established by law . According to Nestor Castro , a Filipino cultural anthropologist , most of these unofficial symbols were passed on as tradition in schools every start of the school year when students were asked to buy posters containing the supposed national symbols . While official national symbols are declared through law , Castro and National Historical Commission of the Philippines ( <unk> ) Section Chief Teodoro <unk> considered that the public must be consulted first before declaration of national symbol . 
 = = = Filipinos as national symbol = = = 
 According to the <unk> Section Chief Teodoro <unk> , and Filipino historian Ambeth Ocampo , there is no Filipino historical figure officially declared national hero through law or executive order . Although , there were laws and proclamations honoring Filipino heroes . In the Rizal Law principally sponsored by Claro M. Recto and enacted in 1956 , Jose Rizal is mentioned as a national hero in the " whereas " clause of the law . Although , " whereas " clauses function as a preamble or introduction and it is not part of the provisions . On 15 November 1995 , the Technical Committee of the National Heroes Committee , created through Executive Order No. 5 by former President Fidel Ramos , recommended nine Filipino historical figures to be National Heroes : Jose Rizal , Andres Bonifacio , Emilio Aguinaldo , Apolinario Mabini , Marcelo H. del Pilar , Sultan <unk> <unk> , Juan Luna , <unk> Aquino , and Gabriela Silang . No action has been taken for these recommended National Heroes until it was revisited in one of the proceedings of the 14th Congress in 2009 . 
 On 3 August 2009 , shortly after the death of former President Corazon Aquino , widow of Benigno Aquino , Jr . , legislative measures have been filed calling for her official recognition as a national hero . Congresswoman <unk> Vinzons @-@ Chato filed a house resolution declaring Corazon Aquino a national hero . Although , a week after she filed the resolution , she realized that there is no Filipino historical figure declared through law . On 10 August 2009 , she cited on her privilege speech in Congress the nine Filipino heroes recommended by National Heroes Committee in 1995 . She then urge Congress to sign the resolutions declaring the nine Filipinos recommended by the National Heroes Committee plus Benigno Aquino , Jr. and Corazon Aquino as national heroes . Congressman Salvador Escudero <unk> Vinzons @-@ Chato 's speech and stated that heroes are made in the hearts and minds of people and not through legislation . After the interpellation , it was moved by House of Representatives to refer the privilege speech of Vinzons @-@ Chato to the Committee of Basic Education and Culture . 
 In 2013 , Bayan Muna Congressmen Neri <unk> and Carlos <unk> Zarate filed House Bill <unk> aiming to declare Andres Bonifacio as National Hero due to his actual participation in the Philippine Revolution against Spain . Another measure filed by Congressman Rene Relampagos from Bohol in February 2014 seeks to declare Jose Rizal as the sole Filipino national hero . According to the bill , he was a nationalist and well known for his Philippine reforms advocacy during the Spanish colonial era . 
 Filipinos awarded with the rank or title National Artist of the Philippines are not considered to be national symbols because the title is given in recognition to the recipient 's contributions to Philippine arts and letters and not as a symbol that represents traditions and ideals and convey the principles of sovereignty and national solidarity . 
 Despite declaration from historical experts that there is no historical person declared as a national hero , in 2003 , an executive order by then President Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo officially declared <unk> Aquino Jr. as one of the national heroes . Due to laws declaring the heroism of Rizal and Bonifacio , their recognition as National Heroes is considered implied . 
 = = List of national symbols = = 
 = = = Official = = = 
 Here are list of national symbols excluding national heroes that were enacted through Philippine law . 
 Notes 
 ... 
 1 The description of the Philippines ' coat of arms can be found under section 14 of Executive Order No. 292 ( Book I / Chapter 4 ) , which is also known as the Administrative Code of 1987 . 
 = = = Unofficial = = = 
 Here are the lists of national symbols that have no official status . 
 = = = = From failed and proposed laws = = = = 
 The following individuals were recommended by the Technical Committee of the National Heroes Committee as national heroes : 
 Emilio Aguinaldo 
 <unk> Aquino 
 Andrés Bonifacio 
 Marcelo H. del Pilar 
 Sultan <unk> <unk> 
 Juan Luna 
 Apolinario Mabini 
 José Rizal 
 Gabriela Silang 
 The review by the Technical Committee of National Heroes was revisited during the 14th Congress at the House of Representatives . In a resolution , a congresswoman added the following two historical figures to the nine heroes declared by the National Heroes Committee , making the total to eleven national heroes . This was referred to a Congressional Committee and still must be acted upon and passed into law to make it official . 
 In August 2009 , a bill has been filed calling for Corazon Aquino 's official recognition as a national hero . In 2003 , Benigno Aquino Jr . , was already officially declared as one of the national heroes by then President Gloria Arroyo through an executive order . 
 <unk> @-@ waling as national flower ; passed by Congress in 2013 but was vetoed by the President Benigno Aquino III . 
 The following are the list of proposed national symbols ( excluding the 10 official national symbols ) as per House Bill 3926 as proposed by Congressman Rene <unk> as national food 
 <unk> as national leaf 
 <unk> as national slippers 
 <unk> as national fish 
 <unk> and Baro 't saya as national costume 
 " Bayan Ko " as national song 
 Carabao as national animal 
 <unk> as national dance 
 Jeepney as national vehicle 
 Jose Rizal as national hero 
 Malacañang Palace as national seat of government 
 Mango as national fruit 
 Manila as national capital 
 National Seal ( essentially modified version of the coat of arms of the Philippines ) 
 <unk> hut ( <unk> <unk> ) as national house 
 Philippine peso as national currency 
 The House of Representatives has approved on third and final reading of House Bill <unk> declaring the <unk> as the national boat . 
 = = = = From various sources = = = = 
 Juan de la Cruz - as national personification ( symbolizing the Filipino people ) 
 <unk> and <unk> as national food 
 <unk> as national sport 
 <unk> as national dance 
 = Connie Talbot = 
 Connie Talbot ( born 20 November 2000 ) is an English child singer from Streetly , West Midlands . She rose to fame in 2007 when she reached the final of the first series of Britain 's Got Talent . Talbot signed with Rainbow Recording Company and released her debut album Over the Rainbow in the UK on 26 November 2007 . The album was re @-@ released 18 June 2008 with a new track listing , and the first single from the album , a cover of Bob Marley 's " Three Little Birds " , was released on 10 June . 
 Despite its negative critical reception , Over the Rainbow has sold over 250 @,@ 000 copies worldwide and reached number one in three countries . Since the initial album release , Talbot has performed publicly and on television in Europe , the US and across Asia , where her music had gained recognition through YouTube . Her second album , Connie Talbot 's Christmas Album , was released on 24 November 2008 , her third , Holiday Magic , was released on 20 October 2009 and her fourth , Beautiful World , was released on 26 November 2012 . While pursuing her musical career , Talbot goes to The Streetly Academy , and lives in Streetly with her family . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Britain 's Got Talent and Sony BMG = = = 
 Talbot initially auditioned for the first series of television reality show Britain 's Got Talent for fun , but her confidence increased when Simon Cowell , whom she is said to have idolised , described her as " pure magic " and said that he would make her earn " £ 1 million @-@ plus this year " . The judges expected a " joke " performance as she had never taken singing lessons , but Talbot 's initial performance received international press coverage . She reached the final round after winning her semi @-@ final with a live performance of " Ben " by Michael Jackson . On the night of the final , she sang The Wizard of Oz 's " Over the Rainbow " , but lost to Paul Potts as a result of the call @-@ in vote . Talbot and Potts had been joint favourites to win the series . 
 According to journalist and Britain 's Got Talent judge Piers Morgan , Talbot 's performances resulted in many children , including Faryl Smith , auditioning for the second series of the show . After his victory , series 2 winner George Sampson spoke of his participation in the first series , where he was knocked out before the live shows , saying " I don 't think I had any shot of winning last year ... When you look at the standard of Paul Potts and Connie Talbot . Paul Potts is out of this league , and Connie is out of this league – I wasn 't good enough . " Talbot voted for Sampson , saying " I liked his dancing – he was good on the lamppost " . 
 Cowell had preliminary agreed to sign Talbot with his own record label , Sony BMG . After recording two songs in London with Talbot ( " Over the Rainbow " and " Smile " ) , the label pulled out of the deal . Talbot 's mother , Sharon , said she was told that her daughter " ... was too young to be their sort of artist " , adding " We have been told to look for a company which looks after children . " In a statement , the label said " there was some deliberation over the possibility of recording with Connie ... However , the decision not to proceed was made with the best intentions for Connie , taking into consideration her age and that it would not be right to do so at this time . " Cowell himself said that " when the time is right , [ he would ] be delighted to see if [ they could ] make it work " . The Talbot family decided to search for another label , saying " while [ Talbot ] loves what she 's doing it would be cruel to stop her . Fame and money will never matter . " 
 = = = Over the Rainbow = = = 
 In October 2007 Talbot signed with the Rainbow Recording Company for a six @-@ figure deal . Rainbow Recording Company , an offshoot of record label Rhythm Riders made specifically for Talbot , was due to release Talbot 's first album on 26 November 2007 . It was later reported that the album was named Over the Rainbow , and the first single , " Over the Rainbow " / " White Christmas " , would be released on 3 December 2007 . Experts predicted that she had a good chance of getting the Christmas number one , but the single was cancelled in favour of an album @-@ first release . Before the album was released , there was much speculation about Talbot and the album , with music experts describing her as potentially being " the next Charlotte Church " . 
 The team behind the album consisted of John Arnison , who also managed Gabrielle and Billy Ocean , and Marc Marot , former managing director of Island Records . It was produced and mixed by Simon Hill and Rob May . Arnison revealed that he and his team " are not going to give [ Talbot ] singing lessons – we don 't need to " , and said that when he met Talbot , he was " blown away " . A schedule was worked out allowing Talbot to continue with her normal school activities while recording the album in her aunt Vicky 's spare bedroom , which her mother described as " a better solution [ than Sony BMG offered ] which has not robbed her of her childhood " . Although Arnison claimed he did not " want to put her through the promotional grind which most artists go through because she is too young " , plans were made for an appearance on daytime television programme This Morning , as well as an appearance on Children in Need on 16 November 2007 . The album was released on 26 November 2007 and Talbot 's mother said that " All the family is really excited , but Connie is quite blase about it . " The album was certified gold in early December , with Talbot being presented a gold disc by Phillip Schofield on This Morning . Initially , 50 @,@ 000 copies of the album were pressed , but an additional 120 @,@ 000 had to be made after the album sold out in days . 
 In late 2007 , public appearances by Talbot included headlining the Great Bridge Christmas and Winter Festival , which local police threatened to cancel unless crowds clamouring to reach the tent in which Talbot was performing could be brought under control . At the event , on 7 December 2007 , Talbot said " I love it here , it 's brilliant , really fun " , but had to be ushered off @-@ stage by the police . Talbot performed publicly in Walsall 's HMV store , and in Birmingham 's Centenary Square . TV appearances included GMTV and Channel 5 news , both on 26 November 2007 . According to her mother , Talbot has received offers for film roles . Sharon said " [ Talbot ] ' s been sent a script , I haven 't had a good look at it yet but it 's really exciting ... Connie 's a singer , not an actress , so we 'll see what happens . It 's completely up to her whether or not she wants to do it . I can 't believe it , though . " 
 Sharon Mawer of Allmusic praised Over the Rainbow by saying " She can sing , for a seven @-@ year old , and most of the notes ( if not all of them ) are in the right order and sung to the right pitch ; the timing is fine too " . However , she criticised the album , saying " there 's no feeling , no emotion , no realisation of what each song is about ; they 're just pretty little songs " , giving the album 2 / 5 . Nick Levine , of Digital Spy , said in a review of the album that Talbot had a " sweet , pure voice " , but that there is " no nuance or depth to her performance " . However , he said that " There 's something inherently wrong about awarding a star rating to a seven @-@ year @-@ old " , and that " the decidedly adult concept of musical merit should have nothing to do with [ her music ] " , awarding the album 2 / 5 . 
 The album was rereleased on 16 June 2008 , but was available for pre @-@ order in May , with three new tracks to replace its Christmas @-@ themed songs . The first single from the album , " Three Little Birds " , was released in June 2008 , and a video for the song was shot in Jamaica . In April and May 2008 , Talbot toured Asia to promote Over the Rainbow . Asian press attributed her success to her videos on YouTube , with the <unk> mentioning that her most viewed video had been watched over 14 million times , and The Straits Times saying that videos of Talbot 's performances have been watched over 30 million times . The tour made stops in South Korea , Taiwan , Hong Kong and Singapore , and Talbot and her family returned to England in late May . Following the tour , it was reported that the album had reached number one on the charts in Taiwan , South Korea and Hong Kong , as well as reaching number three in Singapore . After the tour , Talbot travelled to Poland , where she performed on television . 
 It was also revealed that Over the Rainbow was due for release in America in September , resulting in attention from American press sources including Fox Business Network and MarketWatch . The US version was eventually released on 14 October , with Talbot appearing on American television shows including The Ellen DeGeneres Show to publicise the release . 
 In August 2008 , it was announced that Talbot had signed a contract with Data Design Interactive for production of a video game on the Wii console . The game was to feature 15 songs from Over the Rainbow , allowing players to sing along with a computer @-@ generated image of Talbot or against other players in a karaoke mode . Talbot rerecorded the album for the game . The game was scheduled for release in the first quarter of 2009 , and is called Connie Talbot : Over the Rainbow . The game has never been released , citing copyright issues on the songs used for it . 
 = = = Christmas Album and Holiday Magic = = = 
 In November 2008 , it was announced that Talbot had produced a series of new songs for an album . Recorded in her bedroom studio , Connie Talbot 's Christmas Album was released on 24 November . It is a Christmas themed album , featuring , according to Talbot 's official website , " a mix of classics and modern Christmas tunes " . News was also released of a one @-@ off Christmas special to be shown on ITV1 in the days leading up to Christmas , featuring footage of Talbot 's journey to America and a " secret concert " at her primary school . The documentary , Christmas with Connie , was shown on ITV Central on 18 December . Talbot appeared at Walsall 's HMV branch shortly after the release of her Christmas Album to sign copies and meet fans . She then embarked on a promotional tour making stops around the world , which included a performance at Ewha Womans University in Korea , and a performance on the A Heart for Children television charity gala in Berlin , Germany . She returned home in mid December , to have " a quiet family Christmas " . 
 Connie Talbot 's Christmas Album was difficult to obtain in Britain after the distributor , Pinnacle Entertainment , went into administration . Talbot 's mother , Sharon , was quoted as saying " We don 't really know what 's going to happen at the moment ... We think they 'll probably wait and promote the album later this year . It 's a shame , but they can still get the album in Asia and the US . " Reviewing the album for <unk> magazine , Ruth Harrison gave it 4 / 5 , saying that Talbot has " a great voice when it comes to swing , but lets us down in parts " . 
 In April 2009 , Talbot again travelled to the US to publicise her new single , a cover of " I Will Always Love You " . The single was released in the US on 7 April , along with a newly recorded " You Raise Me Up " . Talbot then traveled to the US on 30 April , and returned on 2 May . Appearances included a performance on Good Day New York on Fox Broadcasting Company 's WNYW . 
 Talbot 's third album , Connie Talbot 's Holiday Magic , was released on 20 October 2009 in the United States and on 30 November 2009 in the United Kingdom . The United States album is dedicated to the Toys for Tots campaign , of which Talbot has been named the child ambassador . In a statement , Bill Grein , Vice @-@ President of the Marine Toys for Tots Foundation , <unk> 
 The Marine Toys for Tots Foundation is extremely proud and excited to have Connie as our youngest ambassador ever ... She is the perfect person to inform the public of the millions of less fortunate children who may be overlooked this Christmas holiday season , unless people step up to donate a toy or make a cash contribution . Her angelic looks and voice will remind everyone of the innocence of children . And they all deserve to experience the magic of the holiday season ! I hope she sells lots of CDs and raises a lot of money and awareness for our children . 
 Along with Talbot 's third album , a television special , entitled Holiday Magic , was produced by WVIA . Holiday Magic featured performances of all of the songs from Connie Talbot 's Holiday Magic , and was available to all PBS stations shown in November and December 2009 . A 17 @-@ track DVD of the special , including two additional songs , " What a Wonderful World " and " Over the Rainbow " , was released for sale . 
 = = = 2010 – 2015 = = = 
 Talbot opened a special concert celebrating South Korea 's hosting of the G20 summit of world leaders in 2010 . Talbot performed for her largest ever audience when she performed on Chinese state television during the Chinese new @-@ year in 2011 . Reporting the event , the Daily Mail 's Kathryn Knight observed that Talbot has " had more than 300 million hits on YouTube and in the Far East , in particular , she 's something of an icon . Japan , Taiwan , Korea , China , Brazil , Mexico and the U.S. — you name it , Connie 's a star there . In fact Connie is in huge demand across the globe – everywhere , that is , apart from her native Britain . " Viewing figures for the event were estimated to be around 400 million . 
 During this time , Talbot continued to upload videos of her performances onto YouTube . Maggie Coughlan , of <unk> , praised her covers of Katy Perry 's " Firework " and Bruno Mars 's " Grenade " , but was most impressed by her cover of Adele 's " Someone Like You " , which she said was performed " with such grace that she makes the entire performance look effortless " . The video was also picked up by <unk> After the death of Whitney Houston , Talbot posted a cover version of " Run to You " as a tribute to Houston . The video received attention from around the world . 
 On 28 November 2011 , Talbot released " Beautiful World " as a single on iTunes . The song was written by Talbot when she was seven . A demo of the track was placed on YouTube , and became the 39th most watched video in the world on the day it was uploaded . 
 In March 2012 , Talbot performed with and led Young Voices , a choir made up of around 7000 primary school children , at the O2 Arena for four nights . The choir broke the world @-@ record for being the largest backing choir for a lead vocalist . This Guinness world record follows her accolades as the youngest artist to make the UK album charts and the youngest to release a gold @-@ selling record . Others involved in the event included Randolph Matthews and The High Kings . Performances took place elsewhere in the United Kingdom , including Manchester and <unk> and were in aid of CLIC Sargent , a children 's cancer charity . 
 Talbot 's single , " Sail Away " , was written and produced by Robbie Nevil and released independently by Group 3 Management , Inc in May 2012 . 
 In June 2012 , she performed three private concerts in Hong Kong and then it was back in L.A. to begin recording demos with the multi @-@ platinum songwriter / producer and Grammy winner , Toby Gad . Talbot wrote a song called " Building Bridges " , which she has performed live a number of times but is yet to be released commercially . 
 In September 2012 , Talbot signed a recording agreement with Hong Kong @-@ based Evolution Limited and went into the studio with Grammy @-@ winning producer Kipper together with Phil Taylor , to record her next album . Her fourth album , Beautiful World , containing 13 tracks , was released in Asia on 26 November 2012 on Evolution 's <unk> label . The title track being a rerecorded version of her self @-@ penned track " Beautiful World " . 
 Talbot performed in Hong Kong , Taiwan , the Philippines and Indonesia for her Beautiful World tour in December 2012 . Her debut headline concert appearance was on 21 December at the Taiwan International Convention Centre ( <unk> ) in front of an audience of 1800 . This was followed by two headline concerts at <unk> , Hong Kong . She also made guest appearances in several TV shows , namely Eat Bulaga ! . 
 Talbot toured with the Young Voices choir for a second year in early 2013 , performing at venues across the UK . The African Children 's Choir also took part in these events . 
 Talbot 's song " Let 's Get Along " , written by Kipper , was featured on ONE Campaign 's <unk> Spotify album in July 2013 . Talbot is also featured in the song " Building Bridges " , which also made the <unk> album , together with Jordan Jansen . 
 Talbot 's vocals are featured in the theme song of the video game Rain , released during the beginning of October 2013 . 
 In October 2013 , Talbot appeared as a special guest at the African Children 's Choir concert in Walsall , UK . It was announced that Talbot would be an ambassador for the African Children 's Choir and have a school named after her . 
 In late April 2014 , Connie performed a couple of concerts in South Korea ( Osan and Seoul ) . These concerts , performed shortly after the horrendous <unk> ferry tragedy , were delivered with much personal consideration by Connie to make sure that all song choices were appropriate . Connie performed with yellow ribbons to show her respect for the families of the victims . The proceeds from at least one of the concerts were donated to the fundraising efforts in support of the families of the victims . 
 On 28 July 2014 , a DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released of Talbot ’ s concerts in Hong Kong and Taiwan during her Beautiful World tour in 2012 . It features live performances of the songs from the Beautiful World album , and two additional songs , " I Will Always Love You " and " Over the Rainbow " . 
 On 7 November 2014 , Talbot released an EP called " Gravity " . She has released three of the five songs from the album , Mr. Blue Sky , Gravity and Inner Beauty from late 2014 to early 2015 . 
 = = = Matters To Me ( 2016 ) = = = 
 February 19 , 2016 , the release of digital single Shut Up ( Move On ) was announced . The single is taken from Connie Talbot 's new studio album Matters To Me , a 13 track album with a bonus track available only on iTunes . The album was released on March 25 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Connie lives in Streetly , in the West Midlands with her mother , Sharon , her father Gavin , her older brother Josh , and her older sister Mollie . When Connie was little , she spent much time with her grandmother Violet , watching The Wizard of Oz . It was with Violet that Connie first sang . Violet died in 2006 , before Connie became internationally known , and Connie sang at her funeral . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 = = = Video albums = = = 
 = = = Extended plays = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 = = = Music videos = = = 
 = William Beebe = 
 William Beebe ( / <unk> / born Charles William Beebe ; July 29 , 1877 – June 4 , 1962 ) was an American naturalist , ornithologist , marine biologist , entomologist , explorer , and author . He is remembered for the numerous expeditions he conducted for the New York Zoological Society , his deep dives in the Bathysphere , and his prolific scientific writing for both academic and popular audiences . 
 Born in Brooklyn , New York and raised in East Orange , New Jersey , Beebe left college before obtaining a degree in order to work at the then newly opened New York Zoological Park , where he was given the duty of caring for the zoo 's birds . He quickly distinguished himself in his work for the zoo , first with his skill in designing habitats for its bird population , and soon also with a series of research expeditions of increasing length , including an expedition around the world to document the world 's pheasants . These expeditions formed the basis for a large quantity of writing for both popular and academic audiences , including an account of his pheasant expedition titled A Monograph of the Pheasants and published in four volumes from 1918 to 1922 . In recognition of the research conducted on his expeditions , he was granted honorary doctorates from Tufts and Colgate University . 
 During the course of his expeditions Beebe gradually developed an interest in marine biology , ultimately leading to his 1930s dives in the Bathysphere off the coast of Bermuda , along with the Bathysphere 's inventor Otis Barton . These dives represented the first time a biologist observed deep @-@ sea animals in their native environment , and set several successive records for the deepest dive ever performed by a human , the deepest of which stood until it was broken by Barton 15 years later . Following his Bathysphere dives , Beebe returned to the tropics and began to focus his study on the behavior of insects . In 1949 , he founded a tropical research station in Trinidad which he named Simla , and which remains in operation as part of the Asa Wright Nature Centre . Beebe 's research at Simla continued until his death from pneumonia in 1962 at the age of 84 . 
 William Beebe is regarded as one of the founders of the field of ecology , as well as one of the early 20th century 's major advocates of conservation . He is also remembered for several theories he proposed about avian evolution which are now regarded as having been ahead of their time , particularly his 1915 hypothesis that the evolution of bird flight passed through a four @-@ winged or " Tetrapteryx " stage , which has been supported by the 2003 discovery of Microraptor gui . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Charles William Beebe was born in Brooklyn , New York , son of the newspaper executive Charles Beebe . Although some sources have described him as an only child , he had a younger brother named John who died in infancy . Early in his life , his family moved to East Orange , New Jersey , where he began to acquire both his fascination with the natural world and his tendency to record everything he saw . The American Museum of Natural History , which opened the year that Beebe was born , fostered Beebe 's love of nature and was an early influence on him . 
 In September 1891 , Beebe began attending East Orange High School . Although Beebe did not formally drop his first name " Charles " until 1915 , before attending high school he was already commonly known as " William Beebe " , as he would be known from this point onward . During his high school years Beebe developed an interest in collecting animals , particularly after receiving his first gun at the age of sixteen , and trained himself in taxidermy in order to preserve them . When he was unable to collect a specimen for himself , he often obtained it from a supply house known as <unk> 's , or by trading with other collectors . Beebe 's first article was published while he was still in high school , a description of a bird called a brown creeper , which appeared in the January 1895 issue of the magazine Harper 's Young People . 
 In 1896 , Beebe was accepted with advanced placement to Columbia University . While attending university , Beebe frequently split his time between the university and the American Museum of Natural history , many of whose researchers were also professors at Columbia . At Columbia he studied under Henry Fairfield Osborn , and developed a close relationship with him which would endure until Osborn 's death in 1935 . 
 While attending Columbia , Beebe persuaded his professors to sponsor him and several fellow students taking research trips to Nova Scotia , where he continued his hobby of collecting , as well as attempting to photograph difficult @-@ to @-@ observe scenes of birds and other animals . Several of Beebe 's photographs from these expeditions were purchased by Columbia professors to use as slides during their lectures . During these trips Beebe also developed an interest in dredging , the practice of using nets to haul up animals that lived deep underwater , and attempting to study them before they died or disintegrated . Beebe never applied to receive a degree from Columbia , although years later he was granted honorary doctorates from both Tufts and Colgate University . 
 = = = Employment at the Bronx Zoo = = = 
 In November 1897 , Frank Chapman sponsored Beebe to become an associate member of the American Ornithologists ' Union , and the following month Beebe gave his first professional lecture on ornithology to a society called Uncle Clarence 's Bergen Point Culture Club . In 1899 , although he had completed all of the required courses for a degree in science from Columbia except for mathematics , he decided to forgo his studies in favor of an invitation from Osborn to work at the New York Zoological Park which was about to open . Several factors contributed to this decision , including both excitement at being part of the zoo , and the sense that his studies were putting too much of a strain on his family 's finances . 
 Osborn appointed Beebe to the position of assistant curator of ornithology . As assistant curator , one of his principal jobs was to breed and rear the zoo 's birds in order to sustain their population . Beebe placed much importance on the birds being given as much space as possible , and proposed the building of a " flying cage " the size of a football field . This was eventually built , although at less than half the size that Beebe had originally requested . While Beebe 's flying cage was criticized as being based on an inaccurate understanding of birds ' needs , it ultimately proved very successful . 
 In 1901 , Beebe returned to Nova Scotia on his first expedition for the zoo , with the goal of collecting marine animals by searching tide pools and with additional dredging . The following year he was promoted from assistant curator to the rank of full curator , a post he held until 1918 . He then went on to serve as an honorary curator from 1919 to 1962 . 
 On August 6 , 1902 , Beebe was married to Mary Blair Rice , better known by her pen name Blair Niles . Blair subsequently accompanied Beebe on several of his expeditions , and as a writer herself , frequently assisted Beebe with his own writing . Beebe and Blair regarded their honeymoon , another trip to Nova Scotia , as a further opportunity for collecting . 
 The following February , Beebe and Blair went on an expedition to the Florida Keys , because Beebe was suffering from a throat infection and the zoo believed that the warm climate would be beneficial to his health . This expedition was Beebe 's introduction to the tropics , with which he developed a long @-@ standing fascination . In July 1903 , at the request of a lawyer named Louis Whealton whom the zoo 's director William Temple Hornaday regarded as a potential donor to the zoo , Beebe and Blair went on another expedition to Virginia 's Barrier Islands . Although it was intended as an expedition for the zoo , Beebe described it as " our third honeymoon this year " . 
 By the end of 1903 , at the age of 26 , Beebe had published more than thirty @-@ four articles and photographs in the past year . For his contributions to science , he was elected a fellow in the American Association for the Advancement of Science . 
 = = = Early exploration and expeditions = = = 
 In December 1903 , in an effort to avert another bout of Beebe 's throat ailment , Hornaday sent him on an expedition to Mexico which would last until the following April . Since Mexico was still largely unstable at this point , he and Blair traveled on horseback and lived mostly in tents , and both carried revolvers for self @-@ protection . Although the purpose of the expedition was to discover , identify and collect Mexico 's birds , it has also been described as yet another honeymoon between him and Blair . Beebe 's first book , titled Two Bird Lovers in Mexico , was an account of this expedition . The last chapter was written by Blair , and was an explanation of how to plan and execute a vacation in the wilderness . The book was enthusiastically well received . 
 Beebe 's second book , The Bird , Its Form and Function , was published in 1906 . This book was a reworking of a manuscript that Beebe had submitted to Henry Holt in 1902 , but which Holt had asked him to expand into a major work on birds . In its finished form it represented a new kind of nature writing in that , although it presented technical information about bird biology and evolution , it did so in a way meant to be accessible to a general audience . It also represented an important turning point for Beebe , because in contrast to his youthful fascination with adding animals to his collection , in this book he was beginning to emphasize the importance of wildlife conservation . Regarding the killing of animals for the sole purpose of collecting , the book states : 
 Although Beebe continued to shoot animals when it was necessary for the purpose of examining them scientifically , he no longer regarded adding to a collection as a valid reason to take a life . In 1906 Beebe presented his own collection , which had grown to 990 specimens during his earlier years as a collector , as a gift to the zoo for educational and research purposes . For this gift he was made a life member of the New York Zoological Society . The same year , he was also elected a fellow of the New York Academy of Sciences . 
 In 1907 , the journal Zoologica was founded by Osborn and Hornaday specifically as a place for Beebe to publish his research . The first issue of the journal contained twenty papers , ten of which were written by Beebe , and two more of which were jointly written by him and Lee Saunders Crandall , the zoo 's assistant curator of birds . The following year Beebe received a promotion from the Zoological Society , placing him on equal footing with the research scientists at the Museum of Natural History . This promotion explicitly granted him two months off each year , for the purpose of further research expeditions . The first expedition conducted under his new privileges , beginning in February 1908 , took him to Trinidad and Venezuela to research birds and insects . During this expedition Beebe captured 40 live birds for the zoo , belonging to 14 different species . 
 At this point in his life , Beebe was forming a close friendship with then @-@ president Theodore Roosevelt , which would last until Roosevelt 's death in 1919 . Beebe admired Roosevelt 's skill as a field naturalist as well as his advocacy of conservation , and Roosevelt 's fame made his support highly valuable in Beebe 's scientific endeavors . Roosevelt in turn admired Beebe 's writing and his respect for the natural world . Roosevelt frequently provided praise for Beebe 's books , and went on to write introductions to Beebe 's books Tropical Wild Life and Jungle Peace . 
 In February 1909 , Beebe and Blair traveled to British Guiana , in the hope that with Roosevelt 's support , it might be possible to establish a permanent field research station there . Another goal of this expedition was to find and capture a hoatzin , a bird whose clawed wings caused it to be considered an important link in the evolution of birds from reptiles . Beebe made extensive documentation of hoatzin behavior through field glasses , but their plans to capture one were foiled when they had to return home early due to Blair breaking her wrist . Despite their failure to obtain their most sought @-@ after prize , the expedition still returned with 280 live birds of 51 species , 33 of which were new to the zoo , although several of these died or escaped during the long trip back to New York . Beebe summarized this expedition in his book Our Search for a Wilderness , which was enthusiastically well reviewed . 
 = = = The pheasant expedition = = = 
 In December 1909 , businessman and philanthropist Anthony R. Kuser proposed to the zoo that Beebe be allowed to go on a voyage around the world for the purpose of documenting the world 's pheasants , which would be financed by Kuser . Hornaday strongly objected to this proposal , describing Kuser as an " evil genius " who was attempting to steal Beebe away from his duties at the zoo . However , the zoo ultimately decided in Kuser 's favor , partly because the scientific papers produced by Beebe 's trip to Guiana had been beneficial to the zoo 's reputation . Hornaday appointed Crandall as the zoo 's acting curator of birds , giving him the duty of caring for its birds in Beebe 's absence . Beebe and Blair left for their expedition accompanied by Robert Bruce Horsfall , whose job would be to provide illustrations of the birds for the book that would hopefully result from this expedition . 
 After crossing the Atlantic Ocean on the RMS Lusitania to London , where they gathered the supplies they would need for their expedition , Beebe and his team traveled across the Mediterranean Sea to Egypt , through the Suez Canal , and across the Indian Ocean to Ceylon , where they began their task of documenting the native wildfowl . From Ceylon they traveled to Calcutta , with the goal of capturing the species of pheasants which live only in the Himalayas . By this point Beebe was beginning to be in conflict with Horsfall , who was unaccustomed to such expeditions . After Beebe had finished his documentation in the eastern part of the range , Horsfall refused to accompany Beebe in the western part of the range , causing Beebe to leave him in the town of <unk> and continue his work in the Western Himalayas without him . Horsfall rejoined them in Calcutta , from which they sailed to Indonesia . The next ship took them to Singapore , where Beebe established a base of operations for the next stage of his expedition . 
 The expedition 's next destination was Sarawak , on the island of Borneo . By the time they left Sarawak , the conflict between Beebe and Horsfall had grown to such a degree that Beebe decided Horsfall was endangering the expedition and must be sent home . In response to Beebe 's dismissal , Horsfall retorted that he had been ill @-@ treated by Beebe from the beginning of the expedition , and that his subsequent actions had been for the express purpose of revenge . Continuing without Horsfall , Beebe and Blair traveled to Batavia in Java , to the island of Madura just to the north , and to Belitung between Borneo and Sumatra . 
 Finished in Java , Beebe and his crew sailed north from Singapore to Kuala Lumpur to begin exploring Malaya . After Malaya , the next portion of their expedition took them to Burma , where they arrived in Rangoon and traveled by rail to Myitkyina . In Burma Beebe succumbed temporarily to a bout of depression , and it was several days before he was able to resume working or continue the expedition . He attributed his recovery to the pile of penny dreadful novels he discovered in his bungalow at <unk> , which he then read constantly for the next few days . 
 The last portion of Beebe 's journey took him to China , from which they made an unplanned visit to Japan in order to escape a riot as well as a surge of bubonic plague . When the plague and riots had subsided , Beebe returned to China to document the local pheasant species , then made a second visit to Japan to study pheasants kept in the Imperial Preserves there . In Japan , Beebe was given two cranes by the Imperial Household in exchange for a pair of swans , which were unknown in Japan . 
 His expedition completed after a total of 17 months , Beebe and Blair crossed the Pacific to San Francisco , then crossed the United States to return to their home in New York . Their expedition had obtained live or stuffed specimens of nearly all the pheasants he had sought , and also produced extensive notes about their behavior . Some of these pheasants , such as Sclater 's <unk> or Himalayan <unk> , had never before been seen in the wild by Americans or Europeans . Beebe 's observations of sexual dimorphism in pheasants during this expedition led him to become the first biologist to correctly understand the mechanism by which this aspect of sexual selection operates . On the basis of his observations he also proposed a new evolutionary model of pheasant ancestry , involving a period of rapid diversification followed by more typical and gradual changes . Although this evolutionary model is now taken for granted , in William Beebe 's time it was a novel idea . 
 In January 1913 , Blair left Beebe for Reno with the intention of divorcing him , since at this time in history it was easier to obtain a divorce in Reno than in most other areas of the United States . The divorce was granted on August 29 , 1913 , after Blair had spent the minimum requirement of six months as a resident in Reno . Obtaining a divorce in Reno required a person to demonstrate that their spouse had committed either adultery or extreme cruelty ; Blair 's complaint accused Beebe of the latter , claiming that during the pheasant expedition he had threatened to commit suicide by " throwing himself in the river , shooting himself through the roof of the mouth with a revolver , and by cutting his throat with a razor . " Beebe made very little effort to contest the divorce , and did not appear in court to offer any testimony . Although newspapers at the time reported Blair 's accusations uncritically , with headlines such as " Naturalist was cruel " , modern biographers consider it more likely that Blair resorted to hyperbole in order to make a case for divorce . A week after her divorce from Beebe , Blair was remarried to their next @-@ door neighbor Robin Niles , suggesting that the true reason for the divorce may have been cuckoldry . On the other hand , some biographers have suggested that Beebe suffered a nervous breakdown during the expedition , and that he may have contributed his own part to Blair 's alienation . 
 Blair 's departure came as a shock to Beebe , and he was severely depressed for more than a year afterward . Despite her assistance during the pheasant expedition , Beebe excised any mention of her from the monograph he was preparing based on the data gathered during it . 
 By the end of 1914 , Beebe 's pheasant monograph was essentially complete in manuscript . While the text was written by Beebe , the illustrations were provided by several artists : Robert Bruce Horsfall , who had accompanied Beebe on the expedition , painted the environmental scenes for the illustrations ' backgrounds , while the pheasants themselves were painted by other artists including George Edward Lodge , Charles R. Knight , and Louis Agassiz Fuertes . Due to the elaborate nature of the book 's color artwork , no American publisher was considered capable of reproducing it . The publisher which Beebe chose for his work was George <unk> and Sons of London , as a result of their success publishing the artwork of John James Audubon . The reproduction of the illustrations themselves was to be handled by several companies in Germany and Austria . Reproductions of the illustrations were in the process of being printed when World War I began , holding up the completion of the project for the next four years . 
 = = = Return to Guiana , and World War I = = = 
 Beebe undertook an expedition to Brazil in 1915 , for the purpose of capturing more birds for the zoo . This expedition was an important turning point for Beebe in several ways . Beebe had far more field experience than either of the two others accompanying him on the expedition , G. Inness <unk> and Herbert Atkins , making this his introduction to the role of a mentor . During this expedition , Beebe was also amazed to discover the number and variety of organisms living under a single tree , and pioneered the method of studying a small area of wilderness for an extended amount of time . This expedition marked the beginning of a shift for Beebe from ornithology to the study of tropical ecosystems . 
 In 1916 , Beebe traveled to Georgetown in pursuit of his earlier goal of establishing a permanent field research station in Guiana . After following several leads which came to nothing , his goal was realized when George Withers , who owned a rubber plantation on the <unk> River , offered him the use of a large house on his property for this purpose . Soon after Beebe and his researchers moved into the plantation house , which was known by the name of Kalacoon , they were paid a visit by Theodore Roosevelt and his family . Roosevelt subsequently wrote an article about the station for Scribner 's Magazine , which helped to build public support for the station . 
 The establishment of the Kalacoon research station enabled Beebe to research the ecology of the surrounding jungle in far more detail than had been possible during his earlier expeditions . Using Kalacoon as his base of operations , Beebe performed a novel type of study : methodically dissecting a small area of jungle , and all of the animals which inhabit it , from the top of the canopy to below the ground . In a second study , Beebe performed the same task for a much larger area of jungle , approximately a quarter mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) square . During his first season at Kalacoon in 1916 , Beebe brought back 300 living specimens for the zoo . This time he succeeded at capturing a hoatzin , the bird that he had narrowly missed during his earlier trip to Guiana , although he was unable to keep it alive for the zoo during the trip back to New York . 
 Beebe summarized his discoveries at Kalacoon in his 1917 book Tropical Wild Life in British Guiana , which inspired many other researchers to plan trips to Kalacoon , or to establish their own field research stations of the type that Beebe had pioneered . 
 Beebe was eager to serve in World War I , but at 40 he was considered too old for regular service . With Roosevelt 's help , he secured a post training American pilots for a flight squadron on Long Island . His training work was halted when , veering to avoid a photographer who had run in front of his airplane as he landed , he crashed on landing and severely injured his right wrist . During a second trip to Kalacoon while his wrist healed , Beebe was further devastated to discover that due to wartime demand for rubber , the entire jungle surrounding the house had been clear @-@ cut to make room for rubber trees . Since the purpose of Kalacoon station had been to study the jungle , the jungle 's destruction left Beebe with no choice but to close the station and return with its supplies to New York . Combined with his earlier loss of Blair , the effect of losing Kalacoon plunged Beebe into depression . This did not go unnoticed by Beebe 's mentor Osborn , who expressed concern about it in a letter to Madison Grant , writing " I find that he is worried and far from well . [ ... ] Without telling him so , we must take care of him . " 
 In October 1917 , Beebe had his opportunity to serve in the war . With the help of a letter of recommendation from Roosevelt , he was given the duty of flying aerial photography planes over German gun emplacements . He also spent time in trenches and accompanied a Canadian Indian platoon on a night raid . Beebe subsequently wrote several articles describing his war experience for Scribner 's Magazine and Atlantic Monthly . Beebe generally did not make the exact nature of his military service clear in his writings about it , although he expressed his general dismay at the realities of the war . The best @-@ known of these accounts is provided by the opening paragraph of his 1918 book Jungle Peace : 
 Beebe 's position in the Zoological Society underwent a change in 1918 : He was given the title of Honorary Curator of Birds , and was made the director of the newly created Department of Tropical Research . With his new position , Beebe no longer had the duty of caring for the zoo 's animals , freeing him to devote himself fully to his writing and research . Beebe 's duties as curator were passed to Lee Crandall , the former Assistant Curator who had worked under Beebe , although Crandall continued to rely on Beebe for help treating illness in birds , and caring for the exotic birds brought back from Beebe 's expeditions . 
 The first volume of Beebe 's pheasant monograph was published that fall , although the ongoing war made it unclear when the remaining three volumes would be published . The first volume was highly praised by reviewers , and received the Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal from the National Academy of Sciences in 1918 . In January 1919 Roosevelt , who was severely ill by this point , wrote to Beebe from his hospital bed congratulating Beebe on the publication of his monograph . His letter of congratulation to Beebe was the last letter that Roosevelt wrote before his death . Volume II of the monograph was published in 1921 , and volumes III and IV were published in 1922 . The completed work , titled A Monograph of the Pheasants , has been considered by some reviewers to be possibly the greatest ornithological monograph of the twentieth century . 
 In 1919 , Osborn helped secure Beebe a new research station in Guiana to replace Kalacoon : Beebe was offered Kartabo Point , an outpost of a New York @-@ based mining corporation . Beebe was enthusiastic about the new station , and it proved very successful for conducting the same detailed analyses of wildlife within small areas that had been performed at Kalacoon . At Kartabo Beebe discovered the phenomenon known as an ant mill , a column of ants following itself in an endless loop until nearly all of them died of exhaustion . 
 = = = Galápagos expeditions = = = 
 Beebe was eager to undertake an expedition to the Galápagos Islands , with the intention of obtaining more detailed data in support of evolution than Charles Darwin had been able to collect in his earlier visit . In 1923 , Harrison Williams agreed to finance such an expedition , and Beebe was provided with a 250 @-@ foot ( 76 m ) steam yacht called the Noma for this purpose along with a support crew . The support crew included a number of scientists who had worked with Beebe previously , as well as some of Williams ' friends whose inclusion was a condition for Williams ' agreement to fund the expedition . Passing through the Sargasso Sea on the way to the Galápagos , Beebe was fascinated by the diversity of life that could be found in the <unk> weed floating on the surface , and spent several days scooping the weed from the water to examine the creatures that lived in it . 
 Beebe 's first expedition to the Galápagos lasted twenty days , broken into two ten @-@ day periods , between which the Noma was forced to return to Panama for fresh water and coal . During this expedition he documented the unique ways that animals that inhabit the Galápagos have evolved in response to the absence of predators . The Galápagos animals generally showed no fear of humans , causing the team to have a high degree of success at capturing live specimens for the zoo . Beebe also discovered a previously unknown bay on Tower Island in the Galápagos , which he named Darwin Bay , and documented the diversity of animal life that inhabited it . During the return to New York from this expedition , Beebe continued to dredge animals from the sea , using a pair of new devices he had devised to assist himself with this : a " pulpit " , an iron cage affixed to the bow of the ship that enabled its occupant to examine the surface of the sea more closely ; and a " boom walk " , a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) boom jutting from the side of the ship from which he suspended himself . The book in which Beebe summarized this expedition , titled Galápagos : World 's End , was an instant best @-@ seller and remained on the New York Times top ten list for several months . 
 In 1924 , Beebe went on another expedition to his Guiana research station of Kartabo , with the goal of continuing the detailed documentation of the tropical ecosystem that he had begun at Kalacoon . The paper which finally resulted from this study was published in Zoologica in 1925 , and was the first study of its kind in the developing field of tropical ecology . Beebe continued to battle depression during this trip to Kartabo , both over his earlier loss of Blair , and over the death of his mother Nettie , who had died shortly before the beginning of the expedition . 
 Despite his ongoing research in Guiana , what Beebe desired most was to return to the Galápagos , this time with a properly fitted @-@ out scientific research vessel that possessed the ability to dredge animals from beneath the ocean . In 1925 , Beebe set out on a second Galápagos expedition , backed by Williams and several other donors . His ship for this expedition was the Arcturus , a steam yacht considerably larger than the Noma that was capable of being at sea for extended periods of time . The Arcturus was outfitted with Beebe 's pulpit and boom walk from the Noma , as well as cages and tanks for live animals , chemicals and vials to preserve dead ones , and a darkroom for developing film and studying the bioluminescent animals they hoped to encounter . 
 The Arcturus did not encounter the thick mats of <unk> in the Sargasso Sea that Beebe was hoping to study , but Beebe and his crew experienced great success dredging creatures from the sea off the coast of Saint Martin and Saba . In the Pacific , they encountered a strange boundary between two currents of very different temperatures , containing a vast diversity of life on the border between the two . He sailed along the border between the currents for several days to document it , theorizing that it could be the cause of the unusual climate which South America had recently been experiencing . Beebe 's study of these currents , and their effect on the climate of South America , is the earliest known study of the phenomenon known as El Niño . 
 Anchoring near Darwin Bay , Beebe made his first attempt at studying sea animals in their native environment by descending into the ocean in a diving helmet . Beebe continued to perform helmet dives throughout his Galápagos expedition , documenting several previously unknown sea animals . In addition to his helmet dives , Beebe applied the same method of research that he had pioneered in the tropics to a small area of ocean , sailing in circles around it for ten days with the intention of documenting all actions and interactions of marine life within that area . This study yielded a collection of 3 @,@ 776 fish of 136 species , many of them also new to science . 
 While anchored off the Galápagos , Beebe and his crew noticed volcanic activity on Albemarle Island , and set out to investigate it . Anchoring in a small cove , Beebe and his assistant John Tee @-@ Van searched for an active crater where they could observe the eruption , and were nearing exhaustion by the time they found one . As he observed the crater , Beebe realized that the air surrounding it was filled with noxious gases , and narrowly avoided suffocation before staggering away from it . Observing the eruption from his ship for another two days , as well as again at a later point in the expedition , Beebe recorded how numerous birds and marine animals were killed after either failing to escape the lava , or drawing too close to it in an attempt to scavenge other animals that had died . 
 During the return from the Galápagos through the Sargasso Sea , Beebe once again failed to find the thick mats of Sargassum whose study had been one of the primary goals of the expedition . Searching for a way to satisfy his expedition 's donors , Beebe hit upon the idea of documenting the marine life of the Hudson Gorge just beyond the shore of New York City . Applying the same techniques to studying the Hudson Gorge that he had used in the Galápagos , Beebe encountered a surprising variety of sea animals , many of which had previously been thought to be exclusive to the tropics . 
 Shortly after Beebe 's return from this expedition , Anthony Kuser requested that Beebe produce a condensed , popular version of his pheasant monograph . The book which resulted from this , titled Pheasants : their Lives and Homes ( also known by the title Pheasants of the World ) , was released in 1926 and received the John Burroughs Medal . During the course of writing this book , Beebe was reminded of many experiences during the pheasant expedition which he had not included in his original monograph , and wrote an additional book titled Pheasant Jungles about his adventures during this expedition . While A Monograph of the Pheasants had been a factual account of this expedition , Pheasant Jungles was a somewhat fictionalized account , in which Beebe altered some aspects of his experience in order to appeal to a wider audience . 
 = = = Haiti and Bermuda = = = 
 In 1927 , Beebe went on an expedition to Haiti in order to document its marine life . Anchoring his ship the Lieutenant in the harbor of Port @-@ au @-@ Prince , he performed over 300 helmet dives examining the area 's coral reefs and classifying the fish that inhabited them . These dives involved several technological innovations : a watertight brass box which could be used to house a camera for underwater photography , and a telephone which was incorporated into the diving helmet , allowing the diver to dictate observations to someone on the surface instead of having to take notes underwater . Within a hundred days , Beebe and his team had created a catalog of species inhabiting the area nearly as long as what had been assembled on the neighboring island of Puerto Rico in the past four hundred years . In 1928 Beebe and Tee @-@ Van published an illustrated and annotated list of 270 such species , which was expanded in 1935 bringing the total to 324 . Beebe provided an account of this expedition in his 1928 book Beneath Tropic Seas , which was the first of his books to receive less than enthusiastic reviews , due to its episodic structure . 
 As he gained experience with helmet diving , Beebe soon became an enthusiastic advocate of it , believing it to be something that should be experienced by everyone who had the opportunity to do so . He later went so far as to suggest that beachfront homes would someday contain their own underwater gardens , to be experienced with the help of diving helmets : 
 By this point in his life Beebe was developing a close friendship with the American romance novelist Elswyth Thane , who had met Beebe in 1925 . Very little of their early correspondence survives , but Elswyth had idolized Beebe for years , and her first novel Riders of the Wind was devoted to him . The novel was an account of a young woman who falls in love with , and eventually marries , a much older adventurer who strongly resembled Beebe . Beebe and Elswyth were married on September 22 , 1927 , when Beebe was 50 . Due to Elswyth 's tendency to misrepresent her age , conflicting accounts exist of how old she was when she and Beebe were married , ranging from 23 to 28 . Elswyth and Beebe had an open marriage , in which neither expected sexual exclusivity from the other so long as their life together was not damaged . 
 Although Riders of the Wind was partially based on Beebe 's pheasant expedition , Elswyth did not enjoy Beebe 's current research . She disliked the heat of the tropics , and was unwilling to go with Beebe to Kartabo . As a compromise , Beebe decided to continue his marine research in Bermuda , where she and Beebe had spent their honeymoon . Bermuda 's governor Louis Bols introduced Beebe to Prince George , who was fascinated by Beebe 's books , and Prince George persuaded Beebe to take him helmet diving . Governor Bols and Prince George subsequently offered Beebe Nonsuch Island , a 25 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 10 km2 ) island off the east coast of Bermuda , for use as a research station . 
 With the financial help of his sponsors , Beebe planned to use his new research station on Nonsuch island to conduct a thorough study of an 8 @-@ mile ( 13 km ) square area of ocean , documenting every living thing they could find from the surface to a depth of 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . However , Beebe 's ability to research the deep ocean using these methods was constrained by the inherent limitations of dredging , which could only provide an incomplete picture of the animals living there . Beebe compared the knowledge that could be gained of the deep ocean from dredging to what a visitor from Mars could learn about a fog @-@ shrouded earthly city by using a dredge to pick up bits of debris from a street . Beebe began planning to create an underwater exploration device , which he could use to descend into the depths and observe these environments directly . The New York Times carried articles describing Beebe 's plans , which called for a diving bell with the shape of a cylinder . 
 These articles caught the attention of Otis Barton , an engineer who had long admired Beebe and who had his own ambition to become a deep @-@ sea explorer . Barton was convinced that Beebe 's design for a diving vessel would never be capable of withstanding the extreme pressure of the deep ocean , and with the help of a friend who arranged a meeting with Beebe , proposed an alternative design to him . Barton 's design called for a spherical vessel , which was the strongest possible shape for resisting high pressure . Barton had the good fortune that years earlier , Theodore Roosevelt had proposed a similar idea to Beebe , and Beebe approved of Barton 's design . Beebe and Barton made a deal : Barton would pay for the sphere and all of the other equipment to go with it . In return , Beebe would pay for other expenses such as chartering a ship to raise and lower the sphere , and as the owner of the sphere Barton would accompany Beebe on his expeditions in it . Beebe named their vessel the Bathysphere , from the Greek prefix <unk> meaning " deep " combined with " sphere " . 
 = = = Work at Nonsuch Island = = = 
 From 1930 to 1934 , Beebe and Barton used the Bathysphere to conduct a series of dives of increasing depth off the coast of Nonsuch Island , becoming the first people to observe deep @-@ sea animals in their native environment . The Bathysphere was lowered into the ocean using a steel cable , and a second cable carried a phone line which the Bathysphere 's occupants used to communicate with the surface , as well as an electrical cable for a searchlight to illuminate animals outside the Bathysphere . Beebe 's observations were relayed up the phone line to be recorded by Gloria Hollister , his chief technical associate who was also in charge of preparing specimens obtained from dredging . Beebe and Barton made a total of 35 dives in the Bathysphere , setting several consecutive world records for the deepest dive ever performed by a human . The record set by the deepest of these , to a depth of 3 @,@ 028 feet ( 923 m ) on August 15 , 1934 , lasted until it was broken by Barton in 1949 . 
 In 1931 , Beebe and Barton 's Bathysphere dives were interrupted for a year due to technical problems and uncooperative weather . An additional difficulty in 1931 was the death of Beebe 's father , and Beebe left Nonsuch Island for a week in order to attend his father 's funeral . A second year @-@ long interruption occurred in 1933 , and was caused in part by a lack of funds due to the Great Depression . Although Beebe and Barton performed no dives in 1933 , their work gathered a large amount of publicity when the Bathysphere was displayed in a special exhibit for the American Museum of Natural History , and later at the Century of Progress World 's Fair in Chicago , where they shared the fair 's Hall of Science with Auguste Piccard . Beebe and Barton also obtained publicity for their dives from several articles Beebe wrote describing them for National Geographic , and from an NBC radio broadcast in which Beebe 's voice transmitted up the phone line from inside the Bathysphere was broadcast nationally over the radio . 
 Although Beebe attempted to ensure that Barton would receive credit as the Bathysphere 's inventor and Beebe 's fellow diver , the popular media tended to ignore Barton and pay attention only to Beebe . Barton was often resentful of this , believing Beebe to be deliberately hogging the fame . Beebe in turn lacked patience for Barton 's unpredictable moods , and felt that Barton did not display the proper respect for the natural world . Still , Beebe and Barton both had something the other needed : Beebe for his experience as a marine biologist , and Barton for his mechanical skill . Out of pragmatic concern for the success of their dives , they managed to resolve their disagreements well enough to work together at Nonsuch Island , although they did not remain on good terms afterwards . 
 It is likely that Beebe became romantically involved with Hollister during his work at Nonsuch Island . An entry in Beebe 's personal journal , written in a secret code that he used when describing things he wished kept secret , reads " I kissed her [ Gloria ] and she loves me . " It is unclear whether Elswyth knew of Beebe 's affair with Gloria , but if she did she appears to not have minded it . In addition to the open nature of their marriage , Elswyth described in a 1940s interview with Today 's Woman magazine that she enjoyed the knowledge that Beebe was attractive to women . 
 Beebe continued to conduct marine research after 1934 , but he felt that he had seen what he wanted to see using the Bathysphere , and that further dives were too expensive for whatever knowledge he gained from them to be worth the cost . With the help of Beebe 's friend the physician Henry Lloyd , Beebe conducted an expedition in the West Indies examining the stomach contents of tuna , which uncovered previously unknown larval forms of several species of fish . Shortly after returning , Beebe set out on a longer expedition to the waters around Baja California , financed by the Californian businessman Templeton Crocker on board his yacht the Zaca . The goal of this expedition was to study the area 's undersea fauna by means of dredging and helmet diving , and Beebe and his team were surprised by the diversity of animals that they encountered there . In 1937 Beebe went on a second expedition aboard the Zaca , documenting the native wildlife along the Pacific Coast from Mexico to Colombia . During this expedition , rather than focusing on either sea animals as he had at Nonsuch Island or on birds as he had earlier in his life , he attempted to document all aspects of the ecosystem . Beebe described his two expeditions on board the Zaca in his books Zaca Venture and The Book of Bays , in which he emphasized his concern for threatened habitats and his dismay at human destruction . 
 During the two Zaca expeditions Beebe was accompanied by his longtime assistant John Tee @-@ Van as well as Jocelyn Crane , a young <unk> who had first worked for Beebe at Nonsuch Island in 1932 , and who would subsequently be among Beebe 's most cherished associates for the rest of his life . Like Hollister before her , Crane would eventually become Beebe 's lover during the long expeditions that Beebe made without Elswyth 's companionship . During this time Beebe was also forming a close friendship with Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh 's creator A. A. Milne , who wrote of Half Mile Down " I don 't know which I envy you most : all those moral and physical qualities which you have and I lack , or all that wonder of a new world . [ ... ] One of the few things in the world of which I am really proud is that I know Will Beebe . " 
 = = = Return to the tropics = = = 
 Although Beebe continued to use Nonsuch Island as his base of operations throughout the 1930s , with the onset of World War II in 1939 it was announced that the ferry linking Bermuda to New York would soon be making its final run , requiring Beebe and his team to hastily abandon their station there . Transportation to and from Bermuda resumed in 1940 , and Beebe returned there in May 1941 , but the environment was slowly being transformed due to the war . The large number of military ships made docking difficult , most of the island 's reefs were being destroyed in order to construct an airfield , and the combination of construction activity and pollution made observation of the sea life impossible . Appalled by the destruction , Beebe finally rented his station at Nonsuch Island to a military contractor and returned to New York . 
 With the loss of their station on Bermuda , Beebe and Elswyth gave up on their compromise of finding a research station where they could both be happy . Elswyth , who was most content in temperate environments , began searching for a home in New England where she could continue her writing . Meanwhile , Beebe began searching for a new tropical research station to replace Kartabo , which had fallen victim to deforestation just like Kalacoon before it . Beebe eventually helped Elswyth purchase a small farm near Wilmington , Vermont , where he visited her frequently . Elswyth explained in a magazine interview that she was uncomfortable on Beebe 's expeditions , so the two of them had agreed that they would keep their careers separate from their private lives . 
 With the financial assistance of Standard Oil and the Guggenheim Foundation , Beebe established his next research station in Caripito , a small city in Venezuela around 100 miles ( 160 km ) west of Trinidad . Beebe and his team used this station to study the ecology of the region , and recorded how its inhabitants were affected by its cycle of wet and dry seasons . One important study which resulted from this region was the first documentation of rhinoceros beetles using their horns in competition between males , proving that their horns were an adaptation for sexual selection rather than for defense against predators . Although Beebe 's research at Caripito was productive , he felt that the extremity of its wet @-@ dry cycle made it impractical as a research station , and the expanding oil operations in the region were in danger of destroying the local environment . For these reasons , Beebe did not return to Caripito after his first season there . 
 In spring of 1944 , Jocelyn Crane returned to Venezuela to search for a location for a new field station to replace the one at Caripito . The location that she found , known as Rancho Grande , had initially been intended as a palace for Venezuela 's dictator Juan Vicente Gómez in the Henri <unk> National Park . The palace 's construction had been left unfinished after Gómez 's death , and since then the building 's vast corridors and ballrooms had become the home of jaguars , tapirs and sloths . Unlike Beebe 's other tropical research stations , which had been located in lowland regions , Rancho Grande was located on a mountainside in what Beebe described as " the ultimate cloud jungle " . Creole Petroleum , a Venezuelan spin @-@ off of Standard , agreed to cover the cost of the station and finished a small portion of the vast structure for Beebe and his team to use . Beebe and his team began work there in 1945 , staying as guests of the Venezuelan government . 
 Rancho Grande was located at a mountain pass in a branch of the Andes known as the Venezuelan Coastal Range , which was an important migration route for butterflies , and the station proved very lucrative in the study of insects . During his work at Rancho Grande , Beebe broke his leg in a fall from a ladder , and the forced immobility which resulted from having his leg in a cast presented him with a new opportunity for observing the area 's wildlife . At his request , he and his chair were transported into the nearby jungle , and as he sat motionless the wild animals around him soon began to go about their business without noticing his presence . His immobility also presented him with the opportunity to spend hours at a time observing a pair of bat falcons through binoculars , documenting the behavior of their two chicks and every prey item fed to them by their parents . His observations documented several behaviors which were new to science , including the first documented example of play in birds . 
 Although Beebe and his team enjoyed rewarding seasons at Rancho Grande in 1945 and 1946 , they did not return there in 1947 . The reason they gave in their annual report was that the previous two seasons had produced so much material that they needed an additional year to analyze it , but in reality this was more the result of insufficient funding as well as the unstable state of Venezuelan politics . Beebe returned to Rancho Grande in 1948 , where he completed several technical papers about the migration patterns of birds and insects , as well as a comprehensive study of the area 's ecology which he coauthored with Jocelyn Crane . Realizing that the area 's politics might soon put an end to their research there , in spring of 1948 Jocelyn made a side trip to Trinidad and Tobago in hope of finding a site for a research station where the politics would be more secure . Finally , when the 1948 Venezuelan coup d 'état installed Marcos Pérez Jiménez as Venezuela 's dictator , Beebe decided that he could no longer continue to work in Venezuela . Beebe described his experiences at Rancho Grande in his 1949 book High Jungle , which was the last of Beebe 's major books . 
 In January 1950 , the New York Zoological Society held a celebration to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Beebe 's work for them . He was by this point the only remaining member of the zoo 's original staff , and had produced more scholarly papers and publicity than any other employee . Letters and testimonials poured in from other scientists with whom Beebe had worked , attesting to their admiration of him and his influence on them . One letter from the Harvard biologist Ernst Mayr wrote that Beebe 's work had been an inspiration to his own , particularly A Monograph of the Pheasants and Beebe 's books about jungle wildlife . 
 = = = Final years in Trinidad = = = 
 The product of Jocelyn Crane 's search for a potential research station in Trinidad was a house on a hill overlooking the Arima Valley , which was known as <unk> Vale . In 1949 , Beebe bought this estate to use a permanent research station to replace Rancho Grande . Beebe renamed the estate Simla , after the hill in India that featured in Rudyard Kipling 's writings . He later described the sense of destiny that marked his introduction to the estate : 
 At Simla Beebe and his team worked closely together with Asa and Newcome Wright , the owners of the adjacent Spring Hill estate , who provided accommodations for them while water and electricity were connected at Simla . Although the initial purchase of Simla had contained only the house and 22 acres ( 0 @.@ 089 km2 ) of forest surrounding it , Beebe soon realized that this was insufficient for the research he wished to conduct , and purchased another neighboring estate known as St. Pat 's which contained an additional 170 acres ( 0 @.@ 69 km2 ) . In 1953 , Beebe donated both properties to the New York Zoological Society for one dollar , giving him the position of one of the society 's " Benefactors in Perpetuity " . 
 Research at Simla formally began in 1950 . Beebe 's research at Simla combined elements of many different earlier stages of his research , including observations of the life cycles of the area 's birds , detailed analyses of every plant and animal in small areas of forest , and studies of insect behavior . Insects were the focus of the scientific papers he produced during this period , marking a transition from his past areas of study into the field of entomology . Local children periodically brought animal specimens to Beebe at Simla and asked him to classify them . Remembering the early studies of his own childhood , in which he had brought specimens to the American Museum of Natural History , he was happy working with them . 
 In 1952 , on his seventy @-@ fifth birthday , Beebe retired from his position as the director of the <unk> 's Department of Zoological Society and became Director Emeritus , while Jocelyn Crane was promoted to Assistant Director . In honor of his lifetime of work as a naturalist , Beebe was awarded the Theodore Roosevelt Distinguished Service Medal in 1953 . Beebe 's last major expedition occurred in 1955 , retracing the route he had taken during his pheasant expedition 45 years earlier , with the intention of discovering how the populations he had previously studied were faring in response to human encroachment . Jocelyn accompanied him on this expedition for the purpose of documenting Asia 's fiddler crabs . Although Jocelyn 's studies during this expedition served as part of the basis for her monograph Fiddler Crabs of the World , Beebe never published the results of his own observations during it . 
 During Beebe 's later years , Simla was an important gathering point for researchers in many other areas of biology . Other biologists who visited to conduct studies there and exchange ideas with Beebe included myrmecologist Ted <unk> , ethologist Konrad Lorenz , entomologist Lincoln Brower , ethologist Donald Griffin , and ornithologist David Snow . Snow became a regular visitor to Simla , and in return Beebe provided financial assistance for some of Snow 's own research . Beebe devised an unusual method for determining how he would react to his visitors at Simla . His terrace there was decorated with statues of characters from Winnie @-@ the @-@ Pooh that had been a gift from A. A. Milne . Visitors who recognized these characters as Milne 's creations were greeted by Beebe with enthusiasm , while those who did not recognize them were just endured by Beebe until they left . 
 Beebe remained active well into his old age . In 1957 , at the age of eighty , he was still capable of climbing slippery tree trunks in order to study bird nests . However , by 1959 his strength had lessened enough that that long hikes and tree climbing were no longer practical for him , and he contented himself with work that could be conducted in the laboratory , such as dissecting birds ' nests to analyze their method of construction . Beebe also began to be afflicted with a throat ailment which may have been Sjögren 's syndrome , although lacking a complete understanding of what caused it , Beebe and his doctors referred to it as " mango mouth " . Beebe was reluctant to accept speaking engagements because of the effect this had on his voice , although he continued to give lectures on occasion with Jocelyn 's help . 
 In an account of his final meeting with Beebe , Henry Fairfield Osborn , Jr. describes how during Beebe 's last few years he gradually succumbed to illness , eventually becoming nearly immobile and incapable of speech . However , Beebe 's personal physician A. E. Hill provides a differing account , stating that Beebe remained lucid and able to move about without assistance almost until his last day , apart from the periods of time during which his " mango mouth " temporarily slurred his speech . Both accounts agree that throughout his final years Beebe remained fond of playing practical jokes on his visitors at Simla , and retained his sense of humor even within days of his death . 
 William Beebe died of pneumonia at Simla on June 4 , 1962 . According to his wishes , he was buried in <unk> cemetery in Port of Spain . Memorial services were held in both Trinidad and New York City , so that Beebe 's friends in both parts of the world could attend . Following Beebe 's death , Jocelyn succeeded him as the director of the Department of Tropical Research , and continued to run the Simla station along with the rest of Beebe 's former staff . 
 During his life , Beebe had frequently worried that Elswyth would write a biography of him after his death . In order to prevent this possibility , he left all of his papers and journals to Jocelyn . After Elswyth 's death in 1984 , Jocelyn donated Beebe 's papers to the Department of Rare Books and Special Collections at Princeton University 's Firestone Library . Even in the possession of Firestone Library , Beebe 's papers remained inaccessible without Jocelyn 's permission , and most scholars were prevented from using them until Jocelyn offered access to the writer Carol Grant Gould for the purpose of writing Beebe 's biography . 
 = = Personality and cultural image = = 
 William Beebe was more famous in the United States than any other American naturalist prior to the days of television . As a scientific writer who participated in both the popular and academic worlds , he occupied a similar role to the role later occupied by Stephen Jay Gould . Beebe was a well @-@ known figure in the Roaring Twenties of New York City , and was friends with numerous other well @-@ known figures of the period , including Fannie Hurst and the cartoonist Rube Goldberg . Although he was not physically handsome in the traditional sense , he tended to dominate every social and professional situation due to his enthusiasm , intelligence and charisma . As a result of his much @-@ publicized divorce from Blair and his later marriage to Elswyth , he was also known for his stormy relationships with women . 
 Beebe described his religious beliefs as a combination of Presbyterianism and Buddhism . His religion was largely the result of seeking to combine his sense of awe and wonder at the natural world with a scientific understanding of its workings . He was highly critical of efforts to use science to justify political ideologies , such as socialism or the belief that women were inferior to men . Beebe also disapproved of the eugenic ideas advocated by many biologists in the early 20th century , including some of his contemporaries at the zoo , although this was largely out of fear that these ideas would alienate friends of the zoo and cause divisions among its staff . 
 Beebe was an avid player of tennis , and remained skilled enough to beat others at it even in his early seventies . Other pastimes enjoyed by him included parties , theater , dancing , and occasionally cinema . 
 Beebe had a troubled relationship with some of his superiors at the zoo , particularly Hornaday , who was resentful of Beebe 's constant demands for more funding and staff , as well as the fact that as Beebe 's career progressed he gradually devoted less and less time to caring for the zoo itself . One particular point of disagreement was Beebe 's forgetfulness about returning books which he had borrowed from the Zoological Society 's Library , which would occasionally go missing for years as a result . However , Hornaday never publicly expressed his disagreements with Beebe , and did not hesitate to defend Beebe 's work when others criticized it . 
 Beebe had high expectations of the people working under him on all of his expeditions , although he never revealed the exact characteristics that he looked for in potential employees . Henry Fairfield Osborn Jr. recounts one incident in which Beebe turned down a scientist who wished to work with him when the scientist described boredom with his current duties as one of his reasons for requesting this . In response to this request , Beebe retorted : 
 Beebe nonetheless exhibited a high degree of loyalty to those employees who were capable of meeting his standards . When he felt that pressure of working under him had become too great , he would announce that his birthday was approaching , and his staff would have several days free from work in order to celebrate it . On one such occasion , when a scientist working under Beebe whispered to him that he knew it was not in fact Beebe 's birthday , Beebe responded " A man should have a birthday when he needs one . " 
 = = Impact of work and legacy = = 
 William Beebe was a pioneer in the field now known as ecology . His theory that organisms must be understood in the context of the ecosystems they inhabit was completely new for its time , and has been highly influential . The method he invented of methodically analyzing all organisms within a small area of wilderness has become a standard method in this field . Beebe was also a pioneer in the field of oceanography , setting a precedent with his Bathysphere dives which many other researchers would follow . 
 E. O. Wilson , Sylvia Earle and Ernst Mayr have all described Beebe 's work as an influence on their own choice of careers . Among the most significant of Beebe 's influences on other researchers was Rachel Carson , who regarded Beebe as both a friend and an inspiration . Carson dedicated her 1951 book The Sea Around Us to Beebe , writing " My absorption in the mystery and meaning of the sea have been stimulated and the writing of this book aided by the friendship and encouragement of William Beebe . " Due to Beebe 's renewed emphasis on field research at a time when laboratory studies were becoming the dominant trend in biology , more recent field researchers such as Jane Goodall and George Schaller are also sometimes considered his intellectual descendants . 
 By writing for a scientific as well as popular audience , Beebe did much to make science accessible to the general public . This was particularly significant in the area of conservation , of which he was one of the most important early advocates . With his many writings about the dangers of environmental destruction , Beebe helped to raise public awareness about this topic . However , Beebe 's prolific writing for a popular audience had a downside , in that other scientists of his time were reluctant to hold him in high accord because they regarded him as a popularizer . 
 During the course of his career , Beebe authored over 800 articles and 21 books , including his four @-@ volume pheasant monograph . He had a total of 64 animals named after him , and himself described one new species of bird and 87 species of fish . While 83 of the fish that he described were done so in a conventional manner , the remaining four were done so based on visual observations . 
 A lingering controversy exists in ichthyology over the validity of the four species Beebe described on the basis of visual descriptions only , which he had observed during his Bathysphere dives . The naming of a new species ordinarily requires obtaining and analyzing a type specimen , something which was obviously impossible from inside the Bathysphere . Some of Beebe 's critics claimed that these fish were illusions resulting from condensation on the Bathysphere 's window , or even that Beebe willfully made them up , although the latter would have been strongly at odds with Beebe 's reputation as an honest and rigorous scientist . While many of Beebe 's observations from the Bathysphere have since been confirmed by advances in undersea photography , it is unclear whether others fit the description of any known sea animal . One possibility is that although these animals indeed exist , so much remains to be discovered about life in the deep ocean that these animals have yet to be seen by anyone other than him . 
 = = = Tetrapteryx = = = 
 Along with his analysis of pheasant phylogeny and his studies of life in the Galápagos islands , Beebe regarded one of his most important contributions to the field of evolutionary biology to be his hypothesis that the ancestors of birds passed through what he referred to as a “ Tetrapteryx stage ” , with wings on both their front and hind limbs . Beebe based this theory on his observation that the hatchlings and embryos of some modern birds possess long quill feathers on their legs , which he regarded as an atavism ; he also noticed vestiges of leg @-@ wings on one of the specimens of Archaeopteryx . Beebe described his idea in a 1915 paper published in Zoologica , titled " A Tetrapteryx Stage in the Ancestry of Birds " . 
 Gerhard Heilmann discussed Beebe 's Tetrapteryx hypothesis at considerable length in his 1926 book The Origin of Birds . Heilmann examined hatchlings of many other bird species , both closely related to those studied by Beebe and belonging to more primitive species , in hope of finding additional evidence for the leg @-@ wings which Beebe had documented . After failing to find such evidence , Heilmann ultimately rejected Beebe 's Tetrapteryx hypothesis , and this remained the consensus among ornithologists for the next several decades . Beebe , however , continued to advance his Tetrapteryx hypothesis as late as the 1940s . 
 In 2003 , Beebe 's Tetrapteryx hypothesis was supported by the discovery of Microraptor gui , a small feathered dinosaur which possessed asymmetrical flight feathers on both its front and hind limbs . Beebe 's Tetrapteryx hypothesis is now regarded as prescient for its prediction of both the anatomy and likely gliding posture of Microraptor gui , which Richard O. Prum has described as " [ looking ] as if it could have glided straight out of the pages of Beebe ’ s notebooks . " This animal 's discovery has had the effect of resurrecting Beebe 's theory that leg feathers played an important role in the origin of bird flight . 
 = = = William Beebe Tropical Research Station = = = 
 Following William Beebe 's death in 1962 , his research station at Simla remained in operation under Jocelyn Crane 's management , under the new name of the William Beebe Tropical Research Station . However , because Jocelyn 's research required her to travel north for extended periods , by 1965 she had little time to keep the station running . By 1971 , the station had fallen into disuse and was declared closed . Meanwhile , as Asa Wright 's health began to fail in her old age , her friends began to fear that after her death her neighboring estate of Spring Hill might be lost to developers , and established a trust to buy the estate and convert it into the Asa Wright nature center . In 1974 , Beebe 's property was donated to the newly established Asa Wright Nature Center . 
 Now under the management of the Asa Wright Nature Center , the William Beebe Tropical Research Station has gradually been renovated . It is now once again actively involved in research and an important gathering place for scientists . It is also a popular destination for birdwatchers , who can observe the same populations of hummingbirds , tanagers and <unk> that William Beebe studied decades earlier . 
 = Chuck Baldwin presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 The Chuck Baldwin presidential campaign of 2008 began April 10 , 2008 as pastor and radio host Chuck Baldwin of Florida announced his candidacy for the Constitution Party presidential nomination . He previously served as the party 's vice @-@ presidential nominee in 2004 . Baldwin 's main opposition for the nomination was former ambassador Alan Keyes , who had just left the Republican Party . After a campaign touting his stands on civil liberties , foreign affairs , and religion , Baldwin won the nomination at the April 26 Constitution Party National Convention . Attorney Darrell Castle was selected as his running mate . 
 During the general election , Baldwin expressed paleo @-@ conservative positions on a number of issues including protectionism on trade , <unk> in foreign affairs , religious practice in the public sphere , and nativism . He cast himself as a close ally of 2008 Republican presidential candidate , Representative Ron Paul , who ultimately endorsed Baldwin 's campaign . 
 With 199 @,@ 314 votes , about 0 @.@ 15 % of the total , Baldwin finished fifth in the race , ahead of Green Party nominee Cynthia McKinney , but behind both independent Ralph Nader and Libertarian Bob Barr , as well as Republican nominee John McCain and the eventual winner , Democratic nominee Barack Obama 
 = = Background = = 
 Chuck Baldwin was initially a Democrat , but changed his party affiliation to Republican in 1980 . In the 1970s , he founded Crossroad Baptist Church in Pensacola , Florida , which President Ronald Reagan recognized for its growth and influence . As a Republican , Baldwin headed the Florida branch of Moral Majority , which promoted social conservatism . He also hosted a radio show called Chuck Baldwin Live , which focused on conservative issues . It made its national radio debut on the Genesis Communications Network in 2001 . 
 Baldwin left the Republican Party in 2004 , believing it had become a " second big @-@ government , big @-@ spending party " that could be characterized as " more liberal than the Democratic Party ... in practice . " He joined the Constitution Party , but still considered himself a political independent . That year , Constitution Party presidential candidate Michael Peroutka asked Baldwin to be his running mate . The ticket won the nomination at the 2004 Constitution Party National Convention . In the general election , they received 143 @,@ 630 popular votes for 0 @.@ 12 % . Afterwards , Baldwin argued , " the American people haven 't rejected our message ; they haven 't heard our message . " 
 = = Early stages = = 
 While considering a run for president , during an October 2006 interview with The Conservative President 2008 website , Baldwin expressed his frustration with the Republican Party , which he believed was on a course of " self @-@ destruction " and that was only kept afloat by the " absurd liberalism of Democrats . " He praised Congressmen Tom Tancredo and Ron Paul as well as activists Pat Buchanan and Alan Keyes , but stated that the Republican Party had steered too far to the left for him to support any of their candidates for president . When asked if he would run for president in 2008 he stated that he had " no desire to run " but that he was " always open to God 's will . " Baldwin endorsed Ron Paul for the Republican presidential nomination in a message posted to YouTube on December 19 , 2007 . 
 During a March 25 , 2008 interview with Miller Politics , two weeks before Baldwin officially entered the race , he commended Alan Keyes as a possible Constitution Party candidate but stated that he " needs to clarify his foreign policy positions for the party . " He described Libertarian Party candidate Bob Barr as a " very attractive candidate " whom he " like [ s ] ... very much . " When asked about his own presidential aspirations , he responded by saying that " There are many great people in our party that , in my opinion , are much more qualified [ to be the presidential nominee ] than I am . I have always tried to be open to God 's will . At this time , however , I have no inclination that this is God 's will for me . " 
 = = 2008 Constitution Party National Convention = = 
 Baldwin announced on April 10 , 2008 that he would seek the Constitution Party presidential nomination at the party 's April 23 – 26 convention in Kansas City , Missouri . His run was believed to have arisen from draft efforts within the Constitution Party , who feared the party would nominate a pro @-@ Iraq War candidate like Alan Keyes . Until the convention , Baldwin did not campaign and in an April 17 interview with Miller Politics , he stated that he was " not running " but merely placing his name into consideration , " trusting that God will reveal His will accordingly . " 
 During the convention , the party 's founder Howard Phillips endorsed Baldwin and gave a passionate speech in which he referred to Keyes as " the <unk> candidate " who " lingered in the Republican Party until a week ago . " Afterwards , Baldwin defeated Keyes , 383 @.@ 8 to 125 @.@ 7 , winning approximately 74 % of the delegates . He won the majority of delegates from most states with the exceptions of Missouri , Maryland , and Oklahoma , where Keyes narrowly edged Baldwin . At Baldwin 's request , the delegates then chose attorney Darrell Castle of Tennessee as his running mate . 
 Following the nomination , Baldwin set up a campaign website and opened accounts on MySpace and Facebook . He announced that he would use the Internet in the same manner as Ron Paul " to circumvent the media , " holding the mainstream news media responsible for holding back third party candidates . 
 = = General election campaign = = 
 Though Baldwin was not included on many mainstream polls , a May 2008 Fox News opinion poll revealed favorable news for the campaign . It showed that 47 % of the public were open to voting for a third party presidential candidate such as Baldwin , compared to 39 % who were not . Moreover , a Zogby poll discovered that 42 % of conservatives ( whom the Baldwin campaign targeted ) said they would never vote for the presumptive Republican presidential nominee John McCain and found that 86 % of " very conservative " respondents were displeased . 
 Baldwin expressed his own discontent with the Republican Party in a May 22 interview with Montana News . He expressed frustration with evangelicals who " <unk> [ e ] around John McCain " despite his " twenty @-@ plus year track record of liberal policies . " Baldwin highlighted globalism as the main threat to the nation stating that " Immigration , the U.N .... , NATO , NAFTA , CAFTA , the North American Union , the Superhighway , the war in Iraq , China 's threat to our peace ... are connected " through globalism . Baldwin stated that Iran would only be a threat " by sneaking people into our country . And that would be far more difficult with a sealed border . " He stated that the border could be sealed by deploying troops to those areas . 
 At the end of May and the beginning of June , several controversial developments concerning the Baldwin campaign hit the press . Comments surfaced that were made by Baldwin , raising the possibility of a 9 / 11 conspiracy theory of a controlled demolition stating , " I don 't know whether there was any kind of an inside apparatus involved in this or not ... If there 's duplicity involved in some kind of conspiracy , then let 's find out who it is and prosecute whoever 's involved . " 
 = = = Growing media interest = = = 
 The campaign also increased a drive for ballot access , appealing to supporters for help to get on the presidential ballot in Pennsylvania , Massachusetts , Maryland , and West Virginia . 
 The campaign began August by announcing its plans to participate in a demonstration against illegal immigration in Denver during the Democratic National Convention . Baldwin was joined by Bob Barr , Alan Keyes and Tom Tancredo at the " Rally Against Illegal Immigration " during the first day of the convention . Later in August , Baldwin campaigned in Spartanburg , South Carolina where he criticized both party 's presidential nominee 's as " globalists . " He declared his opposition to the Federal Reserve , whom he stated has " subjugated " the nation to " foreign dependence . " He railed against the use of the National Guard in the Iraq War remarking that the forces should be used to " repel " the " invasion " of illegal aliens from the southern border , and described the United Nations as " a sinister organization run by Marxists , socialists and communists . " Baldwin criticized both major parties for not cutting spending stating that " the only difference between Democrats and Republicans is Democrats want to tax and spend and Republicans want to borrow and spend . " He promised that slashing spending would be a priority in his administration . 
 On September 10 , Baldwin appeared on the Lou Dobbs Tonight television program on CNN where he proclaimed that if elected president he would release U.S. Border agents Jose <unk> and Ignacio Ramos . The agents were sentenced to 11 and 12 year terms in prison , respectively , after shooting a drug smuggler on the US @-@ Mexico border . Baldwin promised he would release the men during his first day on the job as President . 
 = = = Final stages = = = 
 On October 7 , Baldwin addressed the John Birch Society on the second day of its 50th anniversary . At the event he discussed the role of Christianity in the United States public life and delivered his stump speech . He attacked globalist entities such as NAFTA , the International Criminal Court , the Law of the Sea Treaty and the Security and Prosperity Partnership as well as calling for the withdrawal of the United States from the United Nations . 
 Later in October , Baldwin was interviewed by NPR where he discussed his opposition to the Federal Reserve , which he described as a " fraudulent system " and which he blamed for the 2008 economic crisis . He attacked Republicans for " <unk> [ ing ] on their promises " in 1994 's Contract with America to " eliminate five federal departments , such as Department of Education , Energy , Commerce ... " and to " slash spending . " He also criticized Republicans ' failure to criminalize abortion during their years in government . As president Baldwin stated he would eliminate the IRS and cut government spending as well . He stated that the " responsibility of government [ is ] to protect life , even life in the womb . " 
 Baldwin participated in a third party debate with Independent candidate Ralph Nader on October 23 , broadcast on CSPAN @-@ 2 . During the debate , Baldwin often agreed with Nader on as wide ranging issues as corporations and the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . He stood in solidarity with Nader in expressing the need to open the presidential debates to third party candidates . He emphasized his connections to Congressman Ron Paul throughout the debate , even suggesting that as president he would appoint " somebody like Ron Paul " as United States Secretary of Treasury . He articulated his opposition to the USA PATRIOT Act and questioned how an ideological conservative could support the legislation . But , he marked a disagreement with Nader on health care , criticizing government involvement in favor of free market solutions but with use of regulation to lower health care costs . Baldwin stated that if elected his first priority would be to secure the border . Throughout the debate Baldwin repeated his party 's pro @-@ life platform and support for the right to bear arms . 
 On election day , Baldwin was on ballot in 37 states . He was a write @-@ in candidate in eleven additional states including Montana where Ron Paul was listed as the party 's nominee . Baldwin was completely absent from ballots in Oklahoma , North Carolina and the District of Columbia . 
 = = = Results = = = 
 Baldwin 's campaign ended after receiving 199 @,@ 314 or 0 @.@ 15 % of the popular vote on Election Day . He finished in fifth place , but won the largest percentage of votes for his party since Howard Phillips in 1996 . 14 @,@ 865 of his votes were won in Michigan , but he won his largest percentage in Utah with 1 @.@ 26 % of the state 's votes . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Baldwin relocated to Montana in 2010 , and founded the Liberty Fellowship , believing the people of the state responded well to his constitutionalist message . In 2012 , he briefly ran for Lieutenant Governor of Montana as the running mate of Republican gubernatorial primary candidate Bob Fanning , but dropped out due to the lack of campaign funds . 
 = Kilham , Northumberland = 
 Kilham is a hamlet and civil parish in the English county of Northumberland , located 8 @.@ 0 miles ( 12 @.@ 9 km ) west of Wooler , 12 @.@ 0 miles ( 19 @.@ 3 km ) east of Kelso , 17 @.@ 0 miles ( 27 @.@ 4 km ) south west of Berwick upon Tweed and 38 @.@ 9 miles ( 62 @.@ 6 km ) north west of Morpeth . It lies on the northern edge of the Northumberland National Park in Glendale . The hamlet , which consists of a small group of agricultural dwellings , is overlooked by Kilham Hill and the northern limits of the Cheviot Hills . The parish had a population of 131 in 2001 , and includes the hamlets of Howtel and Pawston , along with the former upland township of Coldsmouth and Thompson 's <unk> falling to less than 100 at the 2011 Census . Details are now included in the parish of Branxton 
 Situated on the border with Scotland , Kilham had a turbulent history . It suffered from repeated Scottish incursions , and was often destroyed and laid waste . The situation was considered serious enough for a report to be made to the Privy Council of England , about a raid in 1597 which had resulted in the death of several villagers . In later , more peaceful times , the area developed into an agricultural backwater , which was gradually opened up by the construction of roads and railways . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Kilham first appears in documents in 1177 as <unk> , which is usually thought to derive from the Old English <unk> , indicating the presence of kilns . The name was still spelt <unk> as late as the 18th century . 
 = = History = = 
 Several well preserved Bronze Age settlements exist in the area around Kilham , and a cairn on Kilham Hill , excavated in 1905 , was found to conceal a cist containing burnt bones , thought to date from the period . A bronze rapier blade dating from 1500 – 1000 BC , found near the Bowmont Water in the 19th century , and now in the National Museum of Scotland in Edinburgh , provides further evidence of Bronze Age activity in the parish . 
 Iron Age hillforts are found throughout the Cheviot Hills , and the parish contains examples at Bowmont Hill , Kilham Hill , Pawston Camp , and Wester Hill . Such hillforts were not necessarily defensible , and the small interior area of most suggests they were not permanent settlements . Although some may have served as defended farmsteads , others are likely to have been animal enclosures , market places or places of worship . An enclosure at Barley Hill , in the north of the parish , is considered to have been a small farmstead , consisting of roundhouses and adjacent stockyards . 
 Towards the end of the first millennium BC , all of the remaining upland forest in the area had been cleared , and increasing numbers of settlements or homesteads were established on the high moorland . Some of these appear to have been built within the ramparts of earlier hillforts , which had been abandoned for some time . A well @-@ preserved settlement at Longknowe is thought to be Romano @-@ British , although this part of Northumberland lay beyond the Roman frontier for much of the period of occupation . Small enclosed homesteads such as this are likely to have continued in use for several centuries , and were probably only abandoned as the population moved to lower lying hamlets during the Early Medieval period . 
 In 651 King Oswine granted 12 named vills , or townships , including Shotton , and perhaps Thornington , along with a large tract of land beside the Bowmont Water , to Saint Cuthbert . The villagers would have been required to hand over the major proportion of any surplus produce and labour from these communities to the church . 
 By the 13th century , Kilham formed one of the constituent manors of the barony of Wark on Tweed . The barony had been established by King Henry I , and granted to Walter L <unk> , one of his principal agents of government in Northern England . The lord of the manor was Michael of Kilham , although he did not possess the whole township , part being held by Kirkham Priory in North Yorkshire , which had been founded by the barons of Wark . In 1269 it was recorded that the priory had 1 @,@ 000 sheep feeding on the " great moor " of Kilham . Land at Shotton and Coldsmouth was held by Kelso Abbey in the Scottish Borders . The manorial lordship passed through various hands to the Greys of Chillingham Castle , who eventually consolidated ownership of the whole township , in the 17th century acquiring the former Kirkham Priory holdings , which had earlier been sold by the crown after the dissolution of the Monasteries . 
 A bastle , or fortified farmhouse , was built at the north end of the village in the late 16th or early 17th centuries . Right up to the end of the 16th century , Kilham had suffered repeated Scottish incursions . Every valuation of the village 's lands in the 15th century revealed a state of waste and destruction . In 1541 the lack of any defensive structure was criticised by Sir Robert Bowes and Sir Ralph Ellerker , the Border Commissioners , who strongly urged that a tower be built in the village . They also reported on the tower at Howtel , which had been " <unk> and <unk> downe " during an invasion in 1497 . Howtel Tower is mentioned again by Sir Henry <unk> , who in 1584 reported to Queen Elizabeth I that it was one of a number of towers needing repair . Sir Robert Carey , Lord Warden of the Marches , in 1597 reported to the Privy Council of England : 
 On the 14th instant , at night , four Scotsmen broke up a poor man 's door at Kilham on this march , taking his cattle . The town followed , rescued the goods , sore hurt three of the Scots , and brought them back prisoners . The fourth Scot raised his country meanwhile , and at daybreak 40 horse and foot attacked Kilham , but being resisted by the town , who behaved themselves very honestly , they were driven off and two more were taken prisoners . <unk> the Scots raised <unk> ( Teviotdale ) , being near at hand , and to the number of 160 horse and foot came back by seven in the morning , and not only rescued all the prisoners but slew a man , left seven for dead and hurt very sore a great many others . 
 A map dated 1712 shows two rows of dwellings and toft enclosures in the village . A total of 19 buildings are shown , plus a watermill to the north beside the Bowmont Water , and three buildings to the south west at Longknowe . The village appears to extend slightly further along the lane to Longknowe than the current hamlet . Although not shown on the map , the ruins of an earlier chapel are believed to have existed in Chapel Field , on the hillside to the south east of the village . 
 By the latter part of the 19th century Kilham consisted of a large farm with farmhouse and two rows of cottages for the farm 's workforce . There was , in addition , a smithy and a post office . To the south , Thompson 's Walls was by 1800 an estate with a farm complex laid out around a square courtyard . Hemp and flax were grown , and a small mill is shown on maps from the 1860s onwards . The adoption of new agricultural techniques and improvements to the area 's transport infrastructure resulted in greater prosperity for Kilham 's farming community in the late 18th and 19th centuries . Enclosure of common land was intended to increase efficiency , bring more land under the plough , and reduce the high prices of agricultural production , and Howtel Common was enclosed in 1779 . Female <unk> , or <unk> , were employed to work in the fields up to the end of the 19th century . The system was recorded in the Scottish Borders as early as 1656 , and subsequently spread into Glendale . Agricultural labourers , known as hinds , were required to provide a female , often a relative or a girl living with the hind 's family , who would be on call as a day labourer whenever required . The <unk> 's work was regarded as paying the rent of the hind 's cottage . 
 Thomas Henry Scott , a police constable from Pawston , was murdered in 1880 , while attempting to arrest two poachers at <unk> . He had been <unk> and beaten . 
 The Alnwick and Cornhill Railway , owned by the North Eastern Railway , opened in 1887 , providing a rail link to Wooler and Cornhill on Tweed . There was no station at Kilham , the nearest being at Mindrum and Kirknewton , but sidings were built to handle goods traffic . Passenger services were withdrawn in 1930 , with a goods and parcels service continuing until 1965 . Kilham sidings closed in 1953 . 
 Farming at Kilham during most of the 20th century concentrated on rearing pedigree Aberdeen Angus cattle . However , mechanisation and the decline in farming incomes resulted in the farm ceasing to function as an independent unit . In 1988 the Kilham estate was divided into three separate farms : Kilham , Longknowe and Thompson 's Walls . Longknowe Farm now specialises in breeding and rearing sheep and suckler cows , while Kilham Farm is leased to a neighbouring farmer at Thornington , and some of the buildings have been converted into workshops . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Kilham stands on the south bank of the Bowmont Water in Glendale , at the mouth of Kilham Burn . Settlement is limited to dispersed farmsteads and small hamlets , of which Kilham is the largest . Glendale has a clearly defined valley floor and pronounced raised terraces . The area is relatively well wooded , with both coniferous plantations and broadleaved woodland on the surrounding hills , and areas of alder woodland and pollarded willow along the valley floor . The river forms part of the River Tweed Site of Special Scientific Interest , designated in 2001 due to its biological interest , and the River Tweed Special Area of Conservation , designated under the European Habitats Directive for the biological interest within the river system . 
 To the south , the area is dominated by Kilham Hill , 1 @,@ 109 feet ( 338 m ) high , and above Longknowe , in the valley of Kilham Burn , is the former township of Coldsmouth and Thompson 's Walls , lying in the northern limits of the Cheviot Hills . The geology of the upland area is composed of Devonian igneous rocks , and the landscape is characterised by smooth rolling hills and extensive plateaux of semi @-@ natural acidic grass moor , known locally as white grass . There are areas of heather moorland and , in wetter parts , blanket bog dominated by dwarf shrubs , sedges , sphagnum moss and cotton grass . <unk> woodland plantations are common on the upper valley slopes , with the remnants of broadleaved woodland , gorse scrub and meadow grassland in the steep sided valleys . The area reaches a height of 1 @,@ 358 feet ( 414 m ) at Coldsmouth Hill . 
 On the opposite side of the dale , to the north , are the hamlets of Howtel and Thornington . Much of this area consists of glacial gravel , and both sand and gravel were extracted at Thornington . Upstream on the Bowmont Water , the former township of Pawston lies to the south west . 
 Northumberland is the coldest county in England , with mean summer temperatures in the northern lowlands 0 @.@ 5 ° C below those found 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the south . Kilham is sheltered from the prevailing winds , which are from the south west , but there are cold winds from the east in winter . The growing season is between April and November . The low mean temperature and high rainfall result in water @-@ logging of fine textured soils , and leaching of nutrients from soils with a coarser texture . The nearest weather station for which comprehensive records are published is at Boulmer , located 29 @.@ 8 miles ( 48 @.@ 0 km ) south east of Kilham , on the North Sea coast . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Kilham , Coldsmouth and Thompson 's Walls , Howtel and Pawston were four of 15 townships in the ancient parish of Kirknewton , one of the largest parishes in England . Following the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 , parishes were grouped into unions : Glendale Poor Law Union was created in 1837 . Under the Public Health Act 1848 the area of the poor law union became Glendale Rural Sanitary District , which from 1889 formed a second tier of local government under Northumberland County Council . The four townships became civil parishes in their own right , separate from Kirknewton but within the sanitary district , in 1866 , and under the Local Government Act 1894 became part of Glendale Rural District . Coldsmouth and Thompson 's Walls , Howtel and Pawston were amalgamated into Kilham in 1955 . Glendale Rural District was abolished in 1974 , and became part of the newly created Borough of Berwick upon Tweed , which was in turn abolished as a result of the Northumberland ( Structural Change ) Order 2008 , under which Northumberland became a unitary authority in 2009 . 
 Kilham now forms part of Wooler electoral division of Northumberland County Council , represented by Anthony Murray of the Conservative Party , who was elected to the new council on its creation in 2008 . The parish does not have a parish council . 
 Since 1885 , Kilham has been part of Berwick upon Tweed parliamentary constituency . It has been represented by Sir Alan Beith , the deputy leader of the Liberal Democrats , since he won a by @-@ election in 1973 . 
 = = = Public services = = = 
 Water and sanitation are provided by Northumbrian Water , owned since 2011 by Hong Kong based Cheung Kong Infrastructure Holdings . Water supplies come from an aquifer , and are abstracted by boreholes . The electricity distribution company serving Kilham is Northern Powergrid , formerly known as CE Electric , which is owned by Berkshire Hathaway , a multinational conglomerate based in Nebraska . 
 The North East Ambulance Service , formed in 2006 , provides ambulance and paramedic services , operating out of the ambulance station at Wooler . The general provision of health services is the responsibility of Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust . The nearest hospital is Berwick Infirmary in Berwick upon Tweed , which has a 24 @-@ hour minor injuries service . 
 Law enforcement is the responsibility of Northumbria Police , the sixth largest police force in England and Wales , which was formed in 1974 by the merger of Northumberland Constabulary and part of Durham Constabulary . The local neighbourhood team is based at the police station in Berwick upon Tweed . 
 Northumberland Fire and Rescue Service , a division of Northumberland County Council , provides public protection services , operating out of the fire station at Wooler . A search and rescue service is provided by the Northumberland National Park Mountain Rescue Team and North of Tyne Search and Rescue Team . 
 = = Demography = = 
 Kilham had a population of 131 in 2001 , of which 13 @.@ 7 per cent were below the age of 16 , and 11 @.@ 5 per cent were over 64 years of age . Owner occupiers inhabited 13 @.@ 7 per cent of the dwellings , and 61 @.@ 6 per cent were rented . Holiday homes accounted for a further 12 @.@ 3 per cent of dwellings , and 12 @.@ 3 per cent were vacant . The proportion of households without use of a vehicle was 5 @.@ 2 per cent , but 34 @.@ 5 per cent had two or more . The population was predominantly white : 94 @.@ 8 per cent identified themselves as such . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Agriculture has been an important part of Kilham 's life for centuries . As early as the 13th century sheep farming had been developed on the moorland , and in 1269 it was recorded that Kirkham Priory had 1 @,@ 000 sheep on the " great moor " of Kilham . Shepherds often lived in <unk> , temporary summer settlements high in the hills . Hemp and flax were grown , and Aberdeen Angus cattle reared . The high hills and moors of Northumberland are ideal for grazing cattle and sheep , and some of England 's tastiest beef and lamb is produced . 
 In the 19th century , the upland areas were increasingly used for shooting wild gamebirds . The great landowners would hold large organised shooting parties for their friends , employing local farm workers as beaters . <unk> were responsible for looking after the birds before they were shot , and for breeding pheasants in special shelters . Arable farming was more important in the north of the parish , and was aided by increased mechanisation and improved transport links . Andesite was quarried for use as a building material , and sand and gravel extracted . 
 At the 2001 census , 72 @.@ 0 per cent of Kilham 's population were in employment ; the unemployment rate was 5 @.@ 6 per cent . Of those employed , 54 @.@ 5 per cent worked in service industries , while 46 @.@ 8 per cent were in extractive and manufacturing industries . The average distance travelled to work was 14 @.@ 9 miles ( 24 @.@ 0 km ) . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 = = = Coldsmouth and Thompson 's Walls = = = 
 Now almost unpopulated , Coldsmouth and Thompson 's Walls lies 1 @.@ 7 miles ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) south west of Kilham in the northern reaches of the Cheviot Hills . Coldsmouth Hill , 1 @,@ 358 feet ( 414 m ) high , is the highest point in the parish . Two Bronze Age burial cairns crown the summit . A flint knife , bronze dagger and cremated bone were discovered during excavations in 1929 . South of the hill St Cuthbert 's Way , a 62 miles ( 100 km ) long @-@ distance trail , passes on its route from Melrose to Holy Island . Remains of a Romano @-@ British village , on the north west slopes of the hill , include five enclosures containing the circular foundations of buildings . Nearby , Ring Chesters is an Iron Age hillfort . The enclosure contains the circular stone foundations of at least eight huts , two of which contain traces of what may be hearths . In the saddle between the two hills , the remains of the medieval settlement of Heddon , first recorded in 1296 , contain the sites of at least six longhouses , which are each divided into two rooms . The village overlies an earlier Romano @-@ British enclosed settlement . 
 Thompson 's Walls consists of two 19th @-@ century farm cottages and a group of farm buildings , notable for being built entirely of hard , igneous rock . Andesite was quarried , and was used in the construction of Yetholm church . 
 = = = Howtel = = = 
 Howtel is situated 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north east of Kilham , to the north of the Bowmont Water . The name is thought to mean Low Ground with a Wood , and the area has a number of ancient camps and settlements shown on early Ordnance Survey maps . The remains of a peel tower , which was partly destroyed in 1496 , stand in the centre of the hamlet . The walls are over 6 @.@ 6 feet ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) thick . 
 Bowmont House , a former Scottish Presbyterian chapel and manse , is on the Kilham road , to the south of the hamlet . The building dates from 1850 , and is rendered , with ashlar dressings and a Welsh slate roof . 
 = = = Kilham = = = 
 Many of the buildings in Kilham date back to the 19th century , and the stone construction is typical of Northumbrian farms in the 1850s . Locally quarried dark igneous andesite and granite were mainly used , although sandstone was brought in from the east for higher status buildings . Kilham House was transformed from a traditional farmhouse into a small country house by a substantial extension built in 1926 . The appearance was enhanced by the use of identical 12 @-@ pane windows throughout . 
 The old mill pond above the hamlet has been restored by the Northumberland National Park Authority . Blackbirds , wrens and thrushes are often seen in the hedge banks along the lane to Longknowe , and the roadside verges contain a colourful variety of flowering plants , including dog roses , St John 's wort , <unk> and bloody <unk> . Nearby is a <unk> , where Kilham 's shepherds increased the value of the fleeces by washing their sheep 's wool before it was clipped . 
 On the slopes of Kilham Hill are the remains of a <unk> , which provided shelter for shepherds watching over the sheep as they grazed . In summer the hillside is a profusion of purple and blue as wild thyme , cross @-@ leaved heath and <unk> come into bloom ; <unk> have colonised the stony ground . A stone cairn crowns the summit , and was found to conceal a Bronze Age cist containing burnt bones . From the summit , there are views over the Milfield Plain , Glendale and the Till Valley , and to Eildon Hill , Yeavering Bell and the Cheviot Hills . Buzzards , kestrels , lapwings and curlews are common , while bilberry , <unk> and heath bedstraw carpet the soil . 
 North of the hamlet , the trackbed of the former Alston and Cornhill Railway forms part of a walk along the Bowmont Water , where kingfishers , grey herons , oystercatchers and mallards can be seen . Sedge warblers are regular visitors in summer , and short @-@ eared owls hunt in the nearby tree plantation . On the northern bank of the river , <unk> Farm has a 17th @-@ century dovecote . 
 = = = Pawston = = = 
 Pawston lies 2 @.@ 3 miles ( 3 @.@ 7 km ) west of Kilham on the south bank of the Bowmont Water . It was the site of the deserted medieval village of Thornington , first recorded in 1296 . To the north east of Pawston House are single storey shelter sheds and a two @-@ storey granary , dating from the 18th century . An old beam forms a continuous <unk> over the door and two windows , and the building has a steeply pitched Scottish slate roof . South of the house is a 17th @-@ century sundial base decorated with foliage , grotesque heads and festoons . John Selby , a " gentleman dwelling at Pawston " , was killed in 1596 while defending his home against Scottish marauders . Pawston Hill has the remains of an Iron Age settlement . The locally rare wood carpet moth was found at Pawston Lake in 1929 , and a number of nationally or locally scarce plants are also present , including the autumnal water starwort , blunt leaved pondweed , gypsywort , maiden pink and <unk> . 
 Shotton Farm , immediately north of the Scottish border , marks the site of large medieval hamlet , first recorded in 1296 . A document from 1541 records that it had been laying waste for more than 30 years . Shotton House was built in 1828 , and has an ashlar facade and Scottish slate roof . Above the panelled door is a Tuscan entablature showing the year of construction and the original owner 's name . The nearby gatepiers have Greek decoration , and were added in 1829 . 
 The Rising of the North in 1569 was an attempt to depose Queen Elizabeth I and replace her with Mary , Queen of Scots . Thomas Percy , the Earl of Northumberland , one of its leaders , was betrayed while seeking shelter at Harelaw . The current Harelaw House was built in 1593 . It stands below Hare Law , 912 feet ( 278 m ) high , on which are the remains of a hillfort . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Kilham lies on the <unk> road between Akeld and Mindrum . The <unk> runs north east through Howtel to Ford , where it connects with the <unk> . A bus service is provided only on Wednesdays . Service 266 has two morning journeys operated by Glen Valley Tours , and runs a circular Wooler – Akeld – Kirknewton – Kilham – Flodden – Milfield – Akeld – Wooler route . 
 The road from Wooler through Kirknewton and Kilham to the Scottish border was converted into a turnpike by the early 19th century . In 1812 the Ford and <unk> Turnpike Trust took over responsibility for the road from Milfield through Flodden , Howtel , Kilham , Langham and Shotton to the border , and in 1834 the deviation through Thornington was included . With reduced income from tolls due to competition from the new railways , the turnpike trusts were gradually wound up in the late 19th century , and responsibility for highways taken over by Northumberland County Council after its creation in 1889 . 
 From the 1860s onwards , various schemes were promoted to build a railway line , either through Glendale or over the Milfield Plain . In 1881 the Central Northumberland Railway was proposed , linking Newcastle upon Tyne with <unk> , Rothbury , Wooler and Kelso . The threat posed by the proposal spurred the North Eastern Railway to put forward a branch line of its own between Alnwick , Wooler and Cornhill on Tweed . The company was strongly supported by the tradespeople of Alnwick , who were concerned at the loss of business if the farmers of Glendale had a direct <unk> to the rival market and shops in Rothbury . Both schemes were presented to Parliament in 1881 , and it was the North Eastern Railway 's route which gained approval , with the Alnwick and Cornhill Act passed in 1882 . The single @-@ track line opened on 5 September 1887 , having cost £ 272 @,@ 267 to build . From Wooler , it ran through Kirknewton and Kilham to Mindrum , before turning north to Cornhill on Tweed , where it joined the line from Tweedmouth to Kelso . There was no station at Kilham , but sidings were built to handle goods traffic . 
 The North Eastern Railway was amalgamated into the London and North Eastern Railway in 1923 and , just 43 years after the line opened , passenger trains were withdrawn in 1930 , the new owners claiming that passenger numbers had declined due to competition from buses . A goods and parcels service continued , but on 12 August 1948 torrential rain caused severe flooding , damaging the bridge over the Bowmont Water between Mindrum and Kilham . For a while the line operated as two separate lines with termini at Mindrum and Kirknewton , but further flooding in October 1949 destroyed the bridge at <unk> . Rather than rebuild the bridge British Railways , which had taken over the line the previous year , repaired the bridge at Mindrum , restoring services from the north through to Wooler . Goods services were withdrawn from Kilham sidings in 1953 , and the remaining northern part of the line to Wooler finally closed on 29 March 1965 . 
 Apart from a short heritage line , the <unk> Light Railway , operating between <unk> and Etal , the nearest railway station is at Berwick upon Tweed , 17 @.@ 0 miles ( 27 @.@ 4 km ) to the north east on the East Coast Main Line between London and Edinburgh . Services are provided by the East Coast Main Line Company and Cross Country Trains . <unk> , 25 @.@ 2 miles ( 40 @.@ 6 km ) east of Kilham , has a limited commuter service to Newcastle upon Tyne , operated by Northern Rail . 
 = = Education = = 
 A national school for 60 children opened at Howtel in 1875 . Primary education to the age of nine is now provided by Wooler First School , which had 101 pupils in 2007 , and is located in Wooler , 8 @.@ 0 miles ( 12 @.@ 9 km ) to the east . It was last inspected by Ofsted in 2007 . 
 Children aged from nine to 13 attend Glendale Middle School , also located in Wooler , which had 150 pupils when it was last inspected in 2010 . The school has specialist status as a Technology College , holds the Sportsmark and Healthy Schools awards , and has a " partner school " in China . 
 At the age of 13 , pupils transfer to Berwick Academy , formerly Berwick Community High School , in Berwick upon Tweed , 17 miles ( 27 km ) north east of Kilham . As a high school , it was inspected in 2007 when it had 922 pupils , including 174 in the sixth form . The academy has specialist status as both a Business and Enterprise College and as an applied learning college . In 2009 it was awarded High Performing Specialist School status , and holds a Healthy Schools award . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Robert Story , known as " the Craven Poet " , was born at Wark on Tweed in 1795 . His father was an agricultural labourer , and the family moved frequently around the Northumberland villages . When just 10 years old , Story ran away to accompany a lame fiddler on an excursion through the Scottish Borders for a month , and about a year later the family moved to Howtel , where Story attended the local school . He later claimed that this was where " I learned nearly all that I ever learned from a Master — namely to read badly , to write worse , and to cipher a little farther , perhaps than to the Rule of Three . " There he was introduced to Divine Songs for Children , and discovered a love of poetry while reading on the hills , where he was employed as a shepherd . By 1820 he had moved to <unk> in North Yorkshire where he opened a school , and in 1825 published a volume of poetry , Craven Blossoms . Algernon Percy , the Duke of Northumberland , became a patron in 1857 and financed an edition of his works . In 1859 Story was invited to Ayr for the centenary celebrations of Robert Burns , where he recited his poem on Burns . The <unk> considered that " he stands high among the minor poets of Great Britain , and many of his sweet lyrics will most assuredly descend to and be highly admired by posterity , and by none more than Yorkshiremen . " 
 A ten @-@ minute DVD postcard , The Cheviot Hills from Dawn till Dusk , shows the scene across five Cheviot valleys , including Kilham , set to the music On Cheviot Hills by Alistair Anderson . The film shows the changing moods as the day progresses , and was produced by <unk> Films , with support from the Northumberland National Park Authority . 
 Linda Scott @-@ Robinson is a painter living in Howtel . She paints local landscapes and states that her inspiration comes from the ever shifting light that constantly changes the surrounding landscape . She is a member of Network Artists , an independent association of professional artists living and working in Northumberland . 
 <unk> Sidings is an award winning model railway train shunting puzzle created by Alan Wright for the Manchester Model Railway Society 's 1978 show , based on the former Kilham Sidings on the Alnwick and Cornhill Railway . The aim of the puzzle is to create a train consisting of five of the eight wagons sitting in the sidings , in the order in which the wagons are randomly selected . 
 A local saying in Northumberland was " to take Hector 's cloak " , meaning to deceive a friend who relies on your loyalty . The saying referred to the betrayal of Sir Thomas Percy , the Earl of Northumberland , by Hector Armstrong of Harelaw . The earl , a loyal Roman Catholic , had been one of the leaders of the Rising of the North in 1569 , an attempt to depose Queen Elizabeth I and replace her with Mary , Queen of Scots . The rebels captured Barnard Castle and advanced on York but , with little popular support and facing overwhelming government forces , fled north , towards Scotland . The earl sought shelter in Armstrong 's house at Harelaw , but was betrayed to James Douglas , the Earl of Morton , the regent of Scotland . The Scots subsequently sold him to the English government for £ 2 @,@ 000 , and he was beheaded at York , refusing an offer to save his life by renouncing Catholicism . 
 = = Religion = = 
 Although an early chapel is believed to have existed in Kilham , the local parish church , dedicated to Saint Gregory the Great , is at Kirknewton . The site has been used for Christian worship since the 11th century , and the present church dates from the 12th century . It was restored in 1860 . A Scottish Presbyterian chapel , with seating for 350 worshippers , was built at Howtel in 1850 , although this is no longer in use . 
 = = Sport = = 
 <unk> is a popular pastime in the Cheviot Hills , and Coldsmouth Hill is a favoured destination , with excellent views in all directions , and two large burial cairns on its summit . It is most easily climbed from <unk> in Yetholm . St Cuthbert 's Way , a 62 miles ( 100 km ) long @-@ distance trail , passes to the south of the hill on its route from Melrose to Holy Island . Kilham Hill can be ascended from the Kilham Valley or the Kirknewton road east of Kilham . 
 The Northumbria Hang Gliding and <unk> Club , based in Newcastle upon Tyne , organises both hang gliding and paragliding at Coldsmouth Hill , which works in an easterly or west north westerly wind , and Longknowe , which works best in a west north westerly wind . 
 = <unk> ( album ) = 
 xx is the debut album by English indie pop band the xx . After they signed a contract with XL Recordings , the band recorded the album from December 2008 to February 2009 at the record label 's in @-@ house studio in London . Audio engineer Rodaidh McDonald worked with the xx during the recording sessions and strived to reproduce the intimate , <unk> quality of their demos . The band 's Jamie Smith produced xx on his laptop and created electronic beats for the songs , which he then mixed in a detailed process with McDonald . 
 Although the xx had been strongly influenced by R & B acts , the album drew comparisons from critics to alternative rock , electronica , and post @-@ punk sounds . The melancholic songs on xx featured minimalist arrangements and were built around Smith 's beats , Oliver Sim 's basslines , and sparse guitar figures played by Baria Qureshi and Romy Madley Croft , who employed reverb in her lead guitar parts . Most of them were sung as low @-@ key duets by Croft and Sim , both of whom wrote emotional lyrics about love , intimacy , loss , and desire . 
 xx was released in August 2009 by Young Turks , an imprint of XL , and received widespread acclaim from critics , many of whom named it one of the year 's best records . It sold consistently over its first few years of release , becoming a sleeper hit in the United Kingdom and the United States . Although none of its singles became hits , xx benefited commercially from the licensing of its songs to television programs and the band 's Mercury Prize win in 2010 . When Qureshi was dismissed from the group shortly after the album 's release , they continued to play as a trio on a protracted concert tour that helped increase their fanbase , reputation in the press , and confidence as performers . 
 = = Background = = 
 While students at South London 's Elliott School in 2005 , childhood friends Romy Madley Croft and Oliver Sim formed the xx with Jamie Smith and Baria Qureshi . Croft and Sim played guitar and bass , respectively , and dueted as the band 's vocalists , while Smith programmed electronic beats for their songs and Qureshi doubled as a keyboardist and additional guitarist . During late nights , Croft and Sim either shared lyrics with each other through instant messaging or rehearsed quietly with Smith and Qureshi in their bedrooms so they would not disturb the rest of the household . The xx were greatly influenced by American R & B producers such as The Neptunes and Timbaland , whose minimalist productions incorporated vocal harmonies , handclaps , unconventional samples , and pronounced beats . The band covered Aaliyah 's " Hot Like Fire " ( 1997 ) , Womack & Womack 's " Teardrops " ( 1988 ) , and other past R & B hits when they performed live and recorded their demos . 
 After posting the demos on their Myspace page , the xx drew the interest of Young Turks , an imprint label of XL Recordings . They submitted the demos to XL 's head office at Ladbroke Grove and were subsequently signed to a recording contract . The group worked with producers such as Diplo and <unk> , to no success before they were introduced to audio engineer Rodaidh McDonald by the xx 's manager Caius Pawson , who gave him three CDs of demos titled " Early Demos " , " Recorded in Rehearsal Space " , and " What Producers Did Wrong " . McDonald was impressed by the intimate quality and use of silence on the demos , which both he and the band felt may have challenged other producers who wanted to incorporate their individual tastes : " They 'd worked with about four other producers before then that had — and no discredit to them — I guess they 'd seen a lot of space to add a kind of stamp on . There was a lot of empty space in the xx 's music , even then , in the ' Early Demos ' . But we just found that the best stuff was the most sparse . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 At the behest of XL owner Richard Russell , the xx recorded their debut album at the label 's small , in @-@ house recording studio , making them the first act to record there . It was once the head office building 's rear garage before Russell transformed it at the beginning of 2008 into a makeshift writing , rehearsal , and demo space for XL 's artists . McDonald was assigned in September to manage and properly equip the room , which he liked because it was soundproof and " isolated from the rest of the office , so it wasn 't like you were working in the record company 's presence . " Croft , on the other hand , called it a " pretty confined space " the size of a bathroom . Over the next few months , McDonald and Pawson prepared a budget for the label to fund the studio 's preliminary setup , which would have recording equipment specifically suited for the xx , including a modestly sized soundboard ideal for recording a small group . 
 The xx started to record the album in December with McDonald , who engineered the sessions . They would usually record at night after XL 's staff had left , which Croft said made it feel " isolated and quite creepy " . To reproduce the sound he had heard on the band 's demos , McDonald had them write down their instruments ' settings and test different areas of the studio to determine where he should record each member . Sim , who played a Precision Bass manufactured in the 1970s , was often recorded in the hallway outside the studio with a Fender Bassman , one of several amplifiers McDonald experimented with for xx . Some of Qureshi and Croft 's guitars were also done in the hallway . Qureshi played a Gibson SG with a Fender Hot Rod Deluxe or Blues Deluxe amplifier , while Croft played an Epiphone Les Paul on most of the album and a Gibson ES @-@ 335 on a few songs . For her lead guitar parts , Croft used a delay pedal and a Roland Micro Cube amplifier with a reverb setting , which McDonald felt would best replicate her " icy " , echo @-@ filled sound on the demos . 
 After all the instrumental elements had been tracked , Croft and Sim recorded their vocals together , rarely singing backup to one another on any of the songs . McDonald believed it was important for the singers be " in sync " and share the same mental state or mood when performing full takes of songs , some of which he said benefited from when they were both " quite tired and emotional " . He had Croft and Sim sing into Neumann microphones on most of the songs in order to make their vocals sound as " intimate " and conversational as possible . The microphones were among the more expensive items he borrowed for the studio 's preliminary setup so XL would not be overwhelmed with a costly budget . 
 Despite McDonald 's close involvement , the xx had been encouraged to self @-@ produce their album by Russell ; he believed it would remain faithful to both the band 's distinctive live sound and the DIY ethic practiced at XL since its beginnings as a rave label . Smith was chosen by the rest of the group to produce xx . He used Logic 8 recording software on his Mac Pro and often worked late nights in a nearby conference room while they recorded in the studio with drafts of his beats . Smith produced rhythm tracks with an Akai MPC sampler , which he occasionally processed through a Roland RE @-@ 201 and other effects units . He also created click tracks for the rest of the band to keep timing when they recorded their individual parts . After those parts had been recorded , he refined and incorporated his beats into the songs for three to four weeks . Croft trusted that Smith , who did not want to conceal any imperfections by overproducing xx , would make it practical for them to perform live rather than layer the songs with several guitar or vocal elements . 
 Most of xx was recorded from late December to late January before McDonald and Smith began an exhaustive mixing process , which lasted two weeks . For each song , they mixed one or two tracks of each instrument and used Waves Audio components to equalize the recordings . Having enjoyed how the demos captured unintended background noises such as street sounds , McDonald deliberately left certain sounds that would have otherwise been unwanted in the final mix . " I wanted it to sound like people in a room , rather than this polished kind of perfect crystalline thing " , he explained . " It was all the small details that we really liked . " In February , the group wrote and recorded " Fantasy " , " Shelter " , and " Infinity " before finishing xx by month 's end . Sim sang his vocals for " Infinity " on the side of the studio opposite from Croft after his microphone had been unintentionally moved there , which resulted in a distant @-@ sounding vocal exchange on the song . While recording " Shelter " , a mechanical part from the guitar amplifier loosened and caused it to make a clattering sound , which McDonald and the xx chose to retain . " It was just like this missing piece of percussion that the track needed ! " , McDonald recalled . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The songs on xx were developed around a framework of basslines and beats , while incorporating simple guitar riffs for melody , rhythm , and texture ; their melodic notes were separated by rests . Croft said the band 's style of instrumentation had become defined by the limited equipment they originally used : " My guitar sound pretty much came from discovering there was reverb on my little practice amp and really loving the mood it created . " The loudest song , " Intro " , was a largely instrumental recording with double @-@ tracked beats , distorted keyboard , non @-@ lexical vocables , and a guitar riff . Songs such as " Crystalised " and " VCR " began with a melodic ostinato and some understated sounds , including a xylophone on the latter , before leading to quietly sung verses . Croft and Sim exchanged verses on " Crystalised " while backed by the sound of drum stick clicks and basslines before the beat was heard . On the austerely arranged " Night Time " , Croft sang its first two minutes over only guitar and bass before its beat developed . " Fantasy " was highlighted by a shoegazing guitar sound . 
 While McDonald observed a predominant R & B element , Russell felt the xx 's music evoked the early hip hop records he listened to when he was young , as they were often limited to vocals , samples , and beats . Music journalists , however , inferred from xx that their influences were alternative rock acts such as Portishead , Young Marble Giants , and Cocteau Twins , the last of which Croft said she had never heard before the album was released . The Scotsman described xx as a minimalist , melancholic indie pop record that draws on elements from electronica and R & B , as well as The Cure and other alternative groups . According to Sarah Boden of The Observer , the album 's unadorned , dream pop love songs are reminiscent of Cocteau Twins and Mazzy Star , because they feature low tempos , moody melodies , and rhythms influenced by R & B and dubstep . Their arrangements have what Neil McCormick called " a very British , industrial aspect " , somewhat similar to the dub @-@ inflected post @-@ punk sound of English producer Martin Hannett and his work with the band Joy Division . Both Croft and Sim said their combination of seemingly disparate influences could have been attributed to the variety in each band member 's music collection . 
 On xx , Croft and Sim touched on themes of love , desire , and loss in their songwriting , which Croft said has " always been based around emotions , right from the start . My favourite songs are usually quite sad and I think heartbreak is something that so many people can connect with . " Like Croft , Sim said he wrote much of his lyrics at night when his emotions ran " a bit higher " . Because of their reserved personalities , Robert Christgau believed they relied on a low @-@ key , vulnerable style and " traded ideas about intimacy as contemporaries , comrades , prospects , lovers , ex @-@ lovers , and friends " . According to NME magazine 's Emily Mackay , all of the songs dealt with the consuming emotions associated with first love , including the tacit intimacy on " VCR " , the yearning expressed on " Heart <unk> a Beat " , and the premature affection warned of on " Crystalised " . Petra Davis from The Quietus argued that the thematic crux of xx was in the succession of songs from " Islands " to " Shelter " , each of which saw " a radical shift in perspective on a similar — perhaps a single — love story . " 
 The album 's Roman numeral title referred to each of the band members having turned 20 years old by the time xx was released . Because of their age , many critics interpreted the songs as nocturnal depictions of adolescent lust . Philip Sherburne wrote in Spin that xx brimmed with a " young lust " often found in rock music , and recordings such as " Fantasy " and " Shelter " expressed a jaded yearning , particularly in a lyric from the latter song : " Can I make it better with the lights turned on " . Croft vehemently denied this : " We were writing these songs when we were 17 . I can honestly say I 've never thought this is about my sex life . " Croft and Sim , who were both gay , did not intend for the songs to be heard as romantic duets ; she said they were singing " past each other " rather than each other . Having combined their individually written lyrics , they could not definitely explain what their songs were about , although Croft said Sim 's lyrics resonated with her nonetheless and enjoyed the personal interpretation it offered . " You can put them into your own life " , she explained , " like , ' Oh , this is my song . ' " The romantic situations Sim wrote of had been inspired by other people . " I hadn 't really had any relationships to be working off , but I had a huge interest in life , and looking at other people 's relationships around me " , he said . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " Crystalised " was released as the xx 's debut single on 27 April 2009 and helped build interest among listeners and journalists . It was part of a series of singles from xx , which included " Basic Space " on 3 August , " Islands " on 26 October , and " VCR " on 25 January 2010 . They did not receive significant airplay on BBC Radio 1 in the United Kingdom , and other media outlets believed the xx did not warrant strong attention ; one editor from NME said at the time that the band was not ideal for their magazine 's front cover . In the United States , the xx benefited from the word @-@ of @-@ mouth marketing of blogs , beginning when they performed six consecutive sold @-@ out shows at New York City clubs such as Pianos and the Mercury Lounge months prior to the album 's release . 
 Several of the songs from xx were licensed by XL to television programs in the UK and North America . " Intro " became widely used as theme music in television , including sports highlights , episodes of series such as Law & Order and Cold Case , an advertisement for AT & T , and BBC 's coverage of the 2010 British general election . Along with their placement in television , songs from the record were used by North American chain stores such as Starbucks and Urban Outfitters as background music at their locations . According to McCormick , these marketing strategies helped the xx develop enough media presence to garner " over half a million sales around the world without ever having anything as vulgar as a hit " . Kris Chen , XL 's A & R senior vice president , believed the exposure was desired and necessary for promoting an album that was not " driven by pop radio " . Although the band realised their music had to be marketed somehow , Croft expressed reservations about " putting our music on everything , just to put it to anything just for the sake of money " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 xx was released by Young Turks in August 2009 to widespread critical acclaim . According to Alexis Petridis , it was the most acclaimed album of the year , and at Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , it received an average score of 87 , based on 25 reviews . Critics particularly praised the group 's sound on the album ; Simon Price wrote in The Independent that they were being universally lauded for their " atmospheric indie rock , and rightly so " . In a review for The New Yorker , Sasha Frere @-@ Jones remarked that xx rewarded repeated listens because of the band 's disciplined playing , while Mark Edwards of The Sunday Times said it succeeded with simple but " very near perfect " pop songs . AllMusic 's Heather Phares called the instrumentation impeccable and said she was impressed by how poised and refined such a young group sounded . Matthew Cole from Slant Magazine believed Croft and Sim 's rapport gave an emotional weight to the music , which he said sounded timeless and capable of appealing to both indie and popular tastes . Christgau , writing in MSN Music , was somewhat more impressed by the music than by the lyrics , although he said the underlying force behind Croft and Sim 's charmingly minimalist songs was a " spiritual dimension " offered by their ability to " shift roles without ever seeming hostile , cold or even unsupportive " . Daily Telegraph critic Jack <unk> considered it " one of this year 's most beautiful and original debut albums " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times felt the singers were too disengaged and reticent to reveal any genuine emotion . " Though they 're singing to each other , it rarely feels intimate " , he wrote , " more like two shy teenagers , eyes cast downward , awkwardly talking to the ground " . In the opinion of PopMatters critic Ben Schumer , the consistent structures and tempos of the songs made them sound somewhat monotonous on what was an otherwise affecting nocturnal mood piece . Conversely , Joshua Errett from Now found the music and singing mesmerizing but lamented the lyrics , which he deemed emotionally immature and " overwrought " . 
 By the end of 2009 , xx had appeared on several critics ' lists of the year 's best albums . It was ranked second by NME , sixth by Uncut , third by Pitchfork , ninth by Rolling Stone , and fourth by Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot . The Guardian named it the year 's best record in their annual critics poll and Tim Jonze , the newspaper 's editor , hailed it as not only " the sound of 2009 , [ but also ] a distinctive musical statement of the like we may never get to hear again " . It also finished seventh in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop poll of American critics and third in HMV 's Poll of Polls , an annual list compiled by British music retailer HMV and collated from best @-@ album nominations made by journalists in the English and Irish music press . In decade @-@ end lists of the greatest records from the 2000s , The Times and its sister paper The Sunday Times ranked xx thirtieth and seventy @-@ seventh , respectively . In September 2010 , it won the Mercury Prize , an annual award given to the best album from the UK and Ireland . Before the nominations shortlist had been announced , bookmakers and critics considered the xx as favorites and predicted they would win over the more high @-@ profile artists Corinne Bailey Rae , Paul Weller , and Dizzee Rascal . McCormick , one of the critics who predicted its victory , explained that it " seemed the record that most represented Britain " with its charmingly intimate style and unique take on modern pop tastes . 
 xx was not an immediate chart success , but eventually became a sleeper hit . It debuted at number 36 on the UK 's Official Albums Chart and sold 4 @,@ 180 copies in the first week after it was released , while in the United States it did not chart higher than number 92 on the Billboard 200 . The album sold steadily for the next 44 weeks until July 2010 , when its announcement as a Mercury Prize nominee led to a sharp increase in sales and a jump from number 44 to 16 on the British chart . By then , it had sold more than 150 @,@ 000 copies in the UK and 179 @,@ 000 copies in the United States. xx remained in the top 20 of the Official Albums Chart in the weeks leading up to the Mercury Prize ceremony . Immediately after its win that week , it climbed from number 16 to 3 on its highest weekly sales — 28 @,@ 666 copies — and reached a total of 212 @,@ 835 copies sold . According to McCormick , " its triumph is a rare example of the Mercury Prize doing music lovers a service . " In the US , the album reached sales of 350 @,@ 000 copies by June 2012 with consistent weekly sales during its first two years of release , which Time magazine 's Melissa Locker said was " quite a feat " in an era of music piracy , media streaming , and YouTube . 
 Although xx had been highly anticipated by XL , the album 's success exceeded expectations in the press . McDonald said their direction and sound would have been entirely different had expectations been higher . Croft was " baffled " by the acclaim given to what she viewed as an album they had made " for themselves " . Sim had mixed feelings about its success and believed it could affect his songwriting in the future : " This album was done with no expectations . No one knew who we were . When I was writing the songs , I didn 't think anyone other than Romy or James would ever actually hear them . Now I know so many people will . I might feel I have to be a bit more private . " At the Mercury Prize ceremony , he said the time since its release has " felt like a haze " , but that the event serves as " a moment of clarity " . In their acceptance speech , the band announced they would use the £ 20 @,@ 000 prize money to build their own studio , where they subsequently wrote and recorded their second album Coexist . When Coexist debuted in September 2012 , xx was still on the British chart at number 37 and had sold 446 @,@ 734 copies in the UK . The following year , it was ranked number 237 on NME 's list of the top 500 albums of all time and named the 74th greatest debut record by Rolling Stone , who found its music radical as " an exercise in restraint , in the artful use of space and silence " during popular music 's period of maximalism . 
 = = Touring = = 
 After xx was released , the xx toured Europe and North America through the end of 2009 . Their first show in August was at Hoxton Hall in London , which Sim recalled was attended by only 112 people . When Pitchfork 's positive review of the album elicited greater interest among American listeners , the xx were booked as the supporting act for the Friendly Fires 's tour of larger club venues in the US . The difficulties of touring early on exacerbated the growing tensions between the xx and Qureshi , which culminated in her dismissal after a difficult stay at an October music festival in New York . It was reported that she had become fatigued and left the group after they cancelled several concerts . Sim disputed those reports and said her departure had been the band 's decision : " We 've grown up to be very different people . It wasn 't working any more musically or as a friendship . " Croft told NME in November , " I guess ' personal differences ' would be the standard way to say it . I guess it 's just the intensity of being on tour , things are so much heightened . " 
 Rather than find a replacement for Qureshi , the xx continued to tour as a smaller line @-@ up of guitar , bass , and percussion . They also reduced their already minimalist arrangements for songs in concert , although Sim jokingly said Smith " needs another few arms so he can work everything " after Qureshi 's departure . In their shows , Croft abandoned playing solos and chords in favor of less defined figures and motifs , while Smith performed beats and ambient sounds from his synth pad as an accompaniment to Croft and Sim 's playing . Because their style had been suited to the small venues they first played , the xx focused more on the production value of their concerts and performing for larger audiences while on tour . They dressed in dark clothing and illuminated the stage with light boxes displaying their x @-@ shaped , white @-@ on @-@ black logo . 
 With a growing fanbase , the xx made commitments to more concerts and extended their tour for the album . They intermittently toured for 18 months , including most of 2010 . That year , they embarked on their first US tour and played high @-@ profile festivals such as South by Southwest , Coachella , and Bonnaroo . Croft recalled their show at Coachella , where they performed for 30 @,@ 000 people : " That was the moment when I was , like , Oh , my God , I think people might be into this . " They were also a supporting act for fellow English group Florence and the Machine . By touring frequently , the xx broadened their reputation among listeners and the press . In March 2010 , they played two consecutive nights at the Shepherd 's Bush Empire in London to capacity crowds and appeared on the cover of NME , who proclaimed them " the most underrated band in Britain " . In April and May , they toured the southern US and Japan , which Croft said was most demanding part of the tour because " none of us had been away from home continuously for so long . " They were accompanied during this six @-@ week period by photographer Jamie @-@ James Medina , who later published his photos of the group in his book The Tourist ( 2010 ) . 
 While on tour , the xx acclimated themselves to the increased attention and became considerably more sociable and confident . As Sim recounted , " If you 'd have put me onstage at London 's Shepherd 's Bush Empire a few years ago , I 'd have run away . I couldn 't have done it . We used to be terrified . " In June , the band played the Glastonbury Festival in Somerset and , according to journalist Jude Rogers , displayed a newfound confidence through the rest of their summer and " post @-@ Mercury [ Prize ] autumn " concerts : " Croft would sing more boldly , Sim developed an onstage swagger and Smith began experimenting with different rhythms and textures . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Romy Madley Croft and Oliver Sim , all music composed by Madley Croft , Sim , Jamie Smith , and Baria Qureshi , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = The xx = = = 
 Romy Madley Croft – guitar , vocals 
 Oliver Sim – bass , vocals 
 Jamie Smith – beats , mixing , MPC , production 
 Baria Qureshi – guitar , keyboards 
 The xx – design , photography 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Phil Lee – art direction , design 
 Rodaidh McDonald – engineering , mixing 
 Nilesh Patel – mastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Type Ib and Ic supernovae = 
 Types Ib and Ic supernovae are categories of stellar explosions that are caused by the core collapse of massive stars . These stars have shed ( or been stripped of ) their outer envelope of hydrogen , and , when compared to the spectrum of Type Ia supernovae , they lack the absorption line of silicon . Compared to Type Ib , Type Ic supernovae are hypothesized to have lost more of their initial envelope , including most of their helium . The two types are usually referred to as stripped core @-@ collapse supernovae . 
 = = Spectra = = 
 When a supernova is observed , it can be categorized in the Minkowski – Zwicky supernova classification scheme based upon the absorption lines that appear in its spectrum . A supernova is first categorized as either a Type I or Type II , then sub @-@ categorized based on more specific traits . Supernovae belonging to the general category Type I lack hydrogen lines in their spectra ; in contrast to Type II supernovae which do display lines of hydrogen . The Type I category is sub @-@ divided into Type Ia , Type Ib and Type Ic supernovae . 
 Type Ib / Ic supernovae are distinguished from Type Ia by the lack of an absorption line of singly ionized silicon at a wavelength of 635 @.@ 5 nanometres . As Type Ib / Ic supernovae age , they also display lines from elements such as oxygen , calcium and magnesium . In contrast , Type Ia spectra become dominated by lines of iron . Type Ic supernovae are distinguished from Type Ib in that the former also lack lines of helium at 587 @.@ 6 nm . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Prior to becoming a supernova , an evolved massive star is organized in the manner of an onion , with layers of different elements undergoing fusion . The outermost layer consists of hydrogen , followed by helium , carbon , oxygen , and so forth . Thus when the outer envelope of hydrogen is shed , this exposes the next layer that consists primarily of helium ( mixed with other elements ) . This can occur when a very hot , massive star reaches a point in its evolution when significant mass loss is occurring from its stellar wind . Highly massive stars ( with 25 or more times the mass of the Sun ) can lose up to 10 − 5 solar masses ( M ☉ ) each year — the equivalent of 1 M ☉ every 100 @,@ 000 years . 
 Type Ib and Ic supernovae are hypothesized to have been produced by core collapse of massive stars that have lost their outer layer of hydrogen and helium , either via winds or mass transfer to a companion . The progenitors of Types Ib and Ic have lost most of their outer envelopes due to strong stellar winds or else from interaction with a close companion of about 3 – 4 M ☉ . Rapid mass loss can occur in the case of a Wolf @-@ Rayet star , and these massive objects show a spectrum that is lacking in hydrogen . Type Ib progenitors have ejected most of the hydrogen in their outer atmospheres , while Type Ic progenitors have lost both the hydrogen and helium shells ; in other words , Type Ic have lost more of their envelope ( i.e. , much of the helium layer ) than the progenitors of Type Ib . In other respects , however , the underlying mechanism behind Type Ib and Ic supernovae is similar to that of a Type II supernova , thus placing Type Ib / c between Type Ia and Type II . Because of their similarity , Type Ib and Ic supernovae are sometimes collectively called Type <unk> supernovae . 
 There is some evidence that a small percent of the Type Ic supernovae may be the progenitors of gamma ray bursts ( GRB ) ; in particular , type Ic supernovae that have broad spectral lines corresponding to high @-@ velocity outflows are thought to be strongly associated with gamma ray bursts ( GRB ) . However , it is also hypothesized that any hydrogen @-@ stripped Type Ib or Ic supernova could be a GRB , dependent upon the geometry of the explosion . In any case , astronomers believe that most Type Ib , and probably Type Ic as well , result from core collapse in stripped , massive stars , rather than from the thermonuclear runaway of white dwarfs . 
 As they are formed from rare , very massive stars , the rate of Type Ib and Ic supernovae occurrence is much lower than the corresponding rate for Type II supernovae . They normally occur in regions of new star formation , and have never been observed in an elliptical galaxy . Because they share a similar operating mechanism , Type Ib / c and the various Type II supernovae are collectively called core @-@ collapse supernovae . In particular , Type Ib / c may be referred to as stripped core @-@ collapse supernovae . 
 = = Light curves = = 
 The light curves ( a plot of luminosity versus time ) of Type Ib supernovae vary in form , but in some cases can be nearly identical to those of Type Ia supernovae . However , Type Ib light curves may peak at lower luminosity and may be redder . In the infrared portion of the spectrum , the light curve of a Type Ib supernova is similar to a Type II @-@ L light curve . ( See Supernova . ) Type Ib supernovae usually have slower decline rates for the spectral curves than Ic . 
 Type Ia supernovae light curves are useful for measuring distances on a cosmological scale . That is , they serve as standard candles . However , due to the similarity of the spectra of Type Ib and Ic supernovae , the latter can form a source of contamination of supernova surveys and must be carefully removed from the observed samples before making distance estimates . 
 = The Old Man and the Key = 
 " The Old Man and the Key " is the thirteenth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired in the United States on the Fox network on March 10 , 2002 . In the episode , Grampa Simpson falls in love with Zelda , an old woman who has just moved in to the senior home in which Grampa lives . However , Grampa is not the only one in the home who is infatuated with Zelda . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Lance Kramer . The storyline was pitched by Vitti , who based it on an article about social status in senior homes . The episode features Olympia Dukakis as Zelda , and Bill <unk> as his television character Ray J. Johnson . The song " Ode to Branson " , which was written by Vitti and composed by Alf Clausen , was submitted for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music And Lyrics in 2002 , which it ultimately lost to a score from The Blue Planet . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Homer anticipating the new XFL season before Marge tells him that the league has folded , which she hears from the league 's MVP , who now works at her hair salon . The Simpson family then gets a phone call from Grampa Simpson 's retirement home saying that he is dead . When the family arrives he informs them the home got it wrong and Grampa is still alive . A beautiful new woman named Zelda moves into his retirement home . Grampa is determined to win her love over Zack , the youthful owner of a minivan . After renewing his driver 's license ( which Patty quickly gave to him in return that he would not wink at her again ) , Grampa convinces Homer to let him borrow the car to romance her . Although he impresses the new old gal , Homer and Marge think she is a hoochie and only likes Grampa because he can drive . After he crashes Homer 's car in a death race with the Souvenir Jackitos , a rival seniors gang , Homer gets particularly livid with Grampa and takes his keys away , forbidding him to drive ever again . Zelda informs Grampa that she got them tickets to Branson , Missouri but when he tells her he does not have a car Zelda leaves with Zack and his minivan . 
 Grampa steals Marge 's car and " kidnaps " Bart , taking him on the road to Branson , Missouri to win back Zelda . When realizing that Grandpa and Bart are heading to Branson , Homer , Marge , Lisa , and Maggie , take a bus there . However they end up not in Branson , Missouri , but Bronson , Missouri ( where everyone in town looks and talks like Charles Bronson ) . Ray Jay Johnson , Mr. T , <unk> , Yakov Smirnoff , Charlie Callas , Bonnie Franklin and Adrian <unk> are the stars of the show in Branson they go to see . ( Tennessee Ernie Ford is backstage , but crumbles to dust when Grampa proves he is dead by showing the deceased singer his obituary . ) Grampa calls out to his lady from on @-@ stage , but then denounces her in front of everyone , who then call her ( in a chant ) a hoochie , sending her fleeing off the stage in tears . Grampa then reconciles with Homer . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Old Man and the Key " was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Lance Kramer . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on March 10 , 2002 . The idea for the episode was pitched by Vitti , who was inspired by an article about senior homes . The article described senior homes as being a lot like high schools , in that there are popular and unpopular people , and that those who , for example , own a car are " like kings " . Vitti suggested that the episode should be that " Grampa 's life [ is ] basically like that of a teenager " , with Homer acting as if he was Grampa 's father . The Souvenir Jackitos , who challenge Grampa to a death race in the episode , were conceived from an observation by the writers . The writers argued that the only ones buying expensive trademarked jackets are old people who want to appear younger . 
 A scene in the episode shows Grampa and Bart driving to Branson with Marge 's car , listening to the radio . Because the scene consists entirely of auditive gags , the Simpsons staff had difficulty figuring out what to show visually during the scene . In the DVD audio commentary for the episode , Jean explained that these scenes “ get a really big laugh at the table , ” but are subsequently hard for the animators . The scene makes use of a repeated background , an animation technique made famous by Hanna @-@ Barbera in order to cut budget . 
 The song " Ode to Branson , " which is performed by several " washed @-@ up " celebrities , was composed by Alf Clausen and written by Vitti . Even though Vitti received sole credit for writing the song , parts of the lyrics were written by Simpsons writer Carolyn Omine , which were then revised by fellow writer Matt Selman . Selman was especially satisfied with the rhyme sung by Mr. T ; he stated that whenever he feels down , he thinks of that rhyme and that it " boosts [ him ] up inside . " The episode features American actress Olympia Dukakis as Grampa 's love interest Zelda . American comedian Bill <unk> also makes an appearance , as his television character Ray J. Johnson . The owner of the minivan is portrayed by series regular Hank Azaria , who imitated the voice of Clark Gable for the character . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
