 In July 1987 , Guns N ' Roses released its debut album Appetite for Destruction . Although the record received critical acclaim , it experienced a modest commercial start , selling as many as 500 @,@ 000 copies in its first year of release . However , fueled by the band 's relentless touring and the mainstream success of the single " Sweet Child o ' Mine " — Rose 's tribute to his then @-@ girlfriend Erin Everly — the album rose to the No. 1 position on the Billboard 200 in August 1988 , and again in February 1989 . To date , Appetite for Destruction has sold over 30 million copies worldwide , 18 million of which sold in the United States , making it the best @-@ selling debut album of all time in the U.S. 
 During the band 's performance at the Monsters of Rock festival in Castle Donington , England , in August 1988 , two fans were crushed to death when many in the crowd of 107 @,@ 000 began slam @-@ dancing to " It 's So Easy " . Rose had halted the show several times to calm the audience . From then on , he became known for personally addressing disruptive fans and giving instructions to security personnel from the stage , at times stopping concerts to deal with issues in the crowd . In 1992 , Rose stated , " Most performers would go to a security person in their organization , and it would just be done very quietly . I 'll confront the person , stop the song : ' Guess what : You wasted your money , you get to leave . ' " As a result of the deaths at Monsters of Rock , the festival was canceled the following year . 
 In November 1988 , Guns N ' Roses released the stopgap album G N ' R Lies , which sold more than five million copies in the U.S. alone . The band – and Rose in particular – were accused of promoting racist and homophobic attitudes with the song " One in a Million " , in which Rose warns " niggers " to " get out of my way " and complains about " faggots " who " spread some fucking disease . " During the controversy , Rose defended his use of the racial slur by claiming that " it 's a word to describe somebody that is basically a pain in your life , a problem . The word nigger doesn 't necessarily mean black . " In 1992 , however , he conceded that he had used the word as an insult towards black people , stating , " I was pissed off about some black people that were trying to rob me . I wanted to insult those particular black people . I didn 't want to support racism . " In response to the allegations of homophobia , Rose stated that he considered himself " pro @-@ heterosexual " and blamed this attitude on " bad experiences " with gay men , citing an attempted rape in his late teens and the alleged molestation by his biological father . The controversy led to Guns N ' Roses being dropped from the roster of an AIDS benefit show in New York organized by the Gay Men 's Health Crisis . 
 With the success of Appetite for Destruction and G N ' R Lies , Rose found himself lauded as one of rock 's most prominent <unk> . By the time he appeared solo on the cover of Rolling Stone in August 1989 , his celebrity was such that the influential music magazine agreed to his absolute requirement that the interview and accompanying photographs would be provided by two of his friends , writer Del James and photographer Robert John . MTV anchorman Kurt Loder described Rose as " maybe the finest hard rock singer currently on the scene , and certainly the most charismatic . " 
 = = = 1990 – 93 : International success with Use Your Illusion = = = 
 In early 1990 , Guns N ' Roses returned to the studio to begin recording the full @-@ length follow @-@ up to Appetite for Destruction . Recording sessions initially proved unproductive due to Steven Adler 's struggle with drug addiction , which made him unable to perform and caused sessions to abort for several days at a time . Adler was fired the following July and replaced by Matt Sorum of The Cult . Keyboardist Dizzy Reed also joined the band that year at Rose 's insistence . Sorum and Reed played their first show with Guns N ' Roses at Rock in Rio 2 in January 1991 . The group fired its long @-@ time manager , Alan Niven , in May of that year ; Rose reportedly forced the dismissal of Niven against the wishes of his band mates by refusing to complete the new album until Niven was gone . He was replaced by roadie Doug Goldstein , whom Izzy Stradlin described as " the guy who gets to go over to Axl 's at six in the morning after he 's smashed his $ 60 @,@ 000 grand piano out of the picture window . " 
 In May 1991 , still without an album to promote , the band embarked on the two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year Use Your Illusion Tour , which became known for its financial success and myriad controversial incidents that occurred during shows , including late starts , on @-@ stage rantings and even riots . Rose received much criticism for his late appearances at concerts , sometimes taking the stage hours after the band was scheduled to perform . In July 1991 , 90 minutes into a concert at the Riverport Amphitheater near St. Louis , after on @-@ stage requests from Rose for security personnel to confiscate a fan 's video camera , Rose himself dived into the crowd to seize the contraband item . After being pulled back on stage , he announced , " Thanks to the lame @-@ ass security , I 'm going home ! " and departed , following which some 2500 fans staged a riot , resulting in an estimated $ 200 @,@ 000 in damages . 
 In September 1991 , with enough material completed for two albums , Guns N ' Roses released Use Your Illusion I and Use Your Illusion II , which debuted at No. 2 and No. 1 respectively on the Billboard 200 , a feat not achieved by any other group . By the albums ' release , however , Rose 's relationships with his bandmates had become increasingly strained . His childhood friend Izzy Stradlin abruptly left the group in November 1991 ; he was replaced by Gilby Clarke of Kill For Thrills . Of his reasons for leaving , Stradlin said , " I didn 't like the complications that became such a part of daily life in Guns N ' Roses , " citing the riot and Rose 's chronic lateness as examples , as well as his new @-@ found sobriety making it difficult to be around other bandmates continued alcohol and substance abuse . At some point during the remainder of the tour , Rose reportedly demanded , and received , sole ownership of the Guns N ' Roses name from Slash and Duff McKagan ; Rose allegedly issued an ultimatum — they had to sign the name over to him or he would not perform . ( In 2008 , however , Rose stated that these reports were false and that the alleged coercion would have rendered the contract legally untenable . ) 
 Another riot occurred in August 1992 at Montreal 's Olympic Stadium , during a co @-@ headlining tour with Metallica . Prior to Guns N ' Roses ' appearance , Metallica 's set was cut short after singer @-@ guitarist James Hetfield suffered second @-@ degree burns in a pyrotechnics accident . However , Guns N ' Roses was unable to go on stage early , because Rose once again was late arriving at the venue . Nearly an hour into their show , Rose complained of voice problems before walking off stage , following which a riot erupted in downtown Montreal , resulting in an estimated $ 400 @,@ 000 in damages . In November of that year , Rose was convicted of property damage and assault in relation to the Riverport riot ; he was fined $ 50 @,@ 000 and received two years ' probation . 
 Guns N ' Roses played its final show of the Use Your Illusion Tour on July 17 , 1993 at River Plate Stadium in Buenos Aires ; it proved to be Rose 's last live performance with the band for seven and a half years . The following August , Rose testified in court against Steven Adler , who had filed a lawsuit contending that he had been illegitimately fired . When the judge ruled against Rose , he agreed to an out @-@ of @-@ court settlement of $ 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 and 15 % of the royalties for everything Adler recorded prior to his departure . In November of that year , Guns N ' Roses released " The Spaghetti Incident ? " a cover album of mostly punk songs , which proved less successful than its predecessors . Rose had included the hidden track " Look at Your Game , Girl " , a song written by convicted murderer Charles Manson , which he intended as a personal message to his ex @-@ girlfriend Stephanie Seymour . Controversy ensued , and the band subsequently pledged to donate any royalties to the son of one of Manson 's victims . 
 = = = 1994 – 2000 : Hiatus = = = 
 Without consultation from his band mates , Rose did not renew Gilby Clarke 's contract with the band in June 1994 , as he claimed Clarke to be only a " hired hand . " Tension between Rose and Slash reached a breaking point after the latter discovered that Rose had hired his childhood friend Paul " Huge " Tobias as Clarke 's replacement . Although the band recorded material during this time , it was ultimately not used because , according to Rose , their lack of collaboration prevented them from producing their best work . Slash finally left Guns N ' Roses in October 1996 due to his differences with Rose , while Matt Sorum was fired in June 1997 after an argument over Tobias 's involvement in the band . Duff McKagan departed the band in August of that year , leaving Rose and Dizzy Reed as the only remaining band members of the Use Your Illusion era . 
 As the stability of Guns N ' Roses collapsed , Rose withdrew from public view . The band never officially broke up , although it did not tour or perform for several years and no new material was released . Rose continued to recruit new musicians to replace band members who either left or were fired . By the late 1990s , he was considered to be a recluse , rarely making public appearances and spending most of his time in his mansion in Malibu . In various media reports , he was referred to as the " Howard Hughes of rock " and " rock 's greatest recluse . " Rose was said to spend his nights rehearsing and writing with the various new lineups of Guns N ' Roses , working on the band 's next album , Chinese Democracy . 
 = = = 2001 – 11 : Touring in support of Chinese Democracy = = = 
 In January 2001 , Rose resurfaced with Guns N ' Roses at Rock in Rio 3 to commence the decade @-@ long Chinese Democracy Tour , though the majority of its scheduled concerts over the next two years did not take place . A critically panned surprise appearance at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards was followed by an incident in November when a riot erupted at Vancouver 's General Motors Place after Rose failed to show up for a scheduled concert . When venue staff announced the cancellation , a riot broke out , resulting in an estimated $ 100 @,@ 000 in damages . As the band 's line @-@ up continued to evolve , his constant band mates were guitarist Richard Fortus , bassist Tommy Stinson , and keyboardists Dizzy Reed and Chris Pitman . 
 After the tour was cancelled by the promoter , Rose again withdrew from the public view . During this time , he joined Slash and Duff McKagan in a lawsuit against Geffen Records in an unsuccessful attempt to block the release of the Greatest Hits compilation album , and lent his voice to the 2004 video game Grand Theft Auto : San Andreas . In a rare interview in January 2006 , Rose stated that " people will hear music this year . " While Guns N ' Roses toured extensively throughout 2006 and 2007 , with several guest appearances by Izzy Stradlin , Chinese Democracy again failed to materialize . Rose did collaborate with his friend Sebastian Bach on his album Angel Down . 
 Fifteen years after its last album , in November 2008 , Guns N ' Roses released Chinese Democracy exclusively via the electronics retailer Best Buy . Rose did not contribute to the album 's promotion ; by December , he had reportedly been missing for at least two months and had not returned phone calls or other requests from his record label . In a subsequent interview , Rose stated that he felt he had not received the necessary support from Interscope Records . A year after the album 's release , in December 2009 , Guns N ' Roses embarked on another two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years of touring , including a headlining performance at Rock in Rio 4 . Rose was subsequently sued by former band manager Irving Azoff , who sought $ 1 @.@ 87 million in unpaid fees related to the tour . In a countersuit , Rose alleged Azoff had deliberately mismanaged the band and their album 's promotion to force him to join his former band mates for a reunion tour . Both cases were settled . According to Rose in 2011 , part of the settlement agreement dictated that Rose and the current Guns N ' Roses had to do a number of performances with Azoff 's company Live Nation as the promoter . 
 In November 2010 , Rose sued Activision , the producers of the video game Guitar Hero , for $ 20 million , claiming that Activision had violated an agreement with him to not include any reference to Slash or his band Velvet Revolver in the game in return for a license to use the song " Welcome to the Jungle " . Instead , Rose noted that an image of Slash was used on the game 's front cover . Rose 's claim was summarily dismissed in February 2013 , when the judge ruled that Rose had not brought suit on the contract , which relied on oral promises , within the two @-@ year statute of limitations that began with the game 's October 2007 release . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Hall of Fame and regrouping ; AC / DC = = = 
 Together with the other members of Guns N ' Roses ' classic lineup , Rose was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2012 , their first year of eligibility . He did not attend the induction ceremony in April , however , as he had announced in an open letter three days prior . Rose , who had long been on bad terms with several of his former band mates , wrote that the ceremony " doesn 't appear to be somewhere I 'm actually wanted or respected . " He subsequently joined his band in residencies at The Joint in Las Vegas in 2012 and 2014 , as part of the Appetite for Democracy Tour celebrating the anniversaries of Appetite for Destruction and Chinese Democracy . By mid @-@ 2014 , the group 's new album , recorded concurrently with Chinese Democracy , and a remix album were completed and pending release , but no new material emerged . 
 In response to an informal study that named him the ' World 's Greatest Singer " based on a study of vocal ranges , Rose told Spin in 2014 , " If I had to say who I thought the best singers were , I 'd say first that I don 't know there 's a definitive answer as in my opinion it 's subjective , and second that my focus is primarily rock singers . That said , I enjoy Freddie Mercury , Elvis Presley , Paul McCartney , Dan McCafferty , Janis Joplin , Michael Jackson , Elton John , Roger Daltrey , Don Henley , Jeff Lynne , Johnny Cash , Frank Sinatra , Jimmy Scott , Etta James , Fiona Apple , Chrissie Hynde , Stevie Wonder , James Brown and a ton of others ( predominantly Seventies rock singers ) and would rather hear any of them anytime rather than me ! " 
 Rose and Slash reunited for the Not in This Lifetime ... Tour , one of the most @-@ anticipated reunion tours in rock history . Alongside Dizzy Reed and returning member Duff McKagan , who had previously made guest appearances with the band , they comprised two @-@ thirds of the band 's Use Your Illusion @-@ era line @-@ up , with Chinese Democracy @-@ era members Richard Fortus and Frank Ferrer joining new member Melissa Reese to fill out the rest of the lineup . Rose shared a stage with Slash for the first time in nearly 23 years during the group 's surprise performance at The Troubadour in April 2016 , ahead of its headlining shows at Coachella . He additionally joined Australian hard rock band AC / DC to perform as lead singer for the remainder of the band 's Rock or Bust World Tour , after long @-@ time lead vocalist Brian Johnson had to stop touring due to hearing problems . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Health issues = = = 
 During Rose 's late teens , a psychiatrist concluded that his delinquent behavior was evidence of psychosis . In addition , he made note of his high IQ . By the age of 26 , Rose had been diagnosed with bipolar disorder . Although he was prescribed lithium to combat the disorder , he stated it was ineffective and claimed to be in control of his moods . In a subsequent interview , he questioned the diagnosis altogether , stating , " I went to a clinic , thinking it would help my moods . The only thing I did was take one 500 @-@ question test — ya know , filling in the little black dots . All of sudden I 'm diagnosed manic @-@ depressive . ' Let 's put Axl on medication . ' Well , the medication doesn 't help me deal with stress . The only thing it does is help keep people off my back because they figure I 'm on medication . " In contrast to his public image , Rose was not a heavy drug user , though he did not disavow the use of illicit substances entirely . 
 In the early 1990s , Rose became a staunch believer in homeopathic medicine , and began regularly undergoing past life regression therapy . He went public with his " uncovered memories " of being sexually abused by his biological father at the age of two , which he said had stunted his emotional growth : " When they talk about Axl Rose being a screaming two @-@ year @-@ old , they 're right . " His dislike of touring was caused in part by the various illnesses he contracted over time due to hotel and airplane air conditioning , including a mutated form of polio , a mutated form of rubella , swine flu , scarlet fever , and strep throat in his heart . He expressed his belief that these health problems were caused by him unconsciously lowering his own resistance as a form of " self @-@ punishment " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = With Guns N ' Roses = = = 
 Appetite for Destruction ( 1987 ) 
 G N ' R Lies ( 1988 ) 
 Use Your Illusion I ( 1991 ) 
 Use Your Illusion II ( 1991 ) 
 " The Spaghetti Incident ? " ( 1993 ) 
 Chinese Democracy ( 2008 ) 
 = = = With Hollywood Rose = = = 
 The Roots of Guns N ' Roses ( 2004 ) 
 = = = With <unk> = = = 
 Ready to Rumble ( 2014 ) 
 = = = Guest appearances = = = 
 The Decline of Western Civilization Part II : The Metal Years – Original Motion Picture Soundtrack by various artists ( 1988 ; " Under My Wheels " ft . Alice Cooper ) 
 The End of the Innocence by Don Henley ( 1989 ; " I Will Not Go Quietly " ) 
 Fire and Gasoline by Steve Jones ( 1989 ; " I Did U No Wrong " ) 
 Pawnshop Guitars by Gilby Clarke ( 1994 ; " Dead Flowers " ) 
 Anxious Disease by The <unk> ( 1996 ; " Anxious Disease " ft . Slash ) 
 Angel Down by Sebastian Bach ( 2007 ; " Back in the Saddle , " " ( Love Is ) a <unk> , " " Stuck Inside " ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Millennium Group = 
 The Millennium Group is a fictional secret society featured in the crime thriller television series Millennium . Having begun life as a Christian sect at the end of the 1st century AD , the Group grew into a far @-@ reaching network which , as the 3rd millennium approached , presented itself as a private investigative firm liaising with law enforcement organizations . Despite being fraught with internal schisms , the Group tried on several occasions to artificially instigate the end of the world as the year 2000 approached . 
 The Millennium Group 's role as an investigative organization was based on the real @-@ life Academy Group , a society of retired law enforcement agents in the United States . The presentation of the Group varied as the series progressed , with its role changing from that of a benevolent investigative group to an antagonistic mystic sect . The Millennium Group has met with negative responses , with its vacillating depiction being a focus of criticism both from critics and from series star Lance Henriksen . 
 = = Fictional history = = 
 The Millennium Group first started life as an early Christian sect around the year 100 AD . By the late 10th century , the Group had adopted the ouroboros as its symbol , and the phrase " this is who we are " as a motto . However , around this time schisms within the group began to form as members fought for control of an artifact — the preserved hand of a saint said to be capable of ultimately defeating the devil . Despite these internal rivalries , the group persisted into the 20th century . The Group 's modern organization stems from J. Edgar Hoover , the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation , who began the process of turning the Group 's attention to criminal investigation in order to monitor individuals and societal trends . 
 As the 3rd millennium approached , the Group 's internal differences began to manifest into two factions — the " Roosters " , who believed in a religiously eschatological view of the end of the world , and the " Owls " , who believed the world would end with a secular natural disaster . Attempting to instigate the end of the world artificially , the Rooster faction began to develop a lethal virus ; in 1998 they released this virus in the Pacific Northwest , killing upwards of seventy people before the outbreak was contained . A year later , a vastly depleted Millennium Group staged one last attempt to trigger the apocalypse , resurrecting deceased members in order to create the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse ; when this plot was foiled by the FBI , it was believed to have caused the dissolution of the Group . 
 = = Production = = 
 The inspiration for the Millennium Group was a real @-@ life organization called the Academy Group , which consisted of retired law enforcement agents working as a private investigative firm . Millennium 's creator Chris Carter had come to know members of the Academy Group through contacts he had made with the Federal Bureau of Investigation while researching his earlier television series The X @-@ Files . The Academy Group focused on offender profiling , which shaped the main Millennium Group characters of Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) and Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) . Describing his initial inception of the Group , Carter has stated " they believe that all this random violence we see these days , there may actually be some order in the chaos [ ... ] These guys think that , if they care enough , that they can stem the tide of this thing " . 
 In the series ' second season , new executive producers Glen Morgan and James Wong began to explore a new direction for the Group , moving away from its investigative function and giving a more religious focus . The tone of the second season focused more on the supernatural , showing the Group dealing with demonic forces more than the serial killers of the first season . Producer Ken Horton felt that the increased focus on the Group in the second season arose as the first season 's use of serial killers as episodic antagonists had " overpowered " its storytelling , making it necessary to turn the show 's attention elsewhere instead ; the focus switched from external forces and villains to the internal workings of the Group . The introduction of schisms within the Group was inspired by Wong 's research into the Knights Templar and Freemasonry , as he considered these secretive organizations to have mirrored the way he wanted to present the Group , and he felt each contained factions or reactionary elements which he wanted to recreate . 
 During the third season , the Millennium Group became the series ' chief villains , playing an antagonistic role against Frank Black rather than the supportive role they had previously played . Series star Lance Henriksen , who portrayed Black , felt that this change was unnecessary and damaged the series , as it discarded the work that had been done to " build up " the Group in previous seasons . Henriksen would later state his belief that the " idea of a cultish kind of Millennium Group [ ... ] just about destroyed the show " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical opinions of the Millennium Group 's role within the series have generally been negative , tending to focus on their inconsistent presentation . Writing in the collection Back to Frank Black : A Return to Chris Carter 's Millennium , author Joseph <unk> found that the changing nature of the Group 's aims and methods seemed contradictory , writing that " over the course of Seasons Two and Three , the Millennium Group appears to become more dedicated to promoting fear of the future than to fighting it " . In another essay in this collection , Gordon Roberts described the Group as " endlessly fascinating " , and compared the Group to an organized crime syndicate , likening its requirement of continued devotion to the family unit . 
 Keith Uhlich , writing for Slant magazine , felt that the " reinvention of the Millennium Group from a criminal consulting firm to an ancient , protective sect " did not fit with Carter 's typical character development , which focussed on individuals and the careers that " define their existence " . The A.V. Club 's Zack Handlen felt that the third season 's focus on a villainous Group reduced them to " yet another cabal with seemingly limitless influence and power " , describing them as " just another one of Carter ’ s beloved shadowy conspiracies " . 
 = 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt = 
 The 1937 Social Credit backbenchers ' revolt took place from March to June 1937 in the Canadian province of Alberta . It was a rebellion against Premier William Aberhart by a group of backbench ( not part of the cabinet ) members of the Legislative Assembly ( MLAs ) from his Social Credit League . The dissidents were unhappy with Aberhart 's failure to provide Albertans with C $ 25 monthly dividends through social credit as he had promised before his 1935 election . When the government 's 1937 budget made no move to implement the dividends , many MLAs revolted openly and threatened to defeat the government in a confidence vote . 
 The revolt took place in a period of turmoil for Aberhart and his government : besides the dissident backbenchers , half of the cabinet resigned or was fired over a period of less than a year . Aberhart also faced criticism for planning to attend the coronation of George VI at the province 's expense and for stifling a recall attempt against him by the voters of his constituency . 
 After a stormy debate in which the survival of the government was called into question , a compromise was reached whereby Aberhart 's government relinquished considerable power to a committee of backbenchers . This committee , dominated by insurgents , recruited two British social credit experts to come to Alberta and advise on the implementation of social credit . Among the experts ' first moves was to require a loyalty pledge from Social Credit MLAs . Almost all signed , thus ending the crisis , though most of the legislation the experts proposed was ultimately disallowed or struck down as unconstitutional . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the midst of the Great Depression , Calgary schoolteacher and radio evangelist William Aberhart became a convert to a British economic theory called social credit . Believing it could end the depression and restore prosperity , he began to promote it around Alberta . When the provincial government proved resistant to adopting it , Aberhart resolved to field social credit candidates in the 1935 provincial election . These candidates won 56 of the province 's 63 seats , and Aberhart became Premier of Alberta . 
 In the runup to the campaign , Aberhart promised to increase Albertans ' purchasing power by providing monthly dividends to all citizens in the form of non @-@ negotiable " credit certificates " . While he did not commit to any specific dividend amount , he cited $ 20 and , later , $ 25 per month as reasonable figures . Though he noted that these figures were given " only for illustrative purposes " , he repeated them so often that , in the assessment of his biographers David Elliott and Iris Miller , " it would have been impossible for any regular listener not to have gained the impression that Aberhart was promising him $ 25 a month if Social Credit should come to power . " 
 Aberhart had been in some conflict with C. H. Douglas , social credit 's British originator . Douglas , while assiduously avoiding specific comment on the Albertan proposals , submitted them to his Social Credit Secretariat for review ; it found them to be " fallacious from start to finish . " 
 By the end of 1936 , Aberhart 's government had made no progress towards the promised dividends , leaving many Albertans disillusioned and frustrated . These Albertans included some of Aberhart 's own Social Credit MLAs , who had been elected on the promise of dividends and were angry at Aberhart 's failure to follow through . Some of them felt that , while the idea of social credit was sound , Aberhart lacked a real understanding of Douglas 's theory and could not implement it . These MLAs wanted Douglas or somebody from his British organization to come to Alberta and deliver on Aberhart 's campaign promises . One such MLA , Samuel Barnes , had been expelled from the Social Credit caucus and from the Social Credit League for voicing these views . 
 = = Genesis = = 
 In December 1936 , John Hargrave , the leader of the Social Credit Party of Great Britain and Northern Ireland , visited Alberta . While he had been disowned by Douglas , many MLAs frustrated with Aberhart saw Hargrave as their saviour . On arrival in Alberta , he met with Aberhart and his cabinet , who told him that the Canadian constitution ( which made banking a matter of federal , rather than provincial , jurisdiction ) was an obstacle to their introducing social credit . Hargrave proposed a plan for implementing social credit in Alberta ; while he acknowledged that it was unconstitutional , he believed that the federal government would not dare enforce its jurisdiction in the face of broad popular support for social credit . After he presented his plan to a group of Social Credit MLAs , the news media began to report that Aberhart intended to implement a radical and unconstitutional set of laws . Aberhart immediately disavowed any " intention of drastic legislation " and , after studying Hargrave 's plan , announced that neither he nor his cabinet supported it . 
 Despite this statement , the Social Credit caucus invited Hargrave to explain his plan , which he did to the approval of many caucus members . Attorney @-@ General John Hugill pointed out that the plan was unconstitutional , to which Hargrave replied that he was " not interested in legal arguments . " Two weeks later , Hargrave left the province , telling the press that he " found it impossible to co @-@ operate with a government which [ he considered ] a mere vacillating machine . " In this message , some MLAs found confirmation of their misgivings about Aberhart . A group of them , reported as numbering anywhere from five ( " soon joined by eight or ten others " ) to 22 , began to hold meetings in Edmonton 's Corona Hotel to , as Brian Brennan puts it , " plot Aberhart 's downfall " . Brennan identifies their leader as Pembina 's Harry Knowlton Brown , while T. C. Byrne names Ronald Ansley , Joseph Unwin , and Albert Blue . 
 To make matters worse for Aberhart , Minister of Lands and Mines Charles <unk> Ross resigned late in 1936 , followed by Provincial Treasurer Charles Cockroft on January 29 , 1937 . Neither minister 's resignation was directly related to the dissidents ' complaints : Ross resigned over disagreements with Aberhart on oil policy , while Cockroft left over a combination of ill health , clashes with Aberhart over the issue of a federal @-@ provincial loan council , government investment policies , and Aberhart 's approach to patronage . Nevertheless , the resignations were the public 's first clue of dissent in Social Credit 's ranks . Cockroft 's resignation was followed by that of his deputy , J. F. Perceval , and there were rumours that Hugill and Minister of Agriculture and Trade and Industry William Chant would soon follow . This left Minister of Health Wallace Warren Cross , Minister of Public Works and Railways and Telephones William Fallow , and Provincial Secretary Ernest Manning as Aberhart 's only indisputably loyal ministers , and Manning was away from the legislature , ill with tuberculosis . On February 19 , William Carlos Ives of the Supreme Court of Alberta dealt the government another blow when he struck down key provincial legislation , including one act reducing the interest paid on the province 's bonds by half ( though this was only a technical defeat , since the government had been defaulting on its bond payments since the previous April ) . 
 On February 25 , a new session of the legislature opened with the speech from the throne , delivered by Chief Justice Horace Harvey in the absence of Lieutenant @-@ Governor Philip Primrose . Its commitment to social credit was limited to a vaguely worded promise to pursue " a new economic order when social credit becomes effective . " Three days later , on his weekly radio program , Aberhart acknowledged that he had been unable to implement the monthly dividends during the eighteen @-@ month period he had set as his deadline , and asked Social Credit constituency association presidents to convene meetings of all Social Credit members to decide whether he ought to resign . He suggested that , in light of poor spring road conditions in rural areas , these meetings be delayed until early June , during which time he would remain in office . 
 = = Open dissent = = 
 The media objected to Aberhart 's plan to place his government 's future in the hands of the 10 % of Albertans who were Social Credit members ; the Calgary Herald called for an immediate election . To many Social Credit MLAs , Aberhart 's greater offense was bypassing them , the people 's elected representatives . This was especially irksome in view of social credit 's political philosophy , which favoured technocratic rule and held that elected representatives ' only legitimate function was channelling the public desire ; by appealing directly to Social Credit members , Aberhart appeared to be denying the MLAs even this role . In the legislature , Conservative leader David Duggan called for Aberhart 's resignation ; in a move that Brennan reports shocked the assembly , his call was endorsed by Social Credit backbencher Albert Blue . 
 On March 11 or 12 , Cockroft 's replacement as Provincial Treasurer , Solon Low , introduced the government 's budget . It included no implementation of social credit , and was attacked by the opposition parties as " the default budget " and by insurgent Social Crediters as a " banker 's budget " ( a harsh insult given Social Credit 's dim view of the banking industry ) . Ronald Ansley rose immediately to attack it as containing " not one single item that even remotely resembled Social Credit . " Blue , again echoing Duggan , threatened on March 16 to vote against the government 's interim supply bill , the defeat of which , under the conventions of the Westminster parliamentary system , would force the government 's resignation . In response , Aberhart praised Blue 's courage in speaking his mind , and called him a worthy Social Crediter . 
 Surprised by Aberhart 's refusal to be drawn into open conflict , the insurgents needed time to reassess their strategy . They got that time when , on March 17 , Lieutenant @-@ Governor Primrose died , necessitating a five @-@ day adjournment while the federal government selected a replacement . When the legislature reconvened March 22 or 23 , the dissidents filibustered against the budget . Albert Bourcier opened debate , and was followed by , among others , Edith Rogers , Ansley , and Wilson Cain . On March 24 , Harry Knowlton Brown moved an adjournment , which was carried over the government 's objections by a vote of 27 to 25 . Though the insurgents considered this a vote of non @-@ confidence in Aberhart 's government , he refused to resign ; he acknowledged , however , that he would do so if the budget itself was defeated . 
 = = Coronation and recall petition = = 
 Though the bulk of the revolt took place in and around the legislature over the issue of social credit and government fiscal policy , Aberhart was also under attack on other fronts . He had been invited to attend the coronation of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth , set for May 1937 in London , and planned to go . Douglas , challenged by Hargrave for the leadership of the social credit movement and under attack by some of his own followers for his lack of cooperation with the world 's first social credit government , offered to host Aberhart , and a member of Douglas 's social credit secretariat was planning a speaking tour for Aberhart . In the same speech in which he threatened to bring down the government on the supply motion , Blue attacked the trip as an extravagance that depression @-@ ridden Alberta could ill afford . Faced with a political insurgency at home , Aberhart reluctantly decided at the end of March to cancel his trip , inaccurately claiming that he had never definitely decided to go . 
 Such a retreat was not an option in the face of another of Aberhart 's troubles . One of Social Credit 's 1935 promises had been the introduction of recall for MLAs , which they had implemented with their first legislative act . As Aberhart 's popularity fell , the residents of his own Okotoks @-@ High River riding , where he had been elected in a by @-@ election shortly after the general election ( in which he had not run ) , availed themselves of the legislation . On April 9 their petition was endorsed by the riding 's Social Credit constituency association , and by fall it had gathered the signatures of the required two thirds of the electorate . In response , the Social Crediters repealed the Recall Act retroactive to its date of origin ; Aberhart claimed that oil companies active in his riding had intimidated their workers into signing the petition , and that some of the signatories had moved to the area specifically to sign . 
 = = Manoeuvring and negotiation = = 
 On March 29 , in the aftermath of the insurgent victory on Brown 's adjournment motion , Aberhart gave notice of closure on the budget debate . Belatedly realizing that this move would be risking his government in a vote that he might very well lose , he then announced that he would seek the consent of the legislature to withdraw his closure motion and move an interim supply motion instead . The unanimous consent needed to withdraw the closure motion was refused , and the motion itself was defeated . That evening , Aberhart negotiated with the insurgents for four hours until a compromise was accepted : the insurgents would support the supply bill , in exchange for which the cabinet would introduce a bill amending the Social Credit Measures Act to establish a board of MLAs empowered to appoint a commission of " experts " to implement social credit . 
 On March 31 the insurgents kept their part of the agreement by allowing the supply bill to be passed on second reading and the budget to be hoisted for ninety days . However , when the cabinet introduced its promised bill , the insurgents claimed that it was not as agreed and refused to support it . Instead , they demanded Aberhart 's resignation and announced that they were prepared to take over the government within 24 hours . A delegation put this demand to Aberhart in the evening of March 31 ; according to them , he agreed to resign if they allowed the supply bill to pass a third reading . They did so , but Aberhart denied that he had agreed to resign and refused to do so unless he was defeated in a general election . The insurgents , leery of Aberhart 's oratorical powers and the reach of his weekly radio show , wanted to avoid an election . Even so , they rejected a motion by Low to raise their pay for the session by $ 200 , seeing it as a crass bribe . 
 On April 8 or 12 , the government capitulated . Low 's Alberta Social Credit Act delivered what the insurgents wanted , including the creation of " Alberta credit " in the amount of " the unused capacity of industries and people of Alberta to produce wanted goods and services " , the establishment of " credit houses " to distribute this credit , and the creation of a Social Credit Board . The bill was passed , and the insurgents were placated , though Brown warned during a cross @-@ province speaking tour that they were determined to see social credit implemented , and " if anyone gets in our way , he 's going to get into trouble ... we must choose between principles and party , between Social Credit and Premier Aberhart . " 
 = = Social Credit Board and commission = = 
 The Social Credit Board comprised five backbenchers . Insurgent Glenville MacLachlan was chair , and Aberhart loyalist Floyd Baker was secretary . The other three members were insurgents Selmer Berg , James L. McPherson , and William E. Hayes . The Board was empowered to appoint a commission of between three and five experts to implement social credit ; the commission was to be responsible to the Board . 
 Historians have taken different approaches to analyzing the effect of the Board on traditional Westminster parliamentary governance . C. B. MacPherson emphasized " the extent to which the cabinet had abdicated in favour of a board composed of a few private members of the legislature " , Byrne agrees that " in some respects , the powers granted to the board superseded those of the Executive Council " but notes that " Aberhart was permitted to carry on with regular government operations . " Elliott and Miller take a similar approach to MacPherson 's , suggesting that " Aberhart and his cabinet ... were in a position , strange in a cabinet system of government , of being ruled in the matter of economic policy by a board of private members that would be under the influence of Social Credit ' experts ' . " Barr disagrees , arguing that the Board was " still under the control of cabinet " and pointing out that " the cabinet was left with the power " , through its privileged position in introducing legislation , " to supplement or alter the provisions of the Alberta Social Credit Act " under which terms the board was constituted . 
 Whatever the relative influence of the Board and cabinet , the latter disavowed any ownership of the act that established the former . Though it was a government bill , sponsored by Solon Low , the Provincial Treasurer explained that he took no responsibility for it , as it was drawn up by a committee of insurgents " without the interference of the cabinet " . Though some insurgents complained that the version of the bill introduced by the government was different than that drafted by the committee , MacLachlan insisted that there had been no material changes . The bill was passed April 13 , and the legislature adjourned the following day . 
 Immediately after , MacLachlan invited Douglas to come to Alberta and take the head of the expert commission . Douglas suggested that MacLachlan come to London to discuss the matter ; MacLachlan left April 29 , arrived in London May 9 , and proceeded to meet with Douglas at his fishing lodge . Douglas refused to come to Alberta himself , but provided two of the " experts " the Board was charged with finding . The first was L. D. Byrne , who was in the insurance business , was an expert on social credit , and was appointed to do most of the substantive work . The second , tire salesman George Frederick Powell , was expected to handle the commission 's public relations . Powell arrived in Edmonton June 10 with MacLachlan , while Byrne followed several weeks later . 
 While MacLachlan was in England finding his experts , feuding continued in Alberta . Aberhart fired William Chant , a known <unk> , from his cabinet after he refused to resign . Both sides accused one another of subservience to the banking industry , the Social Credit League 's sworn enemy . Baker , the board 's sole Aberhart loyalist , travelled the province defending his premier ; at one 4 @,@ 000 person meeting in Calgary , he was shouted down by angry supporters of the insurgency . A petition calling for Aberhart 's resignation circulated among backbenchers , and proved to be a plant by the cabinet to test MLAs ' loyalty . Outwardly , however , the Social Crediters showed a united front as they awaited the promised experts ; in the first recorded vote after the legislature reconvened June 7 , all insurgents present voted with the government , though 13 were absent . 
 One of Powell 's first actions on arriving in Edmonton was to prepare a " loyalty pledge " committing its signatories " to uphold the Social Credit Board and its technicians . " Most Social Credit MLAs signed , and the six who did not wrote to Powell assuring him of their loyalty to Douglas 's objectives ( though one , former Provincial Treasurer Cockroft , later left the Social Credit League and unsuccessfully sought re @-@ election as an " Independent Progressive " ) . The insurgency was over . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Byrne and Powell prepared three acts for the implementation of social credit : the Credit of Alberta Regulation Act , the Bank Employees Civil Rights Act , and the Judicature Act Amendment Act . The first required all bankers to obtain a license from the Social Credit Commission and created a directorate for the control of each bank , most members of which would be appointed by the Social Credit Board . The second prevented unlicensed banks and their employees from initiating civil actions . The third prevented any person from challenging the constitutionality of Alberta 's laws in court without receiving the approval of the Lieutenant @-@ Governor in Council . All three acts were quickly passed . New Lieutenant @-@ Governor John C. Bowen , asked to grant royal assent , called Aberhart and Attorney @-@ General Hugill to his office . He asked Hugill if , as a lawyer , he believed that the proposed laws were constitutional ; Hugill replied that he did not . Aberhart said that he would take responsibility for the bills , which Bowen then signed . As they left the meeting , Aberhart asked Hugill for his resignation , which he received . Shortly after , the federal government disallowed all three acts . Powell was not discouraged , stating that the acts " had been drawn up mainly to show the people of Alberta who were their real enemies , and in that respect they succeeded admirably . " 
 Soon after the bills were introduced , Social Credit MLAs were subjected to a new loyalty pledge , this one shifting the target of their loyalty from the Social Credit Board to the cabinet . Six MLAs — including former cabinet ministers Chant , Cockroft , and Ross — refused to sign , and were ejected from caucus . 
 In the fall , Aberhart re @-@ introduced the three disallowed acts in altered form , along with two new acts . The Bank Taxation Act increased provincial taxes on banks by 2 @,@ 230 % , while the Accurate News and Information Act gave the chairman of the Social Credit Board a number of powers over newspapers , including the right to compel them to publish " any statement ... which has for its object the correction or amplification of any statement relating to any policy or activity of the Government or Province " and to require them to supply the names of sources . It also authorized cabinet to prohibit the publication of any newspaper , any article by a given writer , or any article making use of a given source . Bowen reserved approval of the bills until the Supreme Court of Canada could comment on them ; all were ruled unconstitutional in Reference re Alberta Statutes . 
 During the fall session in which the offending bills were proposed , police raided an Edmonton office of the Social Credit League and confiscated 4 @,@ 000 copies of a pamphlet called " The Bankers ' Toadies " , which urged its readers as follows : " My child , you should NEVER say hard or unkind things about Bankers ' Toadies . God made snakes , slugs , snails and other creepy @-@ crawly , treacherous and poisonous things . NEVER , therefore , abuse them — just exterminate them ! " The pamphlet also listed eight alleged toadies , including Conservative leader Duggan , former Attorney @-@ General John Lymburn , and Senator William Antrobus Griesbach . Powell and Social Credit whip Joe Unwin were charged with criminal libel and counsel to murder . Both were convicted of the former charge . Unwin was sentenced to three months hard labour ; Powell was sentenced to six months and deported . 
 Aberhart 's government was re @-@ elected in the 1940 election with a reduced majority of 36 of 63 seats . Among the defeated incumbents were dissident leader Brown , the convicted Unwin , the expelled Barnes , and the Provincial Treasurer Low . Aberhart won re @-@ election by running in Calgary ; his replacement as Social Credit candidate in Okotoks – High River was soundly defeated . Aberhart died in 1943 and was replaced as Premier by Ernest Manning , who steered the Social Credit League in a more conservative and conventional direction until his 1968 retirement . 
 Though the disallowance of banking bills put an end to any real chance of social credit being implemented at the provincial level , the Social Credit Board persisted until 1948 , when it was dissolved in response to a number of its anti @-@ semitic pronouncements and its suggestion that the secret ballot and political parties be eliminated . 
 = Baldwin of Forde = 
 Baldwin of Forde or Ford ( c . 1125 – 19 November 1190 ) was Archbishop of Canterbury between 1185 and 1190 . The son of a clergyman , he studied canon law and theology at Bologna and was tutor to Pope Eugene III 's nephew before returning to England to serve successive bishops of Exeter . After becoming a Cistercian monk he was named abbot of his monastery at Forde and subsequently elected to the episcopate at Worcester . Before becoming a bishop , he wrote theological works and sermons , some of which have survived . 
 As a bishop , Baldwin came to the attention of King Henry II of England , who was so impressed he insisted that Baldwin become archbishop . In that office , Baldwin quarrelled with his cathedral clergy over the founding of a church , which led to the imprisonment of the clergy in their cloister for more than a year . Baldwin spent some time in Wales with Gerald of Wales , preaching and raising money for the Third Crusade . After the coronation of King Richard I , the new king sent Baldwin ahead to the Holy Land , where he became embroiled in the politics of the Kingdom of Jerusalem . Baldwin died in the Holy Land while participating in the crusade ; his long @-@ running dispute with his clergy led one chronicler to characterise Baldwin as more damaging to Christianity than Saladin . 
 = = Ecclesiastical career = = 
 Born in Exeter around 1125 , Baldwin was the son of Hugh d <unk> , Archdeacon of Totnes , and a woman of unknown name who later became a nun . Gervase of Canterbury 's story that he was from an even humbler background has been shown by modern scholarship to stem from bias on the medieval chronicler 's part . It is possible that he studied at Bologna in the 1150s with the future Pope Urban III . Robert Warelwast , who was Bishop of Exeter from 1138 to 1155 , had sent Baldwin to Italy to study law . Baldwin was also said to have taught at Exeter , although this is not substantiated by any contemporary record . In 1150 or 1151 Pope Eugene III appointed him tutor to Eugene 's nephew . By 1155 Baldwin seems to have returned to England , where he joined the household of Robert of Chichester , Bishop of Exeter . 
 Baldwin attracted the attention of Bartholomew Iscanus , Bishop of Exeter , who made him archdeacon at Totnes in about 1161 , after Baldwin 's father 's death . Baldwin was known as a canon lawyer during his holding of Totnes . He received a letter from John of Salisbury in 1167 , complaining about Bartholomew 's conduct during the Becket controversy . John accused Bartholomew of not properly supporting Thomas Becket the Archbishop of Canterbury in his dispute with the king , urging Baldwin to influence the bishop to increase his support , and not to sign any appeal by the English bishops against Becket . Other letters from John dealt with rumours concerning Roger , the Bishop of Worcester , who John had heard was speaking badly of Becket . John 's purpose seems to have been to have Baldwin pass along a warning from Becket to Roger about his behaviour ; John was a supporter of Becket 's during the latter 's exile . In 1169 Baldwin was once again peripherally involved in the Becket dispute , when he objected to Becket 's excommunication of a number of noblemen and clergy for opposing Becket 's cause . Baldwin 's objection was not so much that they were excommunicated , but that no warning had been given that such an action was contemplated . 
 Baldwin became a monk in about 1170 , and then abbot of the Cistercian monastery of Forde . He was well known as a canonist , and often acted as a judge @-@ delegate for the papacy , hearing cases that had reached the Roman Curia and been remanded to local experts for decision . In 1166 , Baldwin was the addressee of a work by John of Salisbury , <unk> longa , which was one of the tracts written during the Becket controversy . It was probably at this time that Baldwin wrote De <unk> <unk> . In 1175 he served with his old bishop , Bartholomew , as joint papal judge in a dispute between Malmesbury Abbey and Josceline de Bohon , the Bishop of Salisbury . In 1178 he was recommended to Pope Alexander as a possible candidate for a <unk> , but this never occurred . 
 Baldwin became Bishop of Worcester on 10 August 1180 . While at Worcester , he impressed King Henry II by intervening in a secular case to prevent a hanging on a Sunday . Although the medieval writer Walter Map said that Baldwin was determined to continue writing even after his election to the bishopric , none of Baldwin 's writings can be dated to his time as bishop except for one sermon . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 Baldwin was translated from the see of Worcester to the see of Canterbury in December 1184 , after Henry II let it be known that he would accept only Baldwin at Canterbury ; the previous incumbent , Richard of Dover , had died in April that year . The monks put forward three candidates from within Christ Church Priory : Odo , who had been prior of Christ Church and was then Abbot of Battle Abbey , Peter de Leia , a Cluniac prior of Wenlock Priory and later Bishop of St David 's , and Theobald , Abbot of Cluny , but none of them found favour with the English bishops . Instead , the prelates selected the king 's choice , Baldwin . The selection of Baldwin took place only after a dispute between the members of the cathedral chapter of Canterbury and the suffragan bishops of Canterbury , both of whom claimed the right to elect the new archbishop . 
 Baldwin received his pallium from Pope Lucius III along with Lucius ' approval of his translation . Baldwin was named a papal legate in 1185 , although his authority was limited to his own archdiocese and did not extend into the Archdiocese of York . 
 = = = Dispute with Christ Church Priory = = = 
 During his time as archbishop there was a dispute with the monks of Christ Church Priory in Canterbury , who resented Baldwin 's attempts to impose stricter control over them and disputed the legitimacy of Baldwin 's election . For his part , Baldwin did not approve of the luxurious and pampered life the monks of Christ Church lived , and felt that they profited too much from the cult of Thomas Becket . 
 The dispute escalated when Baldwin deprived the monks of some of the revenues of their monastic estates . After that , Baldwin proposed to establish a church dedicated to Becket in Canterbury itself , staffed by secular rather than monastic clergy . The monks of the cathedral chapter saw this proposed foundation as the first step in an attempt to change the see of Canterbury from a monastic cathedral chapter , a peculiarity of the English Church , to the more normal pattern of secular clergy . It is not clear if Baldwin himself intended such a plan , but the other bishops supported the effort , as contemporary writers made clear . Baldwin sought the advice of Hugh , the Bishop of Lincoln , who advised Baldwin to abandon the plan as it would only cause distress to all parties . The controversy was long and involved and , at one point , the monks were imprisoned within their own buildings for a year and a half , from January 1188 to August 1189 . This led to the suspension of the liturgy in the cathedral . Eventually all the prominent ecclesiastics and monastic houses of Europe were forced into choosing sides in the dispute . In October 1189 , in an attempt to gain control , Baldwin appointed Roger Norreys as the chapter 's prior , an appointment widely acknowledged by contemporaries as putting a useless individual into the office . His plan for financing the church involved soliciting contributions from donors by promising a one @-@ third reduction in penances for annual donations . 
 = = = Service to King Henry = = = 
 In 1188 King Henry II of England called for a tax to support the Third Crusade , following the fall of Jerusalem to Saladin in 1187 . It was collected at the rate of a tenth of all the property and income of any person not vowing to go on crusade . It was popularly known as the " Saladin tithe " and was the most extensive tax ever collected in England up to that point . Being a tithe and not a secular tax , it was collected by dioceses rather than by shires . Baldwin especially was blamed for its harshness , although in February , along with his advisor Peter of Blois , he was in Normandy with the king . 
 Baldwin took the cross , or vowed to go on crusade , along with King Henry and many others in January 1188 , or when he began his preaching campaign on 11 February 1188 to drum up support for the Third Crusade . In April 1188 , Baldwin was in Wales on a tour attempting to secure support for the king 's crusade , and was forcing his servants and followers to exercise on foot up and down hills in preparation for the journey to the Holy Land . He spent most of the year in Wales , preaching the crusade , accompanied by the chronicler Gerald of Wales . Gerald claimed about 3000 recruits for the crusade from his and Baldwin 's efforts in Wales , although he also suggested that Baldwin mainly embarked on the tour to avoid his dispute with the Canterbury monks . 
 A side effect of Baldwin 's tour of Wales was the implied assertion of royal authority in a section of Henry 's domains that had always been somewhat fractious . Baldwin was also asserting his ecclesiastical authority over the Welsh bishops , especially when he made a point of celebrating mass at every Welsh cathedral ; he was the first Archbishop of Canterbury to celebrate mass at St Asaph 's Cathedral . Baldwin excommunicated the only Welsh prince who refused to appear before him and take the cross , Owain Cyfeiliog . 
 Baldwin was with King Henry shortly before the latter 's death , taking part in unsuccessful efforts to negotiate a truce with Henry 's heir , Prince Richard , who had rebelled against his father . After Henry 's death , Richard sought and obtained absolution for the sin of disobedience to his father from both Baldwin and Walter de Coutances , Archbishop of Rouen . Baldwin , along with Coutances , was with Richard on 20 July 1189 at Rouen when the king was invested with the Duchy of Normandy . Baldwin crowned Richard at Westminster Abbey on 13 September 1189 in the first English coronation for which a detailed description survives . 
 = = = Under Richard = = = 
 After the death of Henry II , and the accession of Richard as king , the monks of Christ Church Priory petitioned Richard to intercede in the long @-@ running dispute between them and the archbishop . In November 1189 , Richard and the whole court , including the Queen Mother Eleanor of Aquitaine , travelled to Canterbury in an attempt to end the controversy before the papacy become involved . Richard finally settled the dispute by persuading Baldwin to abandon his church @-@ building project and to dismiss Norreys . Soon after this , Richard left England and Baldwin declared that he was going to found the proposed church at Lambeth , and then join Richard on crusade . Both Richard and Baldwin agreed to appoint Norreys to Evesham Abbey , as the previous abbot of Evesham , Adam of Evesham , had recently died . This appointment eventually led , after Baldwin 's death , to the Case of Evesham . In August 1189 Baldwin objected to the marriage of Prince John , later King John , to Isabel of Gloucester , on the grounds of consanguinity . John promised to obtain a papal dispensation , but never did so . Baldwin laid John 's lands under interdict , but it was lifted by a papal legate who declared the marriage legal . Richard also restored to the archbishops of Canterbury the right to operate a mint , staffed by three moneyers . 
 = = Third Crusade = = 
 In April 1190 Baldwin left England with Richard on the Third Crusade . Leading the English advance guard , Baldwin left Marseilles ahead of Richard together with Hubert Walter and Ranulf de Glanvill . The group sailed directly to Syria on 5 August 1190 . Baldwin delegated the administration of his spiritualities and temporalities to Gilbert Glanvill , the Bishop of Rochester , but entrusted any archiepiscopal authority to Richard FitzNeal , the Bishop of London . The custom of giving the archiepiscopal authority to London had originated in Archbishop Lanfranc 's time . Baldwin continued to conduct some ecclesiastical business however , dealing with the suspended Hugh Nonant , the Bishop of Coventry . Baldwin had suspended Nonant in March 1190 for holding secular office as sheriff , but Baldwin wrote to FitzNeal after his departure that Nonant had agreed to relinquish his secular offices . 
 Baldwin and his group arrived at Tyre on 16 September 1190 . Richard did not arrive in Syria until 1191 . It is unclear exactly why they were sent ahead of the king ; perhaps it was to look out for the king 's interests while Richard took a more leisurely route , or perhaps to rid the king 's entourage of a family grouping around Glanvill that the king did not trust . Baldwin was not a member or close associate of the Glanvill faction , so most likely he was sent ahead to look after the king 's interests , whatever the reasons for the inclusion of his companions . Another concern may have been to get help to the Kingdom of Jerusalem as quickly as possible after the king learned of Frederick Barbarossa 's death on the way to the Holy Land . 
 When Baldwin arrived at Acre on 12 October 1190 , the Muslim forces in the city were under siege by the Frankish forces led by King Guy of Lusignan and Queen Sibylla of Jerusalem , who in turn were being besieged by Saladin . Soon after Baldwin 's arrival , there was a succession crisis in the Kingdom of Jerusalem . Sibylla , a first cousin of Henry II , and her two young daughters all died in July from an epidemic ravaging the siege camp where they were living . This left Guy without a legal claim to the kingdom as he had held the kingship through his wife . The heiress to the kingdom was Sibylla 's half @-@ sister Isabella ; she was already married to Humphrey IV of Toron , but he was loyal to Guy and seems to have had no ambition to be king . A more promising candidate for the throne was Conrad of Montferrat , uncle of the last undisputed king , Baldwin V. Conrad had saved the kingdom from destruction by leading the successful defence of Tyre , and had the support of Isabella 's mother Maria Comnena and stepfather Balian of Ibelin . Maria and Balian abducted Isabella from Humphrey , and compelled her to seek an annulment , so that she could be married to Conrad and enable him to claim the kingship . 
 Baldwin supported Guy 's claim , but Ubaldo , Archbishop of Pisa , Philip of Dreux , Bishop of Beauvais , and <unk> , Patriarch of Jerusalem , supported Conrad . Isabella and Humphrey 's marriage was forcibly annulled . Baldwin , already ailing , attempted to excommunicate everyone involved in the annulment , but he died on 19 November 1190 . He wrote his will shortly before his death , and died surrounded by his followers on the crusade . Hubert Walter assumed the leadership of the English forces , and also became Baldwin 's executor . Walter paid the wages of some soldiers and knights from Baldwin 's estate , and distributed the rest of the money to the poor . 
 = = Writings and studies = = 
 De <unk> <unk> , dealing with the eucharist and <unk> , is Baldwin 's longest surviving work , in 12 manuscripts . It also includes a discussion of martyrdom that reads much like a vindication of Becket 's status as a martyr . It was first printed in 1662 , and has more recently been edited and published in the series Sources Chrétiennes , as volumes 93 and 94 , in 1963 . Others works include 22 sermons , and a work on faith , De commendatione fidei , that only survives in two manuscripts , although another five are known to have existed . One of the missing manuscripts survived until at least the mid @-@ 1600s , as it formed the basis of the first printed edition of De commendatione fidei in 1662 . The modern critical edition of De commendatione was published , along with the sermons , in 1991 as <unk> de Forda Opera : Sermones , De <unk> <unk> with the De commendatione fidei translated into English in 2000 . 
 Renowned for his preaching , Baldwin 's surviving sermons show that interest in them continued after his death . His sermons were first published in 1662 ; the modern edition includes two more ( titled de <unk> and de <unk> cruce ) that were not in the original publication . It appears that originally there were 33 sermons , with the others now lost . The sermons survive in 12 manuscripts , although only 5 are collections of substantial numbers of the works . None of the surviving manuscripts has a complete collection of the 22 sermons . 
 Baldwin also collaborated with Bartholomew Iscanus on a Liber <unk> , which is jointly ascribed to both of them in a Lambeth Palace manuscript , MS 235 . Another work often attributed to Baldwin , the Ad <unk> <unk> <unk> episcopi de <unk> <unk> , survives in three manuscripts and a fragment of a fourth . A number of other works are known to have been authored by Baldwin , but do not survive . These include Carmen <unk> , which was seen by John Bale at Glastonbury Abbey in the 16th century . Other lost works were a commentary on the biblical books of Samuel and Kings , De <unk> <unk> which existed at Christ Church Priory in the 13th century , and De <unk> fidei <unk> , which was seen by John Leland at Christ Church in the 16th century . Some of Baldwin 's letters existed in manuscript form , although they appear never to have circulated as a collection , but they are no longer extant . One of his letters is mentioned in a Rievaulx Abbey catalogue , and Leland mentions others in his works . 
 Besides Baldwin 's own writings , there is a decretal collection known as the Collectio Wigorniensis , still extant in manuscript ( MS ) form . It now resides in the British Library as Royal MS <unk> This collection may have belonged to Baldwin . It was probably compiled at Worcester Cathedral before December 1184 , when Baldwin went to Canterbury , and besides a basic collection of Pope Alexander III 's <unk> it includes a number of letters from the papacy addressed to Baldwin as Bishop of Worcester and as Archbishop of Canterbury . Although the main contents are unexceptional , the compiler of the work numbered the books and <unk> into which the work was divided , an innovation that allowed for much more efficient use of the collection . It is likely that the compiler was one of Baldwin 's clerks , and that this testified to Baldwin 's continuing interest in canon law . The manuscript itself was likely owned either by Baldwin himself or a member of his household . 
 The historian Frank Barlow stated that Baldwin was " one of the greatest English <unk> " . His work was more influential in his inspiration and support for the development of decretal collections , rather than in terms of the actual influence of his judicial decisions themselves . Another collection of writings associated with Baldwin is the correspondence relating to his dispute with the Christ Church monks . The documents relating to this dispute , which dragged on into the archbishopric of Hubert Walter , are published in one whole volume of the Rolls Series , which was edited by the Victorian historian William Stubbs . 
 = = Reputation = = 
 Baldwin 's long @-@ running dispute with his cathedral chapter caused the chronicler Gervase of Canterbury to characterise him as " a greater enemy to Christianity than Saladin . " Another contemporary , Gerald of Wales , praised Baldwin as " distinguished for his learning and religion " , but also claimed that he was gloomy and nervous . Herbert of Bosham dedicated his History of Thomas , a story of Thomas Becket , to the archbishop in the late 1180s . The historian A. L. Poole called Baldwin a " distinguished scholar and deeply religious man , [ but he ] was injudicious and too austere to be a good leader . " Baldwin was also known as a theologian , as well as being a canon lawyer . His clerk and nephew , Joseph of Exeter , accompanied Baldwin on the crusade , and wrote two works after his return to England : <unk> , an epic poem about King Richard on crusade , and De Bello <unk> , a rewriting of the Trojan War . 
 = Battle of Radzymin ( 1920 ) = 
 The Battle of Radzymin ( Polish : Bitwa pod <unk> ) took place during the Polish – Soviet War ( 1919 – 21 ) . The battle occurred near the town of Radzymin , some 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) north @-@ east of Warsaw , between August 13 and 16 , 1920 . Along with the Battle of Ossów and the Polish counteroffensive from the Wieprz River area , this engagement was a key part of what later became known as the Battle of Warsaw . It also proved to be one of the bloodiest and most intense battles of the Polish @-@ Soviet War . 
 The first phase of the battle began on August 13 with a frontal assault by the Red Army on the Praga bridgehead . The Soviet forces captured Radzymin on August 14 and breached the lines of the 1st Polish Army , which was defending Warsaw from the east . Radzymin changed hands several times in heavy combat . Foreign diplomats , with the exception of the British and Vatican ambassadors , hastily left Warsaw . 
 The plan for the battle was straightforward for both sides . The Russians wanted to break through the Polish defences to Warsaw , while the Polish aim was to defend the area long enough for a two @-@ pronged counteroffensive from the south , led by General Józef Piłsudski , and north , led by General Władysław Sikorski , to outflank the attacking forces . 
 After three days of intense fighting , the corps @-@ sized 1st Polish Army under General Franciszek Latinik managed to repel a direct assault by six Red Army rifle divisions at Radzymin and Ossów . The struggle for control of Radzymin forced General Józef Haller , commander of the Polish Northern Front , to start the 5th Army 's counterattack earlier than planned . Radzymin was recaptured on August 15 , and this victory proved to be one of the turning points of the battle of Warsaw . The strategic counteroffensive was successful , pushing Soviet forces away from Radzymin and Warsaw and eventually crippling four Soviet armies . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the failure of the Kiev Offensive , the Polish armies retreated westwards from central Belarus and Ukraine . Although the Bolshevik forces failed to surround or destroy the bulk of the Polish Army , most Polish units were in dire need of fresh reinforcements . The Polish command hoped to halt the advancing Russian forces in front of Warsaw , the capital of Poland . At the same time General ( later Marshal of Poland ) Józef Piłsudski was to lead a flanking manoeuvre from the area of the Wieprz River , while General Władysław Sikorski 's 5th Army was to leave the Modlin Fortress and head north @-@ east , to cut off the Soviet forces heading westwards , to the north of the bend of the Vistula and Bugonarew and on towards Pomerania . However , for this plan to succeed , it was vital that Polish forces hold Warsaw . 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 The defence of Warsaw was organised by the 1st Polish Army under General Franciszek Latinik and by a part of the Northern Front under General Józef Haller . The army consisted of four understrength infantry divisions : the 8th , 11th , and 15th , with the 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division in reserve . In addition , it had at its disposal the battle @-@ weary 10th Infantry Division , two Air Groups ( four <unk> in total ) , 293 pieces of artillery and three armoured trains . 
 The city was to be surrounded by four lines of defence . The outermost ran some 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) to the east of Warsaw : to the east of <unk> Fortress , then along the river <unk> to Dybów and south through <unk> , Nowa Czarna and the <unk> <unk> marshes east of Wołomin . From there it ran through Leśniakowizna , dense forests occupied by artillery training grounds , and then along the Okuniew – <unk> – Vistula line . 
 The second line ran a mile closer to Warsaw , along the lines of partially preserved First World War @-@ era trenches built by German and Russian armies in 1915 , separated by a no man 's land . It ran from the banks of the river Bugonarew at Fort Beniaminów , along the Struga – <unk> – <unk> @-@ <unk> – <unk> line . The two most prominent pivots of this line were the towns of Radzymin and Wołomin . The third line of defence ran in the immediate vicinity of the right @-@ bank borough of Praga , while the Vistula River bridgeheads formed the final fourth line . 
 The 11th Polish Infantry Division was dispatched to Radzymin on August 8 in order to prepare the city 's defences for the expected arrival of Bolshevik forces . While the unit 's core was formed around veterans of the 2nd Polish Rifle Division of the French @-@ equipped and trained Blue Army , it had been recently reinforced with fresh , but raw , recruits . The Poles set up defences in front of the town , utilising some earlier German and Russian First World War trenches and digging new positions . The Polish line ran some 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) in front of the town , from the unfinished 1909 Fort Beniaminów at the banks of the river Bugonarew through Mokre to Dybów . The following day the 6th Russian Rifle Division captured Wyszków some 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) to the north @-@ east . On August 12 the Polish 1st Lithuanian – Belarusian Division abandoned the first line of defence and withdrew through Radzymin towards Warsaw . Radzymin now found itself at the front line ; by nightfall the first Russian forces appeared in front of Ruda and <unk> , two villages manned by the Polish 48th Infantry Regiment , and Russian artillery shelled Radzymin for the first time . 
 = = = Battlefield = = = 
 From the north , Warsaw , which spans the Vistula , was effectively shielded by the Vistula , Bug and Narew rivers . The Red Army 's lack of modern engineering equipment for the river crossings inhibited a flanking attack of Warsaw from the west , which had been Russia 's historical path of attack , towards Płock , Włocławek and Toruń , where their forces could cross the Vistula and strike Warsaw from the west and north @-@ west over permanent bridges there . While a ring of 19th- and early 20th @-@ century Russian @-@ built forts , part of the Warsaw Fortress , ran mostly along the western side of the Vistula , these fortifications lay in ruins ; Russian forces began demolition in 1909 and had destroyed most by the time of their withdrawal from Warsaw in 1915 , during the First World War . 
 The most expedient approach for a large @-@ scale assault on Warsaw was from the east . Terrain was mostly flat ; numerous roads converged radially along an arc from the Modlin Fortress to the north ( where the Narew flows into the Vistula ) , to Legionowo , Radzymin , and Mińsk Mazowiecki directly to the east . Meanwhile , the only permanent defences in the area of Radzymin were the incomplete Fort Beniaminów and a line of First World War trenches west of Radzymin , neglected since their construction by Russians and Germans in 1915 . 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 The first and second lines of Polish defences were manned by regular forces . These included three Polish infantry divisions : the 11th ( from the Bug River to Leśniakowizna ) , the 8th ( Leśniakowizna to Okuniew ) and the 15th ( Okuniew to the Vistula River ) . The 1st Army also held the newly arrived 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division in reserve ( <unk> – <unk> ) , while the Northern Front 's headquarters reserves consisted of the 10th Infantry Division and some smaller units . The third line was manned by units of mobilised State Police and a variety of volunteer units of low combat value . Out of those units , initially only the 11th Division under Colonel Bolesław <unk> took part in the fight . Its 48th Kresy Rifles Regiment ( Colonel <unk> ) manned the Bugonarew @-@ Mokre line , the 46th Kaniów Rifles Regiment ( Colonel <unk> ) manned the Mokre @-@ Czarna perimeter , and the 47th Kresy Rifles Regiment ( Lt. Colonel <unk> ) manned the Czarna – Leśniakowizna line . To the south of the 11th Division were positions around Wołomin manned by the 8th Infantry Division , consisting of the 36th , 21st and 33rd Infantry Regiments , as well as the 13th Infantry Regiment held in reserve , which later took part in the Battle of Ossów . 
 The combat value of Polish units is difficult to assess as they included fresh recruits of the so @-@ called Volunteer Army , veterans of First World War , battle @-@ hardened soldiers who fought in earlier stages of the Polish @-@ Bolshevik War , and civilians with virtually no combat training . Prior to the battle the 46th Regiment received 700 reinforcements : mostly deserters from various formations , a battalion of volunteer sentry guards and march companies of sappers . The 11th Infantry Division , nominally 9000 men strong , in practice had only 1500 soldiers in first @-@ line units . The situation for the Polish Army was so dire that some of the soldiers sent as reinforcements had reportedly " never seen a rifle in their lives " . In addition , most units to make a stand at Radzymin were exhausted after surviving a 600 @-@ kilometre ( 370 mi ) retreat from Belarus . However , the Polish side had superior intelligence and aerial superiority . 
 The two Russian divisions assaulting Radzymin were battle @-@ hardened Siberian divisions led by experienced front @-@ line commanders . Both divisions were as exhausted as their opponents , whom they had chased all the way from Belarus . However , prior to the battle both divisions received reinforcements from other units , instead of fresh recruits , and were much superior in manpower to other Russian units on the Polish front . Later , in his monograph on the war , Marshal of Poland Józef Piłsudski remarked that the commanding officer of the 27th Rifle Division had achieved what was unheard of in the Polish Army despite numerous attempts : putting rear echelons and stragglers of his division into front @-@ line service . This was indeed a problem for both armies , as the number of " bayonets and sabres " , or soldiers fighting in the first line , was at all times smaller than the number of second echelon troops . On August 15 Polish intelligence reported the strength of the Russian forces as " three to four standard Russian divisions " . Even post @-@ war memoirs by General Żeligowski mention " [ t ] hree Russian infantry divisions , that is 27 battalions , though admittedly understrength , against one of our own " , though in fact the Russian forces only had two divisions . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = August 13 = = = 
 Both Polish and Russian planners expected an attack on Warsaw — and Radzymin in particular — from the east . Yet the first fights started to the north @-@ east of the Polish capital . Warsaw was to be assaulted from the east by the 16th Red Army . At the same time the 14th Red Army ( under <unk> <unk> ) captured Wyszków and started a fast march westwards , towards Toruń . It was then to cross the lower Vistula and assault Warsaw from the north @-@ west . However , its 21st Rifle Division remained on the south side of the Bug River and headed for Warsaw directly , under orders from Russia 's Commissar of War Leon Trotsky . Aided by the Russian 27th Rifle Division , it came into contact with the Polish forces at Radzymin on August 12 , and prepared for an assault the following morning . 
 The Soviet probing attack began at 07 : 00 hours , but the 21st Rifle Division achieved no breakthrough . After the Soviets had been repelled , the defending 11th Infantry Division received some artillery reinforcements . The artillery commanders wanted to use the church tower of Radzymin as an observation post and to move the batteries forward , closer to the front line . However , before the relocation of the artillery was complete , a new Soviet attack began at around 17 : 00 , this time carried out by four brigades of the 21st and 27th Rifle Divisions , reinforced with 59 artillery pieces . The Russians achieved a 3 : 1 superiority in firepower . Deprived of artillery support , the inexperienced and overstretched 1 / 46th Infantry Regiment , defending the village of <unk> , broke , and the Soviets gained entry to Radzymin . The Polish unit withdrew in panic , and soldiers left their arms and backpacks behind . One of the artillery officers noted that the Russians achieved complete tactical surprise : " I ordered my dinner prepared when my aide came shouting ' Lieutenant Sir , the Reds are in the city ' " . 
 The retreat was made even more serious by the fact that the gendarmes , tasked with stabilising the front and catching deserters , also fled in panic . The town itself was badly damaged , and the commanding officer of the 46th Regiment , Colonel Bronisław <unk> , was forced to order the retreat of the remainder of his forces south @-@ west from the town . The rest of the division had no option but to fall back to the line of First World War trenches . During the chaotic withdrawal all the artillery sub @-@ units got lost . By 19 : 00 hours the town was in Russian hands . 
 Although the Polish division was defeated , the Russian forces did not pursue . This allowed the Poles to mount a night counterattack . A single machine gun battalion attacked a position behind Radzymin . While ultimately unsuccessful , the battalion forced the Russian troops to remain stationary overnight , giving the Poles badly needed time to regroup and receive reinforcements , which came in the form of a single regiment from the 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division . Instead of retreating to the third line of defences , the Poles remained outside the town , hoping to retake it the following day . 
 News of the defeat at Radzymin reached Warsaw the same day , causing panic among both the government and ordinary people . The following day the battlefield was visited by , among others , Prime Minister Wincenty Witos , papal nuncio Achille <unk> ( the future Pope Pius XI ) , Maciej Rataj and General Józef Haller , the commanding officer of the Northern Front . General Haller 's dispatch of 01 : 00 hours the same night called the Polish defeat at Radzymin " ignominious " , and ordered the commanding officers of the 46th Infantry Regiment and divisional artillery to be immediately court @-@ martialled . The commanding officer of the 46th Regiment was immediately relieved of command and replaced with Major Józef <unk> . 
 The gravity of the situation was well @-@ understood by the Polish Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief Józef Piłsudski , who remarked that all the battle plans for his counteroffensive were based on the assumption that Warsaw would hold , and suggested to General Tadeusz Rozwadowski that he reinforce the Radzymin area with any forces available , including an " en masse tank attack " . Despite this suggestion , out of 49 tanks of the 1st Tank Regiment available in Warsaw at that time , only about six took part in the battle . The loss of Radzymin also forced General Władysław Sikorski 's 5th Army , fighting north of the Bug River and along the Vistula , to start a counteroffensive from the Modlin Fortress earlier than planned . Rozwadowski and General Maxime Weygand , a member of the French Military Mission to Poland , even suggested that Piłsudski also hasten his preparations for a counteroffensive , but he refused and decided to follow the original plans . 
 The Russians considered the capture of Radzymin a crucial accomplishment . The Polish intelligence intercepted and decrypted a euphoric , but completely untrue , report by the Revolutionary Military Committee of the 3rd Army dispatched to Moscow , informing the Russian government that " the brave units of the 3rd Army have captured the town of Radzymin on August 13th , at 23 : 00 hours . In pursuit of the enemy , they are not further than 15 <unk> from Praga . ( ... ) The workers of Warsaw can already sense that their liberation is near . The revolution in Warsaw is ripe . Workers demand that the city be handed over to the Red Army without a fight , threatening to prevent armed soldiers from leaving the city [ for the front ] . The White Poland is dying " . The commanding officer of the Russian 3rd Army , Vladimir <unk> , informed Tukhachevsky that " Poland is now on fire . Only one more push is needed and the Polish fracas will be over " . 
 To counter the threat of a Russian breakthrough , General Latinik ordered General Jan Rządkowski to assault the town the following day with all available forces . To strengthen the assault , the 11th Infantry Division ( under Colonel Bolesław <unk> ) was drawn from the reserves and dispatched to join the assault which was scheduled for 05 : 00 hours the following morning . However , the Polish forces were far from sufficient for the task . Rządkowski argued that he had been promised substantial reinforcements which did not arrive . The battle @-@ hardened Siberian Brigade was at that time tied down in the Modlin Fortress , although the promised cavalry units did arrive — but without their ammunition trains . 
 = = = August 14 = = = 
 The plans for the Polish assault had to be changed due to unexpected Russian actions . The Polish forces expected heavy opposition from at least two Russian divisions . However , in the morning the Russian 21st Division resumed its advance along the Białystok – Warsaw road towards <unk> and Warsaw , while the 27th started its march towards Jabłonna . The 21st Division achieved some early successes when its 5th and 6th Rifle Brigades pushed the Poles back from the Czarna River some 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) to the west . However , at the same time it was advancing right in front of Polish forces which were preparing to assault Radzymin . At 10 : 15 hours the Polish 81st and 85th Infantry Regiments from the 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division assaulted the left flank of the unsuspecting Russians , continued along the Warsaw – Białystok road , and broke through to the town . The attack was led by Lieutenant Colonel Kazimierz Rybicki , who had personally witnessed the defeat of the 46th Regiment the previous day , on his day off . This time spirits were high and the Polish infantry advanced in order , with officers in the first line and the soldiers singing Dąbrowski 's Mazurka . By noon the town was liberated . 
 The success did not last long , as the Russian 27th Rifle Division turned around and arrived at Radzymin just in time for its 81st Brigade to push the exhausted Polish forces back towards the village of <unk> . Threatened by further attacks from <unk> and <unk> , the 85th Regiment retreated after suffering heavy casualties , including the commanding officer of the 1st Battalion , Captain Ryszard <unk> @-@ Zapolski . This time the Soviet 81st Rifle Brigade ( 27th Rifle Division ) pursued the Poles and managed to pierce Polish defences near Wólka Radzymińska and <unk> , breaking through the second line of defences , which were the last before the city limits . The Polish headquarters at Warsaw was " petrified to hear of the complete destruction of the 19th [ Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian ] Division " , a report that fortunately for the Poles proved to be false . The threat to the northern flank was halted , with heavy casualties on both sides , thanks to the intervention of the division 's commanding officer Jan Rządkowski , as well as Front commanding officer Józef Haller , who arrived on the battlefield to personally organise an ad @-@ hoc line of defence west of Wólka Radzymińska , with Polish artillery units shelling the advancing Russians with direct fire . The Soviet advance was halted , and this time chaos in the Polish ranks was avoided , but again lack of reinforcements behind the main line of defences proved a serious problem . 
 In the evening Generals Lucjan Żeligowski , Józef Haller , Jan Rządkowski and Franciszek Latinik met in Jabłonna and again in Struga to prepare a plan for retaking Radzymin once again . It was decided that , since the Soviet 27th Division was bogged down around Radzymin and had not resumed its march towards Jabłonna , the Polish 10th Infantry Division was no longer needed in that sector , and instead could be used to achieve a breakthrough at Radzymin . The division was relocated to Nieporęt , where General Rządkowski discovered the artillery units that were believed to have been destroyed by the Russians the previous day . A single battalion from the 28th Kaniów Rifles Regiment from the 10th Division , led by 1st Lieutenant Stefan <unk> , was ordered to entrench in a forest near Wólka Radzymińska and organise an ambush . The rest of the Polish forces were to start an all @-@ out assault at 05 : 00 hours the following morning , with General Żeligowski in command over the ad @-@ hoc corps . The forces amassed for the assault had a nominal strength of 17 @,@ 000 infantry , 109 artillery pieces , and 220 machine guns . 
 In the evening the 5th Army , operating north of the Bug and Narew rivers with its base of operations in the Modlin Fortress , started a limited counteroffensive with the aim of lessening the pressure on the Polish forces at Radzymin . Grossly outnumbered , the 5th Army could not break through the Russian lines , and got bogged down in intense fights along the Wkra river . However , although initially unsuccessful , the Polish attack prevented the Soviet 5th , 15th and 16th Armies from reinforcing the two divisions already committed to Radzymin . Only the 4th Red Army , the furthest from the battlefield , operating in the north along the East Prussian border and moving towards Toruń , kept advancing almost unopposed . This however did not pose an immediate threat to the defenders of Warsaw , as its advance was finally halted at the outskirts of Włocławek , and it was forced to start a hasty retreat eastwards . 
 = = = August 15 = = = 
 In the early hours of August 15 the Russian forces resumed their attacks on the Polish lines , intending to break through the second line of defences to the area of Nieporęt and Jabłonna . However , as they bypassed a small forest outside Wólka Radzymińska , they were assaulted from the rear by the 1st Battalion of the 28th Infantry Regiment , which had been concealed there earlier . Simultaneously , the remainder of the 28th Regiment began a badly coordinated and half @-@ hearted attack from Nieporęt . Both Polish assaults were bloodily repelled , with the casualties including Lieutenant <unk> who was posthumously awarded the Virtuti Militari medal for his bravery leading the charge , but they did force the Russians to retreat to their initial positions . 
 When the front @-@ line stabilised , the Polish headquarters threw all its reserves into a counterattack . Beniaminów was reinforced with the 29th Infantry Regiment . The Polish attack began around 05 : 30 , after a 20 @-@ minute artillery barrage . Soon the entire 10th Infantry Division started a push along the southern bank of the Bugonarew river in order to outflank the Russian forces from the north , while the 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division pushed directly towards the town . Although the Russian side had superior artillery and brought several Austin @-@ <unk> armoured cars , this time the Polish assault was supported by five Renault FT tanks and numerous aircraft . Despite suffering from mechanical failures , the tanks successfully broke through the Russian lines , and the infantry of the 85th " Wilno Rifles " Regiment from the 1st Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division followed them into the town . After a short struggle the Polish forces once again controlled the town . However , as soon as it was taken , General Żeligowski decided to reorganise his division and could not support the 85th Regiment with fresh forces . Yet another successful counterattack by the Russian 61st and 62nd Infantry Brigades forced the Polish 1st Division to retreat back to its initial positions . 
 At the same time , on the northern flank , the 10th Division was much more successful . Instead of waiting for orders from General Żeligowski , the commanding officer of the 10th Division , Lieutenant Colonel Wiktor <unk> , started a push along the southern bank of the Bugonarew . The 28th and 29th Kaniów Rifles Infantry Regiments managed to reach the village of Mokre , on a small hill overlooking Radzymin and the Białystok @-@ Warsaw road , directly behind the Russian lines . The Russians tried to push the Poles back from that position , but ultimately failed . Their assault on the village of <unk> also ended in failure . Soon the Polish positions in Mokre were secured , and further reinforced with the remainder of the 1st Battalion , 28th Regiment . 
 With the northern flank safely in Polish hands , General Lucjan Żeligowski ordered his Lithuanian @-@ Belarusian Division to complete the encirclement of Radzymin . The division reached a position a few hundred metres from Radzymin by way of the village of <unk> to the south of the town . Fearing envelopment , the Soviets abandoned the town and withdrew east . A single company from the 30th Kaniów Rifles Regiment entered Radzymin unopposed . The town was completely empty ; both the civilians and the Russian soldiers had fled , and one officer remarked that " not a stray dog was left behind in the ruined city " . 
 = = = Aftermath : August 16 and the following days = = = 
 Although the battle was over and Radzymin was secure , the Soviet forces continued to threaten the Polish northern flank . In the early hours of August 16 the Russians mounted yet another assault on Radzymin , reinforced by several armoured cars and led personally by the commanding officer of the 27th Rifle Division , <unk> <unk> . However , by this time the morale of the 27th Division was already broken , and the assault was easily thwarted by the Polish infantry and the three remaining operational FT tanks . The armoured cars withdrew as soon as the Polish tanks opened fire , and the Russian infantry followed . 
 Other Russian forces were more successful to the north of the town , where they managed to capture the village of Mokre from the 28th Regiment . The regiment counter @-@ charged the village , but was initially driven off . However , approximately 80 pieces of emplaced Polish artillery laid a 30 @-@ minute barrage on the village . It was the greatest concentration of artillery fire in the war up to that point , and had a tremendous effect on the morale of the Russian defenders . After the barrage ended Lieutenant Colonel Wiktor <unk> personally led his forces in a bayonet charge ; the regiment re @-@ entered Mokre at noon and the Russians fled . 
 The entire 13th Red Army stalled because of its defeat at Radzymin . After that success the Poles slowly but steadily pushed the Soviets back beyond the first line of defences that had been overrun several days before . By the end of 16 August , the 28th and 30th Infantry Regiments manned most of the trench line along the <unk> River , near the village of Dybów . Although initially the Russian command wanted to use the outskirts of Radzymin as a pivot for a tactical withdrawal to the Radzymin – Brześć line , the following day the Soviet commander ordered a full retreat towards Wyszków and later Grodno . Meanwhile , Piłsudski 's 4th Army outflanked the surprised Russians and went as far north as the left wing of Nikolai <unk> 's 16th Red Army , which at that time was constantly pressured from the front by the 10th and 15th divisions . This made existing Russian plans obsolete , and Polish forces started a pursuit that ended with the victorious Battle of the Niemen River in September . On the day of Polish victory the Soviets issued a propaganda poster in Moscow proclaiming : " Warsaw has fallen . With it the Poland of yesterday became history . It is nothing but a legend now while the truth of today is the red reality . Long live the Soviets ! Long live the invincible Red Army ! " 
 = = Result and assessment = = 
 The battle was a success for the Poles at both the tactical level ( the battle of Radzymin itself ) and the strategic level ( its role in the battle of Warsaw ) . After several days of constant fighting for the town of Radzymin and its immediate vicinity , the Russian attack was repelled and the Poles were able to mount a successful counteroffensive , forcing the Russian armies out of Poland and in the end destroying them completely . 
 However , the conduct of the Polish forces and their commanders at Radzymin in the early part of the battle has been criticised by historians since the 1920s . It was noted by General Lucjan Żeligowski that the importance of the northern approach to Warsaw was poorly understood by the Polish commanders prior to the battle , and that the untested and relatively weak 10th Division was chosen for the task of defending Radzymin " out of sheer incompetence " . In his memoirs he also heavily criticised the commanding officers of the division , whose " military prowess and punctuality in carrying out orders was little more than irony " . Other post @-@ war authors argued that on August 13 , when the first Russian forces appeared in front of Radzymin , the 1st Army had more than enough time to reinforce the weak Polish forces there . Instead , it took several days to recapture what could have been held from the start . 
 Despite the lack of strategic flair in the Polish defence of Radzymin , it was one of the cornerstones of the overall success in the Battle of Warsaw . Although it was Piłsudski 's Assault Group that defeated the Russians , the forces at Radzymin and Sikorski 's 5th Army were responsible for stopping them at the gates of Warsaw . Żeligowski noted in his memoirs that " Warsaw was saved thanks to Polish successes at Mokra , Wólka Radzymińska and Radzymin " . 
 = = The battle in popular culture and the media = = 
 As one of the crucial battles of the war of 1920 , the battle for Radzymin has been featured in novels , memoirs and historical monographs . It was also portrayed in the 2011 film Battle of Warsaw 1920 , although the battle of Radzymin sequence was shot mostly in Piotrków <unk> . Since 1998 a re @-@ enactment of the battle has been held annually on August 15 in Ossów and Radzymin , organised by various re @-@ enactment groups and a local powiat administration . 
 = Time and Eternity ( philosophy book ) = 
 Time and Eternity - An Essay on the Philosophy of Religion ( 1st imp . Princeton New Jersey 1952 , Princeton University Press , 169 pp ) is a philosophy book written by Walter Terence Stace . At the time of writing , Stace was a professor of philosophy at Princeton University , where he had worked since 1932 after a 22 year career in the Ceylon Civil Service . Time and Eternity was one of his first books about the philosophy of religion and mysticism , after writing throughout most of the 1930s and 1940s that was influenced by <unk> philosophy . 
 In his introduction Stace writes that Time and Eternity is an attempt to set out the fundamental nature of religion , and to deal with the conflict between religion and naturalism . He explains that the basic idea set out in the book is that all religious thought is symbolic , and that his influences include Rudolf Otto , especially his Mysticism East and West , and Immanuel Kant . He says he was motivated to write the book in an attempt to add to the " other half of the truth which I now think naturalism [ as espoused in his 1947 essay Man Against Darkness ] misses " . 
 The book begins by looking at religion , specifically God as non @-@ being and as being , put by Stace as the negative and positive divine . Stace then defines two orders of being - time and eternity , which he says intersect in the moment of mystic illumination . He goes on to say that the nature of God or eternity is such that all religious language is symbolic and that it is necessarily subject to contradictions . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The first chapter asks what religion is , stating that religious thought is contradictory , is rooted in intuition , and that God is fundamentally a mystery . The second and third chapters look at the negative divine - the characterisation of God as void , silence or non @-@ being - which Stace maintains is an idea found in all religions . He maintains that mystical experience is shared by all mankind , it is only the theories about it that differ . On this point he says he is in agreement with Otto . In this experience the distinction between subject and object is overcome , indeed there is no difference between the <unk> and the experience . 
 Stace then goes on to explain that all religions say that religious revelation is ineffable , because no words or concepts can be applied to God who is without qualities or predicates . Thus , God cannot be comprehended by the intellect , but is apprehended by intuition . " ... it is of the very nature of intellect to involve the subject @-@ object opposition . But in the mystic experience this opposition is transcended . Therefore the intellect is incapable of understanding it . Therefore it is incomprehensible , ineffable . " 
 Stace then looks at the positive divine ; he asks how concepts can be applied to that which is above all concepts and finds that all propositions about God are symbolical . He defines religious and non @-@ religious symbolism as differing in two respects . Firstly , religious symbols cannot be translated into logical propositions because they refer to an ( ineffable ) experience rather than a proposition . Secondly , the relationship between the religious symbol and what is symbolised is one of evocation rather than " meaning " , as meaning refers to a concept , which is absent in the mystical experience . " Yet in some way this symbolic language evokes in us some glimpse , some hint , seen dimly through the mists and fogs which envelop us , of that being who stands above all human thought and conception . " He goes on to write that some of these symbols feel more appropriate than others ( e.g. God is love not hate ) . 
 Next Stace explains that there are two orders of being : time ( or the world ) and eternity ( or God ) , and these intersect in the moment of mystic illumination . He maintains these orders are distinct , so one order cannot dictate to the other . Here he says that he agrees with Kant , who made a distinction between the world of phenomena and the <unk> , although he is critical of Kant ’ s disregard for mystical experience . 
 Looking at symbolism in religion , Stace states that there are two types of predicates applied to God : first , the ethically @-@ neutral sort , such as God being mind , power or personhood . Secondly , the ethical kind , where he is love , mercy , or righteousness . He explains that the former qualities are justified by an appeal to a hierarchy of being , and the latter to a hierarchy of value . In both cases the more adequate symbol are those that are higher in each hierarchy . In rooting symbolism in hierarchies , Stace explicitly states he is in opposition to Otto who thought religious symbolism was based on analogy between the <unk> and qualities found in the natural world . 
 Stace next looks at religion ’ s claims to truth . He draws an analogy between mystical illumination and aesthetic truth , as the truths of both rest on revelation rather than reason . " Either you directly perceive beauty , or you do not . And either you directly perceive God in intuition , or you do not . " Further , he maintains the arguments of both mystics and naturalists in denying each other ’ s positions are invalid , as they concern different realities . 
 These separate spheres lead Stace to reflect on both proofs for God and <unk> . He writes that proofs and <unk> for God are equally false , as God is only accessible by intuition and not logic . " … the production by philosophers of proofs of the unreality of space , time , and the temporal world generally , is a direct result of their mistaking of their mystical propositions for factual propositions . " Further , proofs of God actually harm religion as they make him a part of the natural order - a point on which he says that he agrees with Kant . Conversely <unk> ( the denial of the reality of the world ) has its root in the mystical moment , within which there is no other truth , God is the supreme reality and there is no naturalistic world . However this is a symbolic truth , rather than a statement of fact . Its counterpart in naturalism is atheism , which denies the reality of God . 
 In the final chapter Stace looks at mysticism and logic . He returns to the idea that theology and mystical philosophies ( he gives the examples of Vedanta , Spinoza , Hegel , and Bradley ) will always contain contradictions . Known as the doctrine of the Mystery of God , he maintains this is because the intellect is inherently incapable of understanding the Ultimate . All attempts to state the nature of the ultimate necessarily produce contradictions . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Virgil C Aldrich reviewed the book alongside Religion and the Modern Mind and The Gate of Silence , also by Stace and published in 1952 . He points out that all three books mark a new direction for Stace who was previously best known as an empiricist and naturalist . For Aldrich this new intellectual interest results in a sharp dualism in both Stace ’ s personality and his thought . However , he writes that fortunately Stace ’ s philosophical background prevents him from supposing that scientific empiricism can confirm religious experience , indeed his religious philosophy is the sort “ that a Hume or a Kant can consort with . ” Aldrich argues that Stace ’ s intellectual sophistication is most evident in his ideas about the negative divine , but his thought is liable to all the standard objections where he proposes notions of the positive divine and religious intuition . Specifically , the notion that religious language is evocative of the mystical experience is problematic , because it is difficult to determine what language is adequate without resorting to literal or abstract ideas . Rudolf Otto ’ s notion of analogy , rejected by Stace , is more robust . Aldrich points out a contradiction in Stace ’ s reliance on hierarchies of being and values to more adequately refer to God , as this implies continuity between the world and eternity , which Stace denies . 
 Julius Seelye Bixler reviewed the book twice , in 1952 and 1953 . In his first review he wrote that he believed Stace was trying to have his cake and eat it with regards to the truth of both naturalism and mysticism . Bixler also wonders whether the revelation of God can really be free of concepts and thus whether time and eternity are utterly unrelated as Stace maintains . He identifies points in Stace ’ s thought where there is continuity between these two states and mystical language does appear to refer to concepts . Finally he rejects the book ’ s analogy of mystical experience to the evocative power of art , maintaining that art must be somewhat related to logic . Nonetheless , Bixler does concur that the book is a fascinating <unk> fidei and personal statement . A year later , he reviewed Time and Eternity alongside Religion and the Modern Mind . As well as reiterating the points he had made earlier , Bixler judges the second book more favourably and recommends reading the two together to better understand the problems they address . 
 Stace was praised for his clarity and ambitious aims in Time and Eternity by Abraham Kaplan who believed the book was one of the best on the subject for many many years . He pointed out that the book ’ s distinction between the orders of time and eternity owed much to Kant ( which Stace himself acknowledged ) . Kaplan reflected that it was the book ’ s emphasis placed on mysticism and a universal religious intuition that would be of particular interest to students of “ Oriental and comparative philosophy ” . The central idea upon which Stace ’ s thought stands or falls , for Kaplan , is that religious language is evocative rather than descriptive . In this both religionists and naturalists will find problems . For the former , Stace can only account for the appropriateness of religious language by relying on ‘ nearness ’ to the divine rather than on resemblance , and this relies on ‘ a vague panpsychism ’ and levels of being in the manner of Samuel Alexander . While for the naturalist , Stace ’ s system of religious symbolism is doomed to remain mysterious , because it does not allow religious metaphors to be translated literally and neither can it be said how they evoke the experience to which they refer . 
 Also noting the unachievable ambition of solving the conflict between naturalism and religion , Martin A Greenman , remarks that one must come to the book “ with a certain mood ” . Too critical a mood would blind the reader to its religious insights , while the sensitivity and depth of its philosophic insights would be lost if one were to approach it in a too enthusiastically religious mood . Greenman finishes by justifying Stace ’ s philosophy to logical positivists by quoting from Wittgenstein 's Tractatus : “ My propositions are <unk> in this way : he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless , when he has climbed out through them , on them , over them … .He must surmount these propositions : then he sees the world rightly ” ( 6 . 54 . ) Dorothy M Emmet found issue with the notion that the mystical experience is the point of intersection between the temporal and eternal orders . She writes that there are difficulties in Stace defining these orders as two distinct “ orders of being ” , rather than just as a way of speaking , because this then means some statements about the temporal order are relevant to what is said about the eternal order and vice versa . Indeed , the interrelation between these two orders is difficult to maintain . She also questioned Stace ’ s characterisation of mystical consciousness as being the same everywhere . 
 More recently , Maurice Friedman writes about the book in the context of the various attempts to find a universal essence - or perennial philosophy - within religion . He finds that Time and Eternity is a more systematic attempt at this than those proposed by Aldous Huxley or Ananda Coomaraswamy , but no more successful . For Friedman , the philosophy that Stace lays out in the book is derived from metaphysical speculation ( that , like the ideas of Huxley and Coomaraswamy , is influenced by Vedanta ) , rather than mystical experience . Central to Friedman ’ s critique is the notion that there is a vast gulf between the mystical experience which Stace defines as beyond thought , and his philosophical system built on this . He also mentions that mystics do not always agree on what experiences , symbols and philosophies are the closest to the divine . 
 The book has received more positive support however . Robert C Neville called Time and Eternity “ the most sophisticated treatment of eternity and time in our century so far ” . In his Thought : A Very Short Introduction , Tim Bayne says the book contains a “ classic ” discussion of ineffability . American writer Arthur <unk> has said that the phrase " that than which there is no other " that he encountered in Time and Eternity was one of a number of factors that contributed to him giving up praying . 
 = Rick Volk = 
 Richard Robert Volk ( born March 15 , 1945 ) is a former American football player who played for the Baltimore Colts , New York Giants , and Miami Dolphins . He retired with 38 career interceptions and 13 fumble recoveries , and totaled 574 yards on interception returns and 548 yards on punt returns . 
 Volk played college football for the University of Michigan from 1964 to 1966 and was a member of the 1964 team that won the Big Ten Conference championship and defeated Oregon State in the 1965 Rose Bowl . He played as a defensive back for Michigan 's defensive unit and as a halfback and quarterback for the offensive unit . Volk was also selected by the Sporting News as a first @-@ team All @-@ American in 1967 . In 1989 , he was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor ; Volk and Ron Johnson were the first two football players from the 1960s to be so honored . 
 Volk went on to a successful 12 @-@ year career as a safety in the National Football League . He played nine years with the Baltimore Colts from 1967 to 1975 . He was a member of the Colts ' teams that lost Super Bowl III to the New York Jets and won Super Bowl V against the Dallas Cowboys . Volk was selected as an NFL All @-@ Pro four times ( 1968 – 1971 ) and played in three Pro Bowls ( 1967 , 1969 , 1971 ) . After being released by the Colts in April 1976 , Volk concluded his playing career with the New York Giants in 1976 and the Miami Dolphins from 1977 to 1978 . In 1977 , Volk was selected by Baltimore fans as a starter for the Colts ' 25th anniversary team . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Volk was born in Toledo , Ohio , in 1945 . He attended <unk> High School in <unk> , Ohio , where he was a three @-@ sports star . He was an all @-@ league basketball and baseball player and also played quarterback on the football team . 
 = = University of Michigan = = 
 Volk enrolled at the University of Michigan in 1963 . His decision to attend Michigan rather than Ohio State was influenced by family ties , including Bob Chappuis , who was Volk 's uncle and finished second in the Heisman Trophy voting while playing for the undefeated 1947 Wolverines . Volk noted : 
 " I had all these stories growing up . He [ Bob Chappuis ] was my hero , so I always wanted to go to Michigan . ... And I didn 't like Woody [ Hayes ] anyway . It was just my Grandpa telling me because he didn 't like Woody , and he hoped Woody would choke on his Thanksgiving turkey . ... Because of Uncle Bob going to Michigan , that 's where I wanted to go . You know , I loved the helmets , loved the uniforms . I said ' Hey , if I could just sit on the bench , that 's all I care about . ' " 
 At Michigan , Volk was a three @-@ year starter from 1964 to 1966 . Prior to the start of the 1964 season , he was given jersey no . 49 , the same number worn by his uncle when he played for Michigan . During the 1964 season , Volk played at the halfback position on both offense and defense and also served as a backup at quarterback to Bob Timberlake . In his first game for the Wolverines , he intercepted a pass in the end zone against Air Force . In his second game , he helped the Michigan defense hold scoreless a high @-@ scoring Navy team led by Hall of Fame quarterback Roger Staubach . He also threw a 33 @-@ yard touchdown pass against Northwestern in October 1964 . In a close victory over Minnesota , after the Golden Gophers had cut Michigan 's lead to five points and advanced the ball to Michigan 's 7 @-@ yard line , Volk " smashed through to down the Gopher ball carrier , and save the game on fourth down . " Volk was described by sports writer Joe Hendrickson as " instinctive — usually in the right place to mess things up for the opposition . " Volk helped the 1964 Michigan team win the Big Ten Conference championship and defeat Oregon State in the 1965 Rose Bowl by a score of 34 – 7 . 
 As a junior in 1965 , Volk started all 10 games for Michigan at cornerback and also started four games on offense as the left halfback . He was selected by both the Associated Press and the United Press International as a first @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten defensive back at the end of the 1965 season . 
 As a senior in 1966 , Volk started all 10 games at safety and also started 2 games at fullback , and even started one game as quarterback . At the conclusion of the 1966 season , he was selected as a first @-@ team All @-@ American by the Sporting News . At the conclusion of his college football career at Michigan , the Newspaper Editors Association distributed a feature story on Volk , describing him as follows : 
 " Rick Volk is a safety man who conjures up an image of homemade apple pie and pancakes smothered in maple syrup , Saturday night movies and picnics in a wooded grove . He is clear @-@ eyed and smooth @-@ cheeked , with a short tilted nose and a smile that shows white . He couldn 't be more pure mid @-@ Americana if he were framed by a billboard . " 
 Volk was invited to play on the College All @-@ Star team following his senior year . At the camp for the All @-@ Star team , he was rated by the scouts as " the best all @-@ around athlete among the high @-@ priced talent preparing for pro debuts . " 
 In 1989 , Volk was inducted into the University of Michigan Athletic Hall of Honor . He joined his uncle , Bob Chappuis , who was inducted into the Hall of Honor five years earlier in 1984 . Volk and Ron Johnson , both inducted in 1989 , were the first two football players from the 1960s to be inducted into the Hall of Honor . 
 = = Professional football = = 
 = = = Baltimore Colts = = = 
 Volk played as a free safety for twelve seasons in the NFL . He was selected four times as an NFL All @-@ Pro ( 1968 @-@ 1971 ) and played three times in the Pro Bowl ( 1967 , 1969 , 1971 ) . Volk also played in the Super Bowl twice for the Baltimore Colts as a member of the Super Bowl III team and the Super Bowl V winning team . 
 He made a name for himself as a rookie in 1967 by recovering an onside kick to help the Colts defeat the Packers . He also set a Colts team record for the longest interception runback with a 94 @-@ yard touchdown return against Chicago in November 1967 . Volk 's interception of the pass intended for Brian Piccolo was his third interception in four games . For his performance against the Bears , he was named the NFL 's Defensive Player of the Week . At the end of his rookie season , Volk was chosen to play in his first Pro Bowl game . 
 In his second season with the team , Volk intercepted 6 passes and totaled 154 yards on interception returns . He also returned 25 punts for 198 yards ( 6th best in the NFL ) in 1968 . He was selected as a first @-@ team NFL All @-@ Pro player at the end of the 1968 NFL season by the Pro Football Writers , the Newspaper Ent . Association , and the United Press International . The Colts won the NFL championship in 1968 and played Joe Namath 's AFL champion New York Jets in Super Bowl III . Volk was knocked unconscious during Super Bowl III when he collided helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet with Jets fullback Matt Snell . Volk was rushed to the hospital after he went into convulsions . He was put in the intensive care ward for two days and moved to a regular room on the Tuesday after the game . 
 In 1970 , Volk helped lead the Colts to another Super Bowl appearance , but were now representing the AFC following the merger of the two leagues ( NFL and AFL ) that year . This time , the Colts defeated the Dallas Cowboys in Super Bowl V. Volk was responsible for covering Pro Football Hall of Famers Bob Hayes and Mike Ditka in the Super Bowl , and he played a key role in the Colts ' victory . In the fourth quarter , the Colts trailed the Cowboys 13 – 6 . Volk intercepted a pass by Cowboys quarterback Craig Morton at the Dallas 33 @-@ yard line and returned it 30 yards to the 3 @-@ yard line to set up the tying touchdown . Baltimore quarterback Earl Morrall later referred to Volk 's interception as the play of the game . Interviewed in 2009 , Volk cited Super Bowl V as his fondest memory of playing in Baltimore . He recalled team owner Carroll Rosenbloom flying the whole team , families included , to the Bahamas the day after the game : " The next day we all got on the plane and flew over to the Bahamas . He took the whole family – my wife and one kid , at the time . I remember we were on the beach , Tom Mitchell and I , and we got the paper to make sure it was really true - that we did win . Because this was like a dream come true on the sand beaches in the Bahamas . " 
 Volk had his best season in 1971 when he was picked as a first @-@ team NFL All @-@ Pro by the Associated Press , Pro Football Writers , and the Newspaper Ent . Association . He remained with Colts for nine years and was one of the last players from the Super Bowl V champions to remain with the team . In 1974 , one Maryland sports writer noted that Volk remained a solid performer : " Although the Colts suffered through an overall dismal campaign in 1973 , Volk remained one of the few solid performers in an otherwise lackluster season . " In June 1975 , Volk prepared for his ninth season with the Colts as one columnist wrote : 
 " Rick Volk has seen both ends of the rainbow in his tenure with the Baltimore Colts . The personable veteran defensive back has known the sweet taste of success , attested by the Super Bowl ring he often wears , and also has survived the agony of defeat — especially after people like Don Shula , John Unitas , Bubba Smith and Tom Matte were no longer wanted or appreciated in the Monumental City . " 
 Volk was placed on waivers by the Colts in April of 1976 ; he was picked up by the Denver Broncos one week later . With Volk 's departure , punter David Lee was the sole remaining player on the Baltimore roster from the 1970 Super Bowl team . 
 In October 1977 , Volk was selected as a starter on the Colts ' 25th anniversary team . The team was selected by the fans in Baltimore , and the only players at any position to receive more votes than Volk were David Lee , Johnny Unitas , Raymond Berry , Alan Ameche , Gino Marchetti , John Mackey , Mike Curtis , Art Donovan , Alex Sandusky , Jim Parker and Bobby Boyd . 
 = = = New York Giants = = = 
 Volk was cut by the Broncos in August 1976 and signed by the Miami Dolphins two weeks later . He did not play for the Dolphins in 1976 and was signed mid @-@ season by the New York Giants . Volk played in 8 games for the Giants in 1976 and tallied 2 interceptions and a fumble recovery . Volk was cut by the Giants in early September 1977 , shortly before the start of the regular season . Volk recalled the disappointment at being cut by the Giants at age 32 : " I felt I should have been in New York , but they went with younger people . I was very disappointed , especially to get cut at the end of training camp . I 'd done all the hard training and was ready for the season – the fun time . " He returned to his home in Baltimore and worked during the fall as a manufacturer 's representative . 
 = = = Miami Dolphins = = = 
 Volk signed with the Miami Dolphins for the final month of the 1977 NFL season . He played in three games for the 1977 Miami Dolphins and had one interception ( off Buffalo Bills quarterback Joe Ferguson ) . Miami head coach Don Shula , who had worked with Volk in Baltimore , said , " We got him in the last four games , and he showed us some great hitting . He also didn 't seem to have lost any speed . " 
 During the 1978 NFL season , Volk appeared in all 16 games for the Dolphins , 13 of them as a starter . Volk started the season strong , intercepting a pass in the season opener against the New York Jets . In the second game of the season , the Dolphins played the Colts in Baltimore . Volk intercepted two passes against Baltimore quarterback Bill Troup and helped the Dolphins to a 42 – 0 win . After the game , Volk told reporters , " I wanted to have a good game in Baltimore , and I couldn 't have asked for anything better than the way it turned out . " While Volk began the 1978 season as a starter , he was replaced by Charlie Babb for the final four games . After the Dolphins lost the AFC wildcard game to the Oilers , Volk announced his retirement . Volk told reporters he had wanted to end his career with a championship team and added , " When the game 's over , you can 't worry about it . For most of the guys , there 'll be another season . For me , this is it . " 
 = = Later years = = 
 Volk began working as a manufacturer 's representative while still playing football , and continued in that business after retiring from the game . Interviewed in 2009 , Volk was selling industrial equipment to steel mills . 
 = Ring Off ( song ) = 
 " Ring Off " is a song by American singer Beyoncé , taken from the reissue of her fifth studio album Beyoncé ( 2013 ) , subtitled More Only ( 2014 ) . The song was released on November 28 , 2014 to contemporary hit radio in Italy and urban adult contemporary in the United States as the second single from the reissue . A midtempo reggae @-@ tinged ballad which is built around a slight dancehall rhythm and dubstep @-@ influenced beats , " Ring Off " addresses the end of a marriage between Beyoncé 's parents . It was written in a form of open letter of encouragement for her mother Tina Knowles . 
 Upon the release of the Platinum Edition , " Ring Off " received mostly favorable reviews from music critics , who deemed it as one of the most personal songs ever released by Beyoncé . Commercially , the single appeared on a few record charts , including the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 , where it peaked at number 5 . It also charted in several European countries including France , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background = = 
 On November 4 , 2014 it was announced through a press release by Parkwood Entertainment that Beyoncé would release a platinum edition of her self @-@ titled fifth studio album on November 24 , 2014 , containing a disc on the album titled Beyoncé : More Only which would include two new songs titled " 7 / 11 " and " Ring Off " . On November 19 , 2014 , 30 @-@ second snippets of the two songs appeared online along with reports that " 7 / 11 " would impact radio stations on November 25 . The following day , the full versions of both songs surfaced on the Internet . " Ring Off " was released on November 28 , 2014 to Italian contemporary hit radio , alongside " 7 / 11 " . " Ring Off " also impacted urban adult contemporary radio in the United States . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Ring Off " was written by Beyoncé , Mike Caren , William Lobban @-@ Bean , Geoff Early , Charles Hinshaw , Adam <unk> , Dixie , Stephen Bishop , Chauncey Hollis , Mike Dean , and Sidney Swift . It is a midtempo ballad which runs at a duration of three minutes . It was described as a reggae @-@ tinged track by Gerrick Kennedy from the Los Angeles Times . Meanwhile , the New York Post 's Hardeep Phull opined that the song was built around a slight dancehall rhythm . Additionally , Allan Raible writing for ABC News noted the slightly dubstep @-@ influenced beats on " Ring Off " . 
 Lyrically , the song addresses the end of a marriage between Beyoncé 's parents Tina Knowles and Mathew Knowles . The lyrics are written in a form of an " open letter " in which the singer praises her mother 's courage for ending a dysfunctional marriage . At the beginning of the song , Beyoncé sings , " Mama , I understand your many sleepless nights / When you think about father / and how you tried to be the perfect wife ... I wish you didn ’ t hurt at all . " Alex Frank of Vogue noted how the song was thematically " an enlightened follow @-@ up " to " Single Ladies " , discussing a similar private subject matter for the singer . He further opined that the lyrics apply to other women who are part of toxic relationships . 
 The last part of " Ring Off " contains lyrics in which Beyoncé declares to her mother that " it 's your time to put your love on top " , encouraging her " to put herself and her own happiness first " ; these lyrics were noted to be a " witty " rework of the singer 's own song " Love on Top " ( 2011 ) . The song ends with portions of a speech delivered by Tina Knowles from the 2014 Texas Women 's Empowerment Foundation Leadership Luncheon . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Jim Farber from New York Daily News wrote that " Ring Off " is " very much worth downloading . " Robert Christgau named the track a " sisterly , <unk> " song . ABC News ' Allan Raible wrote that " Ring Off " was " the counterpoint " to Beyoncé 's previous song " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) : " While that song is about settling down , this is an ode to ' starting over again . ' " On behalf of USA Today , Patrick Ryan labelled the track as a hybrid of " anthemic " sound of " XO " and " Caribbean vibes " of " Standing on the Sun " and " Grown Woman " . Lindsay Zoladz , a reviewer from Vulture , said that " Ring Off " " isn ’ t anything special " musically and likened the song 's style to that of Beyoncé 's previous songs " Schoolin ' Life " ( 2011 ) and " XO " ( 2013 ) . However , Zoladz complimented on the song 's lyrics , calling it " one of the most candidly personal songs Beyoncé ’ s ever released . " Vogue editor Alex Frank praised " Ring Off " for being an " epically good track , but more importantly , one of the most personal , profound songs she has ever released " . Daniel D 'Addario from Time magazine praised " Ring Off " as a " big step forward " in the singer 's music career , noting that it amplified the album 's theme with " an examination of the circumstances under which it ’ s better to be alone " . In 2014 , the song was placed at number 537 on the annual Pazz & Jop poll complied by The Village Voice . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Ring Off " appeared on the French SNEP Singles Chart at number 110 on December 6 , 2014 , and remained for one week . In the Netherlands , the single debuted at number 84 on the Single Top 100 chart on December 6 , 2014 . The following week , it dropped to number 93 . The song also peaked at number 5 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart , a chart which acts as a 25 @-@ song extension to the Billboard Hot 100 . It had a better performance on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart where it peaked at number 31 . In the United Kingdom , " Ring Off " debuted at number 81 on the UK Singles Chart in the chart issue dated December 6 , 2014 ; this placement also became its peak position in that country . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the singer 's official website and the album 's liner notes . 
 Song credits 
 Writing — Beyoncé Knowles , Mike Caren , William Lobban @-@ Bean , Geoff Early , Charles Hinshaw , Adam <unk> , Dixie , Stephen Bishop , Chauncey Hollis , Mike Dean , Sidney Swift 
 Production — Caren , Knowles 
 Additional production — Hit @-@ Boy , Hazebanga , Preach <unk> , Mike Dean 
 Vocals production — Knowles 
 Recording — Caren ; Mike 's House and Cook Classics at the <unk> , Los Angeles 
 Second engineering — Ramon Rivas , John <unk> 
 Audio mixing — Tony Maserati , Stuart White , Mirrorbal Studios , North Hollywood and Le Royal Monceau , Paris 
 Mix engineering — James Krause , Justin Hergett 
 Mix consulting — Derek Dixie 
 Mastering — Dave Kutch , The Mastering Palace , New York City 
 = = Weekly charts = = 
 = The Nightmare Before Christmas = 
 The Nightmare Before Christmas , often promoted as Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas , is a 1993 American stop motion dark fantasy musical film directed by Henry Selick , and produced and conceived by Tim Burton . It tells the story of Jack Skellington , a character from " Halloween Town " who stumbles through a portal to " Christmas Town " and decides to celebrate the holiday , with some dastardly and comical consequences . Danny Elfman wrote the film score and voiced the singing role of Jack . The principal voice cast also includes Chris Sarandon , Catherine O 'Hara , William Hickey , Ken Page , Paul Reubens and Glenn Shadix . 
 The Nightmare Before Christmas originated in a poem written by Tim Burton in 1982 , while he was working as an animator at Walt Disney Feature Animation . With the success of Vincent in the same year , Walt Disney Studios began to consider developing The Nightmare Before Christmas as either a short film or 30 @-@ minute television special . Over the years , Burton 's thoughts regularly returned to the project , and in 1990 , he made a development deal with Disney . Production started in July 1991 in San Francisco . Disney released the film through the Touchstone Pictures banner because the studio believed the film would be " too dark , and scary for kids . " 
 The Nightmare Before Christmas was met with both critical and financial success . The film has since been reissued by Walt Disney Pictures and re @-@ released annually in the Disney Digital 3 @-@ D format from 2006 until 2009 , making it the first stop @-@ motion animated feature to be entirely converted to 3D . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story starts in a forest called Holiday Woods with seven trees containing doors leading to towns representing various holidays : Valentine 's Day , St. Patrick 's Day , Easter , Thanksgiving , Christmas , Halloween and Independence Day . Halloween Town is a fantasy world filled with citizens such as deformed monsters , ghosts , ghouls , goblins , vampires , werewolves and witches . Jack Skellington , a skeleton known as The Pumpkin King , leads them in organizing the annual Halloween holiday ( " This is Halloween " ) . However , in a monologue , Jack reveals he has grown weary of the same routine year after year , and wants something more ( " Jack 's Lament " ) . Wandering dejectedly in the woods , he stumbles across the seven holiday doors and accidentally opens a portal to Christmas Town , whose residents are charged with organizing the annual Christmas holiday ( " What 's This ? " ) . Impressed by the bright and cheery feeling and style of Christmas , Jack presents his findings and his understanding of Christmas , to the Halloween Town residents . However , they fail to grasp his meaning and compare everything to their ideas of Halloween , although there is one Christmas character they can relate to : the fearsome lobster @-@ like king of Christmas Town who flies at night , named " Sandy Claws " ( " Town Meeting Song " ) . Jack is dismayed that no one understands the feeling of Christmas , obsessively tries to study the holiday but fails to grasp any further explanation of it . He ultimately decides that it 's unfair for Christmas Town alone to enjoy the feeling and there 's no reason why he shouldn 't be able to , and announces that the citizens of Halloween Town will take over Christmas this year ( " Jack 's Obsession " ) . 
 Jack 's obsession with Christmas leads him to usurp the role of Santa . Every resident is assigned a task , while Sally , a beautiful rag doll woman created by the town 's mad scientist , starts falling in love with Jack ( " Making Christmas " ) . However , after a vision of a burning Christmas tree , she alone realizes that his plans to run Christmas will become disastrous , but has no luck convincing him . Jack assigns Lock , Shock and Barrel , a trio of mischievous children , to abduct Santa and bring him back to Halloween Town ( " Kidnap The Sandy Claws " ) . Against Jack 's wishes and largely for their amusement , the trio deliver Santa to Oogie Boogie , a gambling @-@ addict bogeyman who plots to play a game with Santa 's life at stake ( " Oogie Boogie 's Song " ) . 
 Christmas Eve arrives and Sally attempts to stop Jack with fog , but fails to do so thanks to Jack 's ghost dog Zero and his glowing nose allowing Jack to embark into the sky on a coffin @-@ like sleigh pulled by skeletal reindeer , guided by Zero . Down on the ground , Sally prays that her premonition does not come true ( " Sally 's Song " ) . Jack begins to deliver presents to children around the world , but the gifts ( shrunken heads , Christmas tree @-@ eating snakes , pumpkin jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ boxes , vampire teddy bears , toy ducks with sharp teeth , man @-@ eating wreaths , bats , etc . ) only terrify the recipients . The children alert their parents , who call the police , who call the military . The air raid siren is activated , and Jack is spotted with search lights , after which he is then shot at by air raid artillery cannons . Initially mistaking the firing for a celebration , he simply flies higher . However , after a reindeer is hit , and his sleigh is grazed , he realizes that he is being targeted , but the next cannon destroys the sleigh , and Jack falls from the sky to Earth , devastating Halloween Town 's citizens . Thought to have been dead by the attack , Jack crash @-@ lands in a cemetery unharmed . Although he is depressed by the failure of his plan , he quickly regains his old spirit , having come up with new ideas for next Halloween . He then rushes back home to rescue Santa and put things right ( " Poor Jack " ) . 
 Meanwhile , Sally attempts to free Santa , but is captured by Oogie . Jack slips into the lair and frees them , then angrily confronts Oogie . Almost immediately , Oogie springs several traps on Jack , who manages to dodge them , and Oogie attempts to flee . However , Jack pulls one of Oogie 's loose threads , revealing him to be nothing more than a collection of snakes and insects , which are all incinerated , save for the last one , which Santa squashes with his boot . Jack apologizes to Santa for his actions , and Santa , while still annoyed with Jack for attempting to take over his job , assures him that he can fix things , and leaves to get rid of the evil toys and deliver the right presents to the world 's children . 
 After Jack returns to Halloween Town , the townspeople celebrate that he 's alive , and Santa , after fixing Christmas , returns and makes snow fall over Halloween Town in reconciliation between himself and Jack . The townspeople are confused by the snow at first , but soon begin to play happily in it , finally realizing what Christmas is about . Jack spies Sally heading to the graveyard , and follows her . Atop the graveyard 's big hill , Jack admits that he reciprocates Sally 's romantic feelings for him , and they declare their new found love , and kiss on the hill ( " Finale / Reprise " ) . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 Chris Sarandon ( speaking voice ) and Danny Elfman ( singing voice ) as Jack Skellington : A skeleton known as the " Pumpkin King " of Halloween Town . He owns a ghost dog named Zero , who has a small , glowing jack @-@ o ' -lantern nose . Danny Elfman also voices Barrell , one of the trick @-@ or @-@ treaters working for Oogie Boogie . 
 Catherine O 'Hara as Sally : A rag doll @-@ like creation of Finklestein , and the growing love interest of Jack . She is an amateur toxicologist that uses various types of poison to liberate herself from the captivity of Finklestein . O 'Hara also voices Shock , one of the trick @-@ or @-@ treaters working for Oogie Boogie . She had previously co @-@ starred in Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) . 
 William Hickey as Doctor Finklestein : A mad scientist , and the " father " of Sally . 
 Glenn Shadix as Mayor of Halloween Town : An enthusiastic leader who conducts town meetings . His wild mood swings from happy to distraught cause his head to spin between a " happy " and " sad " face ; where some career politicians are figuratively two @-@ faced , the Mayor is literally so . Burton and Shadix previously worked on Beetlejuice . 
 Ken Page as Oogie Boogie : A villainous bogeyman in Halloween Town , who has a passion for gambling . 
 Ed Ivory as Santa Claus : The leader of Christmas Town . Santa Claus is responsible for the annual celebration of Christmas , at which time he delivers presents to children around the world . Ivory also does the brief narration at the start of the film . 
 Paul Reubens as Lock . Reubens and Burton previously worked on Pee @-@ wee 's Big Adventure ( 1985 ) and Batman Returns ( 1992 ) . 
 Danny Elfman as Barrel . Elfman also does the singing voice of Jack Skellington . 
 The cast also features Kerry Katz , Carmen <unk> , Randy Crenshaw , Debi Durst , Glenn Walters , Sherwood Ball , and Greg Proops voicing various characters . Patrick Stewart recorded narration for a prologue and epilogue . While not used in the final film , the narration is included on the soundtrack album . 
 = = Production = = 
 As writer Tim Burton 's upbringing in Burbank , California was associated with the feeling of solitude , the filmmaker was largely fascinated by holidays during his childhood . " Anytime there was Christmas or Halloween , [ ... ] it was great . It gave you some sort of texture all of a sudden that wasn 't there before " , Burton would later recall . After completing his short film Vincent in 1982 , then @-@ Disney animator Burton wrote a three @-@ page poem titled The Nightmare Before Christmas , drawing inspiration from television specials of Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer , How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! and the poem A Visit from St. Nicholas . Burton intended to adapt the poem into a television special with the narration spoken by his favorite actor , Vincent Price , but also considered other options such as a children 's book . He created concept art and storyboards for the project in collaboration with Rick Heinrichs , who also sculpted character models ; Burton later showed his and Heinrichs ' works @-@ in @-@ progress to Henry Selick , also a Disney animator at the time . After the success of Vincent in 1982 , Disney started to consider developing The Nightmare Before Christmas as either a short film or 30 @-@ minute holiday television special . However , the project 's development eventually stalled , as its tone seemed " too weird " to the company . As Disney was unable to " offer his nocturnal loners enough scope " , Burton was fired from the studio in 1984 , and went on to direct the commercially successful films Beetlejuice and Batman . 
 Over the years , Burton regularly thought about the project . In 1990 , Burton found out that Disney still owned the film rights . He and Selick committed to produce a full @-@ length film with the latter as director . Disney was looking forward to Nightmare " to show capabilities of technical and storytelling achievements that were present in Who Framed Roger Rabbit . " Nightmare marked Burton 's third film in a row to have a Christmas setting . Burton could not direct because of his commitment to Batman Returns and he did not want to be involved with " the painstakingly slow process of stop motion " . To adapt his poem into a screenplay , Burton approached Michael McDowell , his collaborator on Beetlejuice . McDowell and Burton experienced creative differences , which convinced Burton to make the film as a musical with lyrics and compositions by frequent collaborator Danny Elfman . Elfman and Burton created a rough storyline and two @-@ thirds of the film 's songs , while Selick and his team of animators began production in July 1991 in San Francisco , California with a crew of over 120 workers , utilizing 20 sound stages for filming . Joe Ranft was hired from Disney as a storyboard supervisor , while Eric Leighton was hired to supervise animation . At the peak of production , 20 individual stages were simultaneously being used for filming . In total , there were 109 @,@ 440 frames taken for the movie . 
 Elfman found writing Nightmare 's 11 songs as " one of the easiest jobs I 've ever had . I had a lot in common with Jack Skellington . " Caroline Thompson still had yet to be hired to write the screenplay . With Thompson 's screenplay , Selick stated , " there are very few lines of dialogue that are Caroline 's . She became busy on other films and we were constantly rewriting , reconfiguring and developing the film visually . " The work of Ray Harryhausen , Ladislas <unk> , Edward Gorey , Charles Addams , Jan <unk> , Francis Bacon and Wassily Kandinsky influenced the filmmakers . Selick described the production design as akin to a pop @-@ up book . In addition , Selick stated , " When we reach Halloween Town , it 's entirely German Expressionism . When Jack enters Christmas Town , it 's an outrageous Dr. Seuss @-@ esque setpiece . Finally , when Jack is delivering presents in the ' Real World ' , everything is plain , simple and perfectly aligned . " 
 On the direction of the film , Selick reflected , " It 's as though he [ Burton ] laid the egg , and I sat on it and hatched it . He wasn 't involved in a hands @-@ on way , but his hand is in it . It was my job to make it look like ' a Tim Burton film ' , which is not so different from my own films . " When asked on Burton 's involvement , Selick claimed , " I don 't want to take away from Tim , but he was not in San Francisco when we made it . He came up five times over two years , and spent no more than eight or ten days in total . " Walt Disney Feature Animation contributed with some use of second @-@ layering traditional animation . Burton found production somewhat difficult because he was directing Batman Returns and in pre @-@ production of Ed Wood . 
 = = = Character design = = = 
 The filmmakers constructed 227 puppets to represent the characters in the movie , with Jack Skellington having " around four hundred heads " , allowing the expression of every possible emotion . Sally 's mouth movements " were animated through the replacement method . During the animation process , [ ... ] only Sally 's face ' mask ' was removed in order to preserve the order of her long , red hair . Sally had ten types of faces , each made with a series of eleven expressions ( e.g. eyes open and closed , and various facial poses ) and synchronised mouth movements . " 
 The stop motion figurine of Jack Skellington was reused in James and the Giant Peach ( also directed by Selick ) as Captain Jack . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The owners of the franchise have undertaken an extensive marketing campaign of these characters across many media . In addition to the Haunted Mansion Holiday at Disneyland featuring the film 's characters , Jack Skellington , Sally , Pajama Jack , and the Mayor have been made into <unk> figures , while Jack and Sally even appear in fine art . Moreover , Sally has been made into an action figure and a Halloween costume . A Jack Skellington figurine is available for the Disney Infinity video game , allowing the character to be playable in the game 's " Toy Box Mode " . Jack is also the titular character in the short story " Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas : Jack 's Story " . 
 Jim Edwards contends that " Tim Burton 's animated movie The Nightmare Before Christmas is really a movie about the marketing business . The movie 's lead character , Jack Skellington , the chief marketing officer ( CMO ) for a successful company , decides that his success is boring and he wants the company to have a different business plan . " 
 = = Soundtracks = = 
 The film 's soundtrack album was released in 1993 on Walt Disney Records . For the film 's 2006 re @-@ release in Disney Digital 3 @-@ D , a special edition of the soundtrack was released , featuring a bonus disc which contained covers of five of the film 's songs by Fall Out Boy , Panic ! at the Disco , Marilyn Manson , Fiona Apple , and She Wants Revenge . Four original demo tracks by Elfman were also included . On September 30 , 2008 , Disney released the cover album Nightmare Revisited , featuring artists such as Amy Lee , Flyleaf , Korn , Rise Against , Plain White T 's , The All @-@ American Rejects , and many more . 
 American gothic rock band London After Midnight featured a cover of " Sally 's Song " on their 1998 album Oddities . 
 <unk> <unk> did a French cover of " Sally 's Song " which was released on her album Will you hate the rest of the world or will you renew your life ? in 2010 . 
 Another soundtrack released in 2003 was the Disneyland Haunted Mansion Holiday CD . Although most were not original songs from the movie , one song provided on the CD is a medley of " Making Christmas " , " What 's This ? " , and " Kidnap the Santy Claws " . Other songs included are original holiday songs changed to incorporate the theme of the movie . The last song on the list , however , is the soundtrack for the Disneyland Haunted Mansion Holiday ride . 
 The film was also one of the inspiration for Blink @-@ 182 's " I Miss You " , with its grim mood and lyrical references like " have Hallowe 'en on Christmas " and " Jack and Sally " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Disney decided to release the film under their Touchstone Pictures banner because they thought the film would be " too dark and scary for kids " , Selick remembered . " Their biggest fear , and why it was kind of a <unk> project , [ was ] they were afraid of their core audience hating the film and not coming . " To help market the film , " It was released as Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas , " Burton explained . " But it turned more into more of a brand @-@ name thing , it turned into something else , which I 'm not quite sure about . " The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 9 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 With successful home video sales , Nightmare achieved the ranks of a cult film . Touchstone Home Video first released the film on VHS on September 30 , 1994 , and on DVD on December 2 , 1997 . The DVD release contained no special features . Nightmare was released a second time on October 3 , 2000 as a special edition . The release included an audio commentary by Selick and cinematographer Pete Kozachik , a 28 @-@ minute making @-@ of documentary , a gallery of concept art , storyboards , test footage and deleted scenes . Burton 's Vincent and Frankenweenie were also included . Both DVDs were non @-@ anamorphic widescreen releases . 
 Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on DVD again ( this time with an anamorphic transfer ) and on Blu @-@ ray Disc ( for the first time ) in August 2008 as a two @-@ disc digitally remastered " collector 's edition " , but still containing the same special features . 
 Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released The Nightmare Before Christmas on Blu @-@ ray 3D on August 30 , 2011 . The release is a 3 @-@ disc combo pack including a Blu @-@ ray 3D disc , Blu @-@ ray Disc and a DVD that includes both a DVD and digital copy of the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film initially received positive reviews from critics ; it has since gone on to receive widespread critical acclaim . On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 94 % , based on 88 reviews , with an average rating of 8 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads , " The Nightmare Before Christmas is a stunningly original and visually delightful work of stop @-@ motion animation . " On Metacritic the film has a score of 77 out of 100 , based on 16 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert gave a highly positive review for Nightmare . Ebert believed the film 's visual effects were as revolutionary as Star Wars , taking into account that Nightmare was " filled with imagination that carries us into a new world " . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called it a restoration of " originality and daring to the Halloween genre . This dazzling mix of fun and fright also explodes the notion that animation is kid stuff . ... It 's 74 minutes of timeless movie magic . " James Berardinelli stated " The Nightmare Before Christmas has something to offer just about everyone . For the kids , it 's a fantasy celebrating two holidays . For the adults , it 's an opportunity to experience some light entertainment while marveling at how adept Hollywood has become at these techniques . There are songs , laughs , and a little romance . In short , The Nightmare Before Christmas does what it intends to : entertain . " Desson Thomson of The Washington Post enjoyed stylistic features in common with Oscar Wilde , German Expressionism , the Brothers Grimm and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari . 
 Michael A. Morrison discusses the influence of Dr. Seuss ' How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! on the film , writing that Jack parallels the Grinch and Zero parallels Max , the Grinch 's dog . Philip Nel writes that the film " challenges the wisdom of adults through its trickster characters " , contrasting Jack as a " good trickster " with Oogie Boogie , whom he also compares with Dr. Seuss ' Dr. Terwilliker as a bad trickster . Entertainment Weekly reports that fan reception of these characters borders on obsession , profiling Laurie and <unk> Rudnick , a couple whose " degree of obsession with [ the ] film is so great that ... they named their son after the real @-@ life person that a character in the film is based on . " This enthusiasm for the characters has also been profiled as having spread beyond North America to Japan . 
 Yvonne Tasker notes " the complex characterization seen in The Nightmare Before Christmas " . Most recently , the film ranked # 1 on Rotten Tomatoes ' " Top 25 Best Christmas Movies " list . 
 Danny Elfman was worried the characterization of Oogie Boogie would be considered racist by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) . Elfman 's predictions came true ; however , director Henry Selick stated the character was inspired by the Betty Boop cartoon The Old Man of the Mountain . " Cab Calloway would dance his inimitable jazz dance and sing ' Minnie the Moocher ' or ' Old Man of the Mountain ' , and they would rotoscope him , trace him , turn him into a cartoon character , often transforming him into an animal , like a walrus , " Selick continued . " I think those are some of the most inventive moments in cartoon history , in no way racist , even though he was sometimes a villain . We went with Ken Page , who is a black singer , and he had no problem with it " . 
 Nightmare has inspired video game spin @-@ offs , including Oogie 's Revenge and The Pumpkin King , and is among the many Disney @-@ owned franchises that contribute to the mythology of the Kingdom Hearts series . A trading card game is also available . Since 2001 , Disneyland has held a Nightmare Before Christmas theme for its Haunted Mansion Holiday attraction . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Around the release of the film , Disney executive David Hoberman was quoted , " I hope Nightmare goes out and makes a fortune . If it does , great . If it doesn 't , that doesn 't negate the validity of the process . The budget was less than any Disney blockbuster so it doesn 't have to earn Aladdin @-@ sized grosses to satisfy us . " Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas was given a limited release on October 15 , 1993 , before being wide released on October 29 . The film earned $ 50 million in the United States on its first theatrical run . 
 On October 20 , 2006 , Walt Disney Pictures reissued Nightmare ( no longer under Touchstone ) with conversion to Disney Digital 3 @-@ D. Industrial Light & Magic assisted in the process . It made a further $ 8 @.@ 7 million in box office gross . Subsequently , the 3 @-@ D version of Nightmare has been re @-@ released annually in October . The 2007 and 2008 reissues earned $ 14 @.@ 5 million and $ 1 @.@ 1 million , respectively , increasing the film 's total box office gross to $ 75 million . The El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California has been showing the film in 4 @-@ D screenings annually in October , ending on Halloween , since 2010 . The reissues have led to a reemergence of 3 @-@ D films and advances in RealD Cinema . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was nominated for both the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . Nightmare won the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , while Elfman won Best Music . Selick and the animators were also nominated for their work . Elfman was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score . 
 The American Film Institute nominated The Nightmare Before Christmas for its Top 10 Animated Films list . 
 = = Possible sequel = = 
 In 2001 , Walt Disney Pictures began to consider producing a sequel , but rather than using stop motion , Disney wanted to use computer animation . Burton convinced Disney to drop the idea . " I was always very protective of Nightmare not to do sequels or things of that kind , " Burton explained . " You know , ' Jack visits Thanksgiving world ' or other kinds of things just because I felt the movie had a purity to it and the people that like it ... Because it 's a mass @-@ market kind of thing , it was important to kind of keep that purity of it . " The 2005 video game The Nightmare Before Christmas : Oogie 's Revenge did continue the story of the film , with Capcom 's crew of developers going after Tim Burton for advice , and having the collaboration of the film 's art director , Deane Taylor . In 2009 , Selick said he would do a film sequel if he and Burton could create a good story for it . 
 Characters from The Nightmare Before Christmas have also had cameos in Disney and Square Enix 's role @-@ playing game series , Kingdom Hearts . In the majority of these games , Jack acts as a partner to the main character . In the first game , Jack attempts to liven up Halloween by giving a heart created by Dr. Finklestein to a Heartless , but the experiment goes wrong and the heart soon is taken by Oogie Boogie . In Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories , he tries to help the protagonist , Sora , regain his memories . In Kingdom Hearts II , Halloween Town and its inhabitants are seen , while Jack rekindles his notion of taking over Santa 's job . In the prequel game Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , Jack seeks inspiration for livening up his Halloween by paying attention to the actions of the protagonist , Roxas . 
 In September 2001 , Disneyland 's Haunted Mansion attraction was redesigned with characters , decorations and music from the movie . This attraction is called the Haunted Mansion Holiday , and remains in operation through the Christmas season . It takes ride goers on a what @-@ if adventure of if Jack , as " Sandy Claws , " had visited the Haunted Mansion on Christmas Eve , leaving holiday chaos in his wake . 
 = = Related media = = 
 A video game developed by Capcom , The Nightmare Before Christmas : Oogie 's Revenge , was released for PlayStation 2 and Xbox on October 21 , 2004 in Japan , September 30 , 2005 in Europe and October 10 , 2005 in North America . Set after the events of the film , the player controls Jack as he fights against Oogie Boogie , who is revived and takes over Halloween Town and plots to take over all of the Holiday Worlds . Another game ( a prequel this time ) , The Nightmare Before Christmas : The Pumpkin King , was developed by Tose Co . , Ltd. and was released for the Game Boy Advance in 2005 . A Jack Skellington figure was released for Disney Infinity in October 2013 . 
 A collectible card game based on the film called The Nightmare Before Christmas TCG was released in 2005 by NECA . The game was designed by Quixotic Games founder Andrew Parks and <unk> <unk> . It consists of a Premiere set and 4 Starter Decks based on four characters , Jack Skellington , the Mayor , Oogie Boogie , and Doctor Finklestein . Each Starter Deck contains a rule book , a Pumpkin King card , a Pumpkin Points card , and a 48 @-@ card deck . The game has four card types : Characters , Locales , Creations , and Surprises . The Cards ' rarities are separated into four categories : Common , Uncommon , Rare , Ultra Rare . 
 Quixotic Games also developed The Nightmare Before Christmas Party Game that was released in 2007 by NECA . 
 A collector 's edition The Nightmare Before Christmas @-@ themed <unk> game was issued with orange , purple and black blocks with Jack Skellington heads on them . The set comes in a coffin @-@ shaped box instead of the normal rectangular box . 
 A 168 @-@ card Munchkin Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas @-@ themed Munchkin was developed by USAopoly featuring the citizens of Halloween Town such as Jack Skellington , Oogie Boogie , Doctor Finklestein and Lock , Shock and Barrel . The game comes with a custom die similar to the ones used by Oogie Boogie in the film . 
 = The Show Where Sam Shows Up = 
 " The Show Where Sam Shows Up " is the 16th episode of the second season of the American sitcom Frasier . This episode originally aired on Tuesday , February 21 , 1995 , on NBC , intended as part of a February ratings sweep by the network . It features a central guest appearance of Ted Danson as Sam Malone , a recovering sex addict , bartender and ex @-@ baseball player . In this episode Sam arrives to Seattle to see his old friend Frasier , and then is introduced to Frasier 's family at a dinner in Frasier 's home . During the visit , it 's discovered that Sam was to get married to a woman named Sheila , who previously had a one @-@ night stand with Frasier . Then Sam finds out about Sheila 's dalliance with other men rather than with Frasier , much to Frasier 's relief , which ends Sam 's relationship with her . Danson 's appearance in this episode has received mixed reviews , and the positive highlight about it is his interaction with the cast of Frasier . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Act One = = = 
 Bartender and ex @-@ baseball player Sam Malone ( Ted Danson ) from Cheers arrives in Seattle to see his psychiatrist friend Frasier Crane at the <unk> @-@ FM radio station , and then Frasier becomes very happy and overjoyed by his arrival . According to Sam , after the 1993 Cheers finale , " One for the Road " , lives have changed since Frasier left Boston . Former bar manager of Cheers , Rebecca Howe , was dumped by her plumber husband Don <unk> , who became rich after a successful plumbing invention , and then she settled her life back into the bar without intent to work there again . Bartender Woody Boyd and his wife , Kelly Gaines @-@ Boyd , have a son , who is smarter than his parents . A bar regular patron and postman Cliff Clavin still lives with his mother , stops attending the bar , and has not left home after he read information about a flesh @-@ eating bacteria . 
 = = = " Martin Rises from the Dead " = = = 
 Then Frasier brings Sam home for dinner and introduces him to his family : his father Martin ( John Mahoney ) who is an ex @-@ cop and a baseball fan of Sam Malone , his brother Niles ( David Hyde Pierce ) who is also a psychiatrist , and his housekeeper Daphne Moon ( Jane Leeves ) . During the family introduction , Sam explains that , as mentioned in Cheers , Frasier 's father was supposed to be a dead scientist and that Frasier is supposed to be the only child , much to dismay of Frasier 's family . Frasier explains the inconsistency , indicating that he had an argument with Martin , which motivated him into making up the " dead scientist father " story . 
 Then Daphne becomes charmed by Sam 's flirts on her , as well , which enrages Niles , who has a secret crush on Daphne . Frasier tells Niles that Sam has a sexual addiction and assures Niles that Sam still attends group meetings of sexual addicts , recommended by Frasier in the Cheers episode " The Guy Can 't Help It " ( 1993 ) . Meanwhile , Sam and Martin enjoy their conversation together , and Frasier learns that Sam was supposed to marry a woman named Sheila " yesterday " . 
 After joyous family gathering , with Frasier and Sam alone in the living room , Sam confesses to Frasier that he has a relationship with Sheila for six months and that Sam left her at the wedding altar . Frasier assures Sam that Sam has wedding jitters and that Sam is ready to leave his old empty sex life behind in favor of a committed relationship . Frasier advises him to continue this relationship and to be always honest to her , especially about leaving her at the altar . 
 = = = " A Dirty Little Secret " = = = 
 At the café , Sam introduces his fiancée Sheila ( Téa Leoni ) to Frasier . After short conversation , Frasier realizes that Sheila is the woman with whom he slept three months ago . Then Frasier goes to the hotel room , at where she and Sam are staying . Sheila explains that she is also a sex addict , like Sam , and that Sam and she met for the first time at one of group meetings of sexual addicts . Frasier begs her not to tell Sam about their short @-@ time affair . Suddenly , Sam arrives into the room and then , in order to be honest to her , confesses to Sheila that , at the day of their engagement , Sam slept with another woman twice . Then Sheila confesses that she slept with other two regular patrons : Paul ( " short , bald , fat " ) and then Cliff Clavin . Though he forgives her dalliance with Paul , Sam is disgusted to learn about Cliff and breaks off his relationship with Sheila . ( When she turns to Frasier for help , he is equally disgusted about Cliff . ) 
 At Frasier 's car , Sam , at Frasier 's relief and <unk> to confess , still does not find out about his fling with Sheila , yet Sam is bothered that Cliff and she made a fling together , and is relieved to go back to Boston . Frasier assures Sam that Sam has proven himself to be competent for a " meaningful " committed relationship , even if Sheila is " not the one " . However , Frasier begins to frown by Sam 's plans to pursue a cocktail waitress at an airport bar . 
 = = Reception = = 
 This episode originally aired on NBC on Tuesday , February 21 , 1995 , at 9 : 00 pm ( Eastern ) / 8 : 00 pm ( Central ) as part of the February ratings sweep , rivaling against ABC 's Home Improvement , CBS 's television movie Falling for You , and Fox 's broadcast of the 1992 film <unk> , and landed on No. 6 with an 18 @.@ 8 rating and a 27 share . 
 Mike Drew from Milwaukee Journal Sentinel rated this episode three and a half stars out of four and praised Cheers character Sam Malone 's guest appearance in this episode , even if he disdained Sam 's sexual escapades . John Martin , a syndicate writer from The New York Times , found Sam 's interaction with characters of Frasier brilliant , especially Daphne Moon . Ginny Holbert from Chicago Sun @-@ Times rated this episode , three and a half stars out of four , as well , and called it a must for Cheers fans and trivia buffs who wanted inconsistencies of Frasier 's family background " [ cleared ] up " . Dusty Saunders from Rocky Mountain News was marveled by the comparison between " the macho Sam and the unathletic Niles " and presented blend of " the macho , rakish spirit of Cheers and the neurotic , off @-@ the @-@ wall style of Frasier . " Rick <unk> from The Sacramento Bee praised a reunion between two friends , Sam Malone and Frasier Crane , even when they are different from each other . 
 On the other hand , Donna Callea from The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal found this episode disappointing , called Ted Danson 's guest reprisal as Sam Malone a ratings ploy , considered Danson 's performance apathetic and <unk> , and saw a reunion between Sam and Frasier Crane not well @-@ executed . Frazier Moore from The Associated Press called Sam 's appearance a ratings ploy , as well , but a must @-@ see for a Cheers fan and any other viewer who lacks interest on the show Frasier . Elaine Liner from Corpus Christi Caller @-@ Times found Sam Malone " sheepish " in this episode . Scott D. Pierce from Deseret News found this episode not as good as previous Frasier episodes that featured Frasier 's ex @-@ wife , Lilith Sternin ( Bebe Neuwirth ) , Sam " old and [ tiring ] " in Frasier , and Danson 's performance " lethargic " , but Sam D. Pierce found some of its moments funny , especially from " fresh " Niles . Reviews from Frasier Online , a fan dedication website for the show Frasier , were mixed . Some liked Sam 's interaction with Frasier 's family but found a romantic story and its scenes between Ted Danson and Téa Leoni poorly executed . One found Cheers references not suitable for viewers not familiar with the show 's predecessor Cheers , especially ones used for humor . 
 = L.A. Takedown = 
 L.A. Takedown , also called L.A. Crimewave and Made in L.A. , is a 1989 crime thriller . Originally filmed as an unsuccessful pilot for an NBC television series , it was reworked and aired as a stand @-@ alone TV film . The film was later released on VHS and , in Region 2 , on DVD . L.A. Takedown was written and directed by Michael Mann and its ensemble cast includes Scott Plank , Alex McArthur , Michael Rooker , Daniel Baldwin , and Xander Berkeley . Scott Plank starred as Vincent Hanna , a detective on the hunt for professional criminal Patrick McLaren , played by McArthur ; the story was based on the real @-@ life investigation of Chicago criminal Neil McCauley . The film is best known as the basis for the 1995 film Heat . The film was moderately well received in retrospective reviews , but remains overshadowed by its remake . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Los Angeles robbery @-@ homicide sergeant Vincent Hanna ( Plank ) is on the trail of a gang of ruthless professional criminals , led by the methodical Patrick McLaren ( McArthur ) , whose only mistake in the last heist was the killing of armored car guards by the new recruit , Waingro ( Berkeley ) , who is a loose cannon . But Hanna is soon surprised when he discovers that he and McLaren have quite a lot in common . While McLaren and his gang plan another heist , Hanna and his colleagues keep surveillance . Hanna is facing a personal problem , as the police work is straining his relationship with his wife , Lillian ( Pouget ) . Moreover , McLaren is also facing a similar problem when he finds himself falling in love with Eady ( Harrington ) , which he personally condemns due to the commitment required to his profession . 
 Things then take a turn for the very worst , as McLaren unsuccessfully attempts to kill Waingro , who in turn betrays the team to the police . When Hanna arrives on the scene unexpectedly with the police , McLaren and his crew engage them in a mid @-@ street shootout , in which most of McLaren 's crew are killed . After making an unlikely escape , McLaren is presented with an opportunity to leave Los Angeles for a new life with Eady , but he decides to first take revenge for Waingro 's betrayal . However , after McLaren tracks down Waingro in a hotel room , he is ambushed by Hanna and his team . Waingro takes advantage of the confusion to shoot McLaren through a closed door . In retaliation for McLaren 's murder , Hanna kills Waingro . In the final sequences of the film , Hanna is reunited with his wife . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Scott Plank as Vincent Hanna , sergeant of detectives working for the Los Angeles Police Department Robbery @-@ Homicide division . 
 Alex McArthur as Patrick McLaren , professional robber , head of his own gang of criminals . 
 Michael Rooker as Detective Bosko , Hanna 's second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 Ely Pouget as Lillian Hanna , Vincent Hanna 's estranged wife . 
 Vincent <unk> as Michael Cerrito . 
 Victor Rivers as Detective Arriaga . 
 Richard Chaves as Detective Lou Casals . 
 Laura Harrington as Eady , McLaren 's love interest . 
 Peter Dobson as Chris <unk> . 
 Xander Berkeley as Waingro , a new recruit to McLaren 's gang . 
 Daniel Baldwin as Detective Bobby Schwartz . 
 R. D. Call as Harry Dieter . 
 Juan Fernández as Harvey <unk> . 
 Clarence Gilyard , Jr. as Mustafa Jackson . 
 Cary @-@ Hiroyuki Tagawa as Hugh Benny . 
 The majority of the main cast appeared as guest stars in episodes of one or both of Michael Mann 's two shows produced in the 1980s , Miami Vice and Crime Story . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 The origins of L.A. Takedown lay in real life . Michael Mann , the film 's producer and screenwriter , cited producer , screenwriter and Chicago ex @-@ police officer Chuck Adamson as an inspiration for the character of Vincent Hanna . Mann , who collaborated with Adamson on Miami Vice and Crime Story and several minor projects , was told of an investigation Adamson partook in . In 1963 , he was investigating Neil McCauley , a professional robber . According to Mann , " one day they simply bumped into one another . [ Adamson ] didn 't know what to do : arrest him , shoot him or have a cup of coffee . " Adamson later killed McCauley in a stand @-@ off after a failed robbery . 
 In 1979 , Mann wrote an early 180 @-@ page draft for the screenplay . After making his first feature film , Thief , he re @-@ wrote the draft . In a 1983 interview , he mentioned he was planning to make a film based on the draft , and was looking for someone to direct it . He later offered the director position to Walter Hill , but Hill refused . In the late 1980s , NBC commissioned Mann to produce a new television series . Mann felt the draft would make a good pilot episode , but decided to set the story in Los Angeles , deeming the L. A. Robbery – Homicide Division a better basis for a TV show . He took the 180 @-@ page screenplay and edited out roughly 110 pages to make room for a 90 @-@ minute pilot . However , the new series was not picked up by the network . Instead , it was released as a television film entitled L.A. Takedown . 
 The pilot was shot in nineteen days , with ten days of pre @-@ production , which was noted atypically fast for Mann . The film score was written by Tim Truman , and cinematography done by Ron Garcia . The soundtrack also featured the song " L.A. Woman " performed by Billy Idol . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Mann had cast Scott Plank in the role of Hanna , which was not well received by NBC . They expressed interest in buying the series on the condition of finding a new lead actor , but Mann refused , leading to NBC 's rejecting the show . The unsuccessful pilot was , however , aired as a television film on NBC on August 27 , 1989 at 9 : 00 pm . In 1990 , it was released on VHS in Finland , with several other European countries following in the early 1990s . On March 19 , 2008 , a DVD of the movie was released in Germany , featuring several scene selections as bonus content . 
 L.A. Takedown received mixed @-@ to @-@ positive reviews from film critics , with its acting being the most poorly received . On its first airing , The Globe and Mail gave the film a two star rating . Hal Erickson of AllRovi compared the film to Mann 's cult TV series Miami Vice , but felt it emphasized style over substance . Dragan <unk> for Movie Reviews in Croatian ( Croatian : <unk> <unk> na <unk> ) , in comparing the film with its remake , Heat , praised Mann 's choice to hire unknown actors for L.A. Takedown , which contrasted with big stars in Heat . Although he derided Berkeley 's performance as Waingro , he concluded that it was " a fine companion piece to Heat . " A reviewer from <unk> des <unk> Films of Germany was less enthusiastic , citing routine action sequences and a confusing plot due to the overly large cast . Lol Frost of Empire gave L.A. Takedown two out of five stars , acknowledging the worthiness of the plot , but citing lack of Mann 's typical filming style . Frost concluded that the film was " a bit of a dud , but a noble effort . " 
 = = Remake = = 
 After directing The Last of the Mohicans , Mann decided to remake L.A. Takedown into a wide release cinema feature . He viewed the film as a dry run for the original story , which was a complex , multi @-@ layered crime drama axed for the television film . He consulted a longer 1986 draft to work on the remake . Having made L.A. Takedown , Mann felt he had a much better idea of how he wanted to structure the remake , saying : " I charted the film out like a 2 hr 45 min piece of music , so I 'd know where to be smooth , where not to be smooth , where to be staccato , where to use a pulse like a heartbeat . " 
 On April 5 , 1994 , Mann was reported to have abandoned an earlier plan to produce a James Dean biographical film in favor of the L.A. Takedown remake , entitled Heat . Heat was made on a US $ 60 million budget with an all @-@ star cast , and released in 1995 . It featured Al Pacino as Vincent Hanna , Robert De Niro in the role of Patrick McLaren , now renamed Neil McCauley , Val Kilmer as Chris <unk> , Mykelti Williamson as Arriaga , now renamed Drucker , Diane Venora in the role of Lillian , now renamed Justine , and Ted Levine as Schwartz , now renamed Bosko . The film was met with critical acclaim and grossed US $ 187 million , becoming a financial success . 
 Not only featuring a bigger budget and well @-@ known actors , Heat also had significant storyline differences compared to L.A. Takedown . Among other things , the remake included Chris <unk> ' gambling addiction , the subplot concerning Roger Van Zant and his attempt to double @-@ cross the crew ( in this film Waingro plots against the crew by himself ) , and Hanna 's troubled stepdaughter — plot elements not present in the original film . Because of this , Heat runs nearly twice the length of L.A. Takedown . Nowadays , L.A. Takedown is best known for being the basis of Heat , and is often compared to it in an unfavorable light . 
 = German destroyer Z7 Hermann Schoemann = 
 Z7 Hermann Schoemann was a Type 1934A @-@ class destroyer built for Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine in the mid @-@ 1930s . The ship was plagued by machinery problems for most of her life and was under repair when World War 2 began in September 1939 . She covered her sister ships over the next few months as they laid offensive minefields in English waters in late 1939 – early 1940 . Hermann Schoemann played a minor role in the Norwegian Campaign as engine problems limited her availability throughout 1940 and for most of 1941 . 
 She was transferred to France in early 1942 to escort two battleships and a heavy cruiser home to Germany through the English Channel in the Channel Dash . The ship was then transferred to Norway where she participated in Operation Sportpalast ( Sports Palace ) , an unsuccessful attempt to intercept Convoy QP 8 returning from Russia . Another unsuccessful intercept was made in early April before the Germans were successful with Convoy QP 11 at the end of the month . The convoy 's escorts conducted a skillful defense and prevented Hermann Schoemann and the other two destroyers from sinking more than a single Soviet freighter . The German commander broke off the action in the hopes of locating the crippled light cruiser HMS Edinburgh . They found the cruiser and her escorting destroyers on 2 May ; Edinburgh disabled Hermann Schoemann before she could fire any torpedoes and her captain was forced to scuttle her shortly afterwards . The destroyer had 8 men killed and 45 wounded in the engagement . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Hermann Schoemann had an overall length of 119 meters ( 390 ft 5 in ) and was 114 meters ( 374 ft 0 in ) long at the waterline . The ship had a beam of 11 @.@ 30 meters ( 37 ft 1 in ) , and a maximum draft of 4 @.@ 23 meters ( 13 ft 11 in ) . She displaced 2 @,@ 171 long tons ( 2 @,@ 206 t ) at standard load and 3 @,@ 110 long tons ( 3 @,@ 160 t ) at deep load . The two Wagner geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller shaft , were designed to produce 70 @,@ 000 PS ( 51 @,@ 000 kW ; 69 @,@ 000 shp ) using steam provided by six high @-@ pressure Wagner boilers . The ship had a designed speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) and she reached a maximum speed of 36 @.@ 8 knots from 66 @,@ 000 shp ( 49 @,@ 000 kW ) while testing various propellers . Hermann Schoemann carried a maximum of 752 metric tons ( 740 long tons ) of fuel oil which was intended to give a range of 4 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 100 km ; 5 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) , but the ship proved top @-@ heavy in service and 30 % of the fuel had to be retained as ballast low in the ship . The effective range proved to be only 1 @,@ 530 nmi ( 2 @,@ 830 km ; 1 @,@ 760 mi ) at 19 knots . The crew numbered 10 officers and 315 enlisted men , plus an additional four officers and 19 enlisted men if serving as a flotilla flagship . 
 The ship carried five 12 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 5 in ) SK C / 34 guns in single mounts with gun shields , two each superimposed , fore and aft . The fifth gun was carried on top of the aft superstructure . Her anti @-@ aircraft armament consisted of four 3 @.@ 7 @-@ centimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) SK C / 30 guns in two twin mounts abreast the rear funnel and six 2 @-@ centimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) C / 30 guns in single mounts . Hermann Schoemann carried eight above @-@ water 53 @.@ 3 @-@ centimeter ( 21 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes in two power @-@ operated mounts . A pair of reload torpedoes were provided for each mount . Four depth charge throwers were mounted on the sides of the rear deckhouse and they were supplemented by six racks for individual depth charges on the sides of the stern . Enough depth charges were carried for either two or four patterns of 16 charges each . Mine rails could be fitted on the rear deck that had a maximum capacity of 60 mines . A system of passive hydrophones designated as ' GHG ' ( Gruppenhorchgerät ) was fitted to detect submarines and the S @-@ Gerät active sonar system was scheduled to be installed during March 1940 . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Z7 Hermann Schoemann , named after Lieutenant ( Kapitänleutnant ) Hermann Schoemann , was ordered on 9 January 1935 and laid down at DeSchiMAG , Bremen on 7 September 1935 as yard number <unk> . She was launched on 16 July 1936 and completed on 9 September 1937 under the command of Lieutenant Commander ( Korvettenkapitän ) Erich Schulte <unk> . The ship participated in the late 1937 naval maneuvers as part of the 2nd Destroyer Division ( 2 . Zerstörer @-@ Division ) . Hermann Schoemann hosted Adolf Hitler and his retinue for a short cruise from Kiel to Eckernförde in July 1938 and participated in the August Fleet Review and the following fleet exercise . Korvettenkapitän Theodor Detmers relieved Schulte @-@ <unk> in October . The division accompanied the heavy cruiser Admiral Graf Spee on her voyage to the Mediterranean in October where they visited Vigo , Tangiers , and Ceuta before returning home . The destroyer had a lengthy refit at Wilhelmshaven from February 1939 to October . 
 Hermann Schoemann patrolled the Skagerrak to inspect neutral shipping for contraband goods in October . The ship attempted to lay a minefield off the British coast on the night of 12 / 13 November , with two of her sisters , but had to turn back after she and Z6 Theodor Riedel suffered machinery breakdowns . She made another attempt on the night of 18 December to mine the Humber estuary , together with two other destroyers , but the German ships had to abandon the sortie when they could not pinpoint their location with the required degree of precision . While patrolling in the Jade estuary on 23 December , she collided with her sister Z15 Erich Steinbrinck in a heavy fog . Hermann Schoemann covered minelaying sorties in January and February 1940 , but spent most of March under repair for machinery problems . 
 The ship was allocated to Group 2 for the Norwegian portion of Operation Weserübung . The group 's task was to transport the 138th Mountain Infantry Regiment ( 138 . Gebirgsjäger Regiment ) of the 3rd Mountain Division to seize Trondheim together with Admiral Hipper , but her machinery broke down again before the troops were loaded and she was replaced by Friedrich Eckoldt . As part of the post @-@ Narvik reorganization of the Kriegsmarine 's destroyer forces , Hermann Schoemann was assigned to the 6th Destroyer Flotilla ( 6 . Zerstörer Flotille ) . In June the flotilla was tasked to escort the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , as well as the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper in Operation Juno , a planned attack on Harstad , Norway , to relieve pressure on the German garrison at Narvik . The ships sortied on 8 June and sank the troop transport Orama , the oil tanker Oil Pioneer and the minesweeping trawler Juniper en route . The German commander , Admiral Wilhelm Marschall , then ordered the Admiral Hipper and all four destroyers to Trondheim because of the heavy weather , where they arrived in the morning of 9 June . The two battleships continued the sortie and sank the aircraft carrier Glorious and her two escorting destroyers , although Scharnhorst was badly damaged by a torpedo from the destroyer Acasta in the engagement . The battleship was escorted home by the destroyers Steinbrinck , Z10 Hans Lody and Hermann Schoemann for repairs . On 25 June , Hermann Schoemann began a lengthy refit that lasted until 15 February 1941 , although her machinery continued to be problematic . 
 = = = 1942 = = = 
 She was declared operational in June and transferred to Kirkenes , Norway , the following month . However , continued machinery problems forced her return to Germany in August and repairs that lasted until January 1942 . Now assigned to the 5 . Zerstörer Flotille , Hermann Schoemann sailed from Kiel on 24 January for France as part of the preparations for the Channel Dash . On the evening of 25 January , Z8 Bruno Heinemann struck two mines laid by HMS Plover off the Belgian coast and sank . The survivors were put ashore at Le Havre before the flotilla reached Brest on the 26th . The German ships departed on the evening of 11 February and the nighttime and morning portion of the transit through the English Channel was uneventful . In the afternoon , however , Hermann Schoemann twice drove off British Motor Torpedo Boats , together with her sister Z14 Friedrich Ihn . British aircraft began to make their presence know with repeated attacks on the German ships . Hermann Schoemann was undamaged by British aircraft , but was repeatedly struck in the stern by 20 mm cannon shells from the defending German fighters . Later that afternoon , Vice Admiral ( Vizeadmiral ) Otto Ciliax , commander of the battleship flotilla , was transferred to the ship after his temporary flagship , the destroyer Z29 , was disabled by a premature detonation in one of her guns that sent shrapnel into the machinery spaces . 
 Shortly afterwards , Hermann Schoemann joined four other destroyers in escorting the heavy cruisers Prinz Eugen and Admiral Scheer to Trondheim . Heavy weather forced three of the destroyers to return to port before reaching Trondheim and Prinz Eugen was torpedoed and badly damaged by the submarine HMS Trident on 23 February after their separation . On 6 March , the battleship Tirpitz , escorted by Hermann Schoemann and three other destroyers , sortied from Trondheim to attack the returning convoy QP 8 and the Russia @-@ bound PQ 12 as part of Operation Sportpalast . The following morning , Ciliax ordered the destroyers to search independently for Allied ships and they stumbled across the 2 @,@ 815 @-@ gross register ton ( GRT ) Soviet freighter <unk> , a straggler from QP 8 , later that afternoon and sank her . Tirpitz rejoined them shortly afterwards and they continued to fruitlessly search for Allied shipping until they sailed for the Vestfjorden on the 9th . 
 On 9 April , the ship was transferred to the 8 . <unk> Flotille in Kirkenes . Together with the destroyers Z24 and Z25 , Hermann Schoemann sortied to intercept Convoy QP 14 two days later , but failed to locate any Allied ships in heavy snow and low visibility . The trio sortied again on 30 April to intercept the westbound Convoy QP 11 and the crippled light cruiser HMS Edinburgh , torpedoed earlier by the German submarine U @-@ 456 . They found the convoy the next day , but they only managed to sink a Soviet 2 @,@ 847 @-@ GRT freighter as the convoy 's four escorting destroyers repeatedly rebuffed attempts to reach the convoy 's ships . Despite a significant firepower advantage , the Germans only moderately damaged HMS Amazon in the day 's engagements . Captain ( Kapitän zur See ) Alfred Schulze @-@ Hinrichs , commander of the flotilla , broke off the battle in the late afternoon and decided to search for the cruiser , his original objective . They found Edinburgh and her escorts on the morning of 2 May and closed to attack with torpedoes . The cruiser opened fire first and disabled Hermann Schoemann with her second salvo with hits in both engine rooms . The destroyer turned away and dropped smoke floats to create a smoke screen behind which she could hide . The damage was too severe to return to base and , as the crew prepared to abandon ship , Hermann Schoemann was attacked by the British destroyers who hit her at least three more times . Z24 and Z25 took off about 223 survivors before the ship was scuttled by her crew at coordinates 72 ° 20 ′ N 35 ° 05 ′ E. Another 56 men were rescued by U @-@ 88 after the German destroyers broke off the engagement . During the battle 8 men were killed and another 45 wounded . 
 = Percy Shaw Jeffrey = 
 Percy Shaw Jeffrey , FRGS ( 14 March 1862 Cheltenham , England – 22 February 1952 ) was a respected English schoolmaster and author of several books on a range of topics , including significant contributions towards the teaching of phonetics in schools . Jeffrey taught at a variety of schools before spending sixteen years as headmaster at Colchester Royal Grammar School . With his wife , Alice , he retired first to South Africa , then to the town of Whitby , North Yorkshire , in 1916 , where he spent his time between numerous trips to countries around the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Percy Shaw Jeffrey grew up with his parents , Thomas Ashby Jeffrey , a chemist , and Mary Helen Jeffrey ( née Sparrow ) , in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire , and with his younger siblings Ada Constance , Russell Henry , Ethel Maude and Amy Louise . For three years from 1875 , he attended Trent College , Long Eaton , where he rose to become " Head of the School , <unk> accessit [ runner up ] for the Duke of Devonshire 's Gold Medal , with first @-@ class honours in the Cambridge Local , third in the list in Latin and distinguished in French " . 
 = = Early teaching career = = 
 Whilst reading for a maths scholarship at the University of Marburg , he was offered the chance to work at Trent College , unofficially , as first the headmaster 's private secretary , and then as a teacher . Unfortunately , he was unable to win the Marburg scholarship in 1881 , and , left unemployed after the death of the Headmaster the year after , he took up a post as a junior master at Emanuel School , Wandsworth , soon after its move to new premises . On 30 January 1884 , he matriculated into the University of Oxford as a member of The Queen 's College , where he completed a Bachelor of Arts in 1887 and was granted his MA in 1890 . He was disappointed to receive a degree with only third @-@ class honours , however , and was advised to put any ambition of teaching on hold — advice which he did not follow . 
 After a brief spell teaching at Christ 's College , Finchley , for six months during 1887 , Jeffrey became an assistant mathematics and science master at The Skinners ' School , Royal Tunbridge Wells , whilst simultaneously studying for an Inter Bachelor of Science , with first class honours . Whilst at Skinners ' he published words he had written for the school song , set to music by Cuthbert H. Cronk , which persist to the present day . Although it was not his initial intention , in 1893 he took up a post as private tutor to a student he had been coaching at The Skinners ' School and travelled to Florida with him . 
 Upon his return and owing to a shortage of officers , a short diversion from his teaching duties during 1893 saw Shaw Jeffrey join the Volunteer battalion of the Royal West Kent Regiment . Unable to afford a new uniform ( then costing £ 80 ) , after a change in regiment apparel to a much more popular red @-@ with @-@ light @-@ blue colour scheme , he was forced to resign his commission later that year . 
 In 1894 he took up another post , this time to become a holiday modern @-@ languages tutor ( a well paid position ) to the son of Sir Thomas and Lady Glen @-@ Coats , Thomas Glen @-@ Coats , later to compete at the 1908 Olympics . Putting his schoolmaster plans aside , he travelled with them to France , and the next year to Germany , where both enrolled at the University of Marburg . Once Glen @-@ Coats was " safely ... installed at Merton College , Oxford , " Shaw Jeffrey returned to the university to study for a <unk> , but , shortly before completing the degree in 1897 , he was persuaded by the Dean of Queen 's College to take up a position at Clifton College , Bristol . 
 = = Headmaster at Colchester Royal Grammar School = = 
 Having been an assistant master at the Clifton College for three years , he was offered a position as headmaster at a new school which was to be founded in Argentina by the educationalist Michael Ernest Sadler , but could not get the funding to travel there , instead he assumed the role of headmaster at Colchester Royal Grammar School ( known locally as CRGS ) . It is unclear exactly what date he can be said to have joined the school , because although agreement between the school and the governing legislature was reached in May 1899 , the process of finding a new headmaster went on under the guidance of an interim one . Certainly , his official term as headmaster started on 1 September 1900 and by the end of 1900 he had already made his mark on the school — achievements included the introduction of a new school song , " Carmen <unk> " , which used the same tune as , and a variation of the lyrics for , the school song of The Skinners ' School . He retired his post as headmaster in 1916 , but kept a lasting interest in the school . 
 During his 16 @-@ year stay at CRGS , student numbers increased from 29 to 180 boys under his guidance , particularly through the introduction of day pupils . Shaw Jeffrey is also credited with the introduction of many changes at the school , including the introduction of purple blazers , the setting up of the Old Colcestrian Society for former boys ( and quite often honoured former masters ) , a preparatory school , a cadet corps , an orchestra , a bugle band and a series of school entertainments and theatrical performances , and the acquisition of several buildings on behalf of the school . He was a national pioneer of the teaching of modern European languages through phonetics , employed language teachers from Germany and France , and set up arrangements for foreign study during holidays . 
 Whilst at CRGS he founded the school magazine , The Colcestrian , designed to relay information about the school to students , ex @-@ students and parents on a regular basis . This ran for over sixty consecutive years , and has recently been restarted in a similar style . Even after he left the school , he wrote into the magazine , adding his own memories , thoughts and opinions on articles of news published . He often signed himself off as " J " , " an abbreviation that was and is commonly used in reference to him " throughout his time at CRGS and as synonymous with the man himself that it could be used for an article about his death in the local newspaper . 
 In recognition of his achievements at the school , a school house was named after him in 1950 . The change from School House to Shaw Jeffrey 's House completed a quartet that had featured three other notable headmasters of the school since Shaw Jeffrey himself introduced the four @-@ house system in 1908 . The house is still informally known by students as " J 's " . Another tribute , a painting of him by Frank Daniell , a Colchester artist , was presented to him on his retirement by the governors of CRGS and members of the Old Colcestrian Society and a replica was initially to be hung in the school hall ; . it was , however , the replica that was taken by Shaw Jeffrey and the original hung in the school , where it remains . 
 = = Visits to Borley Rectory = = 
 Jeffrey was the first known witness of what was later deemed to be paranormal activity at Borley Rectory . In 1885 he spent time at the rectory with his friend Henry " Harry " Bull with whom he was studying at Oxford , during which he experienced " lots of small adventures at the Rectory . Stones falling about , my boots found on top of the wardrobe , etc . " He also stated that he had seen the nun who was reputed to haunt the rectory several times and had often heard the ghostly coach during the night . In his view , however , the most striking of the phenomena , which he later recounted to the researcher and author on the subject Harry Price , was the loss of a French dictionary which was later thrown on the floor of his bedroom in the night . 
 Price regarded Jeffrey 's testimonies as an " important contribution to the evidence for the early haunting of Borley Rectory " , and used them in many of the studies which made the rectory famous in 1937 . However , due to the time difference been events and their reporting over 50 years later , they have been challenged as unreliable . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Jeffrey was particularly at home with modern languages , having become fluent in both French and German in the 1890s , and lectured on the topic and how it should be taught – phonetically , in his opinion . Later on , he authored more works relating to education , including the Work and Progress Record Book ( Arnold ) and The Schools of England ( Ed . J. Burrow ) . He was also a contributor to the Argosy and other London periodicals , including the English Illustrated Magazine , Longmans and the Boy 's Own Paper . 
 His first book , however , came with Useful Facts in Physiology ( Educational Supply Association ) in 1889 . Later , having settled down at CRGS , he used his spare time to publish Elementary German Words and Phrases for Red Cross Workers and Elementary French Words and Phrases for Red Cross Workers ( both Hachette ) in 1914 . They were endorsed by Queen Alexandra and spawned over 50 @,@ 000 copies . Over the course of his life he adapted and authored several foreign @-@ language works for English audiences , namely : 
 The Study of Colloquial and Literary French , With notes on the present state of modern language teaching , etc . A joint work with his professor at the University of Marburg , Eduard <unk> ; 
 <unk> <unk> ( Published 1902 , by Whittaker ) , an adaptation of a story from Ludwig Bechstein 's Deutsches <unk> , with added introduction and notes . 
 Au Pôle en <unk> from the French original by Victor Patrice ; 
 <unk> . ( Conte <unk> ) from the French original by Édouard René and Lefebvre Laboulaye . 
 Short passages for translation into French and German ( Oxford University Press ) 
 In 1923 he published another non @-@ fiction book , Whitby Lore and Legend , having retired to Whitby via South Africa . A Schoolmaster 's Apologia : Memories of Eighty Years was his collection of memoirs , published by Abbey Press , Whitby , in 1948 . His time at CRGS is documented in his 1948 collaboration , Some Chapters in the History of the Royal Grammar School Colchester , with the one time Mayor of Colchester , Sir William Gurney Benham , who was a personal friend of Jeffrey and first president of the Old Colcestrian Society . 
 After retirement , Jeffrey could also give time to his love of travelling , and authored a number of related titles . Round the World with an Empress and Round the world with the ' Empress of Britain ' ( both Ed . J. Burrow ) were accounts of the trips he made while lecturing on board the liners of Canadian Pacific Railway during the British winter ; a series dubbed The Little Travel Books ( Horne ) documented others of his travels , and grew out of articles he wrote for the Whitby Gazette . They included : 
 Black and White in South Africa 
 Sunshine on the Waters ( Australia and New Zealand ) 
 Eastward to the Cape . 
 <unk> @-@ South African Roundabout . 
 Third Time Lucky ( South Africa ) . 
 Columbus Calling ( West Indies ) . 
 A selection of these books he later sent to Princess Elizabeth and Princess Margaret , who were said to have enjoyed them . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 On 13 August 1901 , only shortly after becoming headmaster at CRGS , Jeffrey married his wife Alice , whom he had met on a Mediterranean cruise , and who stayed at the school throughout his time there . On his retirement , they moved to South Africa , where he did " valuable works on the Press for the Allied cause " . From 1914 onwards they also had possession of Whitby 's <unk> Old Hall , built in 1530 , as a residence , and eventually took residence there on his return from South Africa , though they were often away travelling . 
 Despite retirement from any sort of career , Shaw Jeffrey maintained that he " had no intention of leading an idle life " and was variously an inspector and examiner for both the University of Cambridge and the University of London and an assessor for all of Cambridge 's French papers for five years after the introduction of the higher certificate . He was also an occasional inspector in modern languages for the Board of Education and deputised as professor of French at the University of Durham while the professor himself was incapacitated due to illness . He was an assessor of all modern language papers set at Durham for five years . He continued to fill in positions inspecting in Spanish and Italian , despite only having learned the languages during his travels . 
 Although he spent barely 10 or 12 weeks in any one year in Whitby , he was still attached to it . Shortly before his death he published A Haunt of Ancient Peace , a history of <unk> Old Hall ( with Sir D 'Arcy Power , KBE ) , and also made several large donations : £ 3000 to Whitby Parish Church , £ 2000 to the museum and £ 500 to the Whitby Literary and Philosophy Society . 
 Jeffrey died on 22 February 1952 , leaving Alice as a widow . The couple had just celebrated their golden wedding anniversary , a fact reported in the Essex County Standard , along with a short obituary , and an overview of the latest Old Colcestrian annual meeting ( held only a day after his death ) , at which a variety of tributes had been paid . The article describes him as " one of Colchester 's most famous headmasters " and one with " tons of personality " . His death was particularly poignant for members of CRGS , for it came two days before a World War Two war memorial , for which he and his wife had contributed the majority of the money , was to be unveiled and dedicated . On her death , his wife left their house in Whitby to the Whitby Literary and Philosophy Society , though efforts to turn it into a museum were ultimately unsuccessful . 
 = Paranoid ( Ty Dolla Sign song ) = 
 " Paranoid " is a song by American rapper Ty Dolla $ <unk> , released on September 10 , 2013 , as the first single from his debut EP , Beach House EP ( 2014 ) . The song , produced by DJ Mustard , features a guest appearance from B.o.B. The song was written by Tyrone Griffin , Bobby Simmons and Dijon McFarlane . " Paranoid " is a hip hop song that lyrically describes being in fear of getting caught cheating . 
 " Paranoid " received overall favorable reviews from music critics . The song peaked at number 29 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and reached number nine on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . An accompanying music video premiered through Revolt and YouTube on October 22 , 2013 that features both Ty and B.o.B being tortured by their girlfriends . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 " Paranoid " is a hip hop song backed by a synthesizer @-@ driven production created by DJ Mustard . The song was originally recorded by Ty Dolla Sign and his frequent collaborator Joe Moses , and it was included on DJ Mustard 's Ketchup mixtape . It was then released again on Ty 's July 2013 mixtape , Beach House 2 . Then , when the song was officially released and pushed as a single later in the year , Moses ' verse had been replaced by Ty 's Atlantic Records label @-@ mate B.o.B .. It was rumored that Moses had been replaced by B.o.B due to Moses ' comments in his verse about T.I. ' s wife Tameka Cottle , however Ty denied the rumor and deemed it " hilarious . " 
 On the song , Ty croons about him juggling a relationship between two different women , and being worried about one of them finding out about the other . Overall , the two artists detail multiple girls attempting to catch them in the act cheating , causing them to be on edge . The song premiered on Rap Radar on August 28 , 2013 , where it was announced that it would be released as a single on September 10 , 2013 . As promised , on September 10 , 2013 , the song was released for digital download as the first single from Ty 's debut EP Beach House EP on Amazon.com. 
 On December 15 , 2013 , Ty performed the song during Power 106 's Cali Christmas and was backed by DJ Mustard on the turntables as he performed . On December 17 , 2013 , Ty performed the song for the first time on national television on DJ Skee 's Skee Live via AXS TV . He was accompanied by Joe Moses who performed his verse on the studio version of the song . On January 27 , 2014 , Ty performed " Paranoid " along with DJ Mustard on The Arsenio Hall Show . Then on March 15 , 2014 , Ty performed the song during Taylor Gang 's set at SXSW . On March 21 , 2014 , Ty performed " Paranoid " accompanied by The Roots on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon . 
 The song 's official remix was also featured on the Beach House EP . It featured new guest appearances by Trey Songz , French Montana and DJ Mustard . On January 13 , 2014 , the remix premiered via SoundCloud and on the following day , it was released to iTunes . The remix was serviced to mainstream urban radio in the United States on February 12 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Paranoid " was met with generally positive reviews from music critics . Vibe referred to the song as Ty 's introduction to the masses and said he " has a hit on his hands . " Christopher Weingarten of Rolling Stone said , it features " frank lines delivered with Casanova charm and a thin layer of computer love . " Matt <unk> of HotNewHipHop called it one of the better songs on the tape , giving credit to the chorus and Joe Moses ' verse . Chris Jenkins of Pitchfork Media praised Joe Moses ' verse on the original song , but he called B.o.B 's a " <unk> verse . " Overall , he said the song 's economy is its greatest strength . Grant Jones of RapReviews credited Trey Songz for upstaging Ty and called French Montana 's verse on the remix " entertaining " but found Ty 's performance on the song to be " an age @-@ old example of limited ability . " In February 2014 , Complex named it the fourth best song that DJ Mustard had produced . 
 " Paranoid " debuted at number 97 on US Billboard Hot 100 for the week of January 4 , 2014 . Ten weeks later , it peaked at number 29 and spent a total of twenty weeks on the chart . It peaked at number nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . On November 19 , 2015 , " Paranoid " was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , denoting sales of over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units in the country . 
 = = Music video = = 
 On October 22 , 2013 , the Ethan Lader @-@ directed music video premiered via rap mogul Diddy 's television network Revolt . The video shows an overly intoxicated Ty Dolla Sign and B.o.B drugged with paranoia about their various women . Ty is hunted down by his two female lovers when they discover that he has been cheating on them . They team up to get revenge , chasing him through the streets and attacking him at home . By the end of the night , Ty finds himself bleeding out on the middle of his kitchen floor , from a stab wound courtesy of his two lovers . Meanwhile , B.o.B suffers a similar fate via a drugged drink given to him by a seductive , promiscuous woman . Ty 's body is then taken away in the trunk of a car . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Documentary = 
 The Documentary is the debut studio album by American rapper The Game . It was released on January 18 , 2005 , by Aftermath Entertainment , G @-@ Unit Records and Interscope Records . It serves as his major @-@ label debut , preceded by the release of his independently @-@ released debut , Untold Story ( 2004 ) . In 2001 , after The Game recovered from a shooting , he began to embark his rap career . He was then discovered by Dr. Dre ( who signed him to his Aftermath Entertainment label ) . The album includes the production from high @-@ profile producers such as Dr. Dre , Kanye West , Scott Storch and Timbaland , among others . The album features guest appearances from 50 Cent , Eminem , Nate Dogg and Faith Evans , among others . This would be The Game 's only album on Aftermath and G @-@ Unit Records , as he left the label after a feud began to occurred between him and fellow G @-@ Unit label @-@ mate 50 Cent . 
 The Documentary debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , selling 586 @,@ 000 units in the first week . In March 2005 , the Recording Industry Association of America certified the album two times platinum and it sold over five million copies worldwide . Upon its release , The Documentary received generally positive reviews , with critics praising the album 's production . Since the album 's release , The Game has been credited as a driving force in reviving the West Coast hip hop scene , which had been overshadowed by artists from the East , Midwest and South . It remains as The Game 's best @-@ selling album to date . On June 16 , 2014 , the sequel to the album was announced , called The Documentary 2 , and it was released on October 9 , 2015 and followed up shorty after by The Documentary 2 @.@ 5 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 After The Game signed with the G @-@ Unit . He completed the recording of his nine songs with a fellow American rapper 50 Cent in his home studio in Farmington , Connecticut . He then went back to Los Angeles , California to finish it up the album with Dr. Dre . While continuing the recording sessions for the album , he began working with a fellow rapper and record producer Kanye West on a song , where Kanye did the chorus . However , the song have been left on the cutting room floor . The Game also have been working on the album with his inspiration goals on reviving on what it would be like to be involved in this hip hop scene for the West Coast , which it has been overshadowed over the past few years by these artists between for the east coast to the south coast . In 2005 , in the interview with Vibe magazine , 50 Cent stated that he was brought in by the Interscope Records to work on the album , which he claimed that was on the verge of being shelved and The Game was being dropped from the label . However , in an interview with Funkmaster Flex , The Game said that his status was never uncertain nor he was close to being dropped . 50 Cent also claimed that he wrote six of The Documentary 's eighteen tracks — " Hate It or Love It " , " How We Do " , " Church for Thugs " , " Special " , " Higher " , and " Westside Story " — and was not receiving proper credit for his work . The Game denied those claims , saying that 50 Cent only helped him write two songs . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The Game recorded tracks based on his life experiences from his childhood to his success as a rapper . When asked about the album , he stated : 
 I grew up in a boys home and I was taken away from my parents when I was like 8 years old ... Here I am , 24 . When my album drops I will be 25 so that 's 17 years I have been going through my struggle by myself . There are 17 tracks on my album and every track sheds light on a different situation I went through the last 17 years . 
 The rapper commented on the album 's perception before its release , saying , " I know everybody was expecting gang @-@ bang , 40 @-@ ounce , low @-@ rider music , but that 's not what I gave them ... I 'm telling a real story , and maybe there are people out there who can relate to my experiences . " Rolling Stone observed that " every song has a well @-@ massaged hook and some immediate appeal , and verses that don 't waste a lot of time getting to the point . " 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The Documentary 's big budget production from high profile hip hop producers was well received from critics . The first half of the album contains " upbeat , gangsta boogie " tracks with the other half relegating " smoothed out R & B maneuvers " . At seven tracks , Dr. Dre co @-@ executive produced the album with his " stripped @-@ down cinematic " approach . " Westside Story " contains an " evil sounding piano <unk> " , " Dreams " has a " simultaneously smooth and eerie " beat , and " Hate It or Love It " unveils a " smoothed out R & B funk vibe " . " Higher " revolves around a pounding synth blast and " How We Do " contains syncopated hand claps with a beat described as " a hypnotic blast of sinister seduction powered by a deliciously primitive 808 pattern and a slinky synth . " " Don 't Need Your Love " samples Mary J. Blige 's " Not Gon Cry " and is one the album 's more soulful songs . " Church for Thugs " delivers a " sing @-@ song <unk> over an accentuated sonic bed " and " Put You on the Game " is a club track containing " dark dirge [ s ] of synth " . 
 Although " Start from Scratch " features R & B singer Marsha Ambrosius , the beat " eschews the traditional R & B vibes " for more " aural intimidation " . IGN called it " the most haunting inclusion on the album . " " The Documentary " features a " busy backing track " of " crashing symphonics and tinny flares of synth " , which one critic believed overshadowed the lyrics . " Runnin ' " is a " dark , Stygian tune augmented by tinges of R & B mellowness . " " No More Fun and Games " has a fast @-@ paced beat that takes inspiration from early 1990s production . " We Ain 't " , which samples Dr. Dre 's " The Watcher " , takes Eminem 's " chug laden synth gurgle " and is described as " one of the most menacingly catchy numbers on the entire album . " Nate Dogg features on two " smoothed out " tracks ; " Special " and the g @-@ funk @-@ inspired " Where I 'm From " . " Don 't Worry " is an R & B flavored track and despite its " minimal production " , one reviewer wrote the song " still hits hard . " The final track , " Like Father , Like Son " , is driven by a " melodramatic , string @-@ laden " beat . Originally , Brandy Norwood was supposed to be on " Don 't Worry " , but Jimmy Iovine did not want a gangsta rapper like The Game on a song with Brandy . 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The album 's title was initially called " Nigga <unk> Attitude Vol . 1 " ( a reference to N.W.A ) , but was changed to " The Documentary " due to legal issues with an injunction filed at the request of Eazy @-@ E 's widow Tomica Woods @-@ Wright prevented him from using N.W.A 's name in the album title . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The album was initially set for a late 2004 release , however , since the other high profile albums — including Eminem 's Encore — were to be released around the same time , it was pushed back to January 18 , 2005 . On September 28 , 2004 The Game released a promotional album entitled Westside Story through Aftermath Entertainment and G @-@ Unit Records . The album was used to promote his major @-@ label debut album , The Documentary . In October 2004 , The Game released his first independent album , titled Untold Story , through Get Low <unk> ( owned by JT the <unk> <unk> ) . The album sold over 82 @,@ 000 copies within its first three months . The album featured artists such as Sean T , Young Noble ( of the Outlawz ) and JT the <unk> <unk> . The Game also appeared on various mixtapes , which has been hosted by DJ 's such as DJ <unk> , DJ Whoo Kid and DJ Clue ? . The Game also released a second mixtape You Know What It Is Vol . 2 through his own record label and appeared on the video game NBA Live 2004 on a song produced by <unk> called " Can 't Stop Me " . On November 15 , 2004 , The Game released a promotional mixtape , titled Charge It to the Game : The Mixtape , through Westside Records . The tape was also used to promote The Documentary . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Westside Story " was the first official single to be released from The Documentary . The song features guest vocals from a fellow American rapper 50 Cent , with the production that was handled by Dr. Dre and Scott Storch . The single entered on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 93 , charted at number 55 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and at number 29 on the Rhythmic Top 40 charts . Rolling Stone described it as " a kind of L.A. version of " In Da Club " with " a simple keyboard part , a spare 808 beat and strings that manage to sound both stressed @-@ out and catchy . " The Game has stated that this song is a tribute to Tupac Shakur , with a direct reference to him , saying " I got California love fuckin bitches to that Pac shit . " The Game also makes references to Tupac 's songs , California Love and Against All Odds . Other references includes , Nate Dogg , Tha Dogg Pound ( <unk> ) and their song New York , Westside Connection , Michael Jackson and his album Thriller , DJ Pooh , Kool G Rap . There is a remix featuring Snoop Dogg singing the hook and a version with both Snoop Dogg and 50 Cent on it . 
 " How We Do " was the second official single to be released from The Documentary . The song features guest vocals from a fellow American rapper 50 Cent , with the production that was handled by Dr. Dre and Mike Elizondo . The single entered on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 4 , and stayed for over four weeks . The single also charted at number 2 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , at number 2 on the Hot Rap Tracks , at number one on the Rhythmic Top 40 , at number 3 on the Hot Digital Songs , at number 38 on the Latin Tropical Airplay , at number 11 on the Pop 100 , at number 14 on the Pop 100 Airplay , at number 14 on the Top 40 Mainstream , and at number 16 on the Top 40 Tracks charts . The single attained respectable international charting . In the United Kingdom the single entered on the UK Singles Chart at number 5 , in Germany the single entered on the German Singles Chart at number 9 , in the Republic of Ireland the single entered on the Irish Singles Chart at number 8 , and in Australia the single entered on the Australian Singles Chart at number 18 . The single was an instant hit with major air play . It was also moderately successful worldwide , reaching the top twenty in most countries . The music video was directed by Hype Williams " . The Recording Industry Association of America certified the single gold . 
 " Hate It or Love It " was the third official single to be released from The Documentary . The song features guest vocals from a fellow American rapper 50 Cent , with the production that was handled by Cool & Dre . The single was the most popular single from the album . The single entered on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 2 , charted at number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , at number one on the Hot Rap Tracks , at number 6 on the Hot Digital Songs , at number 39 on the Latin Tropical Airplay , at number 9 on the Pop 100 , at number 13 on the Pop 100 Airplay , at number one on the Rhythmic Top 40 , and at number 16 on the Top 40 Mainstream charts . The single attained respectable international charting . In the United Kingdom the single entered on the UK Singles Chart at number 4 , in Germany the single entered on the German Singles Chart at number 14 , in the Republic of Ireland the single entered on the Irish Singles Chart at number 5 , in Australia the single entered on the Australian Singles Chart at number 23 , and in Denmark the single entered the Danish Singles Chart at number 17 . The track uses a sample from the song " Rubber Band " performed by The Trammps on their album The Legendary Zing Album . At the 2006 Grammy Awards , it was nominated for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group and Best Rap Song . The music video , which was directed by the Saline Project , was nominated at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Rap Video , but lost to Ludacris ' " Number One Spot " . The Recording Industry Association of America certified the single gold . 
 " Dreams " was the fourth official single to be released from The Documentary . The single entered on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number 32 , charted at number 12 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , at number 5 on the Hot Rap Tracks , at number 74 on the Hot Digital Songs , at number 62 on the Pop 100 , and at number 13 on the Rhythmic Top 40 . The single attained international charting . In the United Kingdom the single entered on the UK Singles Chart at number 8 , in Germany the single entered on the German Singles Chart at number 71 , in the Republic of Ireland the single entered on the Irish Singles Chart at number 11 , and in Australia the single entered on the Australian Singles Chart at number 42 . The song was produced by Kanye West . The track features a sample of " No Money Down " performed by Jerry Butler . Co @-@ Written by Jimmy " <unk> " <unk> ' artist , " Beloved " . The song was dedicated to <unk> Price who was shot dead in 2003 . One critic wrote The Game " sews together a soulful Martin Luther King Jr. type speech with the acerbic wit and hustler charm of Malcolm X. " Phillip Atwell directed the music video . The song is also known for having an incorrect lyric in ' I woke up from that coma 2001 , about the same time Dre dropped 2001 ' . This references the Dr. Dre album 2001 , actually released in 1999 . The song was placed 16th on about.com 's Best Hip @-@ Hop Songs of 2005 . And had singer Mýa Harrison in the music video . 
 " Put You on the Game " was the fifth and final official single from The Documentary . The single was the lowest charting single from the album , reaching only at 96 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . The single attained respectable international charting . In the United Kingdom the single entered on the UK Singles Chart at number 46 , and in the Republic of Ireland the single entered on the Irish Singles Chart at number 22 . The single was produced by Timbaland and co @-@ produced by Danja . This was the first single released by The Game after his truce with 50 Cent fell apart and after The Game released You Know What It Is Vol . 3 . It was recently that a lawsuit has been filed from a Major India Record Company Saregama India , Timbaland , co @-@ producer Nate " Danja " Hills , The Game , Interscope Records , along with a few other Production companies are being sued for using an uncleared sample from artist . The music video features The Game with many appearances by his current and former Black Wall Street affiliates . The video shows various places in Los Angeles County ; including downtown to a Los Angeles , California and Compton , California . The music video showed these landmarks down at the Los Angeles such as Staples Center , The Watts Towers , and LAX . The Game refers to a number of artists , songs and albums in " Put You on The Game " ; including The Chronic , N.W.A , Makaveli , The Notorious B.I.G. , Public Enemy , Flavor Flav , G @-@ Unit , 50 Cent , Dr. Dre and his song " Let Me Ride " , Eve , and Snoop Dogg . During the DVD Stop <unk> , Stop Lyin The Game watches the video for this song pausing at specific spots in the video which shows a dead man at on the ground blocked off by police tape . The Game then repeatedly states that he is wearing G @-@ Unit sneakers , a diss at 50 Cent saying his career is dead . Damon Johnson directed the music video . Entertainment Weekly called it a " club track so <unk> , it 's almost shocking that a California newbie — not a Ludacris — was the recipient of its deep @-@ fried Southern charms . " The song was placed 44th on about.com 's Best Hip @-@ Hop Songs of 2005 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The Game is often credited as a driving force in bringing the West Coast hip hop scene back to recognition . Before its release , he expressed his desire to have high opening week sales , saying , " I want to sell a million albums in my first week . And if I only sell one album the following week , I 'm good . " He also admitted feeling nervous about not being able to live up to the industry expectations , saying , " Yeah , I 've got some butterflies . I 'm worried about my first @-@ week numbers , and I 'm worried about living up to the hype . " The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling 586 @,@ 000 copies in the first week . The Recording Industry Association of America certified the album two times platinum on March 23 , 2005 , and it was the tenth best @-@ selling record of the year . The album has since sold over 2 @.@ 5 million units in the United States . 
 The Documentary peaked at the top fifteen in most European charts it entered . It peaked at number seven on the UK Albums Chart and remained on the chart for thirty @-@ three weeks . It reached the top ten in the Netherlands , France , Ireland , Switzerland , and the top twenty in Belgium , Germany , and Norway . The album topped the Canadian Albums Chart for three weeks and on March 8 , 2005 , it was certified platinum with 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 units shipped . It has since sold over five million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , The Documentary received generally positive reviews . On Metacritic , The Documentary received an aggregate score of 72 out of 100 based on 19 reviews . Pitchfork Media called it " the best West Coast street @-@ rap album since DJ Quik 's 2002 LP Under tha Influence " and described the production as " a rich , triumphant sonic tapestry " . Allmusic wrote the album was an " excellent debut " that " hints at a lot of potential " and observed the " most remarkable aspect of the Game is how he can be such a blatant product of gangsta rap ... and leave a mark so fast . " Rolling Stone noted The Game was " going for emotional impact rather than dazzling wordplay or laughs " and PopMatters described him as " a self @-@ conscious , malicious , nihilistic gangsta rapper with a heart and lyrical content " . On the other hand , Robert Christgau believed the album was " dull even when he isn 't describing his medical problems , this no @-@ talent is <unk> rock at its most brazen " . The A.V. Club praised the production for being " a sonic classic of slow @-@ rolling G @-@ funk and glossy hyper @-@ soul " , but panned The Game for his name dropping , suggesting if he " cut all the references to rappers and albums ... it 'd be a good 15 to 20 minutes shorter — and probably a lot more compelling . " Billboard declared it " one of the best rap albums of the year " and Entertainment Weekly suggested " with the brightest hip @-@ hop stars aligning for him , the Game may have willed himself a popular masterpiece . " 
 IGN criticized the large number of guest appearances , stating " the propensity of guest artists makes it hard to actually get a grasp on the rising star 's own voice . " MusicOMH observed " like many rap albums The Documentary is too long , but it maintains a high level of interest " and overall , it was " an impressive effort " that " introduces a strong presence to the West Coast " . Stylus Magazine wrote " no one disappoints " and despite the record being " so obviously and deeply grounded in marketing , it ’ s still an outstandingly solid and enjoyable " debut . The New York Times noted The Game 's " tough but straightforward rhyme style is appealing but not , usually , enthralling ... This is a rapper who almost never forgets himself , who almost never loses himself in syllables just for the fun of it . " The Village Voice criticized the rapper 's lyrical skills , saying , " the Game 's rhymes are about six degrees from totally artless " . Yahoo ! Music also panned the lyrics for " almost totally lacking in shock value , humour or insight " , but praised the production , writing that " musically , this is probably the greatest major label hip @-@ hop album of recent years – a near faultless succession of hi @-@ tech beats and ominously catchy hooks " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The album appeared on numerous music critics ' and publications ' end @-@ of @-@ year albums lists . Pitchfork Media placed the album at number 35 on their list of Top 50 Albums of 2005 . At the 48th Annual Grammy Awards , The Game was nominated with a total of two nominations , including Grammy Award for Best Rap Song and Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for the smash single " Hate It or Love It " . In 2012 Complex named the album one of the classic albums of the last decade . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Sample credits 
 Information taken from The Documentary 's liner notes . 
 " Intro " contains a sample of " Down into the Magic " performed by Donald Kerr . 
 " Dreams " contains a sample of " No Money Down " performed by Jerry Butler . 
 " Hate It or Love It " contains a sample of " Rubberband " performed by The Trammps . 
 " Don 't Need Your Love " contains a sample of " Not Gon Cry " performed by Mary J. Blige . 
 " The Documentary " contains an audio excerpt from the 2003 's film Livin ' tha Life . 
 " No More Fun and Games " contains a sample of " Gangsta , Gangsta " performed by N.W.A. 
 " We Ain 't " contains a sample of " The Watcher " performed by Dr. Dre featuring Eminem , " One Day at a Time " performed by Tupac Shakur featuring Eminem and The Outlawz , and " <unk> Waiting " performed by 50 Cent featuring Eminem . 
 " Where I 'm From " contains a sample of " Amanda " performed by Dionne Warwick . 
 " Special " contains a sample of " Catherine Howard " performed by Rick Wakeman . 
 " Like Father , Like Son " contains a sample of " Mariya " performed by The Family Circle . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for The Documentary adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = Battle of Cape Esperance = 
 The Battle of Cape Esperance , also known as the Second Battle of Savo Island and , in Japanese sources , as the Sea Battle of Savo Island ( <unk> ) , took place on 11 – 12 October 1942 in the Pacific campaign of World War II between the Imperial Japanese Navy and United States Navy . The naval battle was the second of four major surface engagements during the Guadalcanal campaign and took place at the entrance to the strait between Savo Island and Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands . Cape Esperance ( 9 ° 15 ′ S 159 ° 42 ′ E ) is the northernmost point on Guadalcanal , and the battle took its name from this point . 
 On the night of 11 October , Japanese naval forces in the Solomon Islands area — under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa — sent a major supply and reinforcement convoy to their forces on Guadalcanal . The convoy consisted of two seaplane tenders and six destroyers and was commanded by Rear Admiral Takatsugu Jojima . At the same time , but in a separate operation , three heavy cruisers and two destroyers — under the command of Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō — were to bombard the Allied airfield on Guadalcanal ( called Henderson Field by the Allies ) with the object of destroying Allied aircraft and the airfield 's facilities . 
 Shortly before midnight on 11 October , a U.S force of four cruisers and five destroyers — under the command of Rear Admiral Norman Scott — intercepted Gotō 's force as it approached Savo Island near Guadalcanal . Taking the Japanese by surprise , Scott 's warships sank one of Gotō 's cruisers and one of his destroyers , heavily damaged another cruiser , mortally wounded Gotō , and forced the rest of Gotō 's warships to abandon the bombardment mission and retreat . During the exchange of gunfire , one of Scott 's destroyers was sunk and one cruiser and another destroyer were heavily damaged . In the meantime , the Japanese supply convoy successfully completed unloading at Guadalcanal and began its return journey without being discovered by Scott 's force . Later on the morning of 12 October , four Japanese destroyers from the supply convoy turned back to assist Gotō 's retreating , damaged warships . Air attacks by U.S. aircraft from Henderson Field sank two of these destroyers later that day . 
 As with the preceding naval engagements around Guadalcanal , the strategic outcome was inconsequential because neither the Japanese nor United States navies secured operational control of the waters around Guadalcanal as a result of this action . However , the Battle of Cape Esperance provided a significant morale boost to the US Navy after the disaster of Savo Island . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily U.S. ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The objective was to deny the islands to the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and secure starting points for a campaign to isolate the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The Guadalcanal campaign would last six months . 
 Taking the Japanese by surprise , by nightfall on 8 August , the Allied forces , mainly consisting of U.S. Marines , had secured Tulagi and nearby small islands , as well as an airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal ( later completed and named Henderson Field ) . Allied aircraft operating out of Henderson became known as the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied codename for Guadalcanal . 
 In response , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army — a corps @-@ sized formation headquartered at Rabaul under Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake — with the task of retaking Guadalcanal . On 19 August , various units of the 17th Army began to arrive on the island . 
 Due to the threat of Allied aircraft , the Japanese were unable to use large , slow transport ships to deliver their troops and supplies to the island , and warships were used instead . These ships — mainly light cruisers or destroyers — were usually able to make the round trip down " The Slot " to Guadalcanal and back in a single night , thereby minimizing their exposure to air attacks . Delivering troops in this manner , however , prevented most of the heavy equipment and supplies , such as heavy artillery , vehicles , and much food and ammunition , from being delivered . In addition , they expended destroyers that were desperately needed for commerce defense . These high @-@ speed runs occurred throughout the campaign and were later called the " Tokyo Express " by the Allies and " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . 
 Due to the heavier concentration of Japanese surface combat vessels and their well positioned logistical base at Simpson Harbor , Rabaul , and their victory at the Battle of Savo Island in early August , the Japanese had established operational control over the waters around Guadalcanal at night . However , any Japanese ship remaining within range of American aircraft at Henderson field , during the daylight hours — about 200 mi ( 170 nmi ; 320 km ) — was in danger of damaging air attack . This persisted for the months of August and September 1942 . The presence of Admiral Scott 's task force at Cape Esperance represented the US Navy 's first major attempt to wrest night time operational control of waters around Guadalcanal away from the Japanese . 
 The first attempt by the Japanese Army to recapture Henderson Field was on 21 August , in the Battle of the Tenaru , and the next , the Battle of Edson 's Ridge , from 12 – 14 September ; both failed . 
 The Japanese set their next major attempt to recapture Henderson Field for 20 October and moved most of the 2nd and 38th Infantry Divisions , totalling 17 @,@ 500 troops , from the Dutch East Indies to Rabaul in preparation for delivering them to Guadalcanal . From 14 September @-@ 9 October , numerous Tokyo Express runs delivered troops from the Japanese 2nd Infantry Division as well as General Hyakutake to Guadalcanal . In addition to cruisers and destroyers , some of these runs included the seaplane carrier Nisshin , which delivered heavy equipment to the island including vehicles and heavy artillery other warships could not carry because of space limitations . The Japanese Navy promised to support the Army 's planned offensive by delivering the necessary troops , equipment , and supplies to the island , and by stepping up air attacks on Henderson Field and sending warships to bombard the airfield . 
 In the meantime , Major General Millard F. Harmon — commander of United States Army forces in the South Pacific — convinced Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley — overall commander of Allied forces in the South Pacific — that the Marines on Guadalcanal needed to be reinforced immediately if the Allies were to successfully defend the island from the next expected Japanese offensive . Thus , on 8 October , the 2 @,@ 837 men of the 164th Infantry Regiment from the U.S. Army 's Americal Division boarded ships at New Caledonia for the trip to Guadalcanal with a projected arrival date of 13 October . 
 To protect the transports carrying the 164th to Guadalcanal , Ghormley ordered Task Force 64 ( TF 64 ) , consisting of four cruisers ( San Francisco , Boise , Salt Lake City , and Helena ) and five destroyers ( Farenholt , Duncan , Buchanan , McCalla , and Laffey ) under U.S. Rear Admiral Norman Scott , to intercept and combat any Japanese ships approaching Guadalcanal and threatening the convoy . Scott conducted one night battle practice with his ships on 8 October , then took station south of Guadalcanal near Rennell Island on 9 October , to await word of any Japanese naval movement toward the southern Solomons . 
 Continuing with preparations for the October offensive , Japanese Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa 's Eighth Fleet staff , headquartered at Rabaul , scheduled a large and important Tokyo Express supply run for the night of 11 October . Nisshin would be joined by the seaplane carrier Chitose to deliver 728 soldiers , four large howitzers , two field guns , one anti @-@ aircraft gun , and a large assortment of ammunition and other equipment from the Japanese naval bases in the Shortland Islands and at Buin , Bougainville , to Guadalcanal . Six destroyers , five of them carrying troops , would accompany Nisshin and Chitose . The supply convoy — called the " Reinforcement Group " by the Japanese — was under the command of Rear Admiral Takatsugu Jojima . At the same time but in a separate operation , the three heavy cruisers of Cruiser Division 6 ( <unk> ) — Aoba , Kinugasa , and Furutaka , under the command of Rear Admiral Aritomo Gotō — were to bombard Henderson Field with special explosive shells with the object of destroying the CAF and the airfield 's facilities . Two screening destroyers — Fubuki and Hatsuyuki — accompanied <unk> . Since U.S. Navy warships had yet to attempt to interdict any Tokyo Express missions to Guadalcanal , the Japanese were not expecting any opposition from U.S. naval surface forces that night . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 At 08 : 00 on 11 October , Jojima 's reinforcement group departed the Shortland Islands anchorage to begin their 250 mi ( 220 nmi ; 400 km ) run down the Slot to Guadalcanal . The six destroyers that accompanied Nisshin and Chitose were Asagumo , Natsugumo , <unk> , Shirayuki , Murakumo , and Akizuki . Gotō departed the Shortland Islands for Guadalcanal at 14 : 00 the same day . 
 To protect the reinforcement group 's approach to Guadalcanal from the CAF , the Japanese 11th Air Fleet , based at Rabaul , Kavieng , and Buin , planned two air strikes on Henderson Field for 11 October . A " fighter sweep " of 17 Mitsubishi A6M3 Zero fighters swept over Henderson Field just after mid @-@ day but failed to engage any U.S. aircraft . Forty @-@ five minutes later , the second wave — 45 Mitsubishi G4M2 " Betty " bombers and 30 Zeros — arrived over Henderson Field . In an ensuing air battle with the CAF , one G4M and two U.S. fighters were downed . Although the Japanese attacks failed to inflict significant damage , they did prevent CAF bombers from finding and attacking the reinforcement group . As the reinforcement group transited the Slot , relays of 11th Air Fleet Zeros from Buin provided escort . Emphasizing the importance of this convoy for Japanese plans , the last flight of the day was ordered to remain on station over the convoy until darkness , then ditch their aircraft and await pickup by the reinforcement group 's destroyers . All six Zeros ditched ; only one pilot was recovered . 
 Allied reconnaissance aircraft sighted Jojima 's supply convoy 210 mi ( 180 nmi ; 340 km ) from Guadalcanal between Kolombangara and Choiseul in the Slot at 14 : 45 on the same day , and reported it as two " cruisers " and six destroyers . Gotō 's force — following the convoy — was not sighted . In response to the sighting of Jojima 's force , at 16 : 07 Scott turned toward Guadalcanal for an interception . 
 Scott crafted a simple battle plan for the expected engagement . His ships would steam in column with his destroyers at the front and rear of his cruiser column , searching across a 300 degree arc with SG surface radar in an effort to gain positional advantage on the approaching enemy force . The destroyers were to illuminate any targets with searchlights and discharge torpedoes while the cruisers were to open fire at any available targets without awaiting orders . The cruiser 's float aircraft , launched in advance , were to find and illuminate the Japanese warships with flares . Although Helena and Boise carried the new , greatly improved SG radar , Scott chose San Francisco as his flagship . 
 At 22 : 00 , as Scott 's ships neared Cape Hunter at the northwest end of Guadalcanal , three of Scott 's cruisers launched floatplanes . One crashed on takeoff , but the other two patrolled over Savo Island , Guadalcanal , and Ironbottom Sound . As the floatplanes were launched , Jojima 's force was just passing around the mountainous northwestern shoulder of Guadalcanal , and neither force sighted each other . At 22 : 20 , Jojima radioed Gotō and told him that no U.S. ships were in the vicinity . Although Jojima 's force later heard Scott 's floatplanes overhead while unloading along the north shore of Guadalcanal , they failed to report this to Gotō . 
 At 22 : 33 , just after passing Cape Esperance , Scott 's ships assumed battle formation . The column was led by Farenholt , Duncan , and Laffey , and followed by San Francisco , Boise , Salt Lake City , and Helena . Buchanan and McCalla brought up the rear . The distance between each ship ranged from 500 to 700 yd ( 460 to 640 m ) . Visibility was poor because the moon had already set , leaving no ambient light and no visible sea horizon . 
 Gotō 's force passed through several rain squalls as they approached Guadalcanal at 30 kn ( 35 mph ; 56 km / h ) . Gotō 's flagship Aoba led the Japanese cruisers in column , followed by Furutaka and Kinugasa . Fubuki was starboard of Aoba and Hatsuyuki to port . At 23 : 30 , Gotō 's ships emerged from the last rain squall and began appearing on the radar scopes of Helena and Salt Lake City . The Japanese , however , whose warships were not equipped with radar , remained unaware of Scott 's presence . 
 = = = Action = = = 
 At 23 : 00 , the San Francisco aircraft spotted Jojima 's force off Guadalcanal and reported it to Scott . Scott , believing that more Japanese ships were likely still on the way , continued his course towards the west side of Savo Island . At 23 : 33 , Scott ordered his column to turn towards the southwest to a heading of 230 ° . All of Scott 's ships understood the order as a column movement except Scott 's own ship , San Francisco . As the three lead U.S. destroyers executed the column movement , San Francisco turned simultaneously . Boise — following immediately behind — followed San Francisco , thereby throwing the three van destroyers out of formation . 
 At 23 : 32 , Helena 's radar showed the Japanese warships to be about 27 @,@ 700 yd ( 25 @,@ 300 m ) away . At 23 : 35 , Boise 's and Duncan 's radars also detected Gotō 's ships . Between 23 : 42 and 23 : 44 , Helena and Boise reported their contacts to Scott on San Francisco who mistakenly believed that the two cruisers were actually tracking the three U.S. destroyers that were thrown out of formation during the column turn . Scott radioed Farenholt to ask if the destroyer was attempting to resume its station at the front of the column . Farenholt replied , " Affirmative , coming up on your starboard side , " further confirming Scott 's belief that the radar contacts were his own destroyers . 
 At 23 : 45 , Farenholt and Laffey — still unaware of Gotō 's approaching warships — increased speed to resume their stations at the front of the U.S. column . Duncan 's crew , however , thinking that Farenholt and Laffey were commencing an attack on the Japanese warships , increased speed to launch a solitary torpedo attack on Gotō 's force without telling Scott what they were doing . San Francisco 's radar registered the Japanese ships , but Scott was not informed of the sighting . By 23 : 45 , Gotō 's ships were only 5 @,@ 000 yd ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) away from Scott 's formation and visible to Helena 's and Salt Lake City 's lookouts . The U.S. formation at this point was in position to cross the T of the Japanese formation , giving Scott 's ships a significant tactical advantage . At 23 : 46 , still assuming that Scott was aware of the rapidly approaching Japanese warships , Helena radioed for permission to open fire , using the general procedure request , " <unk> Roger " ( meaning , basically , " Are we clear to act ? " ) . Scott answered with , " Roger " , only meaning that the message was received , not that he was confirming the request to act . Upon receipt of Scott 's " Roger " , Helena — thinking they now had permission — opened fire , quickly followed by Boise , Salt Lake City , and to Scott 's further surprise , San Francisco . 
 Gotō 's force was taken almost completely by surprise . At 23 : 43 , Aoba 's lookouts sighted Scott 's force , but Gotō assumed that they were Jojima 's ships . Two minutes later , Aoba 's lookouts identified the ships as American , but Gotō remained skeptical and directed his ships to flash identification signals . As Aoba 's crew executed Gotō 's order , the first American salvo smashed into Aoba 's superstructure . Aoba was quickly hit by up to 40 shells from Helena , Salt Lake City , San Francisco , Farenholt , and Laffey . The shell hits heavily damaged Aoba 's communications systems and demolished two of her main gun turrets as well as her main gun director . Several large @-@ caliber projectiles passed through Aoba 's flag bridge without exploding , but the force of their passage killed many men and mortally wounded Gotō . 
 Scott — still unsure who his ships were firing at , and afraid that they might be firing on his own destroyers — ordered a ceasefire at 23 : 47 , although not every ship complied . Scott ordered Farenholt to flash her recognition signals and upon observing that Farenholt was close to his formation , he ordered the fire resumed at 23 : 51 . 
 Aoba , continuing to receive damaging hits , turned to starboard to head away from Scott 's formation and began making a smoke screen which led most of the Americans to believe that she was sinking . Scott 's ships shifted their fire to Furutaka , which was following behind Aoba . At 23 : 49 , Furutaka was hit in her torpedo tubes , igniting a large fire that attracted even more shellfire from the US ships . At 23 : 58 , a torpedo from Buchanan hit Furutaka in her forward engine room , causing severe damage . During this time , San Francisco and Boise sighted Fubuki about 1 @,@ 400 yd ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) away and raked her with shellfire , joined soon by most of the rest of Scott 's formation . Heavily damaged , Fubuki began to sink . Kinugasa and Hatsuyuki chose turning to port rather than starboard and escaped the Americans ' immediate attention . 
 During the exchange of gunfire , Farenholt received several damaging hits from both the Japanese and American ships , killing several men . She escaped from the crossfire by crossing ahead of San Francisco and passing to the disengaged side of Scott 's column . Duncan — still engaged in her solitary torpedo attack on the Japanese formation — was also hit by gunfire from both sides , set afire , and looped away in her own effort to escape the crossfire . 
 As Gotō 's ships endeavored to escape , Scott 's ships tightened their formation and then turned to pursue the retreating Japanese warships . At 00 : 06 , two torpedoes from Kinugasa barely missed Boise . Boise and Salt Lake City turned on their searchlights to help target the Japanese ships , giving Kinugasa 's gunners clear targets . At 00 : 10 , two shells from Kinugasa exploded in Boise 's main ammunition magazine between turrets one and two . The resulting explosion killed almost 100 men and threatened to blow the ship apart . Seawater rushed in through rents in her hull opened by the explosion and helped quench the fire before it could explode the ship 's powder magazines . Boise immediately sheered out of the column and retreated from the action . Kinugasa and Salt Lake City exchanged fire with each other , each hitting the other several times , causing minor damage to Kinugasa and damaging one of Salt Lake City 's boilers , reducing her speed . 
 At 00 : 16 , Scott ordered his ships to turn to a heading of 330 ° in an attempt to pursue the fleeing Japanese ships . Scott 's ships , however , quickly lost sight of Gotō 's ships , and all firing ceased by 00 : 20 . The American formation was beginning to scatter , so Scott ordered a turn to 205 ° to disengage . 
 = = = Retreat = = = 
 During the battle between Scott 's and Gotō 's ships , Jojima 's reinforcement group completed unloading at Guadalcanal and began its return journey unseen by Scott 's warships , using a route that passed south of the Russell Islands and New Georgia . Despite extensive damage , Aoba was able to join Kinugasa in retirement to the north through the Slot . Furutaka 's damage caused her to lose power around 00 : 50 , and she sank at 02 : 28 , 22 mi ( 19 nmi ; 35 km ) northwest of Savo Island . Hatsuyuki picked up Furutaka 's survivors and joined the retreat northward . 
 Boise extinguished her fires by 02 : 40 and at 03 : 05 rejoined Scott 's formation . Duncan — on fire — was abandoned by her crew at 02 : 00 . Unaware of Duncan 's fate , Scott detached McCalla to search for her and retired with the rest of his ships towards Nouméa , arriving in the afternoon of 13 October . McCalla located the burning , abandoned Duncan about 03 : 00 , and several members of McCalla 's crew made an attempt to keep her from sinking . By 12 : 00 , however , they had to abandon the effort as interior bulkheads within Duncan collapsed causing the ship to finally sink 6 mi ( 5 @.@ 2 nmi ; 9 @.@ 7 km ) north of Savo Island . American servicemen in boats from Guadalcanal as well as McCalla picked up Duncan 's scattered survivors from the sea around Savo . In total , 195 Duncan sailors survived ; 48 did not . As they rescued Duncan 's crew , the Americans came across the more than 100 Fubuki survivors , floating in the same general area . The Japanese initially refused all rescue attempts but a day later allowed themselves to be picked up and taken prisoner . 
 Jojima — learning of the bombardment force 's crisis — detached destroyers Shirayuki and Murakumo to assist Furutaka or her survivors and Asagumo and Natsugumo to rendezvous with Kinugasa , which had paused in her retreat northward to cover the withdrawal of Jojima 's ships . At 07 : 00 , five CAF Douglas SBD @-@ 3 Dauntless dive bombers attacked Kinugasa but inflicted no damage . At 08 : 20 , 11 more SBDs found and attacked Shirayuki and Murakumo . Although they scored no direct hits , a near miss caused Murakumo to begin leaking oil , marking a trail for other CAF aircraft to follow . A short time later , seven more CAF SBDs plus six Grumman TBF @-@ 1 Avenger torpedo bombers , accompanied by 14 Grumman F4F @-@ 4 Wildcats , found the two Japanese destroyers 170 mi ( 150 nmi ; 270 km ) from Guadalcanal . In the ensuing attack , Murakumo was hit by a torpedo in her engineering spaces , leaving her without power . In the meantime , Aoba and Hatsuyuki reached the sanctuary of the Japanese base in the Shortland Islands at 10 : 00 . 
 Rushing to assist Murakumo , Asagumo and Natsugumo were attacked by another group of 11 CAF SBDs and TBFs escorted by 12 fighters at 15 : 45 . An SBD placed its bomb almost directly amidships on Natsugumo while two more near misses contributed to her severe damage . After Asagumo took off her survivors , Natsugumo sank at 16 : 27 . The CAF aircraft also scored several more hits on the stationary Murakumo , setting her afire . After her crew abandoned ship , Shirayuki scuttled her with a torpedo , picked up her survivors , and joined the rest of the Japanese warships for the remainder of their return trip to the Shortland Islands . 
 = = Aftermath and significance = = 
 Captain <unk> Kijima — Gotō 's chief of staff and commander of the bombardment force during the return trip to the Shortland Islands after Gotō 's death in battle — claimed that his force had sunk two American cruisers and one destroyer . Furutaka 's captain — who survived the sinking of his ship — blamed the loss of his cruiser on bad air reconnaissance and poor leadership from the 8th fleet staff under Admiral Mikawa . Although Gotō 's bombardment mission failed , Jojima 's reinforcement convoy was successful in delivering the crucial men and equipment to Guadalcanal . Aoba journeyed to Kure , Japan , for repairs that were completed on February 15 , 1943 . Kinugasa was sunk one month later during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . 
 Scott claimed that his force sank three Japanese cruisers and four destroyers . News of the victory was widely publicized in the American media . Boise — which was damaged enough to require a trip to the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard for repairs — was dubbed the " one @-@ ship fleet " by the press for her exploits in the battle , although this was mainly because the names of the other involved ships were withheld for security reasons . Boise was under repair until 20 March 1943 . 
 Although a tactical victory for the U.S. , Cape Esperance had little immediate strategic effect on the situation on Guadalcanal . Just two days later on the night of 13 October , the Japanese battleships Kongō and Haruna bombarded and almost destroyed Henderson Field . One day after that , a large Japanese convoy successfully delivered 4 @,@ 500 troops and equipment to the island . These troops and equipment helped complete Japanese preparations for the large land offensive , scheduled to begin on 23 October . The convoy of U.S. Army troops reached Guadalcanal on 13 October as planned and were key participants for the Allied side in the decisive land battle for Henderson Field that took place from 23 – 26 October . 
 The Cape Esperance victory helped prevent an accurate U.S. assessment of Japanese skills and tactics in naval night fighting . The U.S. was still unaware of the range and power of Japanese torpedoes , the effectiveness of Japanese night optics , and the skilled fighting ability of most Japanese destroyer and cruiser commanders . Incorrectly applying the perceived lessons learned from this battle , U.S. commanders in future naval night battles in the Solomons consistently tried to prove that American naval gunfire was more effective than Japanese torpedo attacks . This belief was severely tested just two months later during the Battle of Tassafaronga . A junior officer on Helena later wrote , " Cape Esperance was a three @-@ sided battle in which chance was the major winner . " 
 = Tranz Am = 
 Tranz Am is an action video game developed and published by Ultimate Play The Game that was released for the ZX Spectrum in July 1983 . The game is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic version of the United States and centres around a racing car driver on his quest to obtain the Eight Great Cups of Ultimate , which are scattered throughout the country . 
 The game was written by Chris Stamper and graphics were designed by Tim Stamper . Tranz Am was one of the very few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game ( the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes ) . The game received mostly positive reviews upon release : praise was given to the game 's graphics and simple controls , while criticism was directed at its confusing interface . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game is set in a post @-@ apocalyptic version of the United States in the year 3472 . Eight Great Cups of Ultimate are dispersed around America , and the player 's mission is to obtain all of them . Petrol is in short supply and the only way to re @-@ fuel vehicles is to find petrol pumps , scattered across the country . 
 The game is presented in a top @-@ down perspective and involves driving around America to collect the eight trophies whilst avoiding natural hazards and kamikaze cars , which attempt to crash into the player . The player has a limited supply of petrol and must collect fuel at regular intervals by driving over petrol pumps . Obstacles include trees , boulders and destroyed buildings . The overworld has an invisible border which causes the player 's car to reverse automatically to ensure that they do not cross the game 's boundaries . 
 The interface displays a list of comprehensive data : a map showing a list of key cities in the contiguous United States , petrol gauge , speedometer , remaining lives and engine temperature . Every key city in the game contains at least one petrol station . If the player drives too fast for too long , their car will overheat and eventually break down , thus losing a life . To save an overheating car , the player must slow down or stop entirely . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ashby Computers and Graphics was founded by brothers Tim and Chris Stamper , along with Tim 's wife , Carol , from their headquarters in Ashby @-@ de @-@ la @-@ Zouch in 1982 . Under the trading name of Ultimate Play The Game , they began producing video games for the ZX Spectrum throughout the early 1980s . Prior to founding Ultimate , the Stamper brothers had backgrounds in designing arcade machines , but no marketing experience in the video game sector . The company were known for their reluctance to reveal details about their operations and upcoming projects . Little was known about their development process except that they used to work in " separate teams " : one team would work on development whilst the other would concentrate on other aspects such as sound or graphics . 
 Tranz Am was one of the few Spectrum games also available in ROM format for use with the Interface 2 , allowing " instantaneous " loading of the game when the normal method of cassette loading could take several minutes . The game used the common technique of placing planar sprites with image sprites atop another , which often created graphical errors and overlapped colours on the console . The game was also able to run on the 16K version of the Spectrum . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received a mostly positive reception upon release . Computer and Video Games praised the game 's controls and accessibility , stating that they were " easy to get into " upon the first try . A reviewer writing for Home Computing Weekly found the game to be " compulsive " overall , but noted that the game did not live up to the promises made by the description on the packaging . Simon Lane of Popular Computing Weekly praised the game 's graphics , sound and presentation , stating that they were of " a very high quality " and that Tranz Am was an " original game " in comparison with the other games released by Ultimate . Lane criticised the game 's interface , however , stating that he found it difficult to " concentrate on everything all at once " . Lane also added that the game did not reward the player enough for collecting all of the cups , displaying just a short congratulation message before inviting him or her to begin again . A reviewer writing for Your Computer magazine heralded the game as a program of " outstanding achievement " , considering that the game 's playing area was calculated at " 600 times more than the actual screen area " . 
 = Discipline ( Janet Jackson album ) = 
 Discipline is the tenth studio album by American recording artist Janet Jackson , released by Island Records on February 26 , 2008 . It is her only album released on Island Records , after her five @-@ album deal with Virgin Records America was fulfilled with the release of 20 <unk> .. Jackson worked with producers such as Darkchild , Ne @-@ Yo , Shea Taylor , Stargate , Johntá Austin , Jermaine Dupri , Tricky Stewart , and The @-@ Dream on the album . Jackson 's long @-@ time producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , did not contribute to the project . The album was executive produced by Island Urban president Dupri and Jackson . The album experimented with the electropop , house , and dance @-@ pop genres , and also contained R & B and hip hop orientated tracks . 
 Four singles were released from the album ; the first , " Feedback " , was released as a digital download in December 2007 . The song reached number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , becoming Jackson 's best @-@ charting single since 2001 's " Someone to Call My Lover " . The album 's later singles did not share the success of " Feedback " . The deluxe version of Discipline contained a DVD documenting the production and promotion of the album and music videos . 
 The album received generally positive reviews , with critics arguing that it was an improvement on Jackson 's two previous albums . Despite positive reviews it became one of her least successful albums . It debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , becoming her sixth to top the chart and it was her first album to reach number one in the United States after 2001 's All for You . However , sales of the album quickly fell , and by June the album 's promotion had officially ended . Jackson started her Rock Witchu Tour — with the support of Live Nation — in early September to positive reviews but by the end of that month Jackson parted with her record label due to the album 's commercial failure . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In July 2007 , it was announced that Jackson had signed a recording contract with Island Records , after her five @-@ album deal with Virgin Records America was fulfilled with the release of her album 20 Y.O. Jackson 's tenth studio album , Discipline , which was an acknowledgment of Jackson 's commitment , focus and dedication to her career , was released on February 26 , 2008 under the supervision of label head L. A. Reid . Jackson commented , " I wanted to name the album Discipline because it has a lot of different meanings for me but the most important would be work — to have done this for as long as I have ... And to have had the success that I 've had — not excluding God by any means — but it takes a great deal of focus . " 
 Jackson worked with producers such as Rodney Jerkins ( who produced the lead single " Feedback " alongside D 'Mile ) , Jermaine Dupri , Ne @-@ Yo , Shea Taylor , Stargate , Johntá Austin , Tricky Stewart , and The @-@ Dream . Jackson 's long @-@ time producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , did not contribute to the project . The album was executive produced by Island Urban president Jermaine Dupri and Jackson . She did not write or co @-@ write any songs on the album , a departure from her usual practice of co @-@ writing and producing all of the songs on her albums . The song " So Much Betta " contains sampled portions of the track " Daftendirekt " by the French house music duo Daft Punk . 
 The deluxe edition included a DVD entitled The Making of Discipline . The DVD is split into five chapters that documents the production of the album , its promotion , and the " Feedback " music video . The first chapter entitled " Photo Shoots " , shows Jackson creating a new image for the album and adopting different looks for different markets . She spent two days working on photos for the cover and credit booklet , revealing that she still feels uncomfortable in front of the camera despite two decades in the music industry . In the second chapter , " The Studio " , Jackson expressed her opinion on recording work , stating that although she usually enjoyed the experience , it was , at times , tedious . She discusses further how her songs are built up in layers and parts , from melodies and background vocals or sounds . The third chapter , " Rehearsals " , shows the rehearsals of the dance routine for the " Feedback " music video . The DVD reveals that the eight dancers had been practicing for over a week before they started working with Jackson . The dancers then had three days to rehearse with Jackson and a further two days to complete the video . Jackson described the video as a metaphor for sexual tension . The fourth chapter , " Behind the Video " , shows the making of the video itself . Jackson told the director that she wanted a futuristic , moody concept , and he came up with the idea of jumping between planets . The final chapter is the lead music video in its entirety . On March 31 , 2008 an edition of Discipline in environmentally friendly packaging was released through Wal @-@ Mart stores as part of a green promotion . 
 = = Singles and notable tracks = = 
 The album 's first single " Feedback " , was released as a digital download in December 2007 . In the US , the song reached number nineteen on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , number thirty @-@ nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number twenty @-@ three on the Pop 100 , becoming Jackson 's best @-@ charting single since " Someone to Call My Lover " in 2001 . The song was also successful in Canada and South Africa where it peaked at number three and eight respectively . Due to a rushed release and no international promotion , the song failed to chart highly in European countries , peaking at number thirty @-@ six in <unk> thirty two in Ireland and reaching the top 5 in Greece . 
 Subsequent singles were promoted and released primarily in the US . " Rock with U " , the second single , was released on February 5 , 2008 . A music video was released , with the song peaking at number twenty on the Billboard Dance Club Play Singles chart and at number 4 on the UK R & B charts . Following Jackson 's departure from Island Records two more promotional singles , " Luv " and " Can 't B Good " , were issued to select radio formats . " Luv " , the first promotional single , was released on February 11 , 2008 . It was not accompanied by a music video or promoted and peaked at number thirty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . A second promotional single , " Can 't B Good " , was released March 18 , 2008 to urban formats . The song " <unk> " was featured on the second part of the soundtrack to the film Sex and the City , entitled Sex and the City , Vol . 2 : More Music . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Discipline debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 for the issue dated ending March 15 with 181 @,@ 000 copies sold . While this was a higher chart position than Jackson 's two previous releases , it was a lower first @-@ week sales total compared to Damita Jo which opened with sales of 381 @,@ 000 and 20 Y.O. with sales of 296 @,@ 000 . Paul Grein of Yahoo ! Music observed that with six number one studio albums , Jackson had " <unk> [ d ] her brother Michael Jackson , who has amassed five [ number one ] albums . " With six number @-@ one albums , Jackson is now tied with Mariah Carey and Britney Spears in the US for the third most number @-@ one albums for a female artist , behind Madonna with eight and Barbra Streisand 's ten chart @-@ toppers . In its second week , US sales saw the album fall to number three with 57 @,@ 000 copies sold . In its third chart week , the album fell to number eight with sales of 38 @,@ 000 copies . In its fourth chart week , the album fell to number seventeen with sales of 34 @,@ 000 copies , achieving total US sales in its first month of 310 @,@ 000 copies . 
 The album achieved moderate success in other countries , reaching number three in Canada ( with 6 @,@ 000 copies sold during its first week ) , number nine in Japan ( where it has been certified Gold for 100 @,@ 000 shipments ) , and number nine in Switzerland , but had low sales in most European markets . By June 2008 Island stopped promoting Discipline . The singer expressed open dissatisfaction with the promotion of the album , explaining that there would be no further single releases . The album failed in the UK charts , remaining just one week in position 63 with 3 @,@ 914 copies <unk> did manage to chart in the Top 5 of the UK R & B Album Chart . In France , Discipline debuted at number forty @-@ three with just 3 @,@ 000 copies sold . In Japan the album debuted higher , at number nine with 19 @,@ 839 copies sold . To date , the album has sold 456 @,@ 000 copies in the United States ; 100 @,@ 000 copies in Japan ; 9 @,@ 312 copies in the United Kingdom and over 1 million copies worldwide . 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Discipline received mixed to positive reviews from most music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 61 , based on 14 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Music critic Keith Harris of Rolling Stone wrote , " Janet Jackson has abandoned the plastic R & B of 2006 's 20 Y.O. for a sexier brand of digitized <unk> [ ... ] you can dismiss any images of the abusive Jackson clan that flit into your mind . Just lie back and enjoy the sensations as pure aural <unk> . " Andy Kellman of Allmusic gave a four @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five star rating , noting several tracks were " as innocent , universal , and inviting as anything else in Janet 's past " , and called the songs " Rock with U " and " 2Nite " " irresistible , grade @-@ A dancefloor tracks " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine described it as Jackson 's " most cohesive album in a while " , giving three @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five stars . Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music UK gave it seven out of ten stars saying " Still , if not perfect , there 's plenty to like on Discipline , and while none of it is exactly vintage Janet , there 's enough here to keep the Jackson name on pop 's A @-@ list for a little while longer . " 
 Carol Cooper of The Village Voice called Discipline " the most cohesive deep @-@ groove album from La Jackson since Control . " NOW Magazine reviewer Bryan Borzykowski called it " her most modern and club @-@ friendly " album , and commented saying " Jackson wouldn 't want us to call it a comeback , but it sure sounds like one . " Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times gave it a three @-@ out @-@ of @-@ four rating , saying " Its 22 tracks should be two albums : The first , a club @-@ directed missile helmed by " Darkchild " Rodney Jerkins and Jackson 's beau , Jermaine Dupri , could reassert Jackson 's primacy among glamazon hit @-@ makers ; the second , a bedroom @-@ bound ladies ' favorite coauthored by soul dauphin Ne @-@ Yo , would remind fans of Jackson 's gift for creating truly tender smut . " 
 The Boston Globe music critic Joan Anderman criticized the album saying " Jackson 's decision to recycle the <unk> routine one more time is just boring [ ... ] A quarter @-@ century into her career , it was Jackson 's moment to take a breath , dig a little deeper , and make a bold - or at least a different - statement . Instead , she has trussed herself up in vinyl to coo another batch of digitized porn . " On a better note , she called the tracks " Rollercoaster " and " Luv " " engaging tracks " , describing them as a " sassy @-@ sweet side " and " a plump , crackling confection " , respectively . 
 New York Times music critic Kelefa Sanneh commented saying " If anything , Discipline may be too subtle : a pretty , smartly produced collection that sometimes sounds like background music . " Michael Arceneaux of PopMatters called the album the " same old from her " , adding " These days her look and sound seem nothing more than a continuation of 2001 's All for You . " Entertainment Weekly 's Margeaux Watson wrote that Jackson 's lyrics " sound like the cheesy text messages of a lovesick adolescent " and gave a C- rating . Nick Levine of Digital Spy wrote that " Jackson 's attempts to play the uber @-@ <unk> are beginning to sound very , very desperate " with " embarrassingly lewd lyrics " and gave the record 2 out of 5 stars . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian described most tracks on the album as either boring or unmemorable . Robert Christgau gave the album a " dud " score as he had done with her previous album 20 Y.O. ( ) . 
 = = Rock Witchu Tour = = 
 Although the album promotion stopped in June , Jackson 's fifth concert tour — the North American Rock Witchu Tour , with the support of Live Nation — began on September 10 , 2008 . Amy O 'Brian of The Vancouver Sun described Jackson 's stage show at the GM Place as a " high @-@ voltage performance " . According to O 'Brian , " [ w ] ith an ear @-@ piercing blast of pyrotechnics , a fog of thick cloud and dancers that popped up out of the stage and runway , Jackson proved within the first minutes that she didn 't choose the low @-@ budget route for her Rock Witchu Tour . " Similarly , Jim Harrington of The Oakland Tribune offered a positive review , stating : " Like Jackson 's previous tours , ' Rock Witchu ' was a flashy , high @-@ budget extravaganza built on well @-@ choreographed dance routines and plenty of theatrics . " The initial response to the tour was very good , with sold out shows in Los Angeles and Las Vegas . Supporting acts for the show included LL Cool J and Donnie Klang . 
 Jackson had to reschedule nine dates on the first leg of the tour due to vestibular migraines . However , on November 4 , 2008 , Jackson canceled 7 of the 9 shows which had been rescheduled , citing schedule conflicts as the main reason . On November 19 , it was announced on Japanese newspapers and websites that Jackson will bring the tour to Japan for a series of five shows in Saitama , Nagoya , Osaka , and Fukuoka in February 2009 . However , all five dates were canceled . 
 = = Departure from record label = = 
 On September 22 — while on the Live Nation @-@ supported tour of North America — Jackson parted company with her recording label Island ; their 14 @-@ month relationship was dissolved per a request by Jackson . The singer had previously expressed dissatisfaction with the label , first telling <unk> that they " stopped all promotion whatsoever on the album " after releasing the first single , " Feedback " . In early September she had stated , " I can 't say if we 'll be working with them in the future . I don 't know what the future holds between the two of us . " A spokesperson for Jackson added , " [ Jackson ] will have autonomy over her career , without the restrictions of a label system ... Always known to break new ground and set trends , Janet 's departure from Island Records makes her one of the first superstar artists to have the individual freedom to promote their work through a variety of avenues such as iTunes , mobile carriers and other diverse and innovative channels " . 
 Jackson told Sister 2 Sister magazine , " There were some people who didn 't like the direction I took with this album . I love doing dance songs and I think my fans expect that of me . I have been getting more behind the scenes with film and television . I will probably continue to do music – and acting is still a strong passion of mine – but I really have been loving behind @-@ the @-@ scenes work : producing , directing and all the technical stuff " . A few months before the split , a spokesperson for the label told Billboard , " Unfortunately we haven 't experienced the results we would have liked with this new album . But we respect and support Janet " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] signifies a co @-@ producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Macau Incident ( 1799 ) = 
 The Macau Incident was an inconclusive encounter between a powerful squadron of French and Spanish warships and a British Royal Navy escort squadron in the Wanshan Archipelago ( or Ladrones Archipelago ) off Macau on 27 January 1799 . The incident took place in the context of the East Indies campaign of the French Revolutionary Wars , the allied squadron attempting to disrupt a valuable British merchant convoy due to sail from Qing Dynasty China . This was the second such attempt in three years ; at the Bali Strait Incident of 1797 a French frigate squadron had been driven off during an attack on that year 's China convoy . By early 1799 the French squadron had dispersed , with two remaining ships deployed to the Spanish Philippines . There the frigates had united with the Spanish Manila squadron and sailed to attack the British China convoy gathering at Macau . 
 The British commander in the East Indies , Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier was concerned about the vulnerability of the China convoy and sent reinforcements to support the lone Royal Navy escort , the ship of the line HMS Intrepid under Captain William Hargood . These reinforcements arrived on 21 January , only six days before the allied squadron arrived off Macau . Hargood sailed to meet the French and Spanish ships , and a chase ensued through the Wanshan Archipelago before contact was lost . Both sides subsequently claimed that the other had refused battle , although it was the allied squadron which withdrew , Hargood later successfully escorting the China convoy safely westwards . 
 = = Background = = 
 The East Indian trade was an essential component of the economy of Great Britain in the eighteenth century . Administered by the East India Company from British India , exotic trade goods were carried on large well @-@ armed merchant ships known as East Indiamen , which weighed between 500 and 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 510 and 1 @,@ 220 t ) . Among the most valuable parts of the East India trade was an annual convoy from Macau , a Portuguese port in Qing Dynasty China . Early each year , a large convoy of East Indiamen would assemble at Macau in preparation for their six @-@ month journey across the Indian Ocean and through the Atlantic to Britain . The value of the trade carried in this convoy , nicknamed the " China Fleet " , was enormous : one convoy in 1804 was reported to be carrying goods worth over £ 8 million in contemporary values ( the equivalent of £ 600 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 as of 2016 ) . 
 British interests in the East Indies were protected by a large but scattered Royal Navy squadron under the overall command of Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier . By 1799 , Rainier 's command covered many thousands of square miles of ocean , including the strategically important ports of British India , Bombay , Madras and Calcutta and the coast of British Ceylon , as well as bases in the Red Sea , at Penang and in the Dutch East Indies . He also had to maintain a watch on hostile warships , particularly a French force at the remote island base of Île de France ( now Mauritius ) , the Dutch at Batavia ( now Djakarta ) and the Spanish at Manila . The French had been the greatest threat , with a powerful squadron assembled in 1796 under Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey menacing British shipping in the East Indies in 1796 and 1797 . On 28 January 1797 , Sercey 's force intercepted that year 's unescorted China Fleet in the Bali Strait , and in the ensuing Bali Strait Incident only quick thinking by the commodore , imitating Royal Navy warships in poor visibility , dissuaded Sercey from pressing his attack . 
 Sercey 's force had subsequently broken up as it proved too expensive to maintain as a cohesive force . By late 1798 , Sercey was at anchor in Batavia with only two vessels , the 20 @-@ gun corvette Brûle @-@ Gueule and the 40 @-@ gun frigate Preneuse , which had arrived in Batavia from a diplomatic mission to the Kingdom of Mysore in a state of near @-@ mutiny ; Captain Jean @-@ Matthieu @-@ Adrien Lhermitte had been forced to execute five men for disobedience en route . Sercey also learned that two additional frigates , Forte and Prudente would not be joining him : his orders had been countermanded by Governor Malartic on Île de France and these frigates were now cruising independently against British trade in the Indian Ocean . Sercey decided to augment his forces by uniting them with the allied Spanish squadron at Manila in the Spanish Philippines , his frigates arriving on 16 October 1798 , although the admiral remained at Surabaya . The Spanish squadron had been severely damaged in a typhoon of April 1797 and repairs had taken nearly two years : when British frigates raided Manila in January 1798 not one Spanish ship was in a condition to oppose them . 
 = = Incident at Macau = = 
 News of the junction of the French and Spanish squadrons reached Rainier soon afterwards . With the assembling merchant ships at Macau were the frigates HMS Fox and HMS Carysfort and the 64 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Intrepid , the escort commanded by Captain William Hargood . However Fox and Carysfort were detached with a local convoy in November 1798 , and Rainier , whose forces were largely committed to the Red Sea following the recent French invasion of Egypt , gave urgent orders for the frigates to be replaced by the 38 @-@ gun HMS Virginie and 74 @-@ gun HMS Arrogant . The reinforcements sailed through the Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea , arriving at Macau on 21 January 1799 . 
 The Franco @-@ Spanish squadron , comprising the 74 @-@ gun ships of the line Europa and Montañés , and the frigates Maria de la <unk> and Luisa , accompanied by Preneuse and Brûle @-@ Gueule , sailed from Manila on 6 January 1799 , under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Ignacio Maria de Álava . Alava 's squadron crossed the South China Sea in three weeks , arriving in the Wanshan Archipelago near Macau on 27 January 1799 with the intention of attacking shipping at Macau and in the mouth of the Pearl River . Alava had been informed of the presence of Intrepid by Danish merchants but was unaware of the arrival of Rainier 's reinforcements . 
 Hargood immediately sailed to confront Alava , both squadrons initially forming lines of battle and steering towards one another , Virginie at the head of the British line . What followed has been the subject of dispute . Hargood reported that the Franco @-@ Spanish squadron then turned and fled into the Wanshan Archipelago , where they anchored as darkness fell before withdrawing before dawn . He ascribes this to " their dread of a conflict that would in all probability have terminated in their disgrace " . Alava however reported in the Manila Gazette that it was Hargood who had retreated into the Wanshan Archipelago , pursued closely by Europa . Alava claimed that he would have pressed the attack but for damage to the rigging on Montañés that allowed Hargood to escape . He does not explain why his squadron then subsequently withdrew without attacking the apparently unprotected assembled China Fleet anchored in Macau . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In historian C. Northcote Parkinson 's assessment " It is perhaps fair to conclude that neither squadron was spoiling for a fight " , although he describes Lhermitte 's subsequent reaction as " disgust " and Sercey 's as " fury " . Richard Woodman considered that by this action the French threw " away at a stroke the chance not only of seizing a valuable convoy , but of establishing Franco @-@ Spanish dominance in Indo @-@ Chinese waters " . Alava retired to Manila , the French ships departing for Batavia and subsequently returning to Île de France . There Preneuse was intercepted at the Action of 11 December 1799 by a blockade squadron made up of HMS Tremendous and HMS Adamant , driven on shore and destroyed . Sercey subsequently returned to France , retired from the French Navy and became a planter on Île de France . 
 Hargood sailed from Macau with the China Fleet on 7 February , passing unimpeded into the Indian Ocean . Alava did belatedly send Europa and frigate Fama back to Macau in May , but this achieved nothing . Rainier ensured that the 1800 China Fleet was well defended , but no further attacks were made on British shipping from China before the Peace of Amiens in 1802 . Early in the Napoleonic Wars , in 1804 , a powerful French squadron attacked the China Fleet at the Battle of Pulo Aura , but the East Indiamen succeeded in bluffing the French into withdrawing after a brief exchange of fire . 
 = Southern Area Command ( RAAF ) = 
 Southern Area Command was one of several geographically based commands raised by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . It was formed in March 1940 , and initially controlled units based in Victoria , Tasmania , South Australia and southern New South Wales . Headquartered at Melbourne , Southern Area Command was primarily responsible for air defence , aerial reconnaissance and protection of the sea lanes within its boundaries . From 1942 its operational responsibilities excluded New South Wales . The area continued to operate following the end of the war , before being re @-@ formed in October 1953 as Training Command under the RAAF 's new functional command @-@ and @-@ control system . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Prior to World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force was small enough for all its elements to be directly controlled by RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . After war broke out in September 1939 , the RAAF began to decentralise its command structure , commensurate with expected increases in manpower and units . Its initial move in this direction was to create Nos. 1 and 2 Groups to control units in Victoria and New South Wales , respectively . Then , between March 1940 and May 1941 , the RAAF divided Australia and New Guinea into four geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control zones : Central Area , Southern Area , Western Area , and Northern Area . The roles of these area commands were air defence , protection of adjacent sea lanes , and aerial reconnaissance . Each was led by an Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) responsible for the administration and operations of all air bases and units within his boundary . 
 No. 1 Group , which had been established on 20 November 1939 , was re @-@ formed as one of the first two area commands , Southern Area , on 7 March 1940 . Headquartered in Melbourne , Southern Area Command was given control of all Air Force units in Victoria , Tasmania , South Australia and the southern Riverina district of New South Wales . Its inaugural AOC was Air Commodore Henry Wrigley , who had also led No. 1 Group . His senior administrative staff officer was Group Captain Joe Hewitt . Wrigley handed over command to Air Commodore Adrian " King " Cole , formerly AOC Central Area , in November 1940 . 
 By August 1941 , the RAAF 's expanding instructional program necessitated the establishment of overarching training organisations on a semi @-@ functional , semi @-@ geographical basis . Accordingly , on 2 August 1941 , No. 1 ( Training ) Group was formed in Melbourne to assume responsibility for training units within Southern Area 's boundaries , while No. 2 ( Training ) Group was formed in Sydney to take over training units then under Central Area , which was disbanded ; control of other Central Area units was " divided as convenient " between Southern and Northern Area Commands . Air Commodore Frank Bladin held command of Southern Area from September to December 1941 . 
 As of 20 April 1942 , operational authority over all RAAF combat infrastructure , including area commands , was invested in the newly established Allied Air Forces ( AAF ) Headquarters under South West Pacific Area Command ( SWPA ) . On 15 May , Southern Area , which by then was considered too large , yielded responsibility for operational and maintenance units within New South Wales to a new area command , Eastern Area . Control of maintenance units under Southern Area was transferred to the newly established No. 4 ( Maintenance ) Group in Melbourne on 14 September . September also saw the formation of RAAF Command , led by Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , to oversee the majority of Australian flying units in the SWPA . Bostock exercised control of air operations through the area commands , although RAAF Headquarters continued to hold overarching administrative authority over Australian units . 
 By April 1943 , Southern Area was operating two combat units : No. 67 Squadron , flying maritime reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine missions with Avro Ansons out of RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria ; and No. 86 Squadron , flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters from Gawler , South Australia . Group Captain Ian McLachlan commanded the area from March 1944 until January 1945 , when he handed over to Group Captain Charles Eaton . The German submarine U @-@ 862 operated off southern Australia during the first months of 1945 , and the few combat units in Southern Area were heavily engaged in anti @-@ submarine patrols , attempting unsuccessfully to locate this and any other U @-@ boats in the vicinity . Eaton led the command through to the surrender of Japan in September , and into December 1945 . 
 = = = Post @-@ war reorganisation = = = 
 Following the end of the Pacific War in August 1945 , SWPA was dissolved and RAAF Headquarters again assumed full control of all its operational formations , including the area commands . In September 1946 , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , proposed reducing the five extant mainland area commands ( North @-@ Western , North @-@ Eastern , Eastern , Southern , and Western Areas ) to three : Northern Area , covering Queensland and the Northern Territory ; Eastern Area , covering New South Wales ; and Southern Area , covering Western Australia , South Australia , Victoria and Tasmania . The proposal was part of a much larger plan to restructure the post @-@ war RAAF ; the Federal government rejected the plan and the wartime area command boundaries essentially remained in place . RAAF College ( which became RAAF Academy in 1961 ) was established at RAAF Station Point Cook , Victoria , under Southern Area Command in August 1947 . The area 's later AOCs included Air Commodores Allan Walters , during 1948 – 50 , and Alan Charlesworth , the last officer to command the area , during 1951 – 53 . 
 The Federal government retired Jones in 1952 and replaced him with Air Marshal Donald Hardman , RAF , who proceeded to re @-@ organise the RAAF command @-@ and @-@ control system along functional lines , establishing Home ( operational ) , Training , and Maintenance Commands . The first was re @-@ formed from the existing Eastern Area Command , which was considered a de facto operational organisation owing to the preponderance of combat forces within its sphere . The second was re @-@ formed from Southern Area Command , as it was already the hub of training services , controlling those in New South Wales and Queensland as well as Victoria and South Australia . The third and final functional command was formed from the extant Maintenance Group headquarters in Melbourne . The transition to a functional system was completed in February 1954 , when the three new commands assumed control of all operations , training and maintenance from Western , North @-@ Western , and North @-@ Eastern Area Commands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The functional commands established in 1953 – 54 were revised in 1959 . Home Command was renamed Operational Command , and Training and Maintenance Commands merged to become Support Command . Operational Command was renamed Air Command in 1987 , and three years later Support Command split into Logistics Command and Training Command . Training Command was re @-@ formed as Air Force Training Group , a force element group under Air Command , in 2006 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 As at 30 April 1942 , Southern Area 's order of battle comprised : 
 = Raëlian beliefs and practices = 
 Raëlian beliefs and practices are the concepts and principles of the religion founded by Claud Vorilhon , a former French auto racing journalist who changed his name to Raël . Followers of Raëlism are believers in an advanced race of extraterrestrials called Elohim who created life on earth . Raëlians are individualists who believe in sexual self @-@ determination . As advocates of the universal ethic and world peace , they believe the world would be better if geniuses had an exclusive right to govern in what Rael terms Geniocracy . As believers of life in outer space , they hope that human scientists will follow the path of the Elohim by achieving space travel through the cosmos and creating life on other planets . As believers in the resurrection of Jesus Christ through a scientific cloning process ( which includes memory transfer ) by the Elohim , they encourage scientific research to extend life through cloning , however critics outside are doubtful of its possibility . 
 Active followers of Raëlianism have exhibited their sex @-@ positive feminism and anti @-@ war views through outdoor contacts such as parades . The major initiation rite in the Raëlian Church is the baptism or Transmission of the Cellular Plan and is enacted by upper @-@ level members in the Raëlian clergy known as guides . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 = = = Structure of the Universe = = = 
 Raël says that , " Everything is in everything . " Inside the atoms of living things , he says , are living things made of atoms which themselves have living things made of atoms , and so on , to the infinitely small . The universe itself is contained in an atom inside of another universe , and so on , to the infinitely large . Because of the difference of mass , the activity of life inside a living thing 's atoms would undergo many millennia before enough time passes for that living thing to take a single step . Raëlians believe the universe is infinite and thus lacks a center . Because of this , one could not imagine where an ethereal soul would go , due the universe 's infinite nature . They believe that infinity exists in time as well as in space , for all levels of life . 
 Raëlians believe that humanity would be able to create life on other planets only if humanity is peaceful enough to stop war . In that case , humanity could travel the distances between stars and create life on another planet . Progress in terraforming , molecular biology , and cloning would enable these teams to create continents and life from scratch . Progress in social engineering would ensure that this creation would have a better chance of both surviving and having the potential to understand its creators . Research on how civilization would occur on another planet would allow scientists to decide what traces of their origin should be left behind so that their role in life creation would someday be revealed . The progress achieved by the science teams would ultimately sustain a perpetual chain of life . 
 Raëlians do not believe in reincarnation as dictated by mystical writings because they do not believe that an ethereal soul exists free of physical confinement . Instead the Raëlians think that advanced supercomputers of the Elohim are right now recording the memories and DNA of human beings . When Elohim release this information for the coming resurrection , people would be brought back from the dead and the judgments upon them would be realized based on actions in their past life . People excluded from physical recreation would include those who achieved nothing positive but were not evil . Claude Vorilhon expressed an interest in cloning Hitler for war trials and retroactive punishment . Raël also mentioned cloning as the solution to terrorism by suicide attacks , as the perpetrators would not be able to escape punishment by killing themselves if the Elohim recreated them after their attacks . 
 = = = Intelligent Design = = = 
 = = = = Creation of life on Earth by extraterrestrials = = = = 
 In his book The Message Given to me by Extraterrestrials ( now republished as Intelligent Design : Message from the Designers 2006 ISBN 2 @-@ <unk> @-@ 20 @-@ 3 ) , Vorilhon claims that on 13 December 1973 , he found a spacecraft shaped like a flattened bell that landed inside Puy de <unk> , a volcano near the capital city of Auvergne . A 25 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old human @-@ like extraterrestrial inside the spacecraft named Yahweh said that Elohim was the name that primitive people of Earth called members of his extraterrestrial race — who were seen as " those who came from the sky " . Yahweh explained that Earth was originally void of life , with thick clouds and shallow seas , but the Elohim came , broke apart the clouds , exposed the seas to sunlight , built a continent , and synthesized a global ecosystem . Solar astronomy , terraformation , nanotechnology , and genetic engineering allowed Elohim to adapt life to Earth 's thermal and chemical makeup . 
 Yahweh gave materialistic explanations of the Garden of Eden , a large laboratory that was based on an artificially constructed continent ; Noah 's Ark , a spaceship that preserved DNA that was used to resurrect animals through cloning ; the Tower of Babel , a rocket that was supposed to reach the creators ' planet ; and the Great Flood , the byproduct of a nuclear missile explosion that the Elohim sent . After tidal wave floods following the explosions receded , Elohim scattered the Israelites and had them speak the language of other tribes . 
 According to Vorilhon , Elohim contacted about forty people to act as their prophets on Earth , including Moses , Elijah , Ezekiel , Buddha , John the Baptist , Jesus , Muhammad , and Joseph Smith . The religions thought to be from <unk> origins include Judaism , Buddhism , Christianity , Islam , and Mormonism . 
 From the Raëlian point of view , religious texts indicate that the Elohim would return at the age of Apocalypse or Revelation ( unveiling of the truth ) . Humans from another world would appear to drop down from the sky and meet in the embassy they have asked Raël to build for them and share their advanced scientific knowledge with humanity . Thus , one of their stated main goals of the Raëlian movement is to inform as many people as possible about this extraterrestrial race . 
 The controversy surrounding the origins of Raelian beliefs centers on the writings of several authors in the late 1960s . Jean <unk> , a French writer , translator , and author of books on the esoteric and UFOs wrote several novels detailing the creation of Earth by extraterrestrials . One of the best known researchers in this field is Erich van Däniken , the ' father ' of the Ancient Astronauts theory , which postulates that Earth might have been visited by extraterrestrials in the remote past . 
 With the publication of Chariots of the Gods ? in 1968 , Erich von Däniken introduced the intervention theory to the general public . Von Däniken wrote that the technologies and religions of ancient civilizations were granted by extraterrestrials worshiped as gods . Von Däniken argued that only extraterrestrial intervention can explain the higher technological knowledge presumed to be essential for the production of ancient artifacts such as the Egyptian pyramids , Stonehenge and the Moai of Easter Island . Humans in ancient times considered this extraterrestrial high @-@ tech to be supernatural and the aliens themselves to be ' gods ' . One can find direct parallels to the messages that Vorilhon claimed to have received and written about in his books . Marie @-@ Hélène Parent , ex @-@ guide Raëlian priest , describes <unk> and Vorilhon meeting several times for drinks and conversation throughout the years of 1973 and 1974 , prior to Vorilhon 's claimed extraterrestrial encounter . 
 = = = = Humanity 's chance of creating life on other planets = = = = 
 Raëlians believe that humanity would be able to create life on other planets only if it is peaceful enough to stop war . If done , humanity could travel the distances between stars and create life on another planet . Progress in terraformation , molecular biology , and cloning would enable these teams to create continents and life from scratch . Progress in social engineering would ensure that this creation would have a better chance of both surviving as well as having the potential to understand its creators . Research on how globalization would occur on another planet would allow scientists to decide what traces of their origin should be left behind so that their role in life creation would someday be revealed . The progress achieved by the science teams would ultimately sustain a perpetual chain of life . 
 = = = A coming judgement = = = 
 Raëlians do not believe in reincarnation as dictated by mystical writings because they do not believe that an ethereal soul exists free of physical confinement . Instead the Raëlians think that advanced supercomputers of the Elohim are right now recording the memories and DNA of human beings . When Elohim release this information for the coming resurrection , people would be brought back from the dead and the judgments upon them would be realized based on actions in their past life . People excluded from physical recreation would include those who achieved nothing positive but were not evil . Vorilhon expressed an interest in cloning Hitler for war trials and retroactive punishment . Raël also mentioned cloning as the solution to terrorism by suicide attacks , as the perpetrators would not be able to escape punishment by killing themselves if the Elohim recreated them after their attacks . 
 = = Practices = = 
 = = = Initiation of new members = = = 
 The major initiation rite in the Raëlian Church is the " baptism " or " transmission of the cellular plan " and is enacted by upper @-@ level members in the Raëlian clergy known as guides . Canadian sociologist Susan J. Palmer says that in 1979 , Raël introduced the " Act of Apostasy " as an obligation for those preparing for their Raëlian baptism . CTV Television Network states that apostasy from other religions is required for new Raëlian members . Joining the Raëlian Church through transmission of the cellular plan happens only in certain days of the year . There are four such days — marking anniversaries in the Raëlian calendar . 
 The Raëlian baptism is known as transmission of the cellular plan where " cellular " refers to the organic cells of the body and the " plan " refers to the genetic makeup of the individual . This Raëlian baptism involves a guide member laying water onto the forehead of the new member . The practice began on " the first Sunday in April " of 1976 when Raël baptised 40 Raëlians . Raëlians believe that their genetic information is recorded by a remote computer and would become recognized during their final hour when they will be judged by the extraterrestrial Elohim . 
 There is continuing debate on whether Raëlians can be identified as a cult . The government of France classifies the Raelian Movement as a " secte " ( French word for cult ) . However , according to Glenn McGee , the associate director of the Center for Bioethics at the University of Virginia , part of the sect is a cult while the other part is a commercial website that collects large sums of money from those interested in human cloning . The Bureau of Democracy , Human Rights , and Labor of the United States Department of State and sociologist Susan J. Palmer have classified the International Raëlian Movement as a religion . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Raëlians routinely advocate sex @-@ positive feminism and genetically modified food and actively protest against wars in addition to the Catholic Church . For example , a photographer of the Associated Press snapped a picture of half @-@ naked Raëlian women wearing pasties as part of an anti @-@ war demonstration in Seoul , Korea . A snapshot by Agence France @-@ Presse revealed Raëlians in white alien costumes with signs bearing the message " NO WAR ... ET wants Peace , too ! " . On 6 August 2003 , the first day of Raëlian year 58 AH , a tech article on the USA Today newspaper mentions an " unlikely ally " of the Monsanto Company , the Raëlian Movement of Brazil . The movement gave vocal support in response to the company 's support for genetically modified organisms particularly in their country . Brazilian farmers have been using Monsanto 's genetically engineered soy plant as well as the glyphosate herbicide to which it was artificially adapted . The Raëlians spoke against the Brazilian government 's ban on GMOs . 
 = = = = Topless Rights of Women = = = = 
 Several Raëlian groups in the United States have organized annual protests , claiming that women should have the same legal right to go topless in public , that men enjoy without fear of arrest for indecent exposure . Some have called this a publicity stunt designed to recruit members . Go Topless Day is their annual event , with women protesting topless except for nipple pasties to avoid arrest . It is held near 26 August , the anniversary of the day women were given the USA right to vote . 
