 In July 2001 , Raëlians on the streets attracted Italians and Swiss people as they gave leaflets in protest to over a hundred child molesters in existence among Roman Catholic clergy in France . They recommended that parents should not send their children to Catholic confession . The Episcopal vicar of Geneva sued the Raëlian Church for libel but did not win . The judge did not accept the charges for the reason that the Raëlians were not attacking the whole of the Catholic Church . 
 In October 2002 , Raëlians in a Canadian anti @-@ clerical parade held handed out Christian crosses to high school students . They were invited to burn the crosses in a park not far from Montreal 's Mount Royal and to sign letters of apostasy from the Roman Catholic Church . The Quebec Association of Bishops called this " incitement to hatred " , and several school boards attempted to prevent their students from meeting Raëlians . 
 = = Advocacy = = 
 = = = Embassy for Extraterrestrials = = = 
 Raëlians believe that life on earth — as well as many religions of the world — was the work of extraterrestrial influence . They believe these were scientists and that ancient people saw them as " gods " and gave the name " Elohim " . Raëlians believe that the Embassy for Extraterrestrials or " Third Temple " is to support an official contact with Extraterrestrial Elohim and their messengers of the main religions at the " New Jerusalem " . Writers who have influenced Raëlian beliefs include Zechariah Sitchin and Erich von Däniken . 
 The International Raëlian Movement envisions having an entrance with an aseptic chamber leading to a conference room for twenty @-@ one people as well as a dining room of the same capacity . In the plan are seven rooms for the purpose of receiving human guests into the embassy . The embassy building , along with the swimming pool , would be in the center of a large park and protected from trespassing by a wall − a maximum of two stories @-@ to surround the entire complex 's circumference . Trees and bushes are to be planted in the outskirts of the wall 's area . The walls are to have a northern and southern entrance . The landing pad for the embassy should be able fit a spaceship of twelve meters of diameter or 39 ' 4 " on its terrace . The terrace is to be above the rooms in the torus , which are for extraterrestrials only . The seven rooms directly underneath the landing pad would be protected from occupants of other rooms with a thick metal door . Finally , the International Raëlian Movement wants to avoid military and radar surveillance of the airspace above the embassy . Buildings for administration , food and water provisions , and state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art sanitation and communication systems are part of this vision . A nearby replica of the Raëlian Embassy for Extraterrestrials open to the public is expected to show visitors what it is like inside the real one . 
 In February 1991 , the Raëlian Church modified their symbol to remove the swastika to help in negotiations with building the " Third Temple of Israel " . The official reason given was a telepathic request from extraterrestrials called Elohim to change the symbol in order to help in negotiations with Israel for the building of a Raëlian " embassy " or " third temple of Israel " to greet the anticipated coming of extraterrestrials and founders of past religions , although the country still denies their request . 
 On 13 December 1997 , the leader of the International Raëlian Movement had decided to extend the possibility of building the embassy outside of Jerusalem and also allow that a significant portion of the embassy property be covered with water . The area of the proposed embassy property is still envisioned at a minimum of 3 @.@ 47 square kilometers , with a radius of at least 1 @.@ 05 kilometers . 
 In 2005 , the Israeli Raëlian Guide Kobi Drori stated that the Lebanese government was discussing proposals by the Raëlian movement to build their " interplanetary embassy " in Lebanon . However , one condition was that the Raëlians did not display their logo on top of the building because it mixes a swastika and a Star of David . According to Drori , the Raëlians involved declined this offer , as they wished to keep the symbol as is . 
 = = = Ideas how government and the economy should run = = = 
 According to the book Geniocracy , creating a peaceful worldwide political union requires a form of government that favors intelligence over mediocrity . While having a democratic electoral apparatus , it differs from traditional liberal democracy by requiring members of the electorate to meet a minimum standard of intelligence . The thresholds proposed by the Raëlians are 50 % above average for a candidate and 10 % above average for a voter . Raëlians believe that a world government is only possible through establishing a global currency , a common language , and a transformation of militaries of the world into civil police . 
 In Raël 's book , Extraterrestrials took me to their Planet , Raël claims that an extraterrestrial gave him the idea of Economic Humanitarianism . Under the establishment of Economic Humanitarianism , people would not have ownership of businesses or exploitable goods created by others . Instead , people would rent each of them for a period of 49 years . The founders would be able to receive the rents for up to 49 years or when they die , whichever is later . Any rents not inherited by relatives after 49 years would go to the State . By balancing inheritances , children would be born with enough financial means to forsake menial tasks for endeavors that may benefit the whole of humanity . Family houses could be inherited from generation to generation , free of rent . 
 In his much later book , Maitreya , Raël says the road to a world without money is capitalism and globalisation , as opposed to communism . Capitalism would allow those who contribute much to society to also contribute to its scientific and technological development . Under capitalism , society would produce as much money as it can . The money would become important in the short run as nanotechnology quickly lowers the cost of goods while putting many people out of work . 
 An anti @-@ cult organization called Info @-@ Cult argued that Geniocracy was a fascist ideology . However , Geniocracy is not a political party because it allows for differing political viewpoints . 
 = = = Liberal sensuality = = = 
 According to Vorilhon 's book Sensual Meditation , one should develop the ability to break free of habitual thoughts that prevent one from appreciating everyday phenomena . The book describes in detail six different meditations involving making full use of the lungs ' capacity to expand and contract , oxygenating the blood and the cells within , imagining heat travelling upwards from toe to the head , allowing the skin to feel under itself , and experiencing touch with another person 's body and examining their figure . 
 According to the book Maitreya by Vorilhon , love involves experiencing different varieties and possibilities that allow one to break habits in order to make life more pleasant and interesting and that it is the only thing that can stop war and injustice that persists in today 's world . Raëlians believe in the right to form new religions or new political parties as long as they do not promote violence . As individualists , Raëlians believe that the one who gives the order to harm others is less at fault than the one who executes it . 
 Raëlians say they encourage adult homosexual , bisexual , and heterosexual relationships and that society should recognize them legally . However , government authorities such as those in Switzerland fear that Raëlians are a threat to public morals for supporting liberalized sex education for children . The authorities believe that such liberalized sex education teaches youth how to obtain sexual gratification which would encourage sexual abuse of underage children . The Raëlians disagree with those fears and stated that sex education done properly would involve educating parents as well as children . 
 Susan J. Palmer writes that in 1991 , a French journalist went to a Raëlian Seminar and taped couples having sexual intercourse in tents . These tapes gained widespread publicity — with news stories describing these practices as perverted and a form of brainwashing . 
 Since 1991 , Raël 's teachings on sexual intercourse have caused controversy among other religious groups . The next year , Catholic schools in Montreal , Canada objected to a proposed condom vending machine as contrary to their mission . In response , Raëlian guides gave the Catholic students ten thousand condoms . The Commissioner of Catholic schools for Montreal said they could do nothing to stop them . Around this time , Raëlians dubbed the event " Operation Condom " . 
 = = = Cloning of humans = = = 
 In the scientific community , reproductive cloning refers only to the creation of a genetically identical living thing . " Genetically identical " does not mean altogether identical ; this kind of cloning does not reproduce a living thing 's memories or experiences , for example . However , in discussions of Raëlianism , cloning sometimes seems to refer not only to reproductive cloning , but also reproductive human cloning plus mind and / or brain transfer , or to a process of making adult clones . Raëlians take this even further and say that humanity can attain eternal life through the science of cloning . 
 According to the book Yes to Human Cloning , the first stage of this extended cloning process is creating a human embryo through human cloning . Raëlian bishop and Clonaid CEO Brigitte Boisselier claimed that an American woman underwent a cloning procedure of this type that led to the birth of a girl named Eve on 26 December 2002 . Vorilhon told lawmakers that banning the development of human cloning was comparable to outlawing medical advances such as " antibiotics , blood transfusions , and vaccines . " 
 The second stage of cloning , according to Raëlians , is causing the clone to mature faster than normal . Raël says that in the future , scientists will discover an " accelerated @-@ growth process " in which a process like guided self @-@ assembly of rapidly expanded cells or even nanotechnological assembly of a whole human body can form in a very short time . 
 The third stage is the transfer of memory and personality from the original person to the mature clone . For the process to maintain one branch for personality and memory , as opposed to two , a recording of the individual 's mind would be required before the time of death , and would be transferred to an adult clone body after the original has died . 
 In the final stages of development , hitherto unknown information contained within undamaged DNA would be enough to bring others back from the dead including their memories and personality . This would be done by taking a small sample from someone 's body and preserving it at the time when the level of the brain 's efficiency and knowledge is highest . On the day of death , a cell would be taken from the sample for the cloning to take place , and the memories and personality would be restored to their peak level . 
 The Raëlian Church has close links with the controversial company Clonaid . Brigitte Boisselier , a Raëlian and chief executive of Clonaid , made a controversial and unverified claim that a human baby was conceived through cloning technology . Around this time , Clonaid 's subsidiary <unk> Tech claimed to have in possession a cell fusion device that assisted the cloning of human embryos . The Vatican , however , says that experimenters expressed " brutal mentality " for attempting to clone human beings . Pope John Paul II criticized the experiment which he believed threatened the dignity of human life . In response , the leader of the Raëlian Church dismissed the Pope 's ethical concerns , calling them an " accumulation of religious prejudices . " 
 = Capture of Savannah = 
 The Capture of Savannah , or sometimes the First Battle of Savannah ( because of a siege in 1779 ) , was an American Revolutionary War battle fought on December 29 , 1778 between local American Patriot militia and Continental Army units holding the city and a British invasion force under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Campbell . The British seizure of the city led to an extended occupation and was the opening move in the British southern strategy to regain control of the rebellious Southern provinces by appealing to the strong Loyalist sentiment believed to be there . 
 General Sir Henry Clinton , the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the British forces based in New York City , dispatched Campbell and a 3 @,@ 100 man force from New York to capture Savannah , and begin the process of returning Georgia to British control . He was to be assisted by troops under the command of Brigadier General Augustine Prevost that were marching up from Saint Augustine in East Florida . After landing near Savannah on December 23 , Campbell assessed the American defenses , which were comparatively weak , and decided to attack without waiting for Prevost . Taking advantage of local assistance he successfully flanked the American position outside the town , captured a large portion of Major General Robert Howe 's army , and drove the remnants to retreat into South Carolina . 
 Campbell and Prevost followed up the victory with the capture of Sunbury and an expedition to Augusta . The latter was only occupied by Campbell for a few weeks before he retreated back to Savannah , citing insufficient Loyalist and Indian support and the threat of Patriot forces across the Savannah River in South Carolina . The British held off a Franco @-@ American siege in 1779 , and held the city until late in the war . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1778 , following the defeat of a British army at Saratoga and the consequent entry of France into the American Revolutionary War as an American ally , Lord George Germain , the British secretary responsible for the war , wrote to Lieutenant General Sir Henry Clinton that capturing the southern colonies was " considered by the King as an object of great importance in the scale of the war " . Germain 's instructions to Clinton , framed as recommendations , were that he should abandon Philadelphia and then embark on operations to recover Georgia and the Carolinas , while making diversionary attacks against Virginia and Maryland . 
 = = = British preparations = = = 
 In June and July 1778 Clinton successfully removed his troops from Philadelphia back to New York . In November , after dealing with the threat of a French fleet off New York and Newport , Rhode Island , Clinton turned his attention to the south . He organized a force of about 3 @,@ 000 men in New York and sent orders to Saint Augustine , the capital of East Florida , where Brigadier General Augustine Prevost was to organize all available men and Indian agent John Stuart was to rally the local Creek and Cherokee warriors to assist in operations against Georgia . Clinton 's basic plan , first proposed by Thomas Brown in 1776 , began with the capture of the capital of Georgia , Savannah . 
 Clinton gave command of the detachment from New York to Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Campbell . The force consisted of two battalions ( the 1st and 2nd ) of the 71st Regiment of Foot , the Hessian regiments von <unk> and von <unk> , and four Loyalist provincial units : one battalion from the New York Volunteers , two from DeLancey 's Brigade , and one from Skinner 's Brigade . Campbell sailed from New York on November 26 and arrived off Tybee Island , near the mouth of the Savannah River , on December 23 . 
 = = = American defenses = = = 
 The state of Georgia was defended by two separate forces . Units of the Continental Army were under the command of General Robert Howe , who was responsible for the defense of the entire South , while the state 's militia companies were under the overall command of Georgia Governor John Houstoun . Howe and Georgia authorities had previously squabbled over control of military expeditions against Prevost in East Florida , and those expeditions had failed . These failures led the Continental Congress to decide in September 1778 to replace Howe with Major General Benjamin Lincoln , who had successfully negotiated militia participation in events surrounding the British defeat at Saratoga . Lincoln had not yet arrived when word reached Howe that Clinton was sending troops to Georgia . 
 During November 1778 British raids into Georgia became more and more threatening to the state 's population centers . Despite the urgency of the situation , Governor Houstoun refused to allow Howe to direct the movements of the Georgia militia . On November 18 , Howe began marching south from Charleston , South Carolina with 550 Continental Army troops , arriving in Savannah late that month . He learned that Campbell had sailed from New York on December 6 . On December 23 sails were spotted off Tybee Island . The next day , Governor Houstoun assigned 100 Georgia militia to Howe . 
 A war council decided to attempt a vigorous defense of Savannah , in spite of the fact that they were likely to be significantly outnumbered , hoping to last until Lincoln 's troops arrived . Due the large number of potential landing points , Howe was forced to hold most of his army in reserve until the British had actually landed . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The place Campbell selected for landing was Girardeau 's Plantation , located about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) below the city . When word reached Howe that the landing had started on December 29 , he sent a company of Continentals to occupy the bluffs above the landing site . Campbell realized that the bluffs would need to be controlled before the majority of his forces could land , and dispatched two companies of the 71st Regiment to take control of them . The Continentals opened fire at about 100 yards ( 91 m ) ; the British , rather than returning fire , advanced rapidly with bayonets fixed , denying the Continentals a second shot . The Continentals retreated , having killed four and wounded five at no cost to themselves . By noon , Campbell had landed his army and began to proceed cautiously toward the city . 
 Howe held a council that morning , and ground was chosen at which to make a stand . About one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 7 km ) south of the city he established a line of defense in the shape of an open V , with the ends anchored by swampy woods . On the left Howe placed Georgia Continentals and militia under Samuel Elbert , while on the right he put South Carolina Continentals and militia under Isaac Huger and William Thomson . The line was supported by four pieces of field artillery , and light infantry companies guarded the flanks . Most of Howe 's troops , including the Continentals , had seen little or no action in the war . 
 When Campbell 's advance companies spotted Howe 's line around 2 : 00 pm , the main body stopped short of the field and Campbell went to see what he was up against . He viewed Howe 's defenses as essentially sound , but a local slave told him that there was a path through the swamp on Howe 's right . Campbell ordered Sir James Baird to take 350 light infantry and 250 New York Loyalists and follow the slave through the swamp , while he arrayed his troops just out of view in a way that would give the impression he would attempt a flanking maneuver on Howe 's left . One of his officers climbed a tree to observe Baird 's progress . True to the slave 's word , the trail came out near the Continental barracks , which had been left unguarded ; the Continentals were unaware they had been flanked . When they reached position , the man in the tree signaled by waving his hat , and Campbell ordered the regulars to charge . 
 The first sounds of battle Howe heard were musket fire from the barracks , but these were rapidly followed by cannon fire and the appearance of charging British and German troops on his front . He ordered an immediate retreat , but it rapidly turned into a rout . His untried troops hardly bothered to return fire , some throwing down their weapons before attempting to run away through the swampy terrain . Campbell reported that " It was scarcely possible to come up with them , their retreat was rapid beyond Conception . " The light infantry in the Continental rear cut off the road to Augusta , the only significant escape route , forcing a mad scramble of retreating troops into the city itself . The Georgia soldiers on the right attempted to find a safe crossing of Musgrove Creek , but one did not exist , and many of the troops were taken prisoner . Soldiers who did not immediately surrender were sometimes bayoneted . Colonel Huger managed to form a rear @-@ guard to cover the escape of a number of the Continentals . Some of Howe 's men managed to escape to the north before the British closed off the city , but others were forced to attempt swimming across Yamacraw Creek ; an unknown number drowned in the attempt . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Campbell gained control of the city at the cost to his forces of seven killed and seventeen wounded , not including the four men killed and five wounded during preliminary skirmishing . Campbell took 453 prisoners , and there were at least 83 dead and 11 wounded from Howe 's forces . When Howe 's retreat ended at Purrysburg , South Carolina he had 342 men left , less than half his original army . Howe would receive much of the blame for the disaster , with William Moultrie arguing that he should have either disputed the landing site in force or retreated without battle to keep his army intact . He was exonerated in a court martial that inquired into the event , although the tribunal pointed out that Howe should have made a stand at the bluffs or more directly opposed the landing . 
 General Prevost arrived from East Florida in mid @-@ January , and shortly after sent Campbell with 1 @,@ 000 men to take Augusta . Campbell occupied the frontier town against minimal opposition , but by then General Lincoln had begun to rally support in South Carolina to oppose the British . Campbell abandoned Augusta on February 14 , the same day a Loyalist force en route to meet him was defeated in the Battle of Kettle Creek . Although Patriot forces following the British were ambushed in the March 3 Battle of Brier Creek , the Georgia backcountry remained in Patriot hands . 
 Campbell wrote that he would be " the first British officer to [ rend ] a star and stripe from the flag of Congress " . The British held Savannah until July 11 , 1782 , when its troops were withdrawn . Savannah was used as a base to conduct coastal raids which targeted areas from Charleston , South Carolina to the Florida coast . In the fall of 1779 , a combined French and American siege to recapture Savannah failed with significant casualties . Control of Georgia was formally returned to its royal governor , James Wright , in July 1779 , but the backcountry would not come under British control until after the 1780 Siege of Charleston . Patriot forces recovered Augusta by siege in 1781 , but Savannah remained in British hands until 1782 . 
 = Eaton Hall , Cheshire = 
 Eaton Hall is the country house of the Duke of Westminster . It is set within a large estate 1 mile ( 2 km ) south of the village of Eccleston , in Cheshire , England . The house is surrounded by formal gardens , parkland , farmland and woodland . The estate covers an area of about 10 @,@ 872 acres ( 4 @,@ 400 ha ) . 
 The first substantial house was built in the 17th century . In the early 19th century it was replaced by a much larger house designed by William Porden . This in turn was replaced by an even larger house , with outbuildings and a chapel , designed by Alfred Waterhouse . Building started in 1870 and concluded about 12 years later . By 1960 the fabric of the house had deteriorated and , like many other mansions during this period , it was demolished , although the chapel and many of the outbuildings were retained . A new house was built but its design was not considered to be sympathetic to the local landscape , and in the late 1980s it was re @-@ cased and given the appearance of a French château . 
 The house has been surrounded by formal gardens since the 17th century , the design of which has changed over the centuries in accordance with current ideas and fashions , as has the surrounding parkland . A variety of buildings are included in the estate , some decorative , others built for the business of the estate ; many of these are listed buildings . The house and estate are not normally open to the public , but the gardens are open on three days a year to raise money for charity , and some of the estate 's buildings can be hired for charitable purposes . 
 = = Halls = = 
 Eaton Hall has been the country house of the Grosvenor family since the 15th century . There is evidence of a two @-@ storey house on a moated site in the estate in a 17th @-@ century estate map and an 18th @-@ century engraving . A survey undertaken in 1798 showed that the building was still present . 
 = = = Samwell Hall = = = 
 The first substantial house was built for Sir Thomas Grosvenor , 3rd Baronet . He inherited the estate at the age of 19 when he succeeded his grandfather , Sir Richard Grosvenor , 2nd Baronet , who died in 1664 . The new owner commissioned the architect William Samwell to design the house . Building started in 1675 ; much of the stone used was brought from the ruined Holt Castle in north Wales . By 1683 the cost of building the house had risen to over £ 1 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 530 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . An engraving of the time shows it to have been a substantial square house with three storeys and dormers . The entrance front had nine bays and a portico . The engraving also shows the earlier moated house to the south of the new house . 
 = = = Porden Hall = = = 
 By the time that Robert Grosvenor , then the 2nd Earl Grosvenor , and later the 1st Marquess of Westminster , inherited the estate in 1802 , the Samwell Hall had become old @-@ fashioned and in need of renovation . Grosvenor appointed William Porden to plan the improvements . Building started in 1803 and Porden estimated it would take three years to build at a cost of £ 10 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 530 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . In the event it took just under 10 years and cost over £ 100 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 530 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . The previous house was encased and surrounded by " every possible permutation of the gothic style " ; including turrets , pinnacles , arched windows , octagonal towers , and buttresses ( both regular and flying ) . Two new wings were added in the first stage , and in the 1820s more wings were added , by this time under the direction of Benjamin Gummow . The interior of the house was as lavish as the exterior , with more Gothic detailing . The hangings for the state bed included 97 yards ( 89 m ) of purple damask and 103 yards ( 94 m ) of <unk> ( fine silk ) trimmed with gold lace . When the future Queen Victoria visited in 1832 at the age of 13 , she wrote in her journal : " The house is magnificent " . Others described it as being " as extravagant and opulent as the very latest upholsterer @-@ decorators could make it " . A critic found it " the most gaudy concern I ever saw " and " a vast pile of mongrel gothic which ... is a monument of wealth , ignorance and bad taste " . Richard Grosvenor , 2nd Marquess of Westminster , succeeded his father in 1845 and commissioned the Scottish architect William Burn to make alterations to the house . Burn raised the centre of the south front to make it look like a tower , and changed some of the external Gothic features . The architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner described this house as a " spectacular Gothic mansion " . 
 = = = Waterhouse Hall = = = 
 The 2nd Marquess died in 1869 and was succeeded by his son Hugh Lupus Grosvenor , initially the 3rd Marquess and from 1874 the 1st Duke of Westminster . He appointed Alfred Waterhouse to design another new hall . Again the core of the previous hall was retained ; parts were refaced and re @-@ modelled , other parts were completely rebuilt . A private wing was built for the use of the family , and this was joined to the main part of the hall by a corridor . Waterhouse also designed the chapel and a clock @-@ house , and rebuilt most of the stabling . The work began in 1870 , took 12 years to complete , and cost £ 803 @,@ 000 ( £ NaN in 2016 ) . The library was 90 feet ( 27 m ) long , the dining room with its ante room was 105 feet ( 32 m ) long , and the octagonal great hall contained an organ . For the interior , Henry Stacy Marks painted a frieze of the Canterbury Pilgrims for the morning room , Gertrude Jekyll painted panels for the drawing room , and in other rooms were paintings by Gainsborough , Stubbs and Reynolds . Pevsner wrote that it " was an outstanding expression of High Victorian originality " , and added " this Wagnerian palace was the most ambitious instance of Gothic Revival domestic architecture anywhere in the country " . The Daily Telegraph described it as " one of the most princely and beautiful mansions that these islands contain " . 
 During both World Wars , parts of the hall were used as a hospital . In 1943 , the Britannia Royal Naval College moved to the hall from Dartmouth when the college there was bombed . They moved back to Dartmouth in 1946 , after which the hall was used as an officer cadet training school until the end of National Service in 1958 . 
 = = = Dennys Hall and the present hall = = = 
 By 1960 the hall needed repair and decoration , and dry rot was found in the roof . Robert Grosvenor , 5th Duke of Westminster , decided to demolish the main part of the Waterhouse building and the private wing , retaining the chapel , clock tower and stables ; this took place in 1963 . A new building was commissioned by the Duke who appointed John Dennys , his wife 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , as architect . Dennys had earlier worked on <unk> Grange on the Eaton estate . The intention was to build a modern , manageable home . The result was a rectangular , flat @-@ roofed building , faced with white <unk> , its " whiteness [ being ] a stark contrast to the softness of the Cheshire landscape " . Its construction began in 1971 , it took less than 2 1 ⁄ 2 years to build , and cost £ 459 @,@ 000 ( £ NaN in 2016 ) . The exterior had a central porte @-@ cochère on the entrance front . The house followed an asymmetrical plan , with two storeys plus a basement containing a swimming pool . A central two @-@ storey hall gave access to the principal rooms , with the main reception rooms being on the first floor . The decor included wall coverings in silk and woodblock floors . 
 As the hall was considered to be unsympathetic in appearance to the local countryside , it was decided to change its exterior . This was designed by the Percy Thomas Partnership . Work on <unk> the Dennys Hall to make it look more like a French château began in 1989 and was completed in 1991 . 
 = = = Associated structures = = = 
 Adjacent to the hall are the remaining structures designed by Waterhouse . To the north is Eaton Chapel ; this , with its clock tower , is a Grade I listed building . The decorative scheme of the interior of the chapel is based on the ' Te Deum ' ; it involves stained glass and stone mosaic , and was developed by Frederic Shields . Immediately to the north of the chapel is the Stable Court ; this is listed at Grade II * . The buildings in the Stable Court are in brick , red stone , and half @-@ timbering , with red tile roofs . The west range has a half @-@ timbered upper storey with two gables , and a central gatehouse with turrets which are polygonal at the base and circular higher up and have conical roofs . On each side of the gatehouse are two @-@ storey arcades with gables above . In the courtyard is a statue of a horse by Joseph Boehm , which is listed at Grade II . At the southeast corner of the stable yard is a <unk> 's house , dated 1873 and listed at Grade II * . In a lobby between the stable yard and the chapel is an artificial grotto , listed at Grade II . In the area around the Stable Court are further structures listed at Grade II . To the north is the <unk> Court , which consists of a coach @-@ house , a covered court and a riding school . These were designed in the 1870s for the 1st Duke . To the north of this are Eaton Hall Cottages , four attached cottages , which were designed about the same time . In the forecourt between the <unk> Court and the cottages is a lodge , with gates , piers and screens . Near to the cottages is the former engine shed of the Eaton Hall Railway . To the east of the stable yard is a chapel @-@ like sandstone game pantry dating from the 1870s . 
 From 1896 until 1947 , the estate was served by the 15 in ( 381 mm ) gauge Eaton Hall Railway . The line ran from the hall to a depot at <unk> on the Chester @-@ Wrexham line , and a spur went to Cuckoo 's Nest , where there was a repair yard . Part of the old railway route was re @-@ opened in 1996 . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The estate covers an area of about 10 @,@ 872 acres ( 4 @,@ 400 ha ) , within which about 1 @,@ 235 acres ( 500 ha ) of parkland and about 50 acres ( 20 ha ) of formal gardens . These are listed at Grade II * on the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . The boundaries of the estate generally follow field boundaries but on the east side they follow the line of the River Dee . 
 = = = History = = = 
 In the 17th century , formal gardens were created around the Samwell Hall ; these included such features as parterres and canals . However they were costly to maintain , and in the later part of the 18th century fashions changed to favour a more informal type of garden layout . Credit for designing the informal gardens at Eaton Hall has been given to Lancelot " Capability " Brown . Although one of Brown 's documents dated 1764 shows that payment was made to him by the estate , it also notes that a plan for the garden had been drawn up by William Emes . From this , Marion Mako concludes that , as Brown was an engineer as well as a landscape gardener , the payment was for an engineering project rather than for landscaping . Emes had been influenced by Brown , although he had not been his pupil . With his clerk of works , Thomas Leggett , Emes worked in the estate for the next 10 years . When Robert Grosvenor ( later the 1st Marquess ) inherited the estate at the beginning of the 19th century , it had become run @-@ down . The marquess appointed John Webb , a pupil of Emes , to improve the garden and the landscaping . Among Webb 's innovations were new terrace walls behind the house , the levelling of Belgrave Avenue and the planting of 130 @,@ 000 trees along it , and a serpentine lake to the east of the house alongside the River Dee . He also arranged for the construction of greenhouses and a kitchen garden . 
 Fashions changed again , and in the 1820s William Andrews Nesfield was employed to design new parterres . He also built more terracing and a balustraded wall . Statues , stone urns and vases on pedestals were added to the garden . In 1852 the Camellia House was built ; this was extended in 1870 to its final size of 385 feet ( 117 m ) long , 10 feet ( 3 m ) wide , and 18 feet ( 5 m ) high . The present kitchen garden was created the same year ; this provided the food not only for the hall , but also for Grosvenor House in London . More greenhouses were built and , by about 1880 , 56 gardeners were employed . There were other building works in the grounds . Waterhouse created a grotto between the chapel and the stable yard , and designed the Parrot House and a loggia ( now known as the Temple ) . The Chester architect John Douglas designed the Dutch Tea House in the Tea Garden , and a number of service buildings in the estate . In 1897 – 98 Edwin Lutyens started to improve what had been known as the Italian Garden ( and is now the Dragon Garden ) . 
 Work continued in the gardens and grounds during the 20th century . The 2nd Duke commissioned Detmar Blow , a pupil of Lutyens , to re @-@ design parts of the gardens . With Fernand <unk> , he removed the parterres , built a canal leading away from the house , added hedged compartments to the terraces , and a pond at the base of the terraces ( now the Lioness and <unk> Pond ) . During the Second World War , part of the parkland was requisitioned as an airfield , and in 1940 some of the garden buildings were damaged by a cluster of incendiary devices . After the war , improvement of the gardens did not resume until the 1960s , when the wives of the 4th and 5th Dukes worked with the designer James Russell . Since the early 1990s , the gardens have been further developed under the 6th Duke and his wife , Natalia , working with the garden designers Arabella Lennox @-@ Boyd and Vernon Russell Smith . 
 = = = Formal gardens = = = 
 To the east of the house a series of terraces leads down to the Fish Pond . The retaining walls at the southern end of the upper terrace are listed at Grade II , as are the retaining walls at the end of the upper terrace and the steps leading down to the middle terrace . Stretching along the middle terrace is a long rectangular pool containing a three fountains . The retaining walls of this pool are listed at Grade II , as are the railings on the north and the south side of the terrace . On each side of the pool are two compartments framed by yew hedges . Between these compartments , on each side , is a statue by Raymond Smith . Both of these were made in 1852 for the 2nd Marquess and are listed at Grade II . The one to the north depicts a stag at bay , and that to the south a hunter on a rearing horse . 
 From the end of the pool , steps lead down to a smaller rectangular pool at right @-@ angles to the first . The steps and the retaining wall at the end of the terrace are listed at Grade II . The retaining walls of the pool are also listed at Grade II . This area contains two statues by Jonathan Kenworthy . From this pool a path , known as the Broad Walk , stretches to the north and the south . At each end of the Broad Walk is a building designed by Waterhouse for the 3rd Marquess . At the north end is the Parrot House , dating from 1881 – 83 , which is built in yellow terracotta . It is the form of a round colonnaded Ionic temple with a shallow domed roof . Above the colonnade and the inner drum are concentric balustrades . A flight of eleven steps leads up to the south entrance . The Parrot House is listed at Grade II . At the south end of the Broad Walk is a loggia , dating from about 1880 . This is built in buff and red sandstone . At its front are three arches between Ionic columns . The loggia was built to enclose a Roman altar which was found in 1821 at a spring near Boughton and brought to Eaton in 1822 . The loggia is listed at Grade II . To the east and west of the loggia are reconstructed Roman columns , each of which is listed at Grade II . 
 South of the loggia is the Dutch Tea Garden , which was laid out by C. E. <unk> in about 1905 . The garden contains the Tea House which was designed by John Douglas . This has a cruciform plan and is a half @-@ timbered building on a sandstone plinth . The roof is of red tiles , and sweeps upwards to a small spire surmounted by a weathercock . It is listed at Grade II . In the centre of the garden is a statue of Mercury and in front of the Tea House are two stone Talbots . To the north of the Tea House , on the path leading to the Broad Walk , is a pair of wrought iron gates made in 1913 for the 2nd Duke . The gates and their overthrow are listed at Grade II . 
 To the south of the hall is a formal garden known as the Italian Garden . This contains a pool at the centre of which is the Dragon Fountain . The fountain is listed at Grade II . In the Italian Garden are two statues , also listed at Grade II , which were taken from the old hall when it was demolished ; these are a statue of Joan of Eaton , and of the Norman Bishop Odo . 
 Leading from the north of the house is the Spring Walk , leading to the Kitchen Garden , in which food is grown for the family . To the east of the Kitchen Garden is the Camellia Walk , a long greenhouse filled with camellias . This is 388 feet ( 118 m ) long and is believed to be the longest glass corridor in the world . It is listed at Grade II . Some of the gates in this garden are believed to have been designed by Lutyens , and are listed at Grade II . Other walls and gates around the garden were designed by Waterhouse in about 1870 , and are listed at Grade II * . 
 To the east of the house is the forecourt , which has as its centrepiece a pool containing an equestrian statue of the 1st Duke . This depicts the Duke on horseback holding aloft a falcon . It is in bronze and was made between 1870 and 1879 for the Duke by G. F. Watts . It is listed at Grade II * . The retaining walls of the pond are listed at Grade II . To the west of the forecourt are the Golden Gates which , together with their screens and lodges , are listed at Grade I. The other listed building in the gardens is a large stone urn on the east side of the Fish Pool dating from about 1880 . This is richly carved , is 10 feet ( 3 m ) high , and stands on a circular pedestal which forms the final feature of the eastern view from the hall . It is listed at Grade II . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 The grounds can be entered by a number of approaches , each of which contain structures of architectural importance . Belgrave Avenue , some 1 @.@ 75 miles ( 3 km ) long , is a straight drive which leads from the Wrexham Road ( <unk> ) to the Golden Gates and the forecourt on the east of the hall . Belgrave Lodge , on the south side of the avenue was built in 1899 to a design by John Douglas for the 1st Duke . It is built in red bricks with yellow stone plinths , bands and other dressings and is listed at Grade II . The associated lodge gates , piers and wing walls were designed at the same time by Douglas and are also listed at Grade II . Part way along the avenue , on its north side , is Upper Belgrave Lodge . This was also designed by Douglas for the 1st Duke , it is dated 1877 , and is Grade II listed . Further along the avenue is a Grade II listed obelisk in red sandstone with a copper cap , dated 1890 , designed by Douglas and Fordham . 
 The Aldford Approach leads from the village of Aldford and crosses the River Dee by the Grade I listed Aldford Iron Bridge , which was built in 1824 by William Hazledine for the 1st Marquis . Iron Bridge Lodge , adjacent to this bridge , was designed by Douglas and Fordham in 1894 and is listed at Grade II . Also on this approach is <unk> Hill Lodge which was designed in the 1880s by Douglas ; it is listed at Grade II . On the approach , near the Dutch Tea Garden are gates with an overthrow , and piers dating from about 1870 in Classic Revival style , listed at Grade II . 
 From the north of the hall are two further approaches . The Eccleston Approach goes to the village of Eccleston , and slightly to the west , the Chester Approach bypasses the village , going through Eccleston Hill . Associated with these approaches are further listed buildings . Of these , the major structure is Eccleston Hill Lodge which was designed in 1881 – 82 by Douglas for the 1st Duke and is listed at Grade II * . This is a three @-@ storey gatehouse tower with multiple attached smaller towers and a steeply hipped roof . The other structures are listed at Grade II and comprise Eccleston Lodge which was designed by Douglas and Fordham in 1894 , its associated gates , piers and wing railings , a sandstone <unk> causeway south of the lodge carrying the drive , a house called Eaton Boat , designed by Douglas about 1880 , Garden Lodge designed by Waterhouse in 1881 – 83 , a pair of gates , railings and screen walls adjoining the lodge dating from 1881 – 83 by Waterhouse , Stud Lodge storehouse and domestic offices , designed in 1883 by Douglas , the Stud Riding School , the Stud Stables , the house east of Stud , Eaton Estate Office , designed by Waterhouse in 1880 , the North Lodge of 1881 by Waterhouse , the North Lodge gate and post from about 1881 also by Waterhouse , the Garden House of 1893 by Douglas and Minshull , and gates and gate piers to the south of Garden House . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Eaton Hall is a private residence and is not open to the public , but the gardens are open on three days each year to raise money for charity . In the area of the Stable Court are a number of rooms which are used for exhibitions . The Carriage Museum holds the Westminster Collection of Carriages . The Exhibition Room houses a collection of items relating to the Grosvenor family , and the History Room contains items about the history of the family and illustrations of the hall at various stages in the past . The Stables include items relating to the family 's horses . In the garden , the Parrot House contains an exhibition of paintings by the Victorian artist Henry Stacy Marks . 
 Some of the areas in the stable court are available for hire for charitable fund raising . The Long Room , which was refurbished in 1992 and now has the character of a large country house drawing room , can hold 150 people . The former saddle room is now a dining room . The carriage room and adjoining buildings have been converted into the Wolf Room , which has a movable stage and audio @-@ visual facilities . It can seat 200 people and contains eight black @-@ chalk pictures of birds by Joseph Wolf . The chapel is usually reserved for the family but in December each year it is used for carol concerts to raise money for charity . 
 = Poh Ern Shih Temple = 
 Poh Ern Shih ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; literally : " Temple of Thanksgiving " ) is located on a small hilltop at Chwee Chian Road , off Pasir Panjang Road , on Singapore 's southern coast . The Buddhist temple was built as a memorial to those who lost their lives during the Battle of Pasir Panjang in 1942 , villagers as well as Allied and Japanese soldiers . The temple 's first abbot , Sumangalo , an American <unk> monk , was the first Westerner to be appointed abbot of a Buddhist temple in Singapore . 
 Following a major development project which began in 2003 , Poh Ern Shih became the first religious building in the country to incorporate both eco @-@ friendly and elderly @-@ friendly features . Together with its partner , the Buddhist Fellowship , the temple conducts programmes such as Dharma talks , Sutta discussions and meditation courses in Chinese and English for the Buddhist community . 
 = = History = = 
 Poh Ern Shih is located on the top of Chwee Chian Hill , off Pasir Panjang Road , on Singapore 's southern coast . Facing the hilltop is Bukit Chandu ( ' Opium Hill ' in Malay ) , where the British East India Company had an opium factory to process raw opium from the Golden Triangle for sale to China and South East Asia in the 19th century . To protect its military facilities in the vicinity , the British colonial government placed heavy artillery guns on Chwee Chian Hill before the onset of the Second World War , in anticipation of seaborne attacks by the Japanese off the coast of Pasir Panjang . 
 During the Battle of Pasir Panjang , Bukit Chandu was the last bastion of the 1st and 2nd Battalion Malay Regiment who , together with the 2nd Loyals Regiment , defended the western and southern parts of Singapore from 8 – 14 February 1942 . Despite running low on ammunition and food , the Malay Regiments put up strong resistance , inflicting a heavy toll on the Japanese invaders . Outnumbered , the defenders were finally overrun and massacred by reinforced Japanese forces . A Malay officer , Second Lieutenant Adnan Bin Saidi , was captured alive and tortured by the Japanese , before being executed . The story of his heroism became well known throughout Singapore . 
 = = = Founder Lee Choon Seng = = = 
 Based on the concept of liberating the spirits of the soldiers and civilians who were sacrificed during the Japanese invasion in World War II , the temple of Poh Ern Shih was constructed on the site of the bloodshed on Chwee Chian Hill . It was established in 1954 as a modest single storey temple by philanthropist Lee Choon Seng ( 1888 — 1966 ) , as one of the few Chinese Mahayana temples in Singapore dedicated to the Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva . 
 Lee was born in Yong Choon county , Fujian province , in China . He joined his father in Negri Sembilan in his youth , before moving to Singapore to set up his own property business . He was very successful , and achieved positions of leadership in the local Chinese community . He was widely known as one of the co @-@ founders of the Oversea @-@ Chinese Banking Corporation ( OCBC ) , and was its acting chairman during the Japanese Occupation . As one of the early Buddhist pioneers , Lee was also involved in the foundation of the Buddhist Publications Circulation Centre in 1933 , and the Singapore Buddhist Lodge ( <unk> ) in 1934 . 
 = = = First Western abbot = = = 
 Venerable Sumangalo ( 1903 — 1963 ) was born as Robert Stuart Clifton in Birmingham , Alabama in the United States in 1903 . After receiving his Doctorate in Literature , he lectured on Buddhism in the United States before moving to Asia to further his study of Buddhism . In 1957 , he joined the Theravada Order in Laos and received the monastic name Sumangalo , meaning " very auspicious " . He then left for Malaya and later visited Singapore on a Dharma tour in late 1959 with another American Buddhist monk , Venerable <unk> . Through his efforts , a number of Youth Circles and Sunday schools were set up locally . 
 In January 1959 he was offered the honorary <unk> of Poh Ern Shih , thus becoming the first Westerner to be the abbot of a Buddhist temple in Singapore . While in Singapore , he assisted Pitt Chin Hui in her translation of the Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva Sutra from Chinese to English . He returned to Malaya and spent his later years at Penang Buddhist Association , where most of his Dharma lectures were held . His lectures were later compiled in English and Chinese and are still freely distributed . Venerable Sumangalo died on 6 February 1963 and was cremated in Penang . 
 = = = Female Buddhist pioneer = = = 
 Pitt Chin Hui ( 1906 — 1981 ) was born to a wealthy family in Guangzhou , China . She was the youngest child of the family , and was taken by her mother to Penang to receive her early education . In 1924 , she sat for the Senior Cambridge Examination , and while waiting for the examination results she became an English teacher at the Fujian Girls ' School . In 1927 , she left for further studies at the Zhongshan University in Guangzhou . However , she terminated her tertiary studies and returned to Penang when her mother became seriously ill . While in Penang , she attended Dharma lectures by Venerable <unk> and his disciple , Venerable <unk> , at the <unk> Lok Si Temple . Pitt subsequently became one of <unk> 's disciples , and studied under him . She was responsible for setting up the Maha Bodhi School in Penang and Singapore ( 1946 ) , to promote Buddhist education to the young . Along with her school duties , Pitt was also an active voluntary worker in the Buddhist community . 
 In December 1959 , Pitt embarked on the task of translating the Ksitigarbha Bodhisattva Sutra from Chinese to English at Poh Ern Shih , so that it would be accessible to the English @-@ educated . Venerable Sumangalo assisted Pitt in her translation tasks , as well as offering suggestions for improving the English version . In 1964 , Pitt was awarded the Public Service Star — BBM ( Bintang Bakti <unk> ) — by <unk> Yusof bin Ishak , the First President of the Republic of Singapore . In 1973 , she was appointed as Justice of the Peace by the Second President Dr. Benjamin Henry <unk> . Pitt Chin Hui was also a Vice @-@ President of the World Fellowship of Buddhists . She died in 1981 while on a trip in India . 
 = = Building design = = 
 To allow for expansion , the old premises were demolished . Reconstruction began in 2003 , and the office wing was completed in April 2007 , in phase 1 of the project . The new six @-@ storey building was designed by Lee Coo , who is also the architect behind the Venerable Hong Choon Memorial Hall of the Kong Meng San <unk> Kark See Temple . Occupying a 46 @,@ 938 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 4 @,@ 360 @.@ 7 m2 ) freehold site , the new Poh Ern Shih is an architectural synthesis of classical features combined with modern eco @-@ friendly technology . 
 = = = Civic consciousness = = = 
 Conscious that a large percentage of its devotees were in their 60s , the Honorary President / Director of Poh Ern Shih , Lee Boon Siong , a retired lawyer , grandson of the temple 's founder , and its chief architect , strove to ensure that the temple was accessible to the elderly and those who use wheelchairs . A gentle driveway stretches from the gates to the upper levels of the temple , and every storey of the building has level flooring . The lavatory cubicles are fitted with easily reached " call @-@ for @-@ help " buttons , and the doors are designed so that they can be unlocked from the outside in the case of emergency . 
 = = = Eco @-@ friendly features = = = 
 The temple takes advantage of Singapore 's abundant sunlight by having three different kinds of solar energy cells on its rooftop . They are the poly @-@ crystalline silicon solar array , mono @-@ crystalline silicon solar array and amorphous silicon solar array . Poh Ern Shih 's water is heated by its solar panels , and its night lighting is powered by electricity converted from solar energy , With its breezy location , wind generators have also been erected to convert wind activity into electricity . 
 The rainwater which falls on Poh Ern Shih is collected from surface run @-@ offs and rain gutters and used to irrigate the temple grounds , as well as to generate electricity used for charging the batteries of in @-@ house motorised wheelchairs . The electricity is produced by water from the highest floor of the temple passing through hydroelectric @-@ generators . A purification system is also being installed , so that the collected rainwater can be filtered and made potable . 
 In line with the aim to make use of renewable resources , the furniture in Poh Ern Shih for its resident monastics is made from bamboo . Bamboo is considered to one of the most ecologically friendly materials for use in home furnishing and flooring , because it can be harvested without felling the entire tree . There is therefore no need for replanting , and the bamboo is allowed to regain its full height again over about five years , ready to be harvested again . 
 The second phase of the temple was completed in late 2008 , featuring a new Main Ksitigarbha Prayer Hall as well as a Guanyin Meditation Hall with lapis lazuli statues and a 7 @-@ storey stupa . 
 = = The temple today = = 
 To reinvigorate itself and attract younger blood , Poh Ern Shih entered into a partnership with the Buddhist Fellowship , a non @-@ sectarian Buddhist organisation known locally for its revolutionary projects and activities intended to ensure that the Dharma is propagated in contemporary language and form . The Fellowship — whose more than 2 @,@ 000 members are mainly English @-@ speaking professionals , mostly under 45 years of age — initially rented space at Eton House in Paya Lebar . Lee Boon Siong contacted the Fellowship 's President , Angie <unk> , a Chinese Singaporean married to an English Catholic , offering use of the temple premises . In early 2007 , Angie took up the offer after the rent for Eton House was raised by 57 per cent — a sum which was difficult for the fellowship to afford . The rent charged by the temple is the same as that which the Fellowship was paying before the increase demanded by its previous landlord . 
 The Fellowship moved into its 4 @,@ 000 square feet ( 370 m2 ) of space in Poh Ern Shih on 29 May 2007 . The event was marked by an opening ceremony attended by <unk> Boon Wan , Minister for Health , and the Fellowship 's two spiritual patrons , <unk> Brahm and Venerable Kwang Sheng , Abbot of Kong Meng San <unk> Kark See Temple . The group conducts programmes such as Dharma talks , Sutta discussions and meditation courses led by visiting Sangha and notable lay Buddhist teachers such as Piya Tan , Dr. Ang Beng Choo and Prof. Tan Hun Tong and many more . The temple is open to the public daily , and admission is free . 
 = Zuo zhuan = 
 The Zuo zhuan ( pronounced [ tsu ̯ <unk> <unk> ̯ <unk> ] ; Chinese : <unk> ; Wade – Giles : Tso chuan ) , generally translated as Zuo Tradition or Commentary of Zuo , is an ancient Chinese narrative history that is traditionally regarded as a commentary on the ancient Chinese chronicle Spring and Autumn Annals ( Chunqiu 春秋 ) . It comprises thirty chapters covering a period from 722 to 468 BC , and focuses mainly on political , diplomatic , and military affairs from that era . The Zuo zhuan is famous for its " relentlessly realistic " style , and recounts many tense and dramatic episodes , such as battles and fights , royal assassinations and murder of concubines , deception and intrigue , excesses , citizens ' oppression and <unk> , and appearances of ghosts and cosmic portents . 
 The Zuo zhuan was , for many centuries , the primary text through which the Chinese gained an understanding of their ancient history . Unlike the other two surviving Annals commentaries — the Gongyang and <unk> commentaries — the Zuo zhuan does not simply explain the wording of the Annals , but greatly expounds upon its historical background , and contains a large number of rich and lively accounts of Spring and Autumn period history and culture . The Zuo zhuan is the source of more Chinese sayings and idioms than any other classical work , and its concise , flowing style came to be held as a paragon of elegant Classical Chinese . Its tendency toward third @-@ person narration and portraying characters through direct speech and action became hallmarks of Chinese narrative in general , and its style was imitated by historians , storytellers , and ancient style prose masters for over 2000 years of subsequent Chinese history . 
 Although the Zuo zhuan has long been regarded as " a masterpiece of grand historical narrative " , its early textual history is largely unknown , and the nature of its original composition and authorship have been widely debated . The " Zuo " of the title was traditionally believed to refer to one " Zuo Qiuming " — an obscure figure of the 5th century BC described as a blind disciple of Confucius — but there is little actual evidence to support this . Modern scholars now generally believe that the Zuo zhuan was originally an independent work composed during the latter half of the 4th century BC that was later rearranged as a commentary to the Annals . 
 = = History = = 
 Tracing the early history of the Zuo zhuan is complicated by the fact that there were originally two versions of it : one , known as the " modern script " ( <unk> <unk> ) version , which circulated during the early Han dynasty ( 206 BC – AD 220 ) ; and another , known as the " ancient script " ( <unk> <unk> ) version , which was discovered in the Han imperial archives by scholar Liu Xin during the reign of Emperor Ai of Han ( r . 7 – 1 BC ) . The earliest known mention of the Zuo zhuan appears in Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian ( Shiji <unk> ) , the first of China 's twenty @-@ four dynastic histories , which was completed about 94 BC . 
 Like the other two surviving commentaries on the Spring and Autumn Annals ( Chunqiu 春秋 ) — the Gongyang and <unk> traditions — the Zuo zhuan originally existed in an independent format , with no direct references to the Annals . In the 3rd century AD , scholar Du Yu intercalated it with the Annals so that each Annals entry was followed by the corresponding narrative from the Zuo zhuan , which became the received format of the Zuo zhuan that exists today . Modern scholars now generally believe that the Zuo zhuan was originally an independent work composed during the latter half of the 4th century BC — though probably incorporating some even older material — that was later rearranged as a commentary to the Annals . 
 = = = Authorship = = = 
 The Records of the Grand Historian refers to the Zuo zhuan as " Master Zuo 's Spring and Autumn Annals " ( Zuoshi Chunqiu <unk> ) and attributes it to a man named " Zuo Qiuming " ( or possibly " <unk> Ming " ) , traditionally assumed to be the Zuo Qiuming who briefly appears in the Analects of Confucius ( <unk> <unk> ) when Confucius praises him for his moral judgment . Other than his brief mention in the Analects , nothing is concretely known of Zuo Qiuming 's life or identity , nor of what connection he might have with the Zuo zhuan . This traditional assumption that the title 's " Master Zuo " refers to the Zuo Qiuming of the Analects is not based on any specific evidence , and was challenged by scholars as early as the 8th century during the Tang dynasty . Even if he is the " Zuo " referenced in the Zuo zhuan 's title , this attribution is questionable because the Zuo zhuan describes events from the late Spring and Autumn period that the Zuo Qiuming of the Analects could not have known . Alternatively , some scholars have suggested that the Zuo zhuan was actually the product of one Wu Qi ( <unk> ; d . 381 or 378 BC ) , a military leader who served in the State of Wei and who , according to the Han Feizi , was from a place called " Zuoshi " . 
 = = = Commentary status = = = 
 In the early 19th century , the Chinese scholar Liu <unk> ( 1776 – 1829 ) initiated a long , drawn @-@ out controversy when he proposed , by emphasizing certain discrepancies between it and the Annals , that the Zuo zhuan was not originally a commentary on the Annals . Liu 's theory was taken much further by the noted scholar and reformer Kang Youwei , who argued that Liu Xin did not really find the " ancient script " version of the Zuo zhuan in the imperial archives , as historical records describe , but actually forged it as a commentary on the Annals . Kang 's theory was that Liu Xin — who with his father Liu Xiang , the imperial librarian , was one of the first to have access to the rare documents in the Han dynasty 's imperial archives — took the Discourses of the States ( Guoyu 國語 ) and forged it into a chronicle @-@ like work to fit the format of the Annals in an attempt to lend credibility to the policies of his master , the usurper Wang Mang . 
 Kang 's theory was supported by several subsequent Chinese scholars in the late 19th century , but was contradicted by a large number of 20th @-@ century studies that examined it from many different perspectives . In the early 1930s , French sinologist Henri Maspero performed a detailed textual study of the issue , concluding the Han dynasty forgery theory to be untenable . The Swedish sinologist Bernhard <unk> , based on a series of linguistic and philological analyses he carried out in the 1920s , concluded that the Zuo zhuan is a genuine ancient text " probably to be dated between 468 and 300 BC . " While Liu 's hypothesis that the Zuo zhuan was not originally an Annals commentary has been generally accepted , Kang 's theory of Liu Xin forging the Zuo zhuan is now considered discredited . 
 = = = Manuscripts = = = 
 The oldest surviving Zuo zhuan manuscripts are six fragments that were discovered among the Dunhuang manuscripts in the early 20th century by the French sinologist Paul Pelliot and are now held at the Bibliothèque Nationale de France . Four of the fragments date to the Six Dynasties period ( 3rd to 6th centuries ) , while the other two date to the early Tang dynasty ( 7th century ) . The oldest known complete Zuo zhuan manuscript is the " ancient manuscript scroll " preserved at the Kanazawa Bunko Museum in Yokohama , Japan . 
 = = Content = = 
 The Zuo zhuan recounts the major political , military , and social events of the Spring and Autumn period , and is famous " for its dramatic power and realistic details " . It contains a variety of tense and dramatic episodes : battles and fights , royal assassinations and murder of concubines , deception and intrigue , excesses , citizens ' oppression and <unk> , and appearances of ghosts and cosmic portents . 
 Each Zuo zhuan chapter begins with the Spring and Autumn Annals ( Chunqiu ) entry for the year , which is usually terse and brief , followed by the Zuo zhuan content for that year , which often contains long and detailed narratives . The Zuo zhuan originally contained only its core content , without any content from or references to the Spring and Autumn Annals . In the 3rd century AD , the Chinese scholar Du Yu intercalated the Annals into the Zuo zhuan , producing the received format that exists today . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Though the Zuo zhuan was probably not originally a commentary on the Spring and Autumn Annals ( Chunqiu 春秋 ) — a work which was traditionally viewed as a direct creation of Confucius — its basic philosophical outlook is also strongly Confucian in nature . Its overarching theme is that haughty , evil , and stupid individuals generally bring disaster upon themselves , while those who are good , wise , and humble are usually justly rewarded . The Confucian principle of " ritual propriety " or " ceremony " ( <unk> <unk> ) is seen as governing all actions , including war , and to bring bad consequences if transgressed . However , the observance of li is never shown as guaranteeing victory , and the Zuo zhuan includes many examples of the good and innocent suffering senseless violence . Much of the Zuo zhuan 's status as a literary masterpiece stems from its " relentlessly realistic portrayal of a turbulent era marked by violence , political strife , intrigues , and moral laxity " . 
 The narratives of the Zuo zhuan are highly didactic in nature , and are presented in such a way that they teach and illustrate moral principles . The German Sinologist Martin Kern has stated : " Instead of offering authorial judgments or <unk> hermeneutics , the Zuo zhuan lets its moral lessons unfold within the narrative itself , teaching at once history and historical judgment . " Unlike the Histories of Herodotus or the History of the Peloponnesian War of Thucydides — with which it is roughly contemporary — the Zuo zhuan 's narration always remains in the third person perspective , and presents as a dispassionate recorder of facts . 
 = = = Battles = = = 
 Several of the Zuo zhuan 's most famous sections are those dealing with critical historical battles , such as the Battle of Chengpu and the Battle of Bi . 
 The Battle of Chengpu , the first of the Zuo zhuan 's great battles , took place in the summer of 632 BC at Chengpu ( modern <unk> County , Shandong Province ) in the State of Wey . On one side were the troops of the powerful State of Chu , from what was then far southern China , led by the Chu prime minister Cheng Dechen . They were opposed by the armies of the State of Jin , led by Chong 'er , Duke of Jin , one of the most prominent and well known figures in the Zuo zhuan . Chu suffered a disastrous defeat in the battle itself , and it resulted in Chong 'er being named Hegemon ( <unk> <unk> ) of the various states . 
 The narrative of the Battle of Chengpu is typical of Zuo zhuan battle narratives in that the description of the battle itself is relatively brief , with most of the narrative being focused on battle preparations , omens and prognostications regarding its outcome , the division of the spoils , and the shifts and defections of the various allied states involved in the conflict . This " official [ and ] restrained " style , which became typical of Chinese historical writing , is largely due to the ancient Chinese belief that ritual propriety and strategic preparation were more important than individual valor or bravery in determining the outcome of battles . 
 = = = Succession crises = = = 
 Several of the most notable passages in the Zuo zhuan describe succession crises , which seem to have been fairly common in China during the Spring and Autumn period . These crises often involved the " tangled affections " of the various rulers , and are described in a dramatic and vivid manner that gives insight into the life of the aristocratic elite in the China of the mid @-@ 1st millennium BC . The best known of these stories is that of Duke Zhuang of Zheng , who ruled the State of Zheng from 743 to 701 BC . Duke Zhuang was born " in a manner that startled " his mother ( probably breech birth ) , which caused her to later seek to persuade her husband to name Duke Zhuang 's younger brother as the heir apparent instead of him . The story ends with eventual reconciliation between mother and son — exemplifying the traditional Chinese virtues of both " ritual propriety " ( <unk> ) and " filial piety " ( <unk> <unk> ) — which has made it consistently popular with readers over the centuries . 
 = = = Moral verdicts = = = 
 A number of Zuo zhuan anecdotes end with brief moral comments or verdicts that are attributed to either Confucius or an unnamed <unk> ( <unk> ; " gentleman " , " <unk> " , or " superior man " ) . 
 These " moral of the story " <unk> , which were added later by Confucian scholars , are directed toward those currently in power , reminding them of " the historical precedents and inevitable consequences of their own actions . " They speak with the voices of previous ministers , advisers , " old men " , and other anonymous figures to remind rulers of historical and moral lessons , and suggest that ruler who heed their advice will succeed , while those who do not will fail . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Several sections of the Zuo zhuan demonstrate the traditional Chinese concept of " fate " or " destiny " ( <unk> <unk> ) , referring either to an individual 's mission in life or their allotted life span , and illustrates how benevolent rulers ought to accept " fate " selflessly , as in the story of Duke Wen moving the capital of the state of Zhu in 614 BC . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The Zuo zhuan has been recognized as a masterpiece of early Chinese prose and " grand historical narrative " for many centuries , and has had an " immense influence " on Chinese literature and historiography for nearly 2000 years . It was the primary text by which historical Chinese readers gained an understanding of China 's ancient history . It enjoyed high status and esteem throughout the centuries of Chinese history because of its great literary quality , and was often read and memorized because of its role as the preeminent expansion and commentary on the Annals ( Chunqiu ) , which almost all educated Chinese readers traditionally ascribed to Confucius . The Zuo zhuan 's influence on the Chinese language , particularly on Classical Chinese , can be judged from the fact that the Zuo zhuan is the source of more Chinese literary idioms ( <unk> <unk> ) than any other work , including the Analects of Confucius . 
 The 400 @-@ year period the Zuo zhuan covers is now known as the Spring and Autumn period , after the Spring and Autumn Annals , but the Zuo zhuan is the most important source for the period . This period was a highly significant period in Chinese history , and saw a number of developments in governmental complexity and specialization that preceded China 's imperial unification in 221 BC by the First Emperor of Qin . The latter years of this period also saw the appearance of Confucius , who later became the preeminent figure in Chinese cultural history . The Zuo zhuan is one of the only surviving written sources for the history of the Spring and Autumn period , and is extremely valuable as a rich source of information on the society that Confucius and his disciples lived in and from which the Confucian school of thought developed . It was canonized as one of the Chinese classics in the 1st century AD , and until modern times was one of the cornerstones of traditional education for men in China and the other lands of the Sinosphere such as Japan and Korea . 
 = = Translations = = 
 Legge , James ( 1872 ) . The Ch 'un Ts <unk> , with the Tso <unk> . The Chinese Classics V. London : Trübner . Part 1 ( books 1 – 8 ) , Part 2 ( books 9 – 12 ) . Revised edition ( 1893 ) , London : Oxford University Press . 
 ( French ) <unk> , <unk> ( 1914 ) , <unk> <unk> Ts <unk> et Tso <unk> , La Chronique de la <unk> de Lou [ Chunqiu and Zuo zhuan , Chronicle of the State of Lu ] , Ho Kien Fou : Mission Catholique . 
 ( Japanese ) Takeuchi , Teruo <unk> ( 1974 – 75 ) . <unk> <unk> <unk> [ Chunqiu Zuoshi zhuan ] . <unk> <unk> taikei <unk> [ Fully Interpreted Chinese Literature Series ] 4 – 6 . Tokyo : Shūeisha . 
 Watson , Burton ( 1989 ) . The Tso chuan : Selections from China 's Oldest Narrative History . New York : Columbia University Press . Reprinted ( 1992 ) . 
 Hu , <unk> <unk> ; Chen , <unk> <unk> ( 1996 ) . Zuo zhuan <unk> . Changsha : Hunan <unk> <unk> . ( Contains both English and Mandarin translations ) 
 Durrant , Stephen ; Li , Wai @-@ <unk> ; Schaberg , David , trans . ( 2016 ) , Zuo Tradition ( <unk> ) , Seattle : University of Washington Press . 
 = Sacred Cod = 
 The Sacred Cod is a four @-@ foot , eleven @-@ inch carved @-@ wood effigy of an Atlantic codfish , " painted to the life " , hanging in the House of Represen ­ ta ­ tives chamber of Boston 's Massachu ­ setts State House — ​ ​ " a memorial of the importance of the Cod @-@ Fishery to the welfare of this Commonwealth " ( i.e. Massachu ­ setts , of which cod is officially the " historic and <unk> ­ u ­ ing symbol " ) . The Sacred Cod has gone through as many as three incarnations over three centuries : the first ( if it really existed — ​ ​ the authoritative source calling it a " prehistoric creature of tradition " ) was lost in a 1747 fire , the second disappeared during the American Revolution , and the third is the one seen in the House today . 
 Sacred Cod is not a formal name but a nickname which appeared in 1895 , soon after the carving was termed " the sacred emblem " by a House committee appointed " to investigate the significance of the emblem [ which ] has kept its place under all administrations , and has looked upon outgoing and incoming legislative assemblies , for more than one hundred years . " Soon sacred cod was being used in reference to actual codfish as well , in recognition of the creature 's role in building Massachu ­ setts ' prosperity and influence since early colonial times . 
 In 1933 the Sacred Cod was briefly " Cod @-@ napped " by editors of the Harvard Lampoon , prompting police to drag the Charles River and search an airplane landing in New Jersey . In 1968 it was taken briefly again , this time by students at the University of Massachu ­ setts Boston . 
 A fish figure is displayed in the State House Senate chamber as well — ​ ​ a brass casting ( sometimes called the Holy Mackerel ) above its central chandelier . 
 = = Significance = = 
 <unk> was the first industry practiced by Europeans in Massachu ­ setts , and it is said that the colony 's first export was a cargo of fish . : 23 Thus the codfish has been an important New England symbol for centuries , its image appearing on many early coins , stamps , corporate and government seals , and insignia such as the early crest of the Salem Gazette . In 1743 a prominent Salem businessman built a mansion in which " the end of every stair in his spacious hall [ displayed ] a carved and gilded codfish . " ‍ : 34 @-@ 36 
 In the late 1920s an " amusing " ‍ codfish emblem appeared briefly , " totem @-@ like " , on Massachu ­ setts license plates . 
 = = History = = 
 What is now called the Sacred Cod has hung for three centuries — ​ ​ though with inter ­ <unk> ­ ions , and in at least two ( and possibly three ) successive incarnations — ​ ​ in the chamber of the Massachu ­ setts House of Represen ­ ta ­ tives ( or its <unk> ­ ces ­ <unk> , the House of Assembly of the Province of Massachu ­ setts Bay ) . 
 = = = First Cod = = = 
 Of the Cod 's first incarnation , the Committee on History of the Emblem of the Codfish ( appointed by the House in 1895 ) wrote : 
 There is a dim tradition that in the primitive House of Assembly of the Province there hung a codfish which was the gift of Judge Samuel Sewall [ a judge at the Salem witch trials who ] died in 1729 . [ But his ] published remains make no mention of this tradi ­ <unk> fish , and it is difficult to imagine that a man of his loquacious verbosity would have omitted to chronicle his munificence . : 17 
 Assuming it existed and whatever its origin , when the State House burned in 1747 " this <unk> ­ <unk> creature of tradi ­ tion ... doubtless went up in a whirl of smoke which still clouds its history to the peering vision of the antiquarian . " ‍ : 17 
 = = = Second Cod = = = 
 A second Cod appeared sometime between 1748 ( when the State House was rebuilt ) and 1773 ( when Thomas Crafts , Jr. billed the Province of Massachu ­ setts Bay , " To painting Codfish , 15 shillings " ) . But within a few years , the Committee wrote , the second Cod 
 <unk> ­ <unk> from the State House and was doubtless destroyed , for the closest <unk> ­ i ­ cal research fails to shed any light upon the time , manner or cause of its <unk> ­ pear ­ ance , or to disclose any refer ­ ence to it whatever . <unk> some burly British trooper , quart ­ <unk> in the improvised barracks of the old State House [ during the Siege of Boston ] , took umbrage at the <unk> and span elegance of the newly painted emblem of colonial <unk> ­ <unk> ­ ence and thrift . Such a one may have torn down the cherished symbol from the wall whence it had offered aid and comfort to the rebel patriots , with its <unk> ­ ance of the material wealth accessible to the <unk> ­ <unk> State , and , in spirit of vandalism so <unk> ­ lent at that age , used it to replenish his evening camp fire . : 17 @-@ 18 
 The Committee found " good reason to believe that this missing fish ... was carved by one John Welch , a Boston patriot " . 
 = = = Third Cod = = = 
 The third Cod was installed in 1784 , after Represen ­ ta ­ <unk> John Rowe — ​ ​ namesake of Rowes Wharf , and " a leading spirit in the stirring scenes that led up to the famous ' Boston Tea Party ' " ‍ : 16 — ​ ​ asked leave " to hang up the represen ­ ta ­ tion of a Cod Fish in the room where the House sit , as a memorial of the import ­ ance of the Cod @-@ Fishery to the welfare of this Common ­ wealth , as had been usual form ­ <unk> ... And so the emblem was suspended " in the old State House once again , and this Cod ( which Rowe may have under ­ writ ­ ten person ­ ally ) is the one extant today . : 20 
 In 1798 it was moved to the Representatives chamber in the new State House , : 12 @-@ 13 where it originally hung over the Speaker 's desk . In the 1850s it was moved to the rear of the chamber . 
 = = = Committee on History of the Emblem of the Codfish = = = 
 On January 2 , 1895 — ​ ​ the House 's last day of business before relocating to a new chamber in the same building — 
 [ t ] he question of taking with it the " represen ­ ta ­ tion of a codfish , " which for more than a hundred years had never missed a " roll call , " was brought up for consideration . It was , however , deemed wise to investigate the significance of the emblem before its removal ... 
 Accordingly , after " nearly two months of painstaking research and investigation " the three @-@ member Committee on History of the Emblem of the Codfish submitted its report , and after debating " at length " the House ordered " immediate removal of the ancient ' represen ­ ta ­ tion of a codfish ' from its present position in the chamber recently vacated by the House , and to cause it to be sus ­ <unk> ... in this <unk> ­ <unk> ... " ‍ : 4 
 The Sacred Cod was wrapped in an American flag , placed on a bier , and — ​ ​ escorted by the Sergeant @-@ at @-@ Arms — ​ ​ borne by House <unk> ­ <unk> to the new House chamber , where the assembled Represen ­ ta ­ tives rose in applause . : 7 After repainting by Walter M. Brackett , it was hung where it remains today : " between the two sets of central columns , and under the names ' Motley , ' and ' Parkman ' , " ‍ : 20 facing left as viewed from the floor of the chamber . ( It is some ­ times said that the Cod is turned to face the political party currently in power , but no such tradi ­ tion was mentioned by the Committee . ) ‍ 
 = = " Sacred Cod " nickname = = 
 The Committee 's report refers at one point to " the sacred emblem " , and while it was working an item appeared in the Boston Globe referring to the carving as " the Sacred Cod " . Within a few years authors , journalists , and advertisers — ​ ​ even those far from New England — ​ ​ were using the term routinely . The phrase quickly came to refer not only to the wooden Cod in the State House but to flesh @-@ and @-@ blood cod from the sea as well , especially as an item of commerce . At the 1908 convention of the Retail <unk> of the United States , held in Boston , one delegate recalled 
 the first organized effort ... for the bettering of conditions in the grocery business . I refer to the Boston tea party . How could we get along without the Boston baked beans or the almost sacred cod ? 
 Two years later the New Hampshire Board of Agriculture , bemoaning the counterfeiting of foodstuffs " famous for their distinctive properties or superior quality " , warned that " haddock , hake , pollock , cusk , etc . , are substituted <unk> in place of the sacred cod . " ‍ In 1912 President William Howard Taft , in Boston , addressed a journalists ' banquet in New York City " by long distance tele ­ phone from the home of the sacred cod " . And in 1922 historian Samuel Eliot Morison , emphasizing fishing 's vital role in the colonial economy , wrote that " Puritan Massachu ­ setts derived her ideals from a sacred book ; her wealth and power from the sacred cod . " ‍ 
 The famous doggerel poking fun at Boston 's Brahmins — 
 — paraphrases an earlier poem now little remembered : 
 = = " Cod @-@ napping " and other incidents = = 
 = = = Harvard Lampoon = = = 
 In an incident now referred to as " The Cod @-@ napping " by State House officials , on April 26 , 1933 members of the Harvard Lampoon ( the Harvard College humor magazine ) entered the House of Represen ­ ta ­ tives gallery , cut down the Cod , and carried it away in an unusually large florist 's box equipped with protruding decoy lilies . 
 According to The New York Times — ​ ​ which reckoned the Cod 's value to be " something less than nothing . As an object of art it is worthless " — ​ ​ Massachu ­ setts officials were " shocked into a condition bordering on speech ­ less ­ ness " by the theft , " some <unk> ­ <unk> holding that it would be sacrilege to transact business without the emblem of the Commonwealth looking down upon them . " ( Nonetheless , at the appointed time " [ House ] Speaker Saltonstall looked mournfully at the vacant place and then banged the gavel . The first act of the House fitted the occasion . It passed to be engrossed a bill allowing the cold storage of swordfish . " ) ‍ 
 Meanwhile , Boston mayor James Michael Curley received a tele ­ phone message : " Tell the Mayor that when the Sacred Cod is returned it will be wrapped in the municipal flag , now flying in front of City Hall . Try and catch us when we cop the flag . Lafayette Mulligan , we are here . " ‍ " Indignant " police went so far as to drag the Charles River and , learning that a Lampoon editor had flown to New Jersey , had the plane searched on landing . 
 Eventually a mysterious telephone call sent Harvard official Charles R. Apted to West Roxbury where two men , with collars up and <unk> down , emerged from a car to hand over the Cod ( not wrapped in any flag ) before speeding away . In the early hours of April 29 , after repairs to three damaged fins , the Sacred Cod was re @-@ hung in the House chamber , " six inches [ 15 cm ] higher [ than ] the reach of any <unk> ­ <unk> . A stepladder will be needed to remove it in the future . " ‍ 
 = = = University of Massachusetts = = = 
 Using a stepladder , on November 14 , 1968 students at the new Boston campus of the University of Massachu ­ setts took the Sacred Cod in protest of perceived legislative indifference to their school . ( " Sacred Cod gone from House perch " , the Boston Globe reported . ) ‍ It was found days later in a little @-@ used State House hallway . 
 = = = Greyhound replacement proposal = = = 
 In 1937 Representative John B. <unk> offered a facetious proposal " that the sacred cod be immediately removed [ from the House chamber ] , and a greyhound substituted in its place , as the 1937 Legislature has shown itself to be completely under the power of the dog track operators . " ‍ Apted ( whom the Boston Globe called " the superintendent of caretakers at Harvard and Harvard Cop No. 1 " ) wrote to <unk> : " As one who is , and was , very much interested in preserving [ the Cod 's ] dignity , and furthermore having held it in my arms ... I most respectfully ask a favor , that is : If the greyhound be substituted , that I be presented with the cod in order that it may be preserved for the future of young Americans . " ‍ 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 After the House of Representatives ' move to its new chamber in 1895 the Massachu ­ setts Senate , which took over the old House chamber , incorporated a fish figure ( often dubbed the Holy Mackerel ) ‍ into the chandelier there , as a reminder of the Sacred Cod the Representatives had taken with them . When officials of the World War II aluminum @-@ for @-@ defense drive — ​ ​ misinformed that the Sacred Cod was aluminum — ​ ​ asked that it be donated to the war effort , House Speaker Christian Herter explained that the Cod had been created decades before aluminum 's discovery , and suggested that the Holy Mackerel be considered for sacrifice instead . 
 = Legal history of cannabis in the United States = 
 The legal history of cannabis in the United States relates to the regulation of cannabis ( legal term marijuana ) use for medical , recreational or industrial purposes in the United States . Increased restrictions and labeling of cannabis as a poison began in many states from 1906 onward , and outright prohibitions began in the 1920s . By the mid @-@ 1930s marijuana was regulated as a drug in every state , including 35 states that adopted the Uniform State Narcotic Drug Act . The first national regulation was the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 . 
 Multiple efforts to reschedule cannabis under the Act have failed , and the United States Supreme Court has ruled in United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers ' Cooperative and Gonzales v. Raich that the federal government has a right to regulate and criminalize cannabis , even for medical purposes . 
 = = Early history ( pre @-@ 1850s ) = = 
 The <unk> Company , by decree of King James I in 1619 , ordered every colonist to grow 100 plants specifically for export for fiber . Thus , England 's only colony in America began to grow hemp in order to meet this obligation and , soon , to serve a growing demand in other colonies . George Washington grew hemp at Mount Vernon as one of his three primary crops . The use of hemp for rope and fabric was ubiquitous throughout the 18th and 19th centuries in the United States . Medicinal preparations of cannabis became available in American pharmacies in the 1850s following an introduction to its use in Western medicine by William O 'Shaughnessy a decade earlier in 1839 . 
 Around the same time , efforts to regulate the sale of pharmaceuticals began , and laws were introduced on a state @-@ to @-@ state basis that created penalties for mislabeling drugs , adulterating them with undisclosed narcotics , and improper sale of those considered " poisons " . Poison laws generally either required labels on the packaging indicating the harmful effects of the drugs or prohibited sale outside of licensed pharmacies and without a doctor 's prescription . Those that required labeling often required the word " poison " if the drug was not issued by a pharmacy . Other regulations were prohibitions on the sale to minors , as well as restrictions on refills . Some pharmaceutical laws specifically enumerated the drugs that came under the effect of the regulations , while others didn 't — leaving the matter to medical experts . Those that did generally included references to cannabis , either under the category of " cannabis and its preparations " or " hemp and its preparations . " 
 A 1905 Bulletin from the US Department of Agriculture lists twenty @-@ nine states with laws mentioning cannabis . Eight are listed with " sale of poisons " laws that specifically mention cannabis : North Carolina , Ohio , Wisconsin , Louisiana , Vermont , Maine , Montana , and the District of Columbia . Among those that required a prescription for sale were Wisconsin and Louisiana . Several " sale of poison " laws did not specify restricted drugs , including in Indiana , Rhode Island , Hawaii , Nebraska , Kentucky , Mississippi , and New York . Many states did not consider cannabis a " poison " but required it be labeled . 
 In New York , the original law did enumerate cannabis , and was passed in 1860 following a string of suicides allegedly involving the substances later categorized as poisons . The first draft of the bill ' An act to regulate the sale of poisons ' prohibited the sale of cannabis — as with the other substances — without the written order of a physician . The final bill as passed allowed the sale without a prescription so long as the purpose to which it was issued and name and address of the buyer was recorded , and in addition , all packaging of such substances — whether sold with a prescription or not — had to have the label " poison " on them in uppercase red letters . In 1862 , the section which enumerated the substances was repealed with an amendatory act , though cannabis was still required to be labeled . 
 In some states where poison laws excluded cannabis , there were nonetheless attempts to include it . A bill introduced in 1880 in the California state legislature was titled ' An act to regulate the sale of opium and other narcotic poisons ' and would have prohibited anyone to keep , sell , furnish , or give away any " preparations or mixtures made or prepared from opium , hemp , or other narcotic drugs " without a doctor 's prescription at a licensed store . That bill was withdrawn in favor of one specifically aimed at opium , though further bills including hemp @-@ based drugs were introduced in 1885 and in 1889 . 
 = = = Background to later restrictions = = = 
 As early as 1853 , recreational cannabis was listed as a " fashionable narcotic " . By the 1880s , oriental @-@ style hashish parlors were flourishing alongside opium dens , to the point that one could be found in every major city on the east coast . It was estimated there were around 500 such establishments in New York City alone . An article in Harper ’ s Magazine ( 1883 ) , attributed to Harry Hubbell Kane , describes a hashish @-@ house in New York frequented by a large clientele , including males and females of " the better classes , " and further talks about parlors in Boston , Philadelphia and Chicago . Hemp cigarettes were reported to be used by Mexican soldiers early as 1874 . 
 = = <unk> ( 1900s ) = = 
 = = = Strengthening of poison laws ( 1906 – 1938 ) = = = 
 The Pure Food and Drug Act was then passed by the United States Congress in 1906 and required that certain special drugs , including cannabis , be accurately labeled with contents . Previously , many drugs had been sold as patent medicines with secret ingredients or misleading labels . Even after the passage of regulations , there continued to be criticisms about the availability of narcotics and around 1910 there was a wave of legislation aimed to strengthen requirements for their sale and remove what were commonly referred to as " loopholes " in poison laws . The new revisions aimed to restrict all narcotics , including cannabis , as poisons , limit their sale to pharmacies , and require doctor 's prescriptions . The first instance was in the District of Columbia in 1906 , under ' An act to regulate the practice of pharmacy and the sale of poisons in the District of Columbia , and for other purposes ' . This act was updated in 1938 to the Federal Pure Food , Drug , and Cosmetics Act of 1938 which remains in effect even today , creating a legal paradox for federal sentencing . Under this act , the framework for prescription and non @-@ prescription drugs and foods are set , along with standards as well as the enforcing agency , the FDA . " Goods found in violation of the law were subject to seizure and destruction at the expense of the manufacturer . That , combined with a legal requirement that all convictions be published ( Notices of Judgment ) , proved to be important tools in the enforcement of the statute and had a deterrent effect upon would @-@ be violators . " Marijuana remains under this law defined as a " dangerous drug " . 
 Further regulation of cannabis followed in Massachusetts ( 1911 ) , New York ( 1914 ) , and Maine ( 1914 ) . In New York , reform legislation began under the Towns @-@ Boylan Act , which targeted all " habit @-@ forming drugs " , restricted their sale , prohibited refills in order to prevent habituation , prohibited sale to people with a habit , and prohibited doctors who were themselves habituated from selling them . Shortly after , several amendments were passed by the New York Board of Health , including adding cannabis to the list of habit @-@ forming drugs . 
 A New York Times article noted on the cannabis amendment : 
 The inclusion of Cannabis indica among the drugs to be sold only on prescription is common sense . Devotees of hashish are now hardly numerous here enough to count , but they are likely to increase as other narcotics become harder to obtain . 
 In the West , the first state to include cannabis as a poison was California . The Poison Act was passed in 1907 and amended in 1909 and 1911 , and in 1913 an amendatory act ( Stats . 1913 , Ch . 342 , p . 697 ) was made to make possession of " extracts , tinctures , or other narcotic preparations of hemp , or loco @-@ weed , their preparations and compounds " a misdemeanor . There 's no evidence that the law was ever used or intended to restrict pharmaceutical cannabis ; instead it was a legislative mistake , and in 1915 another revision placed cannabis under the same restriction as other poisons . 
 Other states followed with marijuana laws including : Wyoming ( 1915 ) ; Texas ( 1919 ) ; Iowa ( 1923 ) ; Nevada ( 1923 ) ; Oregon ( 1923 ) ; Washington ( 1923 ) ; Arkansas ( 1923 ) ; Nebraska ( 1927 ) ; Louisiana ( 1927 ) ; and Colorado ( 1929 ) . 
 One source of tensions in the western and southwestern states was the influx of Mexicans to the US following the 1910 Mexican Revolution . Many Mexicans also smoked marijuana to relax after working in the fields . It was also seen as a cheaper alternative to alcohol , due to Prohibition ( which went into effect nationally in 1920 ) . Later in the 1920s , negative tensions grew between the small farms and the large farms that used cheaper Mexican labor . Shortly afterwards , the Great Depression came which increased tensions as jobs and resources became more scarce . Because of that , the passage of the initial laws is often described as a product of racism , yet use of hashish by near eastern immigrants were also cited , as well as the misuse of pharmaceutical hemp , and the laws conformed with other legislation that was being passed around the country . Mexico itself had passed prohibition in 1925 , following the International Opium Convention ( see below ) . 
 = = = International Opium Convention ( 1925 ) = = = 
 In 1925 the United States supported regulation of Indian hemp , also known as hashish , in the International Opium Convention . The convention banned exportation of " Indian hemp " , and the preparations derived therefrom , to countries that had prohibited its use and required importing countries to issue certificates approving the importation and stating that the shipment was required " exclusively for medical or scientific purposes " . The convention did not ban trade in fibers and other similar products from European hemp , and traditionally grown in the United States , According to the 1912 edition of a Swedish encyclopedia the European hemp grown for its fibers lacks the THC content that characterizes Indian hemp . 
 = = = Uniform State Narcotic Act ( 1925 – 1932 ) = = = 
 The Uniform State Narcotic Act , first tentative draft in 1925 and fifth final version in 1932 , was a result of work by the National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws . It was argued that the traffic in narcotic drugs should have the same safeguards and the same regulation in all of the states . The committee took into consideration the fact that the federal government had already passed The Harrison Act in 1914 and The Federal Import and Export Act in 1922 . Many people assumed that the Harrison Act was all that was necessary . The Harrison Act , however , was a revenue @-@ producing act and , while it provided penalties for violation , it did not give the states themselves authority to exercise police power in regard to seizure of drugs used in illicit trade , or in regard to punishment of those responsible . The act was recommended to the states for that purpose . As a result of the Uniform State Narcotic Act , the Federal Bureau of Narcotics encouraged state governments to adopt the act . By the middle of the 1930s all member states had some regulation of cannabis . 
 = = = Federal Bureau of Narcotics ( 1930 ) = = = 
 The use of cannabis and other drugs came under increasing scrutiny after the formation of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics ( FBN ) in 1930 , headed by Harry J. Anslinger as part of the government 's broader push to outlaw all recreational drugs . 
 " When the present administration took office ten countries had ratified the Geneva Narcotic Limitation Convention . The United States was one of these ten .... It was my privilege , as President , to proclaim , on that day , that this treaty had become effective throughout the jurisdiction of the United States .... On Jan. 1 , 1933 , only nine nations had registered their ratification of the limitation treaty . On Jan. 1 , 1935 , only nine States had adopted the uniform State statute . As 1933 witnessed ratification of the treaty by thirty @-@ one additional nations , so may 1935 witness the adoption of the uniform drug act by at least thirty @-@ one more states , thereby placing interstate accord abreast of international accord , to the honor of the legislative bodies of our States and for the promotion of the welfare of our people and the peoples of other lands . " 
 Anslinger claimed cannabis caused people to commit violent crimes and act irrationally and overly sexual . The FBN produced propaganda films promoting Anslinger 's views and Anslinger often commented to the press regarding his views on marijuana . 
 = = = The 1936 Geneva Trafficking Conventions = = = 
 In 1936 the Convention for the Suppression of the Illicit Traffic in Dangerous Drugs ( 1936 Trafficking Convention ) was concluded in Geneva . The US , led by Anslinger , had attempted to include the criminalization of all activities in the treaty – cultivation , production , manufacture and distribution – related to the use of opium , coca ( and its derivatives ) and cannabis for non @-@ medical and non @-@ scientific purposes . Many countries opposed this and the focus remained on illicit trafficking . Article 2 of the Convention called upon signatory countries to use their national criminal law systems to " severely " punish , " particularly by imprisonment or other penalties of deprivation of liberty " acts directly related to drug trafficking . The US refused to sign the final version because it considered the convention too weak , especially in relation to extradition , extraterritoriality and the confiscation of trafficking profits . 
 = = = Marihuana Tax Act ( 1937 ) = = = 
 The American Medical Association ( AMA ) opposed the act because the tax was imposed on physicians prescribing cannabis , retail pharmacists selling cannabis , and medical cannabis cultivation and manufacturing ; instead of enacting the Marihuana Tax Act the AMA proposed cannabis be added to the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act . This approach was unappealing to some legislators who feared that adding a new substance to the Harrison Act would subject that act to new legal scrutiny . Since the federal government had no authority under the 10th Amendment to regulate medicines , that power being reserved by individual states in 1937 , a tax was the only viable way to legislate marijuana . 
 After the Philippines fell to Japanese forces in 1942 , the Department of Agriculture and the U.S. Army urged farmers to grow hemp fiber and tax stamps for cultivation were issued to farmers . Without any change in the Marihuana Tax Act , over 400 @,@ 000 acres of hemp were cultivated between 1942 and 1945 . The last commercial hemp fields were planted in Wisconsin in 1957 . New York Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia , who was a strong opponent of the 1937 Marihuana Tax Act , started the LaGuardia Commission that in 1944 contradicted the earlier reports of addiction , madness , and overt sexuality . 
 The decision of the United States Congress to pass the Marihuana Tax Act of 1937 was based on poorly attended hearings and reports based on questionable studies . In 1936 the Federal Bureau of Narcotics ( FBN ) noticed an increase of reports of people smoking marijuana , which further increased in 1937 . The Bureau drafted a legislative plan for Congress seeking a new law , and the head of the FBN , Harry J. Anslinger , ran a campaign against marijuana . Newspaper mogul William Randolph Hearst 's empire of newspapers used the " yellow journalism " pioneered by Hearst to demonize the cannabis plant and spread a public perception that there were connections between cannabis and violent crime . Several scholars argue that the goal was to destroy the hemp industry , largely as an effort of Hearst , Andrew Mellon and the Du Pont family . They argue that with the invention of the <unk> hemp became a very cheap substitute for the wood pulp that was used in the newspaper industry . However , Hearst newspapers owed large debts to Canadian suppliers of paper , who used wood as raw material . If an alternative raw material for paper had emerged , it would have lowered the price of the paper needed to print Hearst 's many newspapers — a positive thing for Hearst . 
 Mellon was Secretary of the Treasury , as well as the wealthiest man in America , and had invested heavily in nylon , DuPont 's new synthetic fiber . He considered nylon 's success to depend on it replacing the traditional resource , hemp . 
 The company DuPont and many industrial historians dispute a link between nylon and hemp . They argue that the reason for developing nylon was to produce a fiber that could compete with silk and rayon in , for example , thin stockings for women . Silk was much more expensive than hemp and imported largely from Japan . There was more money in a substitute for silk . DuPont focused early on thin stockings for women . As a commercial product , nylon was a revolution in textiles . Strong , water @-@ resistant , it was possible to make very thin fibers from cheap raw materials . The first sales in 1938 in New York of nylon stockings created a line with 4000 middle class women . For years to come , nylon demand was greater than DuPont could produce . And the DuPont Group was very big ; it could move on if nylon had not become a success . 
 In 1916 United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) chief scientists Jason L. Merrill and Lyster H. Dewey created a paper , USDA Bulletin No. 404 " Hemp <unk> as Paper @-@ Making Material " , in which they stated that paper from the woody inner portion of the hemp stem broken into pieces , so called hemp <unk> , was " favorable in comparison with those used with pulp wood " . Merrill and Dewey 's findings were not repeated in a later book by Dewey and have not been confirmed by paper production experts . The consistency of long fibers is too low in hemp <unk> for commercial papermaking . Numerous machines had been devised for breaking and <unk> hemp fibers , but none had been found to be fully satisfactory in actual commercial work To produce fiber from hemp was a labor @-@ intensive process if you include harvest , transport and processing . Technological developments decreased the labor but not sufficient to eliminate this disadvantage . 
 There was also a misconception about the intoxicating effects of hemp because it has the same active substance , THC , which is in all cannabis strains . Hemp normally has a minimal amount of THC when compared to recreational cannabis strains but , in the 1930s , THC was not yet fully identified . The methods FBN used for predicting the psychoactive effect of different samples of cannabis and hemp therefore gave confusing results . 
 = = = Mandatory sentencing ( 1952 , 1956 ) = = = 
 Mandatory sentencing and increased punishment were enacted when the United States Congress passed the Boggs Act of 1952 and the Narcotics Control Act of 1956 . The acts made a first @-@ time cannabis possession offense a minimum of two to ten years with a fine up to $ 20 @,@ 000 ; however in 1970 the United States Congress repealed mandatory penalties for cannabis offenses . 
 = = = The Controlled Substances Act ( 1970 ) = = = 
 In its 1969 Leary v. United States decision the Supreme Court held the Marijuana Tax Act to be unconstitutional , since it violated the Fifth Amendment privilege against self @-@ incrimination . In response , Congress passed the Controlled Substances Act as Title II of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 , which repealed the Marijuana Tax Act . 
 = = = Reorganization ( 1968 , 1973 ) = = = 
 In 1968 the United States Department of the Treasury subsidiary the Bureau of Narcotics and the United States Department of Health , Education , and Welfare subsidiary the Bureau of Drug Abuse Control merged to create the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs as a United States Department of Justice subsidiary . 
 In 1973 President Richard Nixon 's " Reorganization Plan Number Two " proposed the creation of a single federal agency to enforce federal drug laws and Congress accepted the proposal , as there was concern regarding the growing availability of drugs . As a result , on July 1 , 1973 , the Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs ( <unk> ) and the Office of Drug Abuse Law Enforcement ( <unk> ) merged to create the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) . On December 1 , 1975 , the Supreme Court ruled that it was " not cruel or unusual for Ohio to sentence someone to 20 years for having or selling cannabis . " 
 = = = State Office of Narcotics and Drug Abuse ( 1977 ) = = = 
 In January 1976 , California 's study of the economic impact of its law repealing prohibitions of use went into effect . The law reduced the penalty for personal possession of an ounce or less of marijuana from a felony to a <unk> misdemeanor with a maximum fine of $ 100 . Possession of more than an ounce was made a misdemeanor , making the maximum fine $ 500 and / or six months in jail . After the law went into effect , the state 's annual spending towards marijuana laws went down 74 % . Prior to the law , the state had been spending from $ 35 million to $ 100 million . 
 = = = Mandatory sentencing and three @-@ strikes ( 1984 , 1986 ) = = = 
 During the Reagan Administration the Sentencing Reform Act provisions of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 created the Sentencing Commission , which established mandatory sentencing guidelines . The Anti @-@ Drug Abuse Act of 1986 reinstated mandatory prison sentences , including large scale cannabis distribution . Later an amendment created a three @-@ strikes law , which created mandatory 25 @-@ years imprisonment for repeated serious crimes – including certain drug <unk> and allowed the death penalty to be used against " drug kingpins . " 
 = = = United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers ' Cooperative ( 2001 ) = = = 
 In 1996 California voters passed Proposition 215 , which legalized medical cannabis . The Oakland Cannabis Buyers ' Cooperative was created to " provide seriously ill patients with a safe and reliable source of medical cannabis , information and patient support " in accordance with Proposition 215 . 
 In January 1998 the U.S. Government sued Oakland Cannabis Buyers ' Cooperative for violating federal laws created as a result of Controlled Substances Act of 1970 . On May 14 , 2001 , the United States Supreme Court ruled in United States v. Oakland Cannabis Buyers ' Coop that federal anti @-@ drug laws do not permit an exception for medical cannabis and rejected the common @-@ law medical necessity defense to crimes enacted under the Controlled Substances Act because Congress concluded cannabis has " no currently accepted medical use " when the act was passed in 1970 . 
 = = = Gonzales v. Raich ( 2005 ) = = = 
 Gonzales v. Raich 545 U.S. 1 ( 2005 ) was a decision in which the U.S. Supreme Court ruled ( 6 – 3 ) that even where individuals or businesses in accordance with state @-@ approved medical cannabis programs are lawfully cultivating , possessing , or distributing medical cannabis , such persons or businesses are violating federal marijuana laws . Therefore , under federal law violators are prosecuted because the Commerce Clause of the United States Constitution grants the federal government jurisdiction to prosecute marijuana offenses , here defendants violation of the U.S. Controlled Substances Act . 
 In Gonzales the respondents ( criminal defendants ) argued because the cannabis in question had been grown , transported , and consumed entirely within the state of California , in compliance with California medical cannabis laws , the defendants ' activity did not implicate interstate commerce . Therefore , the defendants argued , their activity could not be regulated , and eventually prosecuted , by the federal government through the Commerce Clause . 
 The U.S. Supreme Court disagreed , finding that cannabis grown within California for medical purposes is indistinguishable from illicit marijuana . Moreover , because the intrastate medical cannabis market contributes to the interstate illicit marijuana market , the Commerce Clause applies . Even where California citizens are using medical cannabis in compliance with state law , those individuals and businesses can still be prosecuted by federal authorities for violating federal law . 
 To combat state @-@ approved medical cannabis legislation , the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) routinely targets and arrests medical cannabis patients as well as seizing medical cannabis and the business assets of growers and medical dispensaries . However , the Obama administration has indicated that this practice may potentially be curtailed . 
 = = Efforts to decriminalize ( 1970s – ) = = 
 = = = Medical use = = = 
 In 1978 Robert Randall sued the federal government for arresting him for using cannabis to treat his glaucoma . The judge ruled Randall needed cannabis for medical purposes and required the Food and Drug Administration set up a program to grow cannabis on a farm at the University of Mississippi and to distribute 300 cannabis cigarettes a month to Randall . In 1992 George H. W. Bush discontinued the program after Randall tried to make HIV / AIDS patients eligible for the program . Thirteen people were already enrolled and were allowed to continue receiving cannabis cigarettes ; today the government still ships cannabis cigarettes to four people . Irvin Rosenfeld , who became eligible to receive cannabis from the program in 1982 to treat rare bone tumors , urged the George W. Bush administration to reopen the program ; however , he was unsuccessful . 
 Alaska , Colorado , Washington , Oregon , and the District of Columbia are the only states where possession of up to one ounce is legal . " Citing the dangers of marijuana and the lack of clinical research supporting its medicinal value " the American Society of Addiction Medicine in March 2011 issued a white paper recommending a halt to using marijuana as a medicine in US states where it has been declared legal . 
 = = = Advocacy = = = 
 Several U.S.-based advocate groups seek to modify the drug policy of the United States to decriminalize cannabis . These groups include Law Enforcement Against Prohibition , Students for Sensible Drug Policy , The Drug Policy Alliance , the Marijuana Policy Project , NORML , Coalition for <unk> Cannabis , and Americans for Safe Access . In June 2005 , libertarian economist Jeffrey Alan Miron and over 530 other economists , including Nobel Prize winner Milton Friedman , called for the legalization of cannabis in an open letter to President George W. Bush , the United States Congress , Governors of the United States , and State Legislatures of the United States . The open letter contained Miron 's " Budgetary Implications of Marijuana Prohibition in the United States " report ( view report ) . 
 In 1997 , the Connecticut Law Revision Commission recommended that Connecticut reduce cannabis possession of one ounce or less for adults aged 21 years and over to a civil fine although driving privileges maybe suspended for up to 60 days . In 2001 , the New Mexico state @-@ commissioned Drug Policy Advisory Group stated that <unk> cannabis " will result in greater availability of resources to respond to more serious crimes without any increased risks to public safety . " On November 3 , 2004 , Oakland , California passed Proposition Z , which makes " adult recreational marijuana use , cultivation and sales the lowest [ city ] law enforcement priority . " 
 Ron Paul , a Texas Congressman and 2008 and 2012 Presidential Candidate , stated at a rally in response to a question by a medical cannabis patient that he would " never use the federal government to force the law against anybody using marijuana . " Based on the collective perspective of its Editorial Board , The New York Times commenced a series examining the legalization of cannabis in July 2014 titled " High Time : An Editorial Series on Marijuana Legalization " . The introductory article concludes with the statement : " We recognize that this Congress is as unlikely to take action on marijuana as it has been on other big issues . But it is long past time to repeal this version of Prohibition . " 
 = = = Non @-@ medical use = = = 
 In 1970 the United States Congress repealed mandatory penalties for cannabis offenses and The Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act separated cannabis from other illicit narcotics and removed mandatory sentences for possession of small amounts of cannabis . In 1972 President Richard Nixon commissioned a comprehensive study from the National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse . The Commission found that the constitutionality of cannabis prohibition was suspect and that the executive and legislative branches had a responsibility to obey the Constitution , even in the absence of a court ruling to do so . The Richard Nixon administration did not implement the study 's recommendations . 
 In 1973 Oregon decriminalized cannabis . Laws changed again in 1995 that reduced penalties . Possession of one ounce or less became legally defined as a " violation " ( a crime that is considered a lesser offence than a misdemeanor ) and now is punishable by a $ 500 to $ 1 @,@ 000 fine and up to 6 months of jail time , in some jurisdictions , paid off by means of community service . Possession of multiple containers of any weight , or possession of more than one ounce can sometimes add the additional crime " Intent to Sell " . In some cases people who have no marijuana , but are caught at the scene of a drug bust , are charged with " <unk> " . Stricter punishments exist for sale , cultivation , and proximity to schools . 
 Colorado , Alaska , Ohio , and California followed suit in 1975 . By 1978 Mississippi , North Carolina , New York , and Nebraska had some form of cannabis decriminalization . In 2001 Nevada reduced cannabis possession from a felony offense to a misdemeanor , but only for adults age 21 and older , with other restrictions . Starting in the 1970s multiple states , counties , and cities decriminalized cannabis for non @-@ medical purposes . While many states , counties , and cities have partially decriminalized cannabis , on November 3 , 2004 , Oakland passed Proposition Z , and became the first place to fully decriminalize cannabis to allow the licensing , taxing , and regulation of cannabis sales if California law is amended to allow so . In 2008 Massachusetts passed a voter initiative that decriminalized simple possession of up to one ounce of marijuana , instead making it a civil infraction punishable by a $ 100 fine . Criminal penalties for cultivation and distribution remain in place . In June 2011 , Connecticut decriminalized possession of small amounts of marijuana . 
 On November 6 , 2012 , Colorado Amendment 64 ( 2012 ) was passed by initiative , thereby legalizing the recreational use of cannabis . Colorado Governor John Hickenlooper signed two bills on May 28 , 2013 that made Colorado the world 's first fully regulated recreational cannabis market for adults . Hickenlooper explained to the media : " Certainly , this industry will create jobs . Whether it ’ s good for the brand of our state is still up in the air . But the voters passed Amendment 64 by a clear majority . That ’ s why we ’ re going to implement it as effectively as we possibly can . " In its independent analysis , the Colorado Center on Law & Policy found that the state could expect a to see " $ 60 million in total combined savings and additional revenue for Colorado ’ s budget with a potential for this number to double after 2017 . " On September 9 , 2013 , the Colorado Department of Revenue adopted final regulations for recreational marijuana establishments , implementing the Colorado Retail Marijuana Code ( HB 13 @-@ 1317 ) . On September 16 , 2013 , the Denver City Council adopted an ordinance for retail marijuana establishments . The first stores officially opened on January 1 , 2014 . The state prepared for an influx of tourists with extra police officers posted in Denver . Safety fears led to officials seeking to limit use of the drug in popular ski resorts . 
 = = = State @-@ level legalization = = = 
 Ravin v. State was a 1975 decision by the Alaska Supreme Court that held the Alaska Constitution 's right to privacy protects an adult 's ability to use and possess a small amount of marijuana in the home for personal use . The Alaska Supreme Court thereby became the first — and only — state or federal court to announce a constitutional privacy right that protects some level of marijuana use and possession . 
 Various efforts to legalize recreational marijuana have been attempted by ballot measure , including California Proposition 19 ( 2010 ) and Oregon Measure 80 ( 2012 ) . 
 On November 6 , 2012 , Colorado and Washington became the first states to legalize the sale and possession of cannabis for recreational use since the Marijuana Tax Act of 1937 when they passed Colorado Amendment 64 and Washington Initiative 502 . Each regulated marijuana in a way similar to alcohol , allowing possession of up to an ounce for adults ages 21 and older , with " <unk> " provisions similar to those against drunk driving . Unlike Initiative 502 , Amendment 64 allows personal cultivation ( of up to 6 plants ) . Both provide for commercial cultivation and sales , subject to regulation and taxes . It remains to be seen how the conflicts of these laws with federal law will be resolved . 
 The city of Portland , Maine legalized the possession of up to 2 @.@ 5 ounces of marijuana on November 5 , 2013 , making it the first city on the east coast to do so . The citizens voted in the law with 67 % in favor of legalization . The law does not allow the sale of marijuana ; and city police still intend to enforce state law , under which possession is a civil offense , and only medical marijuana is legal . Supporters of marijuana legalization believe , " this is just the next domino , " said Marijuana Policy Project Maine Political Director , David Boyer , " I think there 's national implications , keeping the momentum that Washington and Colorado started last November in ending marijuana prohibition . " There are hopes that the vote will be a push to legalize it statewide within the next few years . 
 The same day , voters in the cities of Ferndale , Jackson and Lansing , Michigan also voted on and approved similar measures to legalize possession and transfer of less than one ounce of marijuana . The votes were 69 % , 61 % and 63 % in favor respectively . Similar to Portland , state law ( where only medical marijuana is legal ) will likely be enforced , as indicated by the Governor 's statement that " no city charter provision ' shall conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the state . ' " 
 On November 4 , 2014 , the states of Alaska and Oregon along with Washington D.C. ( Initiative 71 ) legalized the recreational usage of marijuana , with laws similar to those of Colorado and Washington . However , by a rider of the 2014 " <unk> " bill ( Consolidated Appropriations Act , 2014 ) , Washington DC was prevented from making additional changes to its marijuana laws for the fiscal year , allowing home use and cultivation , but not commercial sales . 
 As of November 2014 , 28 states have enacted medical marijuana laws , removed jail time for possession of small amounts of marijuana , and / or have legalized the possession , distribution , and sale of marijuana outright . The factors which have led to this change are many , but some of them could include increased support from the medical community for legalization , viable regulatory systems modeled off of alcohol regulation , and the potential for state financial gains from decreased criminal justice costs and increased tax revenues . Although outright legalization for nonmedical use of marijuana has only occurred in four states in the Union , in view of the movements in many states , it is possible that those states will not be alone for long . 
 = = = Territorial @-@ level legalization = = = 
 In November 2014 , Guam became the first US territory to legalize cannabis for medical use . In December 2014 , the US Virgin Islands passed a bill that decriminalized possession of cannabis up to an ounce . In Puerto Rico , medical cannabis was legalized on May 3 , 2015 , by an executive order from its governor . 
 = = = Indian Reservation @-@ level legalization = = = 
 In December 2014 , the US Justice Department allowed recognized Indian Reservations to regulate cannabis laws within their reservation . The laws in the reservations are allowed to be different from state and federal laws . As with State and Territories , the Federal government will not intervene as long as the reservations regulate strict control over marijuana . Some domestic nations such as the Yakama Nation and the Oglala Sioux Tribal Council rejected the approval to allow marijuana on their reservation . 
 In 2015 , the <unk> Santee Sioux Tribe ( South Dakota ) voted to legalize recreational cannabis on its territory . 
 = = Federal reform efforts ( 2013 – ) = = 
 = = = Ending Federal Marijuana Prohibition Act = = = 
 On February 5 , 2013 , Colorado representative Jared Polis introduced Ending Federal Marijuana Prohibition Act of 2013 ( H.R. 499 ; 113th Congress ) , a bill that would decriminalize marijuana on the federal level , instead treating it as a substance to be regulated in a similar manner to alcohol . The act has not been approved by Congress . 
 = = = Respect State Marijuana Laws Act = = = 
 On April 12 , 2013 Rep. Dana Rohrabacher [ R @-@ <unk> ] introduced <unk> " Respect State Marijuana Laws . " Eleven cosponsors , representing both major political parties , have joined <unk> in a federalist approach to drug policy reformation . It passed the House of Representatives on May 30 , 2014 , and still awaits approval from the Senate . 
 = = = No Welfare for Weed Act of 2014 = = = 
 The bill would prevent the use of welfare credit cards to purchase marijuana in states where it has been legalized . The bill was approved by the House in September 2014 . 
 = = = Regulate Marijuana Like Alcohol Act and Marijuana Tax Revenue Act of 2015 = = = 
 In February 2015 , two national @-@ level legalization acts were proposed in Congress , the Regulate Marijuana Like Alcohol Act by Jared Polis ( D @-@ Colorado ) and the Marijuana Tax Revenue Act by Earl <unk> ( D @-@ Oregon ) . 
 = = = The Compassionate Access , Research Expansion and Respect States ( <unk> ) Act of 2015 = = = 
 On March 10 , 2015 , Senators Rand Paul ( R @-@ KY ) , Cory Booker ( D @-@ NJ ) , and Kirsten Gillibrand ( D @-@ NY ) proposed a new bipartisan medical marijuana bill for patients and veterans to access medical marijuana . 
 The act : 
 Would reschedule marijuana from a Schedule I to Schedule II drug to recognize it has accepted medical use , and would amend federal law to allow states to set their own medical marijuana policies . The bill would also permit VA doctors to prescribe veterans medical marijuana to treat serious injuries and chronic conditions . The legislation would not legalize medical marijuana in all 50 states , rather it would respect the states that set their own medical marijuana programs and prevents federal law enforcement from prosecuting patients , doctors and caregivers in those states . 
 = = = Ending Federal Marijuana Prohibition Act of 2015 = = = 
 November 4 , 2015 <unk> Bernie Sanders introduced the bill into Senate . It was read twice and referred to the Committee on the Judiciary . The intentions of the bill are to limit the application of Federal laws to the distribution and consumption of marijuana , and for other purposes . 
 = = Drug courts = = 
 Drug courts first started in 1989 and have spread since . <unk> drug courts were in operation May 2008 , with another 284 being planned or developed . They offer offenders charged with less @-@ serious crimes of being under the influence , possession of a controlled substance , or even drug @-@ using offenders charged with a non @-@ drug @-@ related crime the option of entering the drug court system instead of a conventional criminal court with the possibility of serving a jail sentence . To take advantage of this program , offenders have to plead guilty to the charge , agree to take part in treatment , regular drug screenings , and regular reporting to the drug court judge for a minimum of one year , as well as pay heavy fines and monthly drug court fees . Drug court systems in some areas utilize a color code system , whereas each offender is assigned a designated color , one of which is selected daily by the drug court for drug screening . Offenders must call the " color code " office each morning to see if their color has been selected for screening . Should the offender fail to comply with one or more of the requirements they may be removed from the drug court and incarcerated at the judge 's discretion . If they complete the drug court program the charges brought against them are dropped or reduced . 
 = Edward VI of England = 
 Edward VI ( 12 October 1537 – 6 July 1553 ) was King of England and Ireland from 28 January 1547 until his death . He was crowned on 20 February at the age of nine . The son of Henry VIII and Jane Seymour , Edward was the third monarch of the Tudor dynasty and England 's first monarch raised as a Protestant . During Edward 's reign , the realm was governed by a Regency Council because he never reached his majority . The Council was first led by his uncle Edward Seymour , 1st Duke of Somerset ( 1547 – 1549 ) , and then by John Dudley , 1st Earl of Warwick , from 1551 Duke of Northumberland . 
 Edward 's reign was marked by economic problems and social unrest that , in 1549 , erupted into riot and rebellion . An expensive war with Scotland , at first successful , ended with military withdrawal from Scotland as well as Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer in exchange for peace . The transformation of the Church into a recognisably Protestant body also occurred under Edward , who took great interest in religious matters . Although his father , Henry VIII , had severed the link between the Church of England and Rome , Henry VIII had never permitted the renunciation of Catholic doctrine or ceremony . It was during Edward 's reign that Protestantism was established for the first time in England with reforms that included the abolition of clerical celibacy and the Mass and the imposition of compulsory services in English . The architect of these reforms was Thomas Cranmer , Archbishop of Canterbury , whose Book of Common Prayer is still used . 
 In February 1553 , at age 15 , Edward fell ill . When his sickness was discovered to be terminal , he and his Council drew up a " Devise for the Succession " , attempting to prevent the country 's return to Catholicism . Edward named his first cousin once removed , Lady Jane Grey , as his heir and excluded his half @-@ sisters , Mary and Elizabeth . However , this decision was disputed following Edward 's death , and Jane was deposed by Mary within 13 days . As queen , Mary reversed Edward 's Protestant reforms , which nonetheless became the basis of the Elizabethan Religious Settlement of 1559 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 Edward was born on 12 October 1537 in his mother 's room inside Hampton Court Palace , in Middlesex . He was the son of King Henry VIII by his third wife , Jane Seymour . Throughout the realm , the people greeted the birth of a male heir , " whom we hungered for so long " , with joy and relief . Te <unk> were sung in churches , bonfires lit , and " their was <unk> at the Tower that night above two thousand <unk> " . Queen Jane , appearing to recover quickly from the birth , sent out personally signed letters announcing the birth of " a Prince , conceived in most lawful matrimony between my Lord the King 's Majesty and us " . Edward was christened on 15 October , with his half @-@ sisters , the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Lady Mary as godmother and the 4 @-@ year @-@ old Lady Elizabeth carrying the <unk> ; and the Garter King of Arms proclaimed him as Duke of Cornwall and Earl of Chester . The Queen , however , fell ill on 23 October from presumed postnatal complications , and died the following night . Henry VIII wrote to Francis I of France that " Divine Providence ... hath mingled my joy with bitterness of the death of her who brought me this happiness " . 
 = = = Upbringing and education = = = 
 Edward was a healthy baby who suckled strongly from the outset . His father was delighted with him ; in May 1538 , Henry was observed " dallying with him in his arms ... and so holding him in a window to the sight and great comfort of the people " . That September , the Lord Chancellor , Thomas , Lord Audley , reported Edward 's rapid growth and vigour ; and other accounts describe him as a tall and merry child . The tradition that Edward VI was a sickly boy has been challenged by more recent historians . At the age of four , he fell ill with a life @-@ threatening " quartan fever " , but , despite occasional illnesses and poor eyesight , he enjoyed generally good health until the last six months of his life . 
 Edward was initially placed in the care of Margaret Bryan , " lady mistress " of the prince 's household . She was succeeded by Blanche Herbert , Lady Troy . Until the age of six , Edward was brought up , as he put it later in his Chronicle , " among the women " . The formal royal household established around Edward was , at first , under Sir William Sidney , and later Sir Richard Page , stepfather of Edward Seymour 's wife , Anne Stanhope . Henry demanded exacting standards of security and cleanliness in his son 's household , stressing that Edward was " this whole realm 's most precious jewel " . Visitors described the prince , who was lavishly provided with toys and comforts , including his own troupe of minstrels , as a contented child . 
 From the age of six , Edward began his formal education under Richard Cox and John Cheke , concentrating , as he recalled himself , on " learning of tongues , of the scripture , of philosophy , and all liberal sciences " ; He received tuition from Elizabeth 's tutor , Roger Ascham , and Jean <unk> , learning French , Spanish and Italian . In addition , he is known to have studied geometry and learned to play musical instruments , including the lute and the virginals . He collected globes and maps and , according to coinage historian C. E. Challis , developed a grasp of monetary affairs that indicated a high intelligence . Edward 's religious education is assumed to have favoured the reforming agenda . His religious establishment was probably chosen by Archbishop Thomas Cranmer , a leading reformer . Both Cox and Cheke were " reformed " Catholics or <unk> and later became Marian exiles . By 1549 , Edward had written a treatise on the pope as Antichrist and was making informed notes on theological controversies . Many aspects of Edward 's religion were essentially Catholic in his early years , including celebration of the mass and reverence for images and relics of the saints . 
 Both Edward 's sisters were attentive to their brother and often visited him – on one occasion , Elizabeth gave him a shirt " of her own working " . Edward " took special content " in Mary 's company , though he disapproved of her taste for foreign dances ; " I love you most " , he wrote to her in 1546 . In 1543 , Henry invited his children to spend Christmas with him , signalling his reconciliation with his daughters , whom he had previously <unk> and disinherited . The following spring , he restored them to their place in the succession with a Third Succession Act , which also provided for a regency council during Edward 's minority . This unaccustomed family harmony may have owed much to the influence of Henry 's new wife Catherine Parr , of whom Edward soon became fond . He called her his " most dear mother " and in September 1546 , wrote to her : " I received so many benefits from you that my mind can hardly grasp them . " 
 Other children were brought to play with Edward , including the granddaughter of Edward 's chamberlain , Sir William Sidney , who in adulthood recalled the prince as " a marvellous sweet child , of very mild and generous condition " . Edward was educated with sons of nobles , " appointed to attend upon him " in what was a form of miniature court . Among these , Barnaby Fitzpatrick , son of an Irish peer , became a close and lasting friend . Edward was more devoted to his schoolwork than his classmates and seems to have outshone them , motivated to do his " duty " and compete with his sister Elizabeth 's academic prowess . Edward 's surroundings and possessions were regally splendid : his rooms were hung with costly Flemish tapestries , and his clothes , books , and cutlery were encrusted with precious jewels and gold . Like his father , Edward was fascinated by military arts , and many of his portraits show him wearing a gold dagger with a jewelled hilt , in imitation of Henry . Edward 's Chronicle enthusiastically details English military campaigns against Scotland and France , and adventures such as John Dudley 's near capture at Musselburgh in 1547 . 
 = = = " The Rough Wooing " = = = 
 On 1 July 1543 , Henry VIII signed the Treaty of Greenwich with the Scots , sealing the peace with Edward 's betrothal to the seven @-@ month @-@ old Mary , Queen of Scots . The Scots were in a weak bargaining position after their defeat at Solway Moss the previous November , and Henry , seeking to unite the two realms , stipulated that Mary be handed over to him to be brought up in England . When the Scots repudiated the treaty in December 1543 and renewed their alliance with France , Henry was enraged . In April 1544 , he ordered Edward 's uncle , Edward Seymour , Earl of Hertford , to invade Scotland and " put all to fire and sword , burn Edinburgh town , so razed and defaced when you have sacked and gotten what ye can of it , as there may remain forever a perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon [ them ] for their falsehood and disloyalty " . Seymour responded with the most savage campaign ever launched by the English against the Scots . The war , which continued into Edward 's reign , has become known as " The Rough Wooing " . 
 = = Accession = = 
 The nine @-@ year @-@ old Edward wrote to his father and stepmother on 10 January 1547 from Hertford thanking them for his new year 's gift of their portraits from life . By 28 January 1547 , Henry VIII was dead . Those close to the throne , led by Edward Seymour and William Paget , agreed to delay the announcement of the king 's death until arrangements had been made for a smooth succession . Seymour and Sir Anthony Browne , the Master of the Horse , rode to collect Edward from Hertford and brought him to Enfield , where Lady Elizabeth was living . He and Elizabeth were then told of the death of their father and heard a reading of the will . The Lord Chancellor , Thomas Wriothesley , announced Henry 's death to parliament on 31 January , and general proclamations of Edward 's succession were ordered . The new king was taken to the Tower of London , where he was welcomed with " great shot of ordnance in all places there about , as well out of the Tower as out of the ships " . The following day , the nobles of the realm made their obeisance to Edward at the Tower , and Seymour was announced as Protector . Henry VIII was buried at Windsor on 16 February , in the same tomb as Jane Seymour , as he had wished . 
 Edward VI was crowned at Westminster Abbey four days later on Sunday 20 February . The ceremonies were shortened , because of the " tedious length of the same which should weary and be <unk> <unk> to the King 's majesty , being yet of tender age " , and also because the Reformation had rendered some of them inappropriate . On the eve of the coronation , Edward progressed on horseback from the Tower to the Palace of Westminster through thronging crowds and pageants , many based on the pageants for a previous boy king , Henry VI . He laughed at a Spanish tightrope walker who " tumbled and played many pretty toys " outside St Paul 's Cathedral . At the coronation service , Cranmer affirmed the royal supremacy and called Edward a second Josiah , urging him to continue the reformation of the Church of England , " the tyranny of the Bishops of Rome banished from your subjects , and images removed " . After the service , Edward presided at a banquet in Westminster Hall , where , he recalled in his Chronicle , he dined with his crown on his head . 
 = = Somerset 's Protectorate = = 
 = = = Council of Regency = = = 
 Henry VIII 's will named sixteen executors , who were to act as Edward 's Council until he reached the age of 18 . These executors were supplemented by twelve men " of <unk> " who would assist the executors when called on . The final state of Henry VIII 's will has been the subject of controversy . Some historians suggest that those close to the king manipulated either him or the will itself to ensure a <unk> of power to their benefit , both material and religious . In this reading , the composition of the Privy Chamber shifted towards the end of 1546 in favour of the reforming faction . In addition , two leading conservative Privy Councillors were removed from the centre of power . Stephen Gardiner was refused access to Henry during his last months . Thomas Howard , 3rd Duke of Norfolk , found himself accused of treason ; the day before the king 's death his vast estates were seized , making them available for redistribution , and he spent the whole of Edward 's reign in the Tower of London . Other historians have argued that Gardiner 's exclusion was based on non @-@ religious matters , that Norfolk was not noticeably conservative in religion , that conservatives remained on the Council , and that the radicalism of men such as Sir Anthony Denny , who controlled the dry stamp that replicated the king 's signature , is debatable . Whatever the case , Henry 's death was followed by a lavish hand @-@ out of lands and honours to the new power group . The will contained an " unfulfilled gifts " clause , added at the last minute , which allowed Henry 's executors to freely distribute lands and honours to themselves and the court , particularly to Edward Seymour , 1st Earl of Hertford , the new king 's uncle who became Lord Protector of the Realm , Governor of the King 's Person , and Duke of Somerset . 
 In fact , Henry VIII 's will did not provide for the appointment of a Protector . It entrusted the government of the realm during his son 's minority to a Regency Council that would rule collectively , by majority decision , with " like and equal charge " . Nevertheless , a few days after Henry 's death , on 4 February , the executors chose to invest almost regal power in Edward Seymour , now Duke of Somerset . Thirteen out of the sixteen ( the others being absent ) agreed to his appointment as Protector , which they justified as their joint decision " by virtue of the authority " of Henry 's will . Somerset may have done a deal with some of the executors , who almost all received hand @-@ outs . He is known to have done so with William Paget , private secretary to Henry VIII , and to have secured the support of Sir Anthony Browne of the Privy Chamber . 
 Somerset 's appointment was in keeping with historical precedent , and his eligibility for the role was reinforced by his military successes in Scotland and France . In March 1547 , he secured letters patent from King Edward granting him the almost monarchical right to appoint members to the Privy Council himself and to consult them only when he wished . In the words of historian G. R. Elton , " from that moment his autocratic system was complete " . He proceeded to rule largely by proclamation , calling on the Privy Council to do little more than rubber @-@ stamp his decisions . 
 Somerset 's takeover of power was smooth and efficient . The imperial ambassador , Van der Delft , reported that he " governs everything absolutely " , with Paget operating as his secretary , though he predicted trouble from John Dudley , Viscount Lisle , who had recently been raised to Earl of Warwick in the share @-@ out of honours . In fact , in the early weeks of his Protectorate , Somerset was challenged only by the Chancellor , Thomas Wriothesley , whom the Earldom of Southampton had evidently failed to buy off , and by his own brother . Wriothesley , a religious conservative , objected to Somerset 's assumption of monarchical power over the Council . He then found himself abruptly dismissed from the chancellorship on charges of selling off some of his offices to delegates . 
 = = = Thomas Seymour = = = 
 Somerset faced less manageable opposition from his younger brother Thomas Seymour , who has been described as a " worm in the bud " . As King Edward 's uncle , Thomas Seymour demanded the governorship of the king 's person and a greater share of power . Somerset tried to buy his brother off with a barony , an appointment to the Lord <unk> , and a seat on the Privy Council — but Thomas was bent on scheming for power . He began smuggling pocket money to King Edward , telling him that Somerset held the purse strings too tight , making him a " beggarly king " . He also urged him to throw off the Protector within two years and " bear rule as other kings do " ; but Edward , schooled to defer to the Council , failed to co @-@ operate . In the Spring of 1547 , using Edward 's support to circumvent Somerset 's opposition , Thomas Seymour secretly married Henry VIII 's widow Catherine Parr , whose Protestant household included the 11 @-@ year @-@ old Lady Jane Grey and the 13 @-@ year @-@ old Lady Elizabeth . 
 In summer 1548 , a pregnant Catherine Parr discovered Thomas Seymour embracing Lady Elizabeth . As a result , Elizabeth was removed from Catherine Parr 's household and transferred to Sir Anthony Denny 's . That September , Catherine Parr died in childbirth , and Thomas Seymour promptly resumed his attentions to Elizabeth by letter , planning to marry her . Elizabeth was receptive , but , like Edward , unready to agree to anything unless permitted by the Council . In January 1549 , the Council had Thomas Seymour arrested on various charges , including embezzlement at the Bristol mint . King Edward , whom Seymour was accused of planning to marry to Lady Jane Grey , himself testified about the pocket money . Lack of clear evidence for treason ruled out a trial , so Seymour was condemned instead by an Act of Attainder and beheaded on 20 March 1549 . 
 = = = War = = = 
 Somerset 's only undoubted skill was as a soldier , which he had proven on expeditions to Scotland and in the defence of Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer in 1546 . From the first , his main interest as Protector was the war against Scotland . After a crushing victory at the Battle of Pinkie Cleugh in September 1547 , he set up a network of garrisons in Scotland , stretching as far north as Dundee . His initial successes , however , were followed by a loss of direction , as his aim of uniting the realms through conquest became increasingly unrealistic . The Scots allied with France , who sent reinforcements for the defence of Edinburgh in 1548 , while Mary , Queen of Scots , was removed to France , where she was betrothed to the dauphin . The cost of maintaining the Protector 's massive armies and his permanent garrisons in Scotland also placed an unsustainable burden on the royal finances . A French attack on Boulogne in August 1549 at last forced Somerset to begin a withdrawal from Scotland . 
 = = = Rebellion = = = 
 During 1548 , England was subject to social unrest . After April 1549 , a series of armed revolts broke out , fuelled by various religious and agrarian grievances . The two most serious rebellions , which required major military intervention to put down , were in Devon and Cornwall and in Norfolk . The first , sometimes called the Prayer Book Rebellion , arose mainly from the imposition of church services in English , and the second , led by a tradesman called Robert Kett , mainly from the encroachment of landlords on common grazing ground . A complex aspect of the social unrest was that the protesters believed they were acting legitimately against enclosing landlords with the Protector 's support , convinced that the landlords were the lawbreakers . 
 The same justification for outbreaks of unrest was voiced throughout the country , not only in Norfolk and the west . The origin of the popular view of Somerset as sympathetic to the rebel cause lies partly in his series of sometimes liberal , often contradictory , proclamations , and partly in the uncoordinated activities of the commissions he sent out in 1548 and 1549 to investigate grievances about loss of tillage , encroachment of large sheep flocks on common land , and similar issues . Somerset 's commissions were led by an evangelical M.P. called John Hales , whose socially liberal rhetoric linked the issue of enclosure with Reformation theology and the notion of a godly commonwealth . Local groups often assumed that the findings of these commissions entitled them to act against offending landlords themselves . King Edward wrote in his Chronicle that the 1549 risings began " because certain commissions were sent down to pluck down enclosures " . 
 Whatever the popular view of Somerset , the disastrous events of 1549 were taken as evidence of a colossal failure of government , and the Council laid the responsibility at the Protector 's door . In July 1549 , Paget wrote to Somerset : " Every man of the council have <unk> your proceedings ... would to God , that , at the first stir you had followed the matter hotly , and caused justice to be ministered in solemn fashion to the terror of others ... " . 
 = = = Fall of Somerset = = = 
 The sequence of events that led to Somerset 's removal from power has often been called a coup d 'état . By 1 October 1549 , Somerset had been alerted that his rule faced a serious threat . He issued a proclamation calling for assistance , took possession of the king 's person , and withdrew for safety to the fortified Windsor Castle , where Edward wrote , " Me thinks I am in prison " . Meanwhile , a united Council published details of Somerset 's government mismanagement . They made clear that the Protector 's power came from them , not from Henry VIII 's will . On 11 October , the Council had Somerset arrested and brought the king to Richmond . Edward summarised the charges against Somerset in his Chronicle : " ambition , vainglory , entering into rash wars in mine youth , negligent looking on Newhaven , enriching himself of my treasure , following his own opinion , and doing all by his own authority , etc . " In February 1550 , John Dudley , Earl of Warwick , emerged as the leader of the Council and , in effect , as Somerset 's successor . Although Somerset was released from the Tower and restored to the Council , he was executed for felony in January 1552 after scheming to overthrow Dudley 's regime . Edward noted his uncle 's death in his Chronicle : " the duke of Somerset had his head cut off upon Tower Hill between eight and nine o 'clock in the morning " . 
 Historians contrast the efficiency of Somerset 's takeover of power , in which they detect the organising skills of allies such as Paget , the " master of practices " , with the subsequent ineptitude of his rule . By autumn 1549 , his costly wars had lost momentum , the crown faced financial ruin , and riots and rebellions had broken out around the country . Until recent decades , Somerset 's reputation with historians was high , in view of his many proclamations that appeared to back the common people against a rapacious landowning class . More recently , however , he has often been portrayed as an arrogant and aloof ruler , lacking in political and administrative skills . 
 = = Northumberland 's regime = = 
 In contrast , Somerset 's successor John Dudley , Earl of Warwick , made Duke of Northumberland in 1551 , was once regarded by historians merely as a grasping schemer who cynically elevated and enriched himself at the expense of the crown . Since the 1970s , the administrative and economic achievements of his regime have been recognised , and he has been credited with restoring the authority of the royal Council and returning the government to an even keel after the disasters of Somerset 's protectorate . 
 The Earl of Warwick 's rival for leadership of the new regime was Thomas Wriothesley , 1st Earl of Southampton , whose conservative supporters had allied with Dudley 's followers to create a unanimous Council , which they , and observers such as the Holy Roman Emperor , Charles V 's ambassador , expected to reverse Somerset 's policy of religious reform . Warwick , on the other hand , pinned his hopes on the king 's strong Protestantism and , claiming that Edward was old enough to rule in person , moved himself and his people closer to the king , taking control of the Privy Chamber . Paget , accepting a barony , joined Warwick when he realised that a conservative policy would not bring the emperor onto the English side over Boulogne . Southampton prepared a case for executing Somerset , aiming to discredit Warwick through Somerset 's statements that he had done all with Warwick 's co @-@ operation . As a counter @-@ move , Warwick convinced parliament to free Somerset , which it did on 14 January 1550 . Warwick then had Southampton and his followers purged from the Council after winning the support of Council members in return for titles , and was made Lord President of the Council and great master of the king 's household . Although not called a Protector , he was now clearly the head of the government . 
 As Edward was growing up , he was able to understand more and more government business . However , his actual involvement in decisions has long been a matter of debate , and during the 20th century , historians have presented the whole gamut of possibilities , " <unk> [ ing ] an articulate puppet against a mature , precocious , and essentially adult king " , in the words of Stephen Alford . A special " Counsel for the Estate " was created when Edward was fourteen . Edward chose the members himself . In the weekly meetings with this Council , Edward was " to hear the debating of things of most importance " . A major point of contact with the king was the Privy Chamber , and there Edward worked closely with William Cecil and William Petre , the Principal Secretaries . The king 's greatest influence was in matters of religion , where the Council followed the strongly Protestant policy that Edward favoured . 
 The Duke of Northumberland 's mode of operation was very different from Somerset 's . Careful to make sure he always commanded a majority of councillors , he encouraged a working council and used it to <unk> his authority . Lacking Somerset 's blood @-@ relationship with the king , he added members to the Council from his own faction in order to control it . He also added members of his family to the royal household . He saw that to achieve personal dominance , he needed total procedural control of the Council . In the words of historian John Guy , " Like Somerset , he became quasi @-@ king ; the difference was that he managed the bureaucracy on the pretence that Edward had assumed full sovereignty , whereas Somerset had asserted the right to near @-@ sovereignty as Protector " . 
 Warwick 's war policies were more pragmatic than Somerset 's , and they have earned him criticism for weakness . In 1550 , he signed a peace treaty with France that agreed to withdrawal from Boulogne and recalled all English garrisons from Scotland . In 1551 , Edward was betrothed to Elisabeth of Valois , King Henry II 's daughter . In practice , he realised that England could no longer support the cost of wars . At home , he took measures to police local unrest . To forestall future rebellions , he kept permanent representatives of the crown in the localities , including lords lieutenant , who commanded military forces and reported back to central government . 
 Working with William Paulet and Walter Mildmay , Warwick tackled the disastrous state of the kingdom 's finances . However , his regime first succumbed to the temptations of a quick profit by further debasing the coinage . The economic disaster that resulted caused Warwick to hand the initiative to the expert Thomas Gresham . By 1552 , confidence in the coinage was restored , prices fell , and trade at last improved . Though a full economic recovery was not achieved until Elizabeth 's reign , its origins lay in the Duke of Northumberland 's policies . The regime also cracked down on widespread embezzlement of government finances , and carried out a thorough review of revenue collection practices , which has been called " one of the more remarkable achievements of Tudor administration " . 
 = = Reformation = = 
 In the matter of religion , the regime of Northumberland followed the same policy as that of Somerset , supporting an increasingly vigorous programme of reform . Although Edward VI 's practical influence on government was limited , his intense Protestantism made a reforming administration obligatory ; his succession was managed by the reforming faction , who continued in power throughout his reign . The man Edward trusted most , Thomas Cranmer , Archbishop of Canterbury , introduced a series of religious reforms that revolutionised the English church from one that — while rejecting papal supremacy — remained essentially Catholic , to one that was institutionally Protestant . The confiscation of church property that had begun under Henry VIII resumed under Edward — notably with the dissolution of the chantries — to the great monetary advantage of the crown and the new owners of the seized property . Church reform was therefore as much a political as a religious policy under Edward VI . By the end of his reign , the church had been financially ruined , with much of the property of the bishops transferred into lay hands . 
 The religious convictions of both Somerset and Northumberland have proved elusive for historians , who are divided on the sincerity of their Protestantism . There is less doubt , however , about the religious fervour of King Edward , who was said to have read twelve chapters of scripture daily and enjoyed sermons , and was commemorated by John Foxe as a " godly imp " . Edward was depicted during his life and afterwards as a new Josiah , the biblical king who destroyed the idols of Baal . He could be priggish in his anti @-@ Catholicism and once asked Catherine Parr to persuade Lady Mary " to attend no longer to foreign dances and <unk> which do not become a most Christian princess " . Edward 's biographer Jennifer Loach cautions , however , against accepting too readily the pious image of Edward handed down by the reformers , as in John Foxe 's influential Acts and Monuments , where a woodcut depicts the young king listening to a sermon by Hugh Latimer . In the early part of his life , Edward conformed to the prevailing Catholic practices , including attendance at mass : but he became convinced , under the influence of Cranmer and the reformers among his tutors and courtiers , that " true " religion should be imposed in England . 
 The English Reformation advanced under pressure from two directions : from the traditionalists on the one hand and the zealots on the other , who led incidents of iconoclasm ( image @-@ smashing ) and complained that reform did not go far enough . Reformed doctrines were made official , such as justification by faith alone and communion for laity as well as clergy in both kinds , of bread and wine . The Ordinal of 1550 replaced the divine ordination of priests with a government @-@ run appointment system , authorising ministers to preach the gospel and administer the sacraments rather than , as before , " to offer sacrifice and celebrate mass both for the living and the dead " . Cranmer set himself the task of writing a uniform liturgy in English , detailing all weekly and daily services and religious festivals , to be made compulsory in the first Act of Uniformity of 1549 . The Book of Common Prayer of 1549 , intended as a compromise , was attacked by traditionalists for dispensing with many cherished rituals of the liturgy , such as the elevation of the bread and wine , while some reformers complained about the retention of too many " popish " elements , including vestiges of sacrificial rites at communion . The prayer book was also opposed by many senior Catholic clerics , including Stephen Gardiner , Bishop of Winchester , and Edmund Bonner , Bishop of London , who were both imprisoned in the Tower and , along with others , deprived of their sees . 
 After 1551 , the Reformation advanced further , with the approval and encouragement of Edward , who began to exert more personal influence in his role as Supreme Head of the church . The new changes were also a response to criticism from such reformers as John Hooper , Bishop of Gloucester , and the Scot John Knox , who was employed as a minister in Newcastle under the Duke of Northumberland and whose preaching at court prompted the king to oppose kneeling at communion . Cranmer was also influenced by the views of the continental reformer Martin Bucer , who died in England in 1551 , by Peter Martyr , who was teaching at Oxford , and by other foreign theologians . The progress of the Reformation was further speeded by the consecration of more reformers as bishops . In the winter of 1551 – 52 , Cranmer rewrote the Book of Common Prayer in less ambiguous reformist terms , revised canon law , and prepared a doctrinal statement , the Forty @-@ two Articles , to clarify the practice of the reformed religion , particularly in the divisive matter of the communion service . Cranmer 's formulation of the reformed religion , finally divesting the communion service of any notion of the real presence of God in the bread and the wine , effectively abolished the mass . According to Elton , the publication of Cranmer 's revised prayer book in 1552 , supported by a second Act of Uniformity , " marked the arrival of the English Church at <unk> " . The prayer book of 1552 remains the foundation of the Church of England 's services . However , Cranmer was unable to implement all these reforms once it became clear in spring 1553 that King Edward , upon whom the whole Reformation in England depended , was dying . 
 = = Succession crisis = = 
 = = = Devise for the succession = = = 
 In February 1553 , Edward VI became ill , and by June , after several improvements and relapses , he was in a hopeless condition . The king 's death and the succession of his Catholic half @-@ sister Mary would jeopardise the English Reformation , and Edward 's Council and officers had many reasons to fear it . Edward himself opposed Mary 's succession , not only on religious grounds but also on those of legitimacy and male inheritance , which also applied to Elizabeth . He composed a draft document , headed " My devise for the succession " , in which he undertook to change the succession , most probably inspired by his father Henry VIII 's precedent . He passed over the claims of his half @-@ sisters and , at last , settled the Crown on his first cousin once removed , the 16 @-@ year @-@ old Lady Jane Grey , who on 25 May 1553 had married Lord Guilford Dudley , a younger son of the Duke of Northumberland . 
 In his document Edward provided , in case of " lack of issue of my body " , for the succession of male heirs only , that is , Jane Grey 's mother 's male heirs , Jane 's or her sisters ' . As his death approached and possibly persuaded by Northumberland , he altered the wording so that Jane and her sisters themselves should be able to succeed . Yet Edward conceded Jane 's right only as an exception to male rule , demanded by reality , an example not to be followed if Jane or her sisters had only daughters . In the final document both Mary and Elizabeth were excluded because of <unk> ; since both had been declared bastards under Henry VIII and never made legitimate again , this reason could be advanced for both sisters . The provisions to alter the succession directly contravened Henry VIII 's Third Succession Act of 1543 and have been described as bizarre and illogical . 
 In early June , Edward personally supervised the drafting of a clean version of his devise by lawyers , to which he lent his signature " in six several places . " Then , on 15 June he summoned high ranking judges to his sickbed , commanding them on their allegiance " with sharp words and angry countenance " to prepare his devise as letters patent and announced that he would have these passed in parliament . His next measure was to have leading councillors and lawyers sign a bond in his presence , in which they agreed faithfully to perform Edward 's will after his death . A few months later , Chief Justice Edward Montagu recalled that when he and his colleagues had raised legal objections to the devise , Northumberland had threatened them " trembling for anger , and ... further said that he would fight in his shirt with any man in that quarrel " . Montagu also overheard a group of lords standing behind him conclude " if they refused to do that , they were traitors " . At last , on 21 June , the devise was signed by over a hundred notables , including councillors , peers , archbishops , bishops , and sheriffs ; many of them later claimed that they had been bullied into doing so by Northumberland , although in the words of Edward 's biographer Jennifer Loach , " few of them gave any clear indication of reluctance at the time " . 
 It was now common knowledge that Edward was dying , and foreign diplomats suspected that some scheme to debar Mary was under way . France found the prospect of the emperor 's cousin on the English throne disagreeable and engaged in secret talks with Northumberland , indicating support . The diplomats were certain that the overwhelming majority of the English people backed Mary , but nevertheless believed that Queen Jane would be successfully established . 
 For centuries , the attempt to alter the succession was mostly seen as a one @-@ man @-@ plot by the Duke of Northumberland . Since the 1970s , however , many historians have attributed the inception of the " devise " and the insistence on its implementation to the king 's initiative . Diarmaid MacCulloch has made out Edward 's " teenage dreams of founding an evangelical realm of Christ " , while David Starkey has stated that " Edward had a couple of co @-@ operators , but the driving will was his " . Among other members of the Privy Chamber , Northumberland 's intimate Sir John Gates has been suspected of suggesting to Edward to change his devise so that Lady Jane Grey herself — not just any sons of hers — could inherit the Crown . Whatever the degree of his contribution , Edward was convinced that his word was law and fully endorsed disinheriting his half @-@ sisters : " barring Mary from the succession was a cause in which the young King believed . " 
 = = = Illness and death = = = 
 Edward became ill during January 1553 with a fever and cough that gradually worsened . The imperial ambassador , Scheyfve , reported that " he suffers a good deal when the fever is upon him , especially from a difficulty in drawing his breath , which is due to the compression of the organs on the right side " . Edward felt well enough in early April to take the air in the park at Westminster and to move to Greenwich , but by the end of the month he had weakened again . By 7 May he was " much amended , " and the royal doctors had no doubt of his recovery . A few days later the king was watching the ships on the Thames , sitting at his window . However , he relapsed , and on 11 June Scheyfve , who had an informant in the king 's household , reported that " the matter he ejects from his mouth is sometimes coloured a greenish yellow and black , sometimes pink , like the colour of blood " . Now his doctors believed he was suffering from " a suppurating tumour " of the lung and admitted that Edward 's life was beyond recovery . Soon , his legs became so swollen that he had to lie on his back , and he lost the strength to resist the disease . To his tutor John Cheke he whispered , " I am glad to die " . 
 Edward made his final appearance in public on 1 July , when he showed himself at his window in Greenwich Palace , horrifying those who saw him by his " thin and wasted " condition . During the next two days , large crowds arrived hoping to see the king again , but on the 3rd , they were told that the weather was too chilly for him to appear . Edward died at the age of 15 at Greenwich Palace at 8pm on 6 July 1553 . According to John Foxe 's legendary account of his death , his last words were : " I am faint ; Lord have mercy upon me , and take my spirit " . He was buried in the Henry VII Lady Chapel at Westminster Abbey on 8 August 1553 , with reformed rites performed by Thomas Cranmer . The procession was led by " a <unk> company of <unk> in ther <unk> " and watched by Londoners " <unk> and lamenting " ; the funeral chariot , draped in cloth of gold , was topped by an effigy of Edward , with crown , sceptre , and garter . Edward 's burial place was unmarked until as late as 1966 , when an inscribed stone was laid in the chapel floor by Christ 's Hospital school to commemorate their founder . The inscription reads as follows : " In Memory Of King Edward VI Buried In This Chapel This Stone Was Placed Here By Christ 's Hospital In Thanksgiving For Their Founder 7 October 1966 " . 
 The cause of Edward VI 's death is not certain . As with many royal deaths in the 16th century , rumours of poisoning abounded , but no evidence has been found to support these . The Duke of Northumberland , whose unpopularity was underlined by the events that followed Edward 's death , was widely believed to have ordered the imagined poisoning . Another theory held that Edward had been poisoned by Catholics seeking to bring Mary to the throne . The surgeon who opened Edward 's chest after his death found that " the disease whereof his majesty died was the disease of the lungs " . The Venetian ambassador reported that Edward had died of consumption — in other words , tuberculosis — a diagnosis accepted by many historians . Skidmore believes that Edward contracted the tuberculosis after a bout of measles and smallpox in 1552 that suppressed his natural immunity to the disease . Loach suggests instead that his symptoms were typical of acute bronchopneumonia , leading to a " suppurating pulmonary infection " or lung abscess , septicaemia , and kidney failure . 
 = = = Queen Jane and Queen Mary = = = 
 Lady Mary was last seen by Edward in February , and was kept informed about the state of her brother 's health by Northumberland and through her contacts with the imperial ambassadors . Aware of Edward 's imminent death , she left Hunsdon House , near London , and sped to her estates around Kenninghall in Norfolk , where she could count on the support of her tenants . Northumberland sent ships to the Norfolk coast to prevent her escape or the arrival of reinforcements from the continent . He delayed the announcement of the king 's death while he gathered his forces , and Jane Grey was taken to the Tower on 10 July . On the same day , she was proclaimed queen in the streets of London , to <unk> of discontent . The Privy Council received a message from Mary asserting her " right and title " to the throne and commanding that the Council proclaim her queen , as she had already proclaimed herself . The Council replied that Jane was queen by Edward 's authority and that Mary , by contrast , was illegitimate and supported only by " a few lewd , base people " . 
 Northumberland soon realised that he had miscalculated drastically , not least in failing to secure Mary 's person before Edward 's death . Although many of those who rallied to Mary were conservatives hoping for the defeat of Protestantism , her supporters also included many for whom her lawful claim to the throne overrode religious considerations . Northumberland was obliged to relinquish control of a nervous Council in London and launch an unplanned pursuit of Mary into East Anglia , from where news was arriving of her growing support , which included a number of nobles and gentlemen and " innumerable companies of the common people " . On 14 July Northumberland marched out of London with three thousand men , reaching Cambridge the next day ; meanwhile , Mary rallied her forces at Framlingham Castle in Suffolk , gathering an army of nearly twenty thousand by 19 July . 
 It now dawned on the Privy Council that it had made a terrible mistake . Led by the Earl of Arundel and the Earl of Pembroke , on 19 July the Council publicly proclaimed Mary as queen ; Jane 's nine @-@ day reign came to an end . The proclamation triggered wild rejoicing throughout London . Stranded in Cambridge , Northumberland proclaimed Mary himself — as he had been commanded to do by a letter from the Council . William Paget and the Earl of Arundel rode to Framlingham to beg Mary 's pardon , and Arundel arrested Northumberland on 24 July . Northumberland was beheaded on 22 August , shortly after renouncing Protestantism . His recantation dismayed his daughter @-@ in @-@ law , Jane , who followed him to the scaffold on 12 February 1554 , after her father 's involvement in Wyatt 's rebellion . 
 = = Protestant legacy = = 
 Although Edward reigned for only six years and died at the age of 15 , his reign made a lasting contribution to the English Reformation and the structure of the Church of England . The last decade of Henry VIII 's reign had seen a partial stalling of the Reformation , a drifting back to more conservative values . By contrast , Edward 's reign saw radical progress in the Reformation . In those six years , the Church transferred from an essentially Roman Catholic liturgy and structure to one that is usually identified as Protestant . In particular , the introduction of the Book of Common Prayer , the Ordinal of 1550 , and Cranmer 's Forty @-@ two Articles formed the basis for English Church practices that continue to this day . Edward himself fully approved these changes , and though they were the work of reformers such as Thomas Cranmer , Hugh Latimer , and Nicholas Ridley , backed by Edward 's determinedly evangelical Council , the fact of the king 's religion was a catalyst in the acceleration of the Reformation during his reign . 
 Queen Mary 's attempts to undo the reforming work of her brother 's reign faced major obstacles . Despite her belief in the papal supremacy , she ruled constitutionally as the Supreme Head of the English Church , a contradiction under which she bridled . She found herself entirely unable to restore the vast number of ecclesiastical properties handed over or sold to private landowners . Although she burned a number of leading Protestant churchmen , many reformers either went into exile or remained subversively active in England during her reign , producing a torrent of reforming propaganda that she was unable to stem . Nevertheless , Protestantism was not yet " printed in the stomachs " of the English people , and had Mary lived longer , her Catholic reconstruction might have succeeded , leaving Edward 's reign , rather than hers , as a historical aberration . 
 On Mary 's death in 1558 , the English Reformation resumed its course , and most of the reforms instituted during Edward 's reign were reinstated in the Elizabethan Religious Settlement . Queen Elizabeth replaced Mary 's councillors and bishops with ex @-@ Edwardians , such as William Cecil , Northumberland 's former secretary , and Richard Cox , Edward 's old tutor , who preached an anti @-@ Catholic sermon at the opening of parliament in 1559 . Parliament passed an Act of Uniformity the following spring that restored , with modifications , Cranmer 's prayer book of 1552 ; and the Thirty @-@ nine Articles of 1563 were largely based on Cranmer 's Forty @-@ two Articles . The theological developments of Edward 's reign provided a vital source of reference for Elizabeth 's religious policies , though the internationalism of the Edwardian Reformation was never revived . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = Fuji @-@ class battleship = 
 The Fuji class ( <unk> , Fuji @-@ gata senkan ) was a two @-@ ship class of pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the mid @-@ 1890s . They were the first battleships in the IJN , and were constructed in the UK as Japan lacked the industrial facilities needed to build them . Their design was based on the battleships being built for the Royal Navy at that time . 
 The ships participated in the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , including the Battle of Port Arthur in February 1904 and two bombardments of Port Arthur during the following month . Yashima struck a mine off Port Arthur in May and capsized while under tow several hours later . Fuji fought in the Battles of the Yellow Sea and Tsushima and was lightly damaged in the latter action . She was reclassified as a coast defence ship in 1910 and served as a training ship for the rest of her active career . The ship was hulked in 1922 and converted into a barracks ship fitted with classrooms . Fuji was finally broken up for scrap in 1948 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 19th century , the strategy of the Imperial Japanese Navy was based on the radical Jeune Ecole naval philosophy , as promoted by French military advisor and naval architect Emile Bertin . This emphasised cheap torpedo boats and commerce raiding to offset expensive , heavily armoured ships . The acquisition of two German @-@ built Dingyuan @-@ class ironclads by the Imperial Chinese Beiyang Fleet in 1885 threatened Japan 's interests in Korea . A visit by the Chinese warships to Japan in early 1891 forced the Japanese government to acknowledge that the IJN required similarly armed and armoured ships of its own to counter the ironclads ; the three lightly armoured Matsushima @-@ class cruisers ordered from France would not suffice , despite their powerful guns . The IJN decided to order a pair of the latest battleships from the United Kingdom as Japan lacked the technology and capability to construct its own battleships . 
 Obtaining funding for the battleships was a struggle for the Japanese government . The initial request was submitted in the budget of Prime Minister Matsukata Masayoshi in 1891 , but was deleted by the Diet of Japan due to political infighting . Matsukata submitted the request again and , when again denied , was forced to dissolve his cabinet . His successor , Prime Minister Itō Hirobumi , attempted to pass the funding measure in 1892 , but he also failed . This led to an extraordinary personal intervention by Emperor Meiji in a statement dated 10 February 1893 , wherein the emperor offered to fund the construction of the two battleships himself , through an annual reduction in the expenses of the Imperial Household , and asked that all government officials likewise agree to a reduction in their salaries by ten percent . The funding measure for the Fuji @-@ class battleships was passed by the Japanese Diet soon after . Completion of the ships was originally scheduled for 1899 , but the start of the First Sino @-@ Japanese War shortly before they were laid down in 1894 caused the government to accelerate the schedule by two years . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Fuji class was derived from that of the British Royal Sovereign @-@ class battleships , albeit about 2 @,@ 000 long tons ( 2 @,@ 000 t ) smaller . The Fuji @-@ class ships improved on the Royal Sovereigns in several ways ; they were about 1 knot ( 1 @.@ 9 km / h ; 1 @.@ 2 mph ) faster , they incorporated superior Harvey armour , and their guns , although smaller and lighter , were the same as those of the later Majestic @-@ class and were protected by armoured hoods ( gun turrets ) . The two ships of the class were almost identical even though they were designed by two different naval architects , Yashima by Philip Watts and Fuji by George C. <unk> . The primary difference was that Yashima had her deadwood cut away aft and was fitted with a balanced rudder . This made her almost a knot faster than her sister and gave her a smaller turning circle at the cost of a weaker stern that required careful attention when drydocked lest it sag . 
 The Fuji @-@ class ships had an overall length of 412 feet ( 125 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 73 @.@ 25 – 73 @.@ 75 feet ( 22 @.@ 3 – 22 @.@ 5 m ) , and a normal draught of 26 @.@ 25 – 26 @.@ 5 feet ( 8 @.@ 0 – 8 @.@ 1 m ) . They displaced 12 @,@ 230 – 12 @,@ 533 long tons ( 12 @,@ 426 – 12 @,@ 734 t ) at normal load . The ships had double bottoms and were subdivided into a total of 181 watertight compartments . The crew numbered about 650 officers and enlisted men . Yashima was fitted as a flagship with accommodation for an admiral and his staff . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Fuji @-@ class ships were powered by two Humphrys Tennant 3 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 18 m ) propeller , using steam generated by ten cylindrical boilers with a working pressure of 10 @.@ 898 kg / cm2 ( 1 @,@ 069 kPa ; 155 psi ) . The engines were rated at 13 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) , using forced draught , and designed to reach a top speed of 18 @.@ 25 knots ( 33 @.@ 80 km / h ; 21 @.@ 00 mph ) although the ships proved to be faster during their sea trials , reaching top speeds of 18 @.@ 66 to 19 @.@ 46 knots ( 34 @.@ 56 to 36 @.@ 04 km / h ; 21 @.@ 47 to 22 @.@ 39 mph ) . A watertight centreline bulkhead separated the two engine rooms as well as the four boiler rooms . The boiler rooms were further separated by a transverse bulkhead . Unlike both the Royal Sovereigns and Majestics , the Fuji class had their funnels on the centreline . 
 The ships carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 620 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 590 long tons ) of coal which allowed them to steam for 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 400 km ; 4 @,@ 600 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . They were fitted with three electric dynamos , each rated at 32 kilowatts ( 43 hp ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main battery of the Fuji class consisted of four hydraulically operated Elswick Ordnance Company 40 @-@ calibre Type 41 twelve @-@ inch guns mounted in pear @-@ shaped twin @-@ gun barbettes fore and aft of the superstructure . The barbettes had a firing arc of 240 ° and the guns had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° and could depress to − 5 ° . These barbettes had armoured hoods , or turrets , to protect the guns . The mountings were virtually identical to those used in the first Majestic @-@ class battleships , which could only hoist ammunition from the below @-@ decks magazines in one position . However , 18 shells were stowed in each turret that allowed a limited amount of firing at any angle before their ammunition supply needed to be replenished . The guns were loaded at a fixed angle of 1 ° and fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 730 m / s ) . This gave them an approximate range of 16 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) . 
 Secondary armament of the Fuji class consisted of ten 40 @-@ calibre Type 41 six @-@ inch quick @-@ firing guns , four on the main deck in casemates and six guns on the upper deck protected by gun shields . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) . Protection from torpedo boat attacks was provided by fourteen 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) three @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and ten 47 @-@ millimetre 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . The three @-@ pounder gun fired 3 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 5 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 927 ft / s ( 587 m / s ) while the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder fired 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . The ships were also equipped with five 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one in the bow above water and four submerged tubes , two on each broadside . 
 In 1901 , both ships exchanged 16 of their 47 mm guns for an equal number of QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns . They fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 359 ft / s ( 719 m / s ) . This raised the number of crewmen to 652 and later to 741 . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The armour scheme of the Fuji @-@ class ships was similar to that used by the Royal Sovereigns except that the Japanese ships used superior Harvey armour of the same thickness instead of compound armour . The waterline main belt was 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) high , 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) of which was above the waterline at normal load , and had a maximum thickness of 18 inches ( 457 mm ) . It reduced to 16 inches ( 406 mm ) then 14 inches ( 356 mm ) at the ends past the two barbettes ; above it was a 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) strake of armour that ran between the barbettes . They were 14 inches thick outside the upper armour belt and reduced to 9 inches ( 229 mm ) behind the upper belt . Diagonal bulkheads connected the barbettes to the side armour ; the forward bulkhead was 14 inches thick while the rear bulkhead was 12 inches ( 305 mm ) thick . The armour of the casemates and the barbette hoods had a maximum thickness of 6 inches while the conning tower was protected by 14 inches of armour . The deck armour was 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick and met the sides of the ship at the top of the main armour belt . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 Both ships had reached Japan by February 1898 . At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in 1904 , Fuji and Yashima were assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet . They participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February , when Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the 1st Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defences with his main armament and engage the Russian ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as his eight @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted very little damage on the Russian vessels , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships . Yashima was not struck during the battle , but Fuji was hit twice , two men being killed and 10 wounded . 
 On 10 March , the two ships blindly bombarded the harbour of Port Arthur from Pigeon Bay , on the southwest side of the Liaodong Peninsula , at a range of 9 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 9 mi ) , but did little damage . When they tried again on 22 March , they were attacked by Russian coastal defence guns that had been transferred there , and also from several Russian ships in Port Arthur using observers overlooking Pigeon Bay . The Japanese ships disengaged after Fuji was hit by a 12 @-@ inch shell . 
 Fuji and Yashima participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out two battleships of the Pacific Squadron . When the Russians spotted the five battleships of the 1st Division , they turned back for Port Arthur and the battleship Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , which prompted the Russians to lay more minefields . 
 On 14 May 1904 , the battleships Hatsuse , Shikishima , and Yashima , the protected cruiser Kasagi , and the dispatch boat Tatsuta put to sea to relieve the Japanese blockading force off Port Arthur . The following morning , the squadron encountered a Russian minefield . Hatsuse struck one mine that disabled her steering and Yashima struck two others when moving to assist Hatsuse . Yashima was towed away from the minefield , but she was still taking on water at an uncontrollable rate and the crew abandoned ship some five hours later . Kasagi took Yashima in tow , but the battleship 's list continued to increase and she capsized about three hours later . 
 During the Battle of the Yellow Sea in August 1904 , Fuji was not damaged because the Russian ships concentrated their fire on Tōgō 's flagship , the battleship Mikasa , which was leading the column . In May the following year , during the Battle of Tsushima , Fuji was hit a dozen times , the most serious of which penetrated the hood of the rear barbette , ignited some exposed propellant charges , killed eight men and wounded nine . After the ammunition fire was put out , the left gun in the barbette resumed firing and apparently delivered the coup de grâce that sank the battleship Borodino . 
 On 23 October 1908 , Fuji hosted a dinner for the American Ambassador , Thomas J. O 'Brien , and the senior officers of the Great White Fleet during its circumnavigation of the world . In 1910 , her cylindrical boilers were replaced by Miyabara water @-@ tube boilers and her main armament was replaced by Japanese @-@ built guns . Fuji was reclassified as a first @-@ class coast defence ship the same year , and undertook training duties in various capacities until disarmed in 1922 . Her hulk continued to be used as a floating barracks and training centre at Yokosuka until 1945 . Fuji was damaged by American carrier aircraft during their 18 July 1945 attack on Yokosuka and capsized after the end of the war . The ship was scrapped in 1948 . 
 = Manny Get Your Gun = 
 " Manny Get Your Gun " is the eighth episode of the second season of the sitcom , Modern Family and the 32nd overall . It originally aired November 17 , 2010 on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) . The episode was written by Danny Zuker , from a story by Modern Family co @-@ creator , Christopher Lloyd and was directed by Michael Spiller . 
 In the episode , everyone gathers at a restaurant for Manny 's birthday when Manny has a mini @-@ life crisis of getting older ; Phil and Claire have a race to see who can get there faster ; and Mitchell and Cam get stuck at the mall looking for a gift . 
 " Manny Get Your Gun " received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics with Joel Keller of TV Squad naming it " one of the better ones of the season . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode received the same ratings as the previous episode , " Chirp " and became the second highest rated scripted series of the original week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode begins with Manny ( Rico Rodriguez ) starting his birthday speech to a table filled with angry family members . 
 The episode then goes 30 minutes earlier showing Claire ( Julie Bowen ) hurrying everyone to get to the party on time . This prompts a contest between Claire and Phil ( Ty Burrell ) to see whose route is quicker . Phil rides with Alex ( Ariel Winter ) and Haley ( Sarah Hyland ) , and Luke ( Nolan Gould ) with Claire . 
 In Claire 's car , Luke asks Claire why she is separating from Phil misunderstanding Claire 's earlier statement of the two parents were " separating " . Claire reassures Luke that they are fine and just going separate routes . Claire then starts asking Luke why he wanted to go with Phil instead of her . She stops the car to have a talk with Luke which makes her sadder , but Luke makes her happy by telling her that she is fun too but he wanted to be with Phil because he thought Phil needed him more than Claire does and that her route is faster than Phil 's . 
 In Phil 's car , while he tries convincing the girls the race is not a waste of time , the car 's wheels go out . After fixing it , Haley and Alex tell him that they do not want to go to family camp . This causes Phil to cry which in turn causes Haley and Alex to cry . This saps Phil 's motivation to beat Claire , but Haley and Alex eventually restore his motivation to win . 
 Meanwhile , Mitchell ( Jesse Tyler Ferguson ) and Cameron ( Eric Stonestreet ) are walking through the mall looking for a present for Manny . While there , Cameron stops to help an elderly man named Donald ( Norman Lloyd ) to convince an old lady to take him back , despite Mitchell 's protests that they are running out of time . Cameron is initially delighted to help before realizing Donald is an adulterer . Cameron and Mitchell soon continue their fight about Mitchell not being spontaneous but in the middle of the discussion , Mitchell takes part in a flash mob with a bunch of people to " Free Your Mind " . Mitchell initially thinks Cameron will be happy , but Cameron becomes angry that Mitchell kept it a secret from him . They soon have another fight in their car . 
 In the Pritchett house , Gloria ( Sofía Vergara ) and Jay ( Ed O 'Neill ) have a fight over Gloria 's habit of losing everything and currently losing her keys . Jay initially believes he is right before finding the keys in his pockets , but instead of apologizing to Gloria he secretes the keys in her purse . 
 In the meantime , Manny becomes depressed after Jay informs him he never truly acted like a kid . He tries to live his life as a kid before the party with bad prank calls and mixing sodas . He then opens his old Christmas present ( a flotation device ) and putting it in a pool . A furious Gloria angry at Manny not wanting to go his own party shoots the flotation device with a BB gun Jay gave him . In the car , Jay finally tells Gloria the truth making her furious . 
 After all the family members see that they are about to arrive late , they race to the restaurant , coming close to crashing into each other . The scene then goes to Manny finishing his speech saying that he has enough time to act like a kid , as his older family members still do . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Manny Get Your Gun " was written by Danny Zuker , but was based on a story by Modern Family 's co @-@ creator , Christopher Lloyd . The episode marked Zucker 's fifth writing credit for the series and Lloyd 's first story credit . The episode was directed by Michael Spiller , his eighth directors episode . " Manny Get Your Gun " originally aired on November 17 , 2010 . The episode was filmed on October 20 , October 21 , and October 27 , 2010 . 
 The episode was originally titled " Dash , Flash , Crash " in the original press release , the episode 's title was later formally changed to " Manny Get Your Gun " . Part of the episode 's plot is based on a personal experience of Steven Levitan . He stated in an interview " My wife and I have a constant argument about when we 're in a restaurant , which way to take home - which is the faster way home . " 
 On October 15 , 2010 , William Keck of TV Guide reported that Norman Lloyd of St. Elsewhere was to guest star as a senior citizen who Cameron befriends . He filmed his appearance on October 21 , 2010 . 
 The episode was later put in for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series along with " Caught in the Act " , " The Musical Man " and " Mother 's Day " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Manny Get Your Gun " was viewed by an estimated 12 @.@ 092 million households and received a 7 @.@ 1 rating / 11 % share Nielsen rating meaning that the episode was watched by an average of 7 @.@ 1 % of households and 11 % of all televisions were tuned to the episode when it was broadcast . The episode received a 4 @.@ 8 rating / 13 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 , tying with the ratings from the previous episode , " Chirp " . The episode became the second highest rated scripted series of the week it aired after Glee . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received positive reviews from critics . 
 Joel Keller of AOL 's TV Squad called the episode " one of the better ones of the season " . Despite this , he felt that the Mitch and Cam storyline while " funny " it was " not as funny as they usually are " . He also commented that " It 's just that sometimes Cam is too much Cam for his , or the audience 's , own good . " 
 Donna Bowman of The A.V. Club gave the episode an A- rating . She felt " this episode is a bit less than the sum of its parts ; or maybe the jigsaw pieces have been forced into place a little too emphatically . " 
 Rachel Maddux of New York gave the episode a positive review . She felt that the episode brought the series " out of [ its ] slump " and also commented " This kind of episode is pretty much why we started loving this show in the first place " . 
 Kara Klenk of TV Guide called it " another great episode . " 
 Matt Roush called the episode " comic gold " and felt the episode was " firing on all cylinders " . 
 James Poniewozik of Time gave the episode a positive review . He felt that " This episode may not quite have reached the level of " <unk> " , but by the time it built to its near @-@ four @-@ car @-@ pileup , it had strung together quite a run of funny and sweet moments . " 
 HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall , who is often critical of the series 's second season praised the episode commenting that " nearly everything was clicking " . He also positively compared it to a season one episode of the series when " where everything came together at the end in the style of the strongest season one episodes " . 
 = Kirsten Gillibrand = 
 Kirsten Elizabeth Rutnik Gillibrand ( / <unk> <unk> / <unk> @-@ stən <unk> @-@ ə @-@ brand ; born December 9 , 1966 ) is an American politician and the junior United States Senator from New York , in office since 2009 . Previously , she served in the United States House of Representatives , representing New York 's 20th congressional district ( 2007 – 09 ) . She is a member of the Democratic Party . 
 In December 2008 , President @-@ elect Barack Obama nominated Hillary Clinton as Secretary of State , leaving an empty seat in the New York senate delegation . After two months and many potential names considered , Governor David Paterson appointed Gillibrand to fill the seat . Gillibrand was required to run in a special election in 2010 , which she won with 63 % of the vote . She was re @-@ elected to a full six @-@ year term in 2012 with 72 % of the vote , the highest margin for any statewide candidate in New York . 
 A member of the Democratic Party 's relatively conservative Blue Dog faction while in the House , Gillibrand has been seen as a progressive since her appointment to the Senate . In both cases , her views were significantly defined by the respective constituency she served at the time — a conservative congressional district versus the generally liberal state of New York . For example , while quiet on the U.S. military 's " Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell " policy when she was in the House , during her first 18 months in the Senate , Gillibrand was an important part of the successful campaign to repeal it . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Kirsten Gillibrand was born in Albany , New York , on December 9 , 1966 , the daughter of Polly Edwina ( née Noonan ) and Douglas Paul Rutnik . Both parents are attorneys , and her father has worked as a lobbyist . The couple divorced in the late 1980s . Gillibrand has an older brother , Douglas Rutnik , and a younger sister , Erin Rutnik <unk> . Her maternal grandmother is Dorothea " Polly " Noonan , founder of the Albany Democratic Women 's Club , as well as a leader in Albany Mayor Erastus Corning 's powerful political machine , which lasted for more than 40 years . She has English , Austrian , Scottish , German , and Irish ancestry . 
 During her childhood and college years , Gillibrand used the nickname " Tina . " She began to use her birth name of Kirsten a few years after law school . In 1984 she graduated from Emma Willard School , an all @-@ women 's high school in Troy , New York , and then enrolled at Dartmouth College . Gillibrand majored in Asian Studies , studying in both Beijing and Taiwan . While in Beijing , she studied and lived with Connie Britton . Gillibrand graduated magna cum laude in 1988 . While at Dartmouth , she was a member of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority . During college , Gillibrand interned at Republican U.S. Senator Alfonse D 'Amato 's Albany office . Gillibrand went on to receive her J.D. from UCLA School of Law and pass the bar exam in 1991 . 
 = = Law career = = 
 In 1991 , Gillibrand joined the Manhattan @-@ based law firm of Davis Polk & <unk> as an associate . In 1992 , she took a leave from Davis Polk to serve as a law clerk to Judge Roger Miner on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Albany . 
 Gillibrand 's tenure at Davis Polk is best known for her work as a defense attorney for Tobacco company Philip Morris during major litigation , including both civil lawsuits and U.S. Justice Department criminal and civil racketeering probes . She became a senior associate while working on Philip Morris litigation . While this time in her career has proven controversial , Gillibrand indicates her work for Philip Morris allowed her to take on multiple pro bono cases defending abused women and their children , as well as other cases defending tenants seeking safe housing after lead paint and unsafe conditions were found in their homes . 
 While working at Davis Polk , Gillibrand became involved in — and later the leader of — the Women 's Leadership Forum , a program of the Democratic National Committee . Gillibrand states that a speech to the group by then @-@ First Lady Hillary Clinton inspired her : " [ Clinton ] was trying to encourage us to become more active in politics and she said , ' If you leave all the decision @-@ making to others , you might not like what they do , and you will have no one but yourself to blame . ' It was such a challenge to the women in the room . And it really hit me : She 's talking to me . " 
 Following her time at Davis Polk , Gillibrand served as Special Counsel to Secretary of Housing and Urban Development ( HUD ) Andrew Cuomo during the last year of the Clinton administration . Gillibrand worked on HUD 's Labor Initiative and its New Markets Initiative , as well as on TAP 's Young Leaders of the American Democracy , and strengthening Davis – Bacon Act enforcement . 
 In 1999 , Gillibrand began working on Hillary Clinton 's 2000 U.S. Senate campaign , focusing on campaigning to young women and encouraging them to join the effort . Many of those women later worked on Gillibrand 's campaigns . Gillibrand and Clinton became close during the election , with Clinton becoming something of a mentor to the young attorney . Gillibrand donated more than $ 12 @,@ 000 to Clinton 's senate campaigns . 
 In 2001 , Gillibrand became a partner in the Manhattan office of Boies , Schiller & Flexner , where a client was the Philip Morris parent company <unk> Group . In 2002 she informed Boies of interest in running for office and was allowed to transfer to the firm 's Albany office . She left Boies in 2005 to begin her 2006 campaign for Congress . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 = = = = 2006 = = = = 
 Gillibrand first ran for office in 2006 , in New York 's 20th congressional district against four @-@ term Republican incumbent John E. Sweeney . She considered running in 2004 , but Hillary Clinton believed circumstances would be more favorable in 2006 and advised her to wait until then . Traditionally conservative , the district and its electoral offices had been in Republican hands for all but four years since 1913 , and as of November 2006 , 197 @,@ 473 voters in the district were registered Republicans while 82 @,@ 737 were registered Democrats . Congressman Sweeney at the time said that no Republican could ever lose [ the district ] . Engaging New York 's electoral fusion election laws , Gillibrand ran on both the Democratic and Working Families lines ; in addition to having the Republican nomination , Sweeney was endorsed by the Conservative and Independence parties . 
 During the campaign , Gillibrand was popular with Democratic Party politicians . Mike McNulty , Democratic Congressman from the neighboring 21st congressional district , campaigned for her , as did both Hillary and Bill Clinton ; the former president appeared twice at campaign events . Both parties poured millions of dollars into the respective campaigns . 
 Many saw Gillibrand as moderate or conservative . The American Conservative stated after her eventual victory , " Gillibrand won her upstate New York district by running to the right : she campaigned against amnesty for illegal immigrants , promised to restore fiscal responsibility to Washington , and pledged to protect gun rights . " 
 Gillibrand 's legal representation of Philip Morris was an issue during the campaign . Her campaign finance records showed that she received $ 23 @,@ 200 in contributions from the company 's employees during her 2006 campaign for Congress . 
 The probable turning point in the election was the November 1 release of a December 2005 police report detailing a 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 call by Sweeney 's wife , in which she claimed Sweeney was " knocking her around the house . " The Sweeney campaign claimed the police report was false and promised to have the official report released by State Police , but did not do so . The Sweeney campaign released an ad in which Sweeney 's wife described Gillibrand 's campaign as " a disgrace . " 
 By November 5 , a Siena College Research Poll showed Gillibrand ahead of Sweeney 46 % to 43 % , and she ended up winning with 53 % of the vote . 
 = = = = 2008 = = = = 
 Following Gillibrand 's win , Republicans quickly began speculating about possible 2008 candidates . Len Cutler , director of the Center for the Study of Government and Politics at Siena College , said that the seat would be difficult for Gillibrand to hold in 2008 , noting Republicans substantially outnumbered Democrats in the district . 
 Gillibrand won her bid for re @-@ election in 2008 over former New York Secretary of State Sandy Treadwell , by a 62 % to 38 % margin . Treadwell lost by that margin despite significantly outspending Gillibrand and promising never to vote to raise taxes , not to accept a federal salary , and to limit himself to three terms in office . Campaign expenditures were the second highest in the nation for a House race . Democrats generally saw major successes during the 2008 congressional election , credited in part to a coattail effect from Barack Obama 's presidential campaign . 
 Gillibrand 's legal representation of Philip Morris was again an issue . Her campaign finance records showed that she received $ 18 @,@ 200 from Philip Morris employees for her 2008 campaign , putting her among the top dozen Democrats in such contributions . Questioned during the campaign about her work on behalf of Philip Morris , Gillibrand stated that she had voted in favor of all three anti @-@ tobacco bills in that session of Congress . She said that she never hid her work for Philip Morris , and she added that as an associate at her law firm , she had had no control over which clients she worked for . The New York Times reporting on this issue said that officially , Davis Polk associates are allowed to withdraw from representing clients with whom they have moral qualms . 
 = = = House tenure = = = 
 Upon taking office , Gillibrand joined the Blue Dog Coalition , a group of moderate to conservative Democrats . She was noted for voting against the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 , citing concerns about insufficient oversight and excessive earmarks . Gillibrand opposed New York plans to issue driver 's licenses to illegal immigrants , and voted in favor of legislation withholding federal funds from immigrant sanctuary cities . 
 After taking office , Gillibrand became the first member of Congress to publish her official schedule , listing everyone she met with on a given day . She also published earmark requests she received and her personal financial statement . This " Sunlight Report " , as her office termed it , was praised by a New York Times editorial in December 2006 as being a " quiet touch of revolution " in a non @-@ transparent system . Regarding the earmarking process , Gillibrand stated she wanted what was best for her district and would require every project to pass a " greatest @-@ need , greatest @-@ good " test . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 While in the House of Representatives , Gillibrand served on the following committees : 
 Committee on Agriculture 
 Subcommittee on Conservation , Credit , Energy , and Research 
 Subcommittee on Horticulture and Organic Agriculture 
 Subcommittee on Livestock , Dairy , and Poultry ( Chair ) 
 Committee on Armed Services 
 Subcommittee on Seapower and Expeditionary Forces 
 Subcommittee on Terrorism and Unconventional Threats 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 On December 1 , 2008 , President @-@ elect Barack Obama announced his choice of Hillary Clinton , the junior U.S. Senator from New York , as Secretary of State . This began a two @-@ month search process to fill her vacant Senate seat . Upon a Senate vacancy , under New York law , the Governor appoints a replacement . A special election was held in 2010 , for the remainder of the full term , ending in January 2013 . 
 Governor Paterson 's selection process began with a number of prominent names and high @-@ ranking New York Democrats , including Andrew Cuomo and Caroline Kennedy , vying for the spot . Gillibrand quietly campaigned to Paterson for the position , meeting secretly with him on at least one occasion ; she says she made an effort to underscore her successful House elections in a largely conservative district , adding that she could be a good complement to Chuck Schumer . Gillibrand was presumed a likely choice in the days before the official announcement ; Paterson held a press conference at noon on January 23 announcing Gillibrand as his choice . 
 The response within New York to the appointment was mixed . The upstate media was generally optimistic about appointment of an upstate Senator , as one had not been elected after Charles Goodell left office in 1971 . Many <unk> were disappointed with the selection , with some media outlets stating that Paterson had ignored the electoral influence of New York City and downstate on state politics ( due to the area 's population ) . One questioned whether Paterson 's administration was aware of " [ where ] statewide elections are won and lost " . Gillibrand was relatively unknown statewide , with many voters finding the choice surprising . One source stated , " With every Democrat in New York ... angling for the appointment , there was a sense of bafflement , belittlement , and bruised egos when Paterson tapped the junior legislator unknown outside of Albany . " 
 Gillibrand was sworn in on January 26 , 2009 ; at 42 , she entered the chamber as the youngest senator in the 111th Congress . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 Gillibrand had numerous potential challengers in the September 14 , 2010 Democratic primary election . Some were obvious at the time of her appointment . Most notably , Long Island Congresswoman Carolyn McCarthy was unhappy with Gillibrand 's stance on gun control , but McCarthy ultimately decided not to run . By March 2009 , Harold Ford , Jr . , former Congressman from Tennessee , considered a run but ultimately decided against it . Congressman Steve Israel was also a contender but was talked out of it by President Obama . 
 Concerned about a possible schism in the party that could lead to a heated primary , split electorate , and weakened stance , high @-@ ranking members of the party backed Gillibrand and requested major opponents not to run . In the end , Gillibrand faced Gail Goode , a lawyer from New York City , and won the primary with 76 % of the vote . 
 In what was initially expected to be a heated race , Gillibrand easily prevailed against former Republican congressman Joseph DioGuardi . This was Gillibrand 's first statewide election . By the end of October , a Quinnipiac University Polling Institute poll placed Gillibrand over DioGuardi 57 @-@ 34 % . Gillibrand won the November election 63 – 35 % , carrying 54 of New York 's 62 counties . The counties that supported DioGuardi did so by a margin no greater than 10 % . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 Gillibrand 's special election victory gave her the right to serve the rest of Clinton 's second term , which ended in January 2013 . Gillibrand ran for a full six @-@ year term in November 2012 . In the general election , Gillibrand faced challenger Wendy E. Long , an attorney running on both the Republican Party and Conservative Party lines . Gillibrand was endorsed by The New York Times and the Democrat and Chronicle . She won the seat with 72 @.@ 2 % of the vote , the largest victory margin for a statewide candidate in New York history , and ahead of Schumer 's 71 @.@ 2 % victory in 2004 . She carried all but two mostly rural counties in western New York . 
 = = = Senate tenure = = = 
 On April 9 , 2009 , a combined Schumer – Gillibrand press release stated strong support of a Latino being nominated to the Supreme Court at the time of the next vacancy . Their first choice was Sonia Sotomayor . The two introduced her at Sotomayor 's Senate confirmation hearing in July . 
 During the lame duck session of the 111th Congress , Gillibrand scored two substantial legislative victories : the repeal of Don 't Ask , Don 't Tell and the passage of the James Zadroga 9 / 11 Health and Compensation Act . Both were issues she had advocated for during that session . In the aftermath of these victories , many commentators opined that these victories marked her emergence on the national stage . 
 In March 2011 , Gillibrand co @-@ sponsored the PROTECT IP Act , which would restrict access to web sites judged to be infringing copyrights , but ultimately announced she would not support the bill as @-@ is due to wide critical public response . 
 In 2012 , Gillibrand authored a portion of the <unk> Act , which extended limitations on insider trading by members of Congress . A version of the bill , merged by Senator Joe Lieberman with content from another bill authored by Senator Scott Brown , was passed by Congress and signed into law by President Obama in April . 
 In 2013 , Gillibrand proposed legislation that would remove sexual assault cases from the military chain of command ; the bill was cosponsored by Republican senators Rand Paul and Ted Cruz . Gillibrand 's bill failed to gain enough votes to break a filibuster in March 2014 , however her efforts likely improved her standing as a lawmaker in the Senate . 
 In 2014 , Gillibrand was included in the annual Time 100 , Time magazine 's list of the 100 most influential people . 
 In 2015 , Gillibrand invited campus activist Emma <unk> to attend the State of the Union Address . Her invitation was intended to promote the Campus Accountability and Safety Act , a bill Gillibrand co @-@ sponsored . However , Families Advocating for Campus Equality and others have criticized this decision , and Gillibrand 's public description of <unk> 's accused assailant as " her rapist , " pointing out that both a university hearing and a police investigation had cleared the man of the allegations ; critics of Gillibrand 's decision have accused her of disregarding due process and <unk> a man 's reputation in order to gain support for a political objective . 
 Gillibrand has been less deferential to Senate seniority protocols and more uncompromising in her positions – such as repeal of " don 't ask , don 't tell " and combating sexual assault in the military – than most freshman senators , traits which have sometimes caused friction with her Democratic colleagues . Republican Charles Grassley of Iowa has contrasted her approach with other New Yorkers of both parties , saying she is distinguished by " her determination and knowledge and willingness to sit down one on one with senators and explain what she is up to " . Her fund @-@ raising ability – almost $ 30 million from 2009 through 2013 – has helped her become a mentor for female candidates nationwide . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 While in the Senate , Gillibrand served on the following committees : 
 Committee on Agriculture , Nutrition and Forestry 
 Subcommittee on Domestic and Foreign Marketing , Inspection , and Plant and Animal Health ( Ranking Member ) 
 Subcommittee on Energy , Science and Technology 
 Subcommittee on Hunger , Nutrition and Family Farms 
 Committee on Armed Services 
 Subcommittee on <unk> 
 Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities 
 Subcommittee on Strategic Forces 
 Committee on Environment and Public Works 
 Subcommittee on Green Jobs and the New Economy 
 Subcommittee on Oversight 
 Subcommittee on Superfund , <unk> and Environmental Health 
 Special Committee on Aging 
 = = = Caucus memberships = = = 
 Healthy Kids Caucus 
 International Conservation Caucus 
 Senate Women 's Caucus 
 Sportsmen 's Caucus 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Gillibrand 's views on many issues can be defined as an evolution based on constituent needs ; some have characterized this progression as flip @-@ flopping . In the House , she was known as a conservative liberal or centrist , serving at the will of a highly conservative electorate . She was a member of the Blue Dog Coalition , a caucus of fiscally conservative Democrats . In the Senate , she is known more as a populist @-@ leaning liberal , as she represents a heavily Democratic state . At the time of her appointment to the Senate , a Salon.com editorial said that Gillibrand 's reputation in the House characterized her as " a hybrid politician who has remained conservative enough to keep her seat while appearing progressive enough to raise money downstate . " 
 On social issues , Gillibrand is generally liberal , supporting an abortion rights agenda , legalization of same @-@ sex marriage , and health care reform with a public option . She is a strong advocate for government transparency , being one of a few members of Congress that releases much personal and scheduling information . She is also a strong supporter of female equality and involvement , having begun the website <unk> in 2011 . Although a supporter of gun rights while in the House , Gillibrand has since moved in the direction of gun control . On economic issues , Gillibrand has been more fiscally conservative . 
 Gillibrand has received an 8 % rating from the American Conservative Union , 70 % from Americans for Democratic Action , and 90 % from the American Civil Liberties Union . <unk> rates Gillibrand as a " hard @-@ core liberal . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Gillibrand lives in the town of Brunswick with her husband Jonathan and their two sons . She met Jonathan , a venture capitalist and British national , on a blind date . Jonathan planned to be in the United States for only a year while studying for his Master of Business Administration at Columbia University , but he stayed in the country because of his relationship with her . The two were married in a Catholic church in Manhattan in 2001 . Because of the requirements of Kirsten Gillibrand 's office , the family spends most of its time in Washington . In 2011 , the <unk> sold their house in Hudson and purchased a home in Brunswick to be closer to Kirsten 's family in Albany . 
 The <unk> had their first child , Theodore , in 2003 , and their second son , Henry , in 2008 . She continued to work until the day of Henry 's delivery , for which she received a standing ovation from her colleagues in the House the next day . 
 = = Published works = = 
 In 2014 , Gillibrand published her first book , Off the <unk> : Raise Your Voice , Change the World . The candid memoir was notable in the media upon release due to <unk> of a future presidential run as well as revealing a culture of sexism in the Senate , including specific comments made to her by other members of Congress about her weight and appearance . Off the <unk> debuted at number 8 on the New York Times Best Seller list for hardcover nonfiction . 
 = = Electoral history = = 
 * Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families line and Sweeney was also nominated on the Independence and Conservative lines . 
 * Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families line and Treadwell was also nominated on the Independence and Conservative lines . 
 * Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families and Independence lines and DioGuardi was also nominated on the Conservative line . 
 * Gillibrand was also nominated on the Working Families and Independence lines and Long was also nominated on the Conservative line . 
 = Henry Inman ( Royal Navy officer ) = 
 Captain Henry Inman ( 1762 – 15 July 1809 ) was a British Royal Navy officer during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries , serving in the American Revolutionary War , the French Revolutionary Wars and the Napoleonic Wars . Inman 's service in the American war was punctuated by three shipwrecks : the burning of HMS Lark off Rhode Island in the face of a superior French squadron , the grounding of HMS Santa Monica on Tortola and the foundering of Hector following an engagement with two French ships in the Mid @-@ Atlantic . After the war he was placed in reserve until the Spanish Armament of 1790 , when he was given command of the 14 @-@ gun cutter HMS Pygmy stationed off the Isle of Man . 
 Inman 's subsequent service career was principally in frigates : he was engaged at the Siege of Toulon in HMS Aurore , in a raid at Dunkirk in HMS Andromeda and participated in the Battle of Copenhagen as captain of HMS Désirée . He later served on the ship of the line HMS Triumph at the Battle of Cape Finisterre and was subsequently called to give evidence at the court martial of Sir Robert Calder . After the battle off Finisterre , Inman suffered from ill @-@ health and remained on shore duty until 1809 when he was appointed as Admiralty commissioner for Madras . The lengthy sea journey to India exacerbated his existing health problems and he died just ten days after his arrival . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henry Inman was born in 1762 , the son of the vicar of the Somerset village of Burrington , Reverend George Inman . Educated by his father until the age of 14 , Inman was sent to join the Royal Navy in 1776 , posted aboard the 90 @-@ gun second rate HMS Barfleur . Barfleur 's captain was Sir Samuel Hood , later to become Viscount Hood , who formed a close personal and professional attachment to his subordinate that continued throughout Inman 's military service . After two years on Barfleur , Inman was transferred to the frigate HMS Lark in 1778 for service off New England . The American Revolutionary War had broken out three years earlier , but Barfleur had been based in Britain and so there had been no opportunity for action aboard Hood 's ship . His career in Lark was cut short on 5 August 1778 , when Captain John Brisbane , the senior officer off Rhode Island , ordered the frigate beached and burnt with four other ships when a French fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Comte d 'Estaing appeared off the harbour . Inman and the rest of the crew were transferred to shore duties and over the following week engaged D 'Estaing 's ships from fixed gun batteries as they bombarded the British positions . 
 Inman had lost all his personal possessions in the destruction of Lark and was forced to replace his uniform from his own wages when the Navy refused to provide compensation . Returning to Britain in the frigate HMS Pearl , Inman was promoted to lieutenant in 1780 and returned to the Americas in HMS Camel , transferred soon afterwards into HMS Santa Monica in the West Indies . Shortly after his arrival however , Inman was once again shipwrecked when Santa Monica grounded off Tortola . Although the crew reached the shore in small boats , the ship broke up rapidly and once again Inman lost all of his possessions . Remaining on shore service in the West Indies for the next two years , Inman was again employed in the aftermath of the Battle of the Saintes , appointed to the prize crew of the captured French vessel Hector for the journey to Britain . Hector 's masts and hull had been seriously damaged in the battle , requiring lighter spars to be fitted and 22 of her 74 guns removed to make her more seaworthy . As the fleet could not spare men to man her , the 223 @-@ strong prize crew was made up of men pressed in the Caribbean , principally invalids unfit for frontline service . 
 On 14 August 1782 , Hector separated from the rest of the prize ships in heavy weather and on 22 August encountered two large French frigates , Aigle of 40 guns and Gloire of 32 guns . Together these vessels significantly outclassed the leaky ship of the line in weight of shot , but Captain John Bourchier determined to resist the French attack , preparing Hector as the French approached . The French ships surrounded Hector at 02 : 00 and the engagement was furiously contested , with Bourchier wounded early on and many of his officers following him below with serious injuries . Within a short period , Inman was the only officer remaining on deck , but he was able to successfully drive the French away following a failed attempt to board , although Hector was left in a severely damaged state with 75 men killed or wounded . A hurricane that followed the battle inflicted further damage and the ship was badly flooded , seawater ruining the food supplies and threatening to sink the ship completely . Some of the crew were so ill and exhausted that they collapsed and died while manning the pumps . Inman only managed to prevent the remaining sailors from fleeing below decks by carrying loaded pistols and threatening men who refused his orders . Once the storm had abated it was clear that Hector was foundering ; her rudder and masts had been torn away and the pumps were unable to keep pace with the water leaking through the battered hull . For two weeks Inman made desperate efforts to keep the ship afloat , as food and water supplies ran low and the hull began to collapse in on itself . Fortunately for the men aboard Hector , the tiny snow Hawke appeared and approached the ship of the line to render assistance . Throwing his cargo overboard , Captain John Hill worked with Inman to supervise the transfer of all of Hector 's remaining men , many of whom were wounded or sick , into Hawke as Hector rapidly sank . No men were lost in the operation and Inman was the last to leave , Hector disappearing ten minutes after the boat carrying him reached Hawke . The snow set sail for St John 's in Newfoundland , its crew and passengers subsisting on short rations ; they arrived off the port on the same day they consumed the last water supplies . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 With the Peace of Versailles in 1783 , the war ended and Inman was placed on half @-@ pay in reserve , suffering from poor health caused by his ordeal on Hector . Retiring to his father 's house in Somerset , Inman was not employed again until 1790 , when the Spanish Armament provoked a rapid expansion of the Navy . He was initially commissioned into the frigate HMS Latona under Captain Albemarle Bertie , but in the aftermath of the emergency Inman was given command of the 14 @-@ gun cutter HMS Pigmy , stationed on the Isle of Man . He also married the daughter of Commander Thomas Dalby in 1791 ; the couple would have a son and a daughter . With the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in 1793 , Inman was transferred to Lord Hood 's flagship HMS Victory in the Mediterranean , receiving a promotion to commander on 11 September . Serving during the Siege of Toulon , Inman assisted in the removal of captured French ships from Toulon harbour and as a reward was promoted to post captain on 9 October and given command of the newly captured HMS Espion . While she was stationed off Hyères , Aurore engaged French Republican gun batteries , expending 20 @,@ 000 cannonballs in November and December . 
 When Toulon fell to the Republicans on 18 December 1793 , Inman was initially sent to Corsica and then tasked with carrying a large number of Republican prisoners of war to Malta . With an understrength crew , Inman had difficulty in controlling the prisoners , who deliberately holed the bottom of the ship during the voyage . On arriving at Malta , Inman anchored his leaking ship in deep water under the guns of the port 's defensive batteries and then removed his entire crew , leaving instructions with the prisoners that they could either pump out the water and repair the damage or drown when the ship sank . The prisoners repaired the ship and were taken into captivity on Malta . Transferred from Aurore , Inman spent a brief period on the frigate HMS San Fiorenzo before returning to Britain in command of the fourth rate HMS Romney . 
 Romney was paid off on arrival in Britain and Inman returned to the reserve until 1796 , when he was made temporary captain of Lion and then took command of the frigate HMS Espion . Ordered to sail for the River Clyde , Inman set sail with his family on board but Espion , an old ship in a poor state of repair , was struck by a gale in the English Channel and was almost destroyed . Eventually reaching safety in Spithead , Espion was reduced to the reserve until extensive repairs could be made and Inman was again placed on half @-@ pay . He was reinstated in 1797 as temporary commander of the ship of the line HMS Belliqueux in the immediate aftermath of the Nore Mutiny . Belliqueux had been heavily involved in the uprising : three members of the crew were under sentence of death and six others facing severe punishment for their part in the revolt . Inman was consequently afraid for his life and for the next six months slept with three loaded pistols beside him . Belliqueux was assigned to the blockade of the French Atlantic seaport of Brest and Inman continued to perform this service after he was moved to HMS Ramillies during 1798 , in which he participated in the chase that eventually led to the capture of Hercule . He was subsequently posted to the frigate HMS Andromeda in early 1799 . 
 = = = Désirée and Copenhagen = = = 
 On 2 August 1799 , Inman seized the neutral merchant ship <unk> carrying a cargo of hemp . Although the vessel 's legal state was uncertain , no merchant claimed its cargo and in 1802 she was condemned and sold for over 247 l . In November 1799 , Andromeda was attached to the force that evacuated the Duke of York 's army following the failure of the Expedition to Holland and he remained in the region , observing movements off the Elbe . Andromeda also participated in the Raid on Dunkirk on 7 July 1800 , when four French frigates were attacked by a squadron of British ships in Dunkirk harbour . Although an assault with fireships failed , HMS Dart captured the French frigate Désirée , with Inman following in the cutter Vigilant , crewed by thirty volunteers from Andromeda . Under fire from all sides , Inman successfully boarded the French ship following her surrender and brought her out of the harbour , sending the crew ashore on parole to avoid having to assign men to guard them . Désirée was brought back to Britain and commissioned into the Royal Navy , Inman taking command of the new frigate . 
 In 1801 , Désirée was attached to the fleet gathering at Yarmouth under Sir Hyde Parker and Lord Nelson for service in the Baltic Sea against the League of Armed Neutrality . Sailing for Denmark in March , the fleet anchored off Copenhagen and on 1 April a squadron under Nelson closed with the Danish fleet , which was anchored in a line of battle protecting the harbour . Désirée was ordered to operate at the Southern end of the Danish line , engaging shore batteries and nearby ships while their attention was focused on the main British battle @-@ line . When the battle began at 10 : 00 on 2 April , Inman engaged the <unk> , which was firing on the 50 @-@ gun HMS Isis . Désirée succeeded in inflicting considerable damage on the Danish ship and drew some fire away from the battered Isis . Once <unk> had been abandoned by her Danish crew Désirée was engaged with a number of Danish shore batteries , but due to poor aim of the Danish gunners , who fired over the frigate throughout the engagement , she was not badly damaged and suffered only four men wounded in the battle . At 14 : 00 Danish fire slackened and shortly afterwards Nelson began to withdraw his ships out of range of the Danes . A number of his ships of the line grounded on the complicated shoals in the region and when Désirée came to the assistance of HMS Bellona ] she too became stuck . Bellona was hauled off by Isis shortly afterwards , but Désirée was forced to remain on the sandbank for two days until boats from the squadron could be spared to drag her free . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 At the Peace of Amiens , Désirée remained in service with orders to sail for the West Indies . Inman , whose health was beginning to suffer , resigned command and returned to his family on half @-@ pay until the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars in 1803 , when he was given the 64 @-@ gun ship of the line HMS Utrecht . In 1804 he moved from Utrecht to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Triumph and in February 1805 was attached to the fleet under Sir Robert Calder stationed off Cape Finisterre during the Trafalgar campaign . At 11 : 00 on 22 July , Calder sighted the French and Spanish fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve emerging from the fog off Ferrol and attacked , Triumph third in line behind HMS Hero and HMS Ajax . The battle lines tacked and closed with one another , beginning a general action at 18 : 00 , eventually separating at 21 : 30 . Triumph was heavily engaged in the melee , in which two Spanish ships were captured , and suffered severe damage although light casualties of five killed and six wounded . On 26 July , Inman was briefly detached from the fleet to chase away the French frigate Didon before returning to her station in the battle line , but the action was not resumed , Calder ordering the fleet to return to Britain . In the aftermath of the battle , Calder faced a court martial for his failure to resume the engagement and Inman was called to give evidence : when questioned as to why he had not informed Calder about the damage to his ship , Inman replied " I did not think that a proper time to trouble the admiral with my complaints " . 
 Inman 's health had suffered during his long career at sea , and although he returned to sea in December 1805 aboard Triumph during the Atlantic campaign of 1806 as part of the squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Richard Strachan , his ill @-@ health forced his replacement by Sir Thomas Hardy in May . Returning to his family ashore , Inman was initially given command of the sea fencibles at King 's Lynn before he was made Admiralty commissioner at Madras by Lord Mulgrave in 1809 . The journey to India broke his health completely and he died on 15 July 1809 , just ten days after arriving in Madras . 
 = Rancho San Francisco = 
 Rancho San Francisco was a land grant in present @-@ day northwestern Los Angeles County and eastern Ventura County , California . It was a grant of 48 @,@ 612 acres ( 19 @,@ 673 ha ) by Governor Juan B. Alvarado to Antonio del Valle , a Mexican army officer , in recognition for his service to the state of Alta California . It is not related to the city of San Francisco . 
 The rancho was the location of the first popularly known finding of gold in the Southern California area in 1842 , in Placerita Canyon . Much of the present day city of Santa Clarita lies within the boundary of what was Rancho San Francisco . The adobe headquarters of the rancho , and the site of the gold find ( known today as the " Oak of the Golden Dream " ) , are designated California Historical Landmarks . The rancho included portions of the San Gabriel , Santa Susana , <unk> , and Sierra Pelona Mountain ranges . 
 = = Early history = = 
 After Mission San Fernando Rey de España was established in 1797 , the administrators there realized they would need more land for agriculture and livestock , and they looked north to the Santa Clarita Valley to establish their estancia , or mission rancho . Subsequently , the Tataviam who had been living there were relocated to the Mission , where they were baptized and put to work . The <unk> de San Francisco Xavier was built in 1804 at the confluence of Castaic Creek and the Santa Clara River . 
 Following the Mexican War of Independence , the missions were secularized and the land taken by the Mexican government . In 1834 , Lieutenant Antonio del Valle was assigned to inventory the property of Mission San Fernando . The rancho was supposed to be returned to the Tataviam , but Governor Alvarado deeded it to his friend Del Valle instead on January 22 , 1839 . The Del Valle family moved into the former estancia buildings ( near what is now Castaic ) . 
 Del Valle died in 1841 . On his deathbed , he attempted to reconcile with his estranged son Ygnacio by writing him a letter and offering the entire rancho to him as his inheritance . Del Valle died before his son received the letter . Ygnacio took possession of the land . 
 = = Los Angeles area gold find = = 
 On March 9 , 1842 , Francisco Lopez , the uncle of Antonio 's second wife , Jacoba Feliz , took a rest under an oak tree in Placerita Canyon and had a dream that he was floating on a pool of gold . When he awoke , he pulled a few wild onions from the ground finding flakes of gold in the roots . Contrary to some portraits of him as a farmer who stumbled upon his discovery by dumb luck , Lopez had studied mineralogy at the University of Mexico and had been actively searching for gold . Evidence suggests that gold had previously been found in the area about thirty years prior , but the Lopez gold find was the first popularly documented incident in the area . This sparked a gold rush on a much smaller scale than the 1849 California Gold Rush . About 2 @,@ 000 people , mostly from the Mexican state of Sonora , came to Rancho San Francisco to mine the gold . 
 Knowledge of the gold find seems to have remained largely within Mexican territory . John Sutter , who sided with Gov. Manuel <unk> during the governor 's power struggle with former Gov. Alvarado , was imprisoned after the <unk> insurrectionists won the Battle of Providencia in 1845 . After his release , he headed north through Placerita Canyon , saw the mining operation , and was determined to search for gold near where he later established Sutter 's Fort ; the latter in Mexican territory . 
 During the Mexican – American War , Del Valle destroyed the mine to prevent the United States from gaining its control . The tree where Lopez took his nap is now known as the " Oak of the Golden Dream " and is registered as California Historic Landmark # 168 . 
 = = Later history = = 
 The Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo endorsed legitimate land titles held by the ceded land 's owners . Jacoba Feliz sued for control of Rancho San Francisco . She prevailed and a judgment was issued in her favor in 1857 . Ygnacio Del Valle received the westernmost portion of 13 @,@ 599 acres ( 5 @,@ 503 ha ) , Feliz ( now <unk> ) took 21 @,@ 307 acres ( 8 @,@ 623 ha ) , and her six children received 4 @,@ 684 acres ( 1 @,@ 896 ha ) each . 
 Unfortunately , at this time Southern California experienced a great deal of flooding , and ranchers were forced to mortgage their properties in order to sustain their needs during the interruption in producing their food and needs and other damages to the land and buildings . Feliz mortgaged her portion of the land to William <unk> , who returned a portion of it back to Del Valle in exchange for him settling her debts . Floods were followed by droughts , which again exacerbated the ranchers ' problems . Finally , in 1862 Del Valle was forced to sell off most of his land to oil speculators ( the Philadelphia and California Petroleum Company headed by Thomas A. Scott ) , keeping only his Rancho Camulos . The oilmen were unable to find any oil , and Rancho San Francisco eventually landed in the hands of Henry Newhall , whose name is now closely associated with the Santa Clarita Valley area . 
 Newhall granted right @-@ of @-@ way to Southern Pacific Railroad to build a rail line to Los Angeles and sold them a portion of the land , upon which sprang a new town that the company named after him , Newhall . Another town grew around the train station and Newhall named it after his hometown , Saugus . 
 After Newhall 's death in 1882 , his heirs formed the Newhall Land and Farming Company , which managed the lands . In 1936 , Atholl McBean , Newhall 's grandson @-@ in @-@ law , found oil on the property and changed the name to Newhall Ranch . 
 = = Historic designations = = 
 California Historical Landmark NO . 556 <unk> SAN <unk> Adobe 
 Placerita Canyon State Park – California Historical Landmark NO . 168 OAK OF THE <unk> DREAM : where Francisco Lopez found gold . 
 = The Boat Race 1903 = 
 The 60th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1903 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was umpired for the first time by former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman , whose misfiring starter pistol caused confusion at the start , allowing Cambridge to gain an advantage . They went on to win by six lengths in a time of 19 minutes 33 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 33 – 26 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1902 race by five lengths , and led overall with 33 victories to Cambridge 's 25 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races and C. K. Philips who had represented the Dark Blues four times between 1895 and 1898 . Cambridge were coached by Charles John <unk> who had represented the Light Blues in the 1886 and 1887 races and Claude Goldie who had rowed in the 1898 and 1899 races . The Light Blues were later coached by William Dudley Ward . The umpire for the first time was old Etonian and former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman who rowed in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 During the build @-@ up to the race , Oxford suffered a series of misfortunes , including a bout of influenza which caused several changes in the Dark Blue crew . Centred on the group of Blues returning from the previous year , Cambridge were able to produce " a very fast crew " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 3 @.@ 5 lb ( 77 @.@ 6 kg ) , 4 pounds ( 1 @.@ 8 kg ) more per rower than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained four rowers with Boat Race experience , including A. de L. Long who was rowing in his third consecutive event . Cambridge saw six rowers return from the 1902 crew , including W. H. Chapman , H. B. Grylls , C. W. H. Taylor and R. H. Nelson , all of whom were taking part in their third Boat Race . Only Oxford 's Devereux Milburn was registered as a non @-@ British rower . An American , he attended The Hill School in Pennsylvania before graduating from Harvard University . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . On a strong tide , umpire Pitman attempted to start the race at 3 : 35 p.m. After he shouted " Are you ready ? " , Cambridge squared their blades and were dragged away from their stakeboat , and rowed on despite Pitman failing to correctly discharge the starter pistol . Worse , he failed to notice the departing Light Blues who were already one third of a length ahead before Oxford got on their way . Somewhat dismayed by the disadvantageous start , author and the number seven for this year 's race George Drinkwater stated they " rowed like a beaten crew from the first stroke . " 
 With a lead of nearly three lengths by Hammersmith Bridge , Cambridge pushed on to hold a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half length lead at Barnes Bridge , and passed the finishing post six lengths ahead , in a time of 19 minutes 33 seconds . It was their second consecutive win and their fourth in five years , and took the overall record in the event to 33 – 26 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Palazzo Rusticucci @-@ Accoramboni = 
 The Palazzo Rusticucci @-@ Accoramboni ( also known as Palazzo Rusticucci or Palazzo Accoramboni ) is a reconstructed late Renaissance palace in Rome . Erected by the will of Cardinal Girolamo Rusticucci , it was designed by Domenico Fontana and Carlo Maderno joining together several buildings already existing . Due to that , the building was not considered a good example of <unk> lying along the north side of the Borgo Nuovo street , after 1667 the building faced the north side of the large new square located west of the new Saint Peter 's Square , designed in those years by Gian Lorenzo Bernini . The square , named after the palace Piazza Rusticucci , was demolished in 1937 @-@ 40 because of the erection of the new Via della Conciliazione . In 1940 the palace was demolished and rebuilt with a different footprint along the north side of the new avenue , constructed between 1936 and 1950 , which links St Peter 's Basilica and the Vatican City to the center of Rome . 
 = = Location = = 
 The palace is located in the Borgo rione of Rome along the north side of Via della Conciliazione avenue , its main facade facing south . It belongs to the same block as the Palazzo dei Convertendi , another Renaissance building demolished in the late 1930s and reconstructed in the 1940s east of it . To the west Via Rusticucci separates it from the north Propylaea delimiting the square Piazza Pio XII ( which roughly occupies the same area as the old Piazza Rusticucci ) and facing Saint Peter 's Square . The north side of the building borders two other reconstructed Renaissance edifices of Borgo : the Palazzo Jacopo da Brescia and the house of the physician of Paul III . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Renaissance and baroque = = = 
 Girolamo Rusticucci , secretary of Pope Pius V ( r . 1566 – 72 ) , who in 1570 appointed him Cardinal of Santa Susanna , bought a palace lying almost at the end of the Via <unk> ( the road later named Borgo Nuovo ) in Borgo on 31 March 1572 . This building , once owned by Roberto Strozzi ( exponent of the banker family from Florence ) , had been sold in 1567 to Pope Pius V , who donated it immediately to his nephew Paolo Ghislieri . Ghislieri sold it to the Cardinal five years later with the accordance of the pope . In order to enlarge his building , Rusticucci also bought several nearby houses . Selling negotiation not always finished successfully : an old woman refused to sell her home , forcing the architect to engulf it in the enlarged palace . However , the woman and her heirs could live there until they sold it to the owner of the " Caffè San Pietro " , one of the oldest coffee shops in the city . The strong @-@ willed opposition of another owner forced the cardinal to renounce to extend the building to the east until Borgo Sant 'Angelo , although the works had already commenced . A powerful angular rustication erected at the corner between Borgo Sant 'Angelo and Borgo Nuovo testified until 1937 about the Rusticucci 's intention . Several years went by after the acquisition of Ghislieri 's palace , until in 1584 Rusticucci gave the task to design a larger palace to architect Domenico Fontana . After Fontana 's transferral to Naples who , after the death of Sixtus V ( r . 1585 – 90 ) and the brief intermezzo of Innocent IX ( r . <unk> 1591 ) , could not win the favor of Pope Clement VIII ( r . 1592 – 1605 ) , the task was finished by his nephew Carlo Maderno . It is also worth noticing that in the early 16th century one of the houses which predated the palace hosted an osteria . In the late <unk> Raphael , at that time painting the Vatican loggias , often had lunch together with his aides in a rear room of that eatery . The artists often discussed work problems during lunch , sketching different solutions on the walls of the room . When the palace was built , the osteria remained in place , and the owners always took care of the walls of that room throughout the years . 
 Around 1630 the palace housed for a brief time the Collegio <unk> , one of the oldest schools in Rome , founded in those years by Joseph <unk> , and presently in Via del <unk> , in Trevi rione . 
 After that , the Rusticucci 's heirs sold the building to Mario Accoramboni , member of a family of lesser nobility which had emigrated from the <unk> town of <unk> to Rome . Exponents of the family acquired a high rank in the church and in the city : Ottavio was bishop of <unk> and Urbino , Roberto <unk> at Ferrara , and during the epidemic of 1657 , the owner of the palace , Roberto Accoramboni , received the task ( personally given by Pope Alexander VII ) of defending Borgo from the plague . In 1667 , the erection of the Colonnades of St. Peter 's square by Gian Lorenzo Bernini made it necessary to demolish the last block of houses ( " <unk> " ) in front of the new square , situated between the roads of Borgo Vecchio and Borgo Nuovo : this block was named " <unk> del <unk> " , since one of <unk> buildings hosted the Priory of the knights of Rhodes . The demolition created a large new square , which was delimited on the north side by Palazzo Rusticucci . This square , representing the vestibule of Saint Peter 's Square , took its name from the building . In 1775 in a shop at the ground floor was founded the " Caffè San Pietro " , one of the oldest Coffee Houses in Rome . 
 = = = Modern age = = = 
 On 4 March 1902 the palace became the seat of the Belgian Historical Institute , and after a short time was acquired by the Congregation of Propaganda Fide . In 1940 , because of the construction of the Via della Conciliazione , it was demolished and partially rebuilt in the same year with design by Clemente <unk> Vici , exponent of a Roman dynasty of architects . 
 Through the expropriation decrees , the commercial activities in the palace are known : in 1937 two shops were active along Piazza Rusticucci selling religious articles : moreover , the ground floor of the building hosted a tobacconist , a bakery , a pastry shop and a restaurant . 
 The bakery was originally the aforementioned osteria where Raphael had painted his sketches . Towards the mid @-@ 19th century a Papal Zouave was killed in that eatery , which was shut down by the authorities as a result . When the shop was reopened several years after the capture of Rome on 20 September 1870 , hosting first a pizzeria , then the aforementioned bakery , the rooms were renovated , and all the sketches were lost . 
 = = Description = = 
 The original building had a harmonious and unadorned prospect , known through Rome 's plan by Antonio <unk> published in 1593 , published when the palace was just finished , with seventeen windows and three floors . The facade along Via <unk> resembles those of coeval buildings , like Palazzo <unk> , built in Via del Corso by Bartolomeo Ammannati . Resulting from the union of several small houses , the edifice was very long , especially after the addition of another wing at the west end , along Via del Mascherino , sixty years after the death of Rusticucci in 1603 . After this addition , the palace was unanimously described by the coeval city 's guides as " lacking grace " . Its main front had a monotonous and modest appearance : it was 83 @.@ 35 metres ( 273 @.@ 5 ft ) long , with three floors and a mezzanine , twenty @-@ two windows and a rusticated portal . Its area covered 2 @,@ 700 square metres ( 29 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . To the right of the entrance lay a rectangular yard with three orders , doric , ionic and corinthian . On the opposite side lay a smaller square yard , surrounded by a portico with <unk> . 
 The reconstructed building is shorter , having only 13 windows along its façade , which shows exposed bricks . The two yards have been rebuilt , while the cornices of the windows and the portal come from the original edifice . The palace as of today ( 2016 ) still hosts the " Caffè San Pietro " , which has its seat here since its establishment . 
 A fountain erected in the palace 's yard has been moved to the garden lying between the church of S. Alessio and that of Santa Sabina on the Aventine Hill . 
 = M @-@ 91 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 91 is a largely north – south state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . It runs from Belding to south of Lakeview . Its 24 @-@ mile ( 39 km ) length exists entirely within Ionia and Montcalm counties . It is all undivided surface route . Aside from the two Michigan state highways that are its termini , it has only one other <unk> with any Michigan state highway , and that is with M @-@ 57 in Greenville . 
 M @-@ 91 was formed when M @-@ 66 was rerouted in the 1940s . At the time , the highway continued south to Lowell , but subsequent transfers or roadway sections have truncated the route to its present form . For a time period in the 1980s , M @-@ 91 was even a discontinuous highway when a section in the middle was transferred to county control before the southernmost section was transferred . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 91 starts at an intersection with M @-@ 44 west of Belding in Otisco Township . The road runs north along Storey Road and past the <unk> Golf Course and farmlands . At Bricker Road , M @-@ 91 crosses out of Ionia County into Montcalm County . The trunkline runs along Greenville Road and passes the Greenville Municipal Airport . As it continues north , the highway curves to the northeast running between the Flat River and Baldwin , Como and <unk> lakes . As it enters the south side of Greenville , M @-@ 91 runs along on Lafayette Street . In the center of Greenville , M @-@ 91 meets M @-@ 57 on Washington Street . North of downtown , M @-@ 91 crosses a bend in the Flat River and continues to parallel the river on the east out of town . In rural Montcalm County , M @-@ 91 is once again named Greenville Road and it curves to the west of Turk Lake and continues due north to the community of Langston . North of Langston are Tacoma , West and Spring lakes . Further north , M @-@ 91 curves to the northwest around Farnsworth Lake , resuming its due @-@ north course a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the west . Running through farmlands again , M @-@ 91 terminates at an intersection with M @-@ 46 in Lakeview , just south of Tamarack Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designations = = = 
 The first routing of M @-@ 91 in Michigan was located between Menominee and Cedar River in the Upper Peninsula . This routing was designated by July 1 , 1919 . The designation remained until sometime before December 1927 when it was replaced by M @-@ 35 . 
 In 1927 , all of the current M @-@ 91 was originally part of M @-@ 66 . A second usage of M @-@ 91 was designated from Rogers City towards Cheboygan County along the Lake Huron shore by 1930 . It became part of US 23 by the end of 1940 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 M @-@ 91 was designated for the third time by June 1942 . The number was assigned between US 16 ( Cascade Road / Grand River Avenue ) south of Lowell running northeast along Alden Nash Avenue into Lowell and Lincoln Lake Road north of town . The highway followed Lincoln Lake Road to M @-@ 44 east of Belding and turned to run concurrently along M @-@ 44 to the Belding area . From there it ran north to Greenville and on to Lakeview along the present route . The last section of gravel roadway was paved in Ionia County in 1954 . 
 The highway designation was extended south to the then @-@ new US 16 freeway ( now Interstate 96 ) around 1958 . It was later truncated back to M @-@ 21 in Lowell in 1968 . By 1980 , the section of M @-@ 91 in Ionia County south of M @-@ 44 to the Kent County line was turned back to local control . The highway section in Kent County remained marked as M @-@ 91 , resulting in a discontinuous highway . The southern section between Lowell and the county line was turned back by 1985 , resulting in the modern routing of M @-@ 91 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Chak De ! India = 
 Chak De ! India ( English : Go For it ! India or Go ! India ) is a 2007 Hindi @-@ language Indian sports film , directed by <unk> Amin and Rob Miller ( sports scenes ) , produced by Aditya Chopra , with music by Salim – Sulaiman and a screenplay by Jaideep Sahni . It explores religious bigotry , the legacy of the partition of India , ethnic and regional prejudice and sexism in contemporary India in a fictional story about the Indian women 's national field @-@ hockey team which was inspired by the team 's win at the 2002 Commonwealth Games . The film stars Shahrukh Khan as Kabir Khan , former captain of the Indian men 's national field @-@ hockey team . After a disastrous loss to Pakistan , Khan is ostracized from the sport and he and his mother are driven from the family home by angry neighbors . Seven years later , to redeem himself , Khan becomes the coach of the Indian national women 's hockey team and aims to turn its sixteen contentious players into a championship unit . 
 Chak De ! India won a number of awards , including the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment . On 30 August 2007 , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences requested a copy of the film 's script for a place in its Margaret Herrick Library . When the Indian Hockey Federation was reorganised in April 2008 , former player Aslam Sher Khan said that he wanted " to create a ' Chak De ' effect " in Indian hockey . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Chak De ! India opens in Delhi during the final minutes of a fictional Hockey World Cup match between Pakistan and India , with Pakistan leading 1 – 0 . When Indian team captain Kabir Khan ( Shah Rukh Khan ) is fouled , he takes a penalty stroke . His shot just misses , costing India the match . Soon afterwards , media outlets circulate a photograph of Khan shaking hands with the Pakistani captain . The sporting gesture is misunderstood , and the Muslim Khan is suspected of " throwing " the game out of sympathy towards Pakistan . Religious prejudice forces him and his mother ( <unk> Arora ) from their family home . 
 Seven years later Mr. Tripathi ( Anjan <unk> ) , the head of India 's hockey association , meets with Khan 's friend — and hockey advocate — Uttamaji ( Mohit Chauhan ) to discuss the Indian women 's hockey team . According to Tripathi , the team has no future since the only long @-@ term role for women is to " cook and clean " . Uttamaji , however , tells him that Kabir Khan ( whom no one has seen for seven years ) wants to coach the team . Initially sceptical , Tripathi agrees to the arrangement . 
 Khan finds himself in charge of a group of 16 young women ( each representing a different state ) , divided by their competitive nature and regional prejudices . Komal <unk> ( <unk> Rawat ) , a village girl from Haryana , clashes with Preeti <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) from Chandigarh ; short @-@ tempered Balbir Kaur ( Tanya <unk> ) from Punjab bullies Rani <unk> ( Seema Azmi ) and <unk> <unk> ( Nisha Nair ) , who are from remote villages in Jharkhand . Mary <unk> ( Kimi <unk> ) from Mizoram and Molly <unk> ( <unk> " Chon Chon " <unk> ) , from Manipur in North @-@ East India , face widespread discrimination and sexual harassment . Team captain Vidya Sharma ( Vidya <unk> ) must choose between hockey and the wishes of her husband Rakesh 's ( Nakul Vaid ) family , and Preeti 's fiancé — Abhimanyu Singh ( Vivan <unk> ) , vice @-@ captain of the India national cricket team — feels threatened by her involvement with the team . 
 Khan realizes that he can make the girls winners only if he can help them overcome their differences . During his first few days as coach he benches several players who refuse to follow his rules — including <unk> Naik ( Shilpa Shukla ) , his most experienced player . In response , <unk> repeatedly encourages the other players to defy Khan . When she finally succeeds , Khan angrily resigns ; however , he invites the staff and team to a farewell lunch at McDonald 's . During the lunch , local boys make a pass at Mary ; Balbir attacks them , triggering a brawl between the boys and the team . Khan , recognizing that they are acting as one for the first time , prevents the staff from intervening ; he only stops a man from hitting one of the women from behind with a cricket bat , telling him that there are no cowards in hockey . In an about @-@ face , after the fight the women ask Khan to remain as their coach . 
 The team faces new challenges . When Tripathi refuses to send the women 's team to Australia for the World Cup , Khan proposes a match against the men ’ s team . Although his team loses , their performance inspires Tripathi to send them to Australia after all . The tournament begins with a 7 @-@ 0 loss to Australia , followed by victories over England , Spain , South Africa , New Zealand , Argentina and South Korea . They are again matched with Australia for the final ; this time , they defeat the <unk> for the World Cup . When the team returns home their families treat them with greater respect and Khan , his good name restored , returns with his mother to their ancestral home . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Shortly after the film 's release the media began referring to the 16 actresses who portrayed the players as the " Chak De girls " . The panel of judges at the Screen Awards also used the term , awarding the 2008 Screen Award for Best Supporting Actress to the " Chak De girls " . 
 = = = Team = = = 
 = = = Additional cast = = = 
 Anjan <unk> as Mr. Tripathi , the head Indian hockey official 
 <unk> <unk> as <unk> , assistant coach for the Indian women 's field hockey team 
 Javed Khan as <unk> 
 Mohit Chauhan as Uttamaji , Kabir 's former hockey teammate and friend 
 Vivan <unk> as <unk> Singh , Vice captain of the Indian national cricket team 
 Nakul Vaid as Rakesh , Vidya 's husband 
 <unk> Arora as Kabir 's mother 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 A brief article about the victorious women 's team at the 2002 Commonwealth Games inspired screenwriter Jaideep Sahni to create a film about the Indian women 's hockey team , and he modeled Kabir Khan on hockey coach Maharaj Krishan Kaushik . After listening to the storyline Kaushik suggested that Sahani meet hockey player Mir Ranjan Negi , who faced accusations of throwing the match against Pakistan in the 1982 Asian Games . According to Sahani , he was unaware of Negi 's plight while he wrote the script and any resemblance to Negi 's life was coincidental . Negi agreed , saying that he did not " want to hog the limelight . This movie is not a documentary of Mir Ranjan Negi 's life . It is in fact the story of a team that becomes a winning lot from a bunch of hopeless girls " . Responding to media reports equating Kabir Khan with Negi , Sahani said : " Our script was written a year and a half back . It is very unfortunate that something , which is about women athletes , has just started becoming about Negi . " 
 = = = Title = = = 
 Shah Rukh Khan stated in a speech delivered at the University of Edinburgh that the phrase Chak De ! was originally " an inspirational martial cry that Sikh soldiers used while lifting logs in order to make bridges across rivers on their campaigns against their enemies . It implies the will to get up and get on with it . " 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
