 Although Salman Khan was initially signed for the lead role , he later withdrew due to creative differences with the director . Shah Rukh Khan ( who had originally declined due to a scheduling conflict with Karan Johar 's Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ) was later confirmed as Kabir Khan . Khan accepted the role partly because he used to play hockey in college : " I feel hockey as a sport has been monstrously neglected in our country . I used to play the game during college . In fact , I was quite a good hockey player . So the role was a lot like going back to my past . " Some media sources called the actor 's role offbeat , since it departed from his usual romantic image and included neither lip synched songs nor a single female lead . Casting of the 16 actresses as the hockey players took over six months . Amin described the process as " very , very difficult " and " very strenuous because the requirement was they had to play – and act " . A four @-@ month training camp was held where the girls learned the rules of the game , took acting lessons and followed a strict diet ; safety precautions were also taken . According to Amin , " Learning hockey is very tricky unlike , say , football . You have to know how to hold the stick , how to manoeuvre it , so it doesn 't look fake on screen ... For those who were originally players , we had to make sure they were able to act as well . The dialogue was weighty ; it isn 't frivolous . It has to be delivered with a certain tone , in a certain manner " . The actors , including Khan and the rest of the supporting cast , participated in a number of rehearsals and script readings before principal photography began . 
 Kaushik and his team taught the crew " all [ they ] knew about hockey " . In an interview , he later said that he " taught him ( Sahni ) everything about the game , starting from how the camp is conducted , how the girls come from different backgrounds and cultures , the psychological factors involved . Also how the coach faces pressure to select girls from different states and teams " . After Negi was suggested , the latter assembled a team of hockey players to train the actors . He later said that he " trained the girls for six months . Waking up at 4 , traveling from <unk> to Churchgate . We would retire around 11 in the night . It was tiring . But we were on a mission ... They couldn 't run ; couldn 't hold the hockey sticks . I ensured none of them [ would have to ] cut their nails or eyebrows ( as the players do ) . The girls have worked very hard . I salute them " . Some of the actors , such as <unk> , Sandia , and <unk> , were cast because they were hockey players . Rob Miller was the Sport Action Director , and worked with Negi to train the actors . About working with Khan , Negi recalled that everything was planned " including the penalty stroke that SRK missed . That shot alone took us nearly 20 hours as I was keen that it should be very realistic . I took the help of a lot of my former teammates . But more importantly , it was so easy working with SRK . He is unbelievably modest and was willing to do as many re @-@ takes as we wanted " . Chak De ! India was filmed in India and Australia ( Sydney and Melbourne ) , with <unk> Solutions casting 90 hockey players and 9 @,@ 000 extras . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Chak De ! India premiered on 9 August 2007 at Somerset House in London to an audience of over 2 @,@ 000 during the Film4 Summer Screen and India Now festivals . It was released globally in theaters on 10 August 2007 , playing on only 400 screens in India because of the commercial failure of Yash Raj Films 's two previous films . 
 Due to the film 's strong critical response , theaters reported 80 @-@ percent occupancy for its opening weekend . Chak De ! India topped the Indian box office during its first two weeks , and played to full houses during its first two months . The film was particularly successful in large cities . By the end of its theatrical run Chak De ! India was the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2007 in India , with domestic earnings of ₹ 50 @,@ 54 @,@ 00 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave Chak De India a rating of 91 percent based on 11 reviews ( 10 " fresh " and one " rotten " ) . On Metacritic , the film had a score of 68 from four critics , indicating generally @-@ favorable reviews . 
 In an NPR interview via affiliate WBUR @-@ FM , Mumbai Mirror columnist Aseem Chhabra called Chak De ! India " an example of a film that 's been made within the framework of Bollywood and yet it is a very different film . It does take up some realistic issues , and what I really liked about the film was that the women who acted , you know , who are part of the team , each one of them got a chance . Their personality , their characters , were very well @-@ written , and so , the superstar in the film was Shahrukh Khan , who was the coach of the team ; he doesn 't sort of take over the whole film . Every supporting character gets a role , and it 's a very inspiring movie that really changed the mood in India . People loved it " . Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India gave the film four out of five stars stating that it was a film of " great performances by a bunch of unknowns . " India Today called Chak De ! India " the most feisty girl power movie to have come out of Bollywood ever . " Sudhish Kamath of The Hindu wrote , " At another level , Chak De is about women 's liberation . It is one of the best feminist films of our times . " Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN gave the film four out of five stars , saying " Chak De 's ... a winner all the way . " Shubhra Gupta of The Indian Express called the film " the most authentic , meticulously researched sports movie India has made " . In Kolkata 's Telegraph , Bharathi S. Pradhan wrote that the film combines " an extremely well @-@ knit screenplay with unrelentingly deft direction , 16 unknown , and not even glamorous , girls simply carried you with them , with one single known actor compelling you to watch Chak De India without blinking " . Jaspreet Pandohar of the BBC gave Chak De ! India four out of five stars stating that " while the tale of the sporting underdog is hardly new , Jaideep Sahni 's screenplay offers a rare look at a popular Indian sport often overshadowed by cricket . " Andy Webster of The New York Times wrote that the film gave a fresh look to the conventional underdog sports film , comparing its premise to the U.S. victory in the 1991 FIFA Women 's World Cup . Derek Elley of Variety called Chak De ! India " a patriotic <unk> that scores some old @-@ fashioned entertainment goals . " In The Hollywood Reporter , Kirk Honeycutt wrote that the " technical credits are first rate with excellent cinematography , quicksilver editing , musical montages of practice and a fine use of locations . " 
 Michael Dequina of <unk> was more critical of the film , giving it 2 @.@ 5 out of four stars and calling it " a very familiar , very formula underdog sports movie with nothing to distinguish it from similar , equally slick Hollywood product . " Maitland McDonagh of TV Guide gave Chak De ! India two stars out of four , writing that the film uses " sports @-@ movie conventions to address larger cultural and political issues , and while it doesn 't miss a cliche , it also invests every one with vigorous conviction . " Although Subhash K. Jha gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars , calling it " a fairly predictable story " with dialogue " quite often the stuff bumper stickers are made of " , he wrote that " Chak De India is an outright winner " and " one of the finest sports @-@ based dramas in living memory . " Khalid Mohamed gave the film 3 @.@ 5 stars in the Hindustan Times stating that the film " may be predictable but compels you to root for a team of losers whom only an earth @-@ angel can save from disastrous defeat " . 
 Apart from critics , Chak De ! India tied with Taare Zameen Par for the Best film of 2007 according to various Bollywood movie directors such as Madhur Bhandarkar , David Dhawan , Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra , Anurag Basu , and Sriram Raghavan . 
 = = Social impact = = 
 Chak De ! India has become an influential film . The title track song " Chak De ! India , " now doubles as a sports anthem in India and is played at numerous sports events . According to Salim Merchant , the song " almost became the sports anthem of the country , especially after India won the Cricket World Cup [ 2011 ] . It was no longer our song but the country 's song " . After India 's World Cup victory , Indian team player Virat Kohli " sang ' Chak de India ' to the crowd " . When India defeated South Africa at the 2015 Cricket World Cup , Nitin Srivastava of the BBC noted : " MCG has erupted with " Vande Mataram " ( the national song of India ) and " Chak De India " ( Go India ! ) slogans in the air ! And there 's no age barrier for cricket fans who came and enjoyed the match " . 
 In addition , the suspension of the Indian Hockey Federation in April 2008 also indicated the film 's influence . India Today used the title to label the event in two articles , titled " Operation Chak De impact : <unk> resigns " and " Operation Chak de impact : <unk> in Lok Sabha " . The Indiatimes , in an article titled , " Five wise men set for a Chak De act " also argued , " It looks like Indian hockey has done a real Chak de this time around " . In addition , former hockey player Aslam Sher Khan , who was appointed by the Indian Olympic Association to head a committee which will replace the <unk> , pointed to the film as a model to work towards . He stated in an interview , " We have to make a Team India as you have seen in Bollywood blockbuster Chak De ! India . There are players from several parts of the country . We have to unite them to make a powerful force . " In another interview , he emphasised that he wants " to create a Chak De effect " on hockey in India . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Chak De ! India 's soundtrack , composed by Salim – Sulaiman with lyrics by Jaideep Sahni , was released on 1 August 2007 . 
 = Ray of Light ( song ) = 
 " Ray of Light " is a song by American singer Madonna . It is the title track from her seventh studio album Ray of Light ( 1998 ) , and was released as the album 's second single on May 6 , 1998 , by Maverick Records . The song was also included on the compilation albums GHV2 ( 2001 ) and Celebration ( 2009 ) . Written by Madonna , William Orbit , Clive Muldoon , Dave Curtiss , Christine Leach , and produced by Madonna and Orbit , " Ray of Light " is based on Curtiss Maldoon 's " Sepheryn " and is an electronic dance song with techno , trance , Eurodance , and disco influences , " Ray of Light " contains several sound effects such as whistles , bleeps and bells , the usage of electric guitar , and underlying synths . Lyrically , the song has a theme of freedom . 
 The song has received critical acclaim by music critics , for its club @-@ friendly , electronic sound , lyrics , and " emotional warmth " . The song was also nominated for three Grammy Awards ; for Record of the Year , Best Dance Recording , and Best Short Form Music Video , winning the last two . " Ray of Light " debuted and peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Madonna 's highest debut on the chart to date . It also reached number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart . Internationally , the song reached the top five in Canada , Finland , Italy and the United Kingdom , and peaked at number one in Scotland and Spain . 
 An accompanying music video for " Ray of Light " was directed by Jonas Åkerlund and shows scenes from different cities around the world , with Madonna singing the song in front of them . The video was critically acclaimed , receiving the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video , as well as winning five awards at the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards . Later , Stefano Salvati accused her of plagiarizing the concept of a music video he directed for Biagio Antonacci in 1994 . The song has been performed in three of Madonna 's concert tours , most recently on her Sticky & Sweet Tour ( 2008 – 09 ) . It has been covered by a number of artists , and has been featured in several elements of popular culture , such as on the FOX show Glee , as well as different advertising campaigns . 
 = = Background = = 
 Madonna began recording Ray of Light with English electronic musician and producer William Orbit in 1997 , after Guy Oseary , Maverick Records 's partner , phoned Orbit and suggested that he send some songs to Madonna . Orbit then sent a 13 @-@ track digital audio tape to Madonna , and " Ray of Light " was among these tracks . It is based on a track written in the 1970s , called " Sepheryn " , by English folk music duo Curtiss Maldoon . In 1996 , Christine Leach , Clive Maldoon 's niece , recorded her version for the track . She worked for a time with Orbit . Leach said she had always loved the duo 's work and " Sepheryn " had a dream @-@ like quality . When she rewrote the chorus melody , she removed a few bits . After Madonna heard Christine 's version of the track , she liked it , and reworked the lyrics . Dave Curtiss said he " couldn 't believe it " after he heard the track , and was pleased with what Madonna had done with his original composition . Madonna said about the song : " It 's totally out of control . The original version is well over 10 minutes long . It was completely indulgent , but I loved it . It was heartbreaking to cut it down to a manageable length . " Its original version was set to be included on a compilation album , titled Veronica Electronica , although it was not released . 
 = = Composition = = 
 An electronic dance music song , " Ray of Light " has received stylistic comparisons to rave , psychedelic and acid music . The track contains strong techno elements , as well as disco , trance , and Eurodance influences , and it sees Madonna deepen her dance roots and go for a more electronic sound . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , the song is set in common time , with a moderately fast groove tempo of 126 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of B ♭ major , with Madonna 's vocals on the song spanning from B ♭ 3 to F5 , with the latter note sung on the " ah @-@ ah " vocalization near the end of the song . " Ray of Light " has a basic sequence of B ♭ – E ♭ – B – E – B ♭ as its chord progression . 
 The song starts with an electric guitar riff which has been compared to English alternative rock / Britpop band Oasis , after which the fast techno melody begins , which , according to biographer Lucy O 'Brien in Madonna : Like an Icon , has been described as having a " bubbling psychedelic undertow " , as well as combining " melodic pop with bleep @-@ driven techno " . Throughout the composition , there are numerous electronic sound effects , including whistles , bells and bleeps . Its beat has been described as " restless " . Towards the middle of the track , the electric guitar riff is repeated in which Madonna sings the same line as the start of the song , until the dance section returns , and the song gradually ends . Madonna 's " breathlessly " delivered vocals on the song are noted to be different to the ones featured in her singles before the 1996 film Evita . " Lyrically , the song has a theme of freedom and it shows a more spiritual side to Madonna . According to Madonna the track is a mystical look at the universe and how small we are . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Ray of Light " received acclaim from music critics . In a review for the album as a whole , Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic described the track as " swirling " . In a separate review , Liana Jonas of the same website called the track a " wickedly good club song " , as well as claiming that it was " sonically progressive yet listener @-@ friendly " ; she also praised Madonna 's vocals , comparing them to those of a " club diva to celestial goddess " . Larry Flick from Billboard described it as Madonna at her best . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone in his review for the album as a whole , wrote that , alongside other tracks such as " Swim " and " Drowned World / Substitute For Love " , Madonna is " positively ferocious " . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine wrote that the song was a " celebratory tech @-@ frenzy " , and noted Madonna 's " elation " in the song , giving it an " A " rating . Sputnikmusic listed the song as the album 's recommended tracks . Michael R. Smith from The Daily Vault praised the song as one of Madonna 's best singles , explaining : 
 What makes " Ray Of Light " one of Madonna 's best singles is the fact that it is such a bitch to sing . Filled with multiple octave changes , it forced Madonna to push her vocal as far as it could possibly go . The song demanded she make use of her upper register and hold notes longer than she ever had before . It really is a techno gem that is always a standout at her concerts . After hearing a sample of it for the first time in the spring of 1998 , I just knew that Madonna had outdone herself . The song brings the entire album of to a whole new level . 
 In her book Madonna : Like an Icon , Lucy O 'Brien described the song as " speedy acid electronica " and an " ecstatic hymn to the skies " and noted that the song was composed a semitone higher than the singer 's vocal comfort zone , but claimed that " the strain really helped " . The A.V. Club commented that the " pumped @-@ up title track is bound to be a deserving smash " . J.D. Considine of The Baltimore Sun noted that Madonna 's " newfound strength is particularly apparent in pulsing , rhythm driven tracks like the title tune , which finds her soaring confidently at the top of her register on the busily percolating chorus , then whispering breathily on the brief , dream @-@ like bridge " . David Browne , while reviewing Ray of Light for Entertainment Weekly , titled the song as " <unk> techno @-@ glitter @-@ ball " . Idolator 's Stephen Sears explained that Madonna 's vocals throughout the album were a " game @-@ changer " , including on the song , as she strengthened her voice while working on her film Evita . He ends his review by stating " Indeed , no choir is needed to lift ' Ray Of Light ' into disco heaven . Madonna supplies the highs herself in some perfect moments : the extended , spiraling way she wails ' yea @-@ ea @-@ ears ' at 3 : 27 or how her vocal spins out of control at 4 : 14 , matched by Orbit 's frenzied guitar work " . 
 = = Accolades and recognition = = 
 In 1999 , " Ray of Light " won two Grammy Awards for Best Dance Recording and Best Short Form Music Video . It was also nominated for Record of the Year , but lost to Celine Dion 's " My Heart Will Go On " . Furthermore , The Village Voice ranked it as the fourth best in 1998 in their Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . " Ray of Light " is also often ranked as being one of the best songs of the 1990s . In 2005 , the song was placed at number 401 on Blender 's " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " . In a Slant Magazine list of the best singles of the 1990s , in which " Ray of Light " was placed 16th , it was written that the song 's " beat is restless " , and that " Ray of Light " is " a standout single " due to its " emotional warmth " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Ray of Light " was Madonna 's highest debuting single at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 , for the issue dated July 11 , 1998 . " Ray of Light " was present for a total of 20 weeks on the Hot 100 , and placed at number 75 on the year @-@ end chart . The song also reached the top of the Hot Dance Music / Club Play chart of Billboard . " Ray of Light " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in September 1998 , for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single across United States . In Canada , it debuted at number 85 on the RPM Singles Chart and reached number three in its eighth week . It was present on the chart for a total of 30 weeks . 
 In Australia , " Ray of Light " debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at its peak of number six on May 24 , 1998 , staying there for one week . It was present for a total of 17 weeks on the chart , and was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies of the single . At the year @-@ end charts of ARIA , " Ray of Light " was the 57th best @-@ selling Australian single of 1998 . In New Zealand , " Ray of Light " also debuted at its peak position of number nine on the RIANZ Singles Chart , and reached a peak position of number two after three weeks . It was present for a total of 14 weeks on the chart and fell out on September 13 , 1998 , at number 31 . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Ray of Light " debuted and peaked at number two on May 9 , 1998 , being held off the number one spot by All Saints 's " Under the Bridge / Lady Marmalade " , which also debuted the same week . The single was the 68th best @-@ selling song of 1998 in the UK , with the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certifying it silver , for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies of the song . According to the Official Charts Company , " Ray of Light " has sold 275 @,@ 000 copies in the region as of 2008 . The track debuted at its peak of number nine on the issue dated May 16 , 1998 on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles chart . In Belgium , " Ray of Light " was moderately successful in both territories , peaking at number 25 in Flanders and 33 in Wallonia . In the Netherlands , the song debuted at number 45 on the Dutch Top 40 , and reached a peak of 22 on May 16 , 1998 , remaining there for three weeks . The song reached a peak of number two in Finland , where it remained for two weeks , before spending a total of five weeks on the chart . In Sweden , it reached number 14 and spent 10 weeks on the chart . On the Swiss Singles Chart , " Ray of Light " debuted at its peak of number 32 on the issue dated May 24 , 1998 . The song also reached number one in Spain on its debuting week . It stayed on the top spot for three weeks before descending the chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Ray of Light " was directed by Jonas Åkerlund , with Madonna 's scenes being shot in early April 1998 at MTV 's Times Square studios in New York and Los Angeles . The images of Madonna 's background include various cities , such as Los Angeles , New York , London , Las Vegas , and Stockholm . The video premiered on MTV Live on May 12 , 1998 . Madonna stated that when she makes an album , she " puts [ her ] soul on it " , but a music video is a lot more working with a director . With the Ray of Light album , she wanted to have videos with a fresh expression , and she wanted new directors to replace of the old ones she had worked with for years . She felt that Jonas Åkerlund has a special way of working . She commented that she and the director " met on the telephone , and he sent me a whole bunch of treatments I didn 't like . But he kept at it and didn 't give up " . The singer also mentioned that the video is basically " a day in the life of the earth to show that we are rushing forward to the end of the 1900s century at full speed . I think Jonas made an excellent interpretation of the song , although he forced me to dance like crazy for two days . He 's a tough director " . Åkerlund stated that " It was damn good ! Madonna was pleased with the quick result and [ is ] a dream to work with — it was probably the easiest job I 've done in years ! " Additionally , he said : 
 " I had two ideas that did not fit the song . She said no even though I had a very clear idea of how she would look in the video . I worked up on another idea and brought together a featured band for her to see . I did it all in front of me . [ ... ] In retrospect , it feels good , the video we have done much better suited to the track than the first ideas . She [ Madonna ] has an incredible track on everything she is doing . Style , music , business — she has a mental track of every single thing and won 't give up until she is completely satisfied . And on music videos there is nothing she does with one hand on her back — she 's engaged to one hundred percent " . 
 The music video for " Ray of Light " starts with the rising of the sun , until it progresses into a Koyaanisqatsi @-@ esque section , featuring time @-@ lapse images of daily life , from people riding a subway , ordering food , bowling , and children in a classroom to sped @-@ up city @-@ scapes and freeways at night . As the video goes on , night starts to fall , and high @-@ speed images of Madonna dancing in a discothèque progress , until she is seen falling asleep on the dance floor . 
 On June 23 , 1998 , the music video of " Ray of Light " was released on VHS as a limited edition of 40 @,@ 000 copies by Warner Music Vision . It had sold 7 @,@ 281 copies of the following month after its release , becoming the best @-@ selling video singles of the Nielsen SoundScan era . A few days after its release , Italian director Stefano Salvati accused Madonna 's Warner Bros. Records imprint Maverick Records for plagiarizing the concept of a music video he directed for Biagio Antonacci 's 1994 single " Non è Mai Stato <unk> " . According to Salvati , copies of his videos were submitted to Maverick before the " Ray of Light " video was shot and requested it to be pulled from distribution . Both videos featured the respective singers performing at regular speed against a backdrop of high @-@ speed images . However , he did not sue the singer or her companies . The video received a total of eight MTV Video Music Awards nominations in 1998 , eventually winning five ; for Video of the Year , Best Female Video , Best Direction , Best Editing and Best Choreography , becoming her most @-@ winning song at the show . Madonna said she was grateful for MTV 's <unk> of the music video . The video was ranked at number four on " The Top 100 Videos That Broke The Rules " , issued by MTV on the channel 's 25th anniversary in August 2006 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Ray of Light " has been featured in the set lists of three Madonna tours – 2001 's Drowned World Tour , 2006 's Confessions Tour and 2008 – 09 's Sticky & Sweet Tour . In 1998 she premiered " Ray of Light " during her surprise concert at the Roxy NYC nightclub . She also appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show in and performed " Ray of Light " and " Little Star " . During the 1998 MTV Video Music Awards Madonna started performing " Shanti / Ashtangi " , sporting black hair and wearing an Indian sari . Lenny Kravitz then appeared playing the guitar , which paved way to " Ray of Light " . A religious group called the World Vaishnava Association claimed that Madonna offended Hindus with the performance by continuing to wear a Hindi mark on her head while performing the song . A spokesperson for the association stated that the mark is a symbol of chastity , harmony and purity , and is designed to show " dedication to God " . The representative also said that because Madonna simulated a sexual act and wore a see @-@ through tank top onstage while wearing the mark , she offended both Hindus and Yogis . A spokesperson for Madonna stated that the singer did not understand why the World Vaishnava Association was upset as she had not done anything insulting , and did not wish to insult anyone . However , the vice president of the World Vaishnava Association claimed that " the Hindu community and Eastern spiritual seekers the world over should be happy for Madonna personally in terms of her genuine interest in enlightened life , and grateful to her for her sincere efforts to attract others to the same " . 
 Three years later , " Ray of Light " was included as the fifth song from the opening Neo @-@ Punk segment of Madonna 's 2001 Drowned World Tour , which featured Madonna and her dancers dancing along to the song wearing punk inspired clothing , while the backdrop screens showed an extended version of the song 's music video . This time , the electric guitar was played by Monte Pittman . Michael Hubbard from MusicOMH noted that " things quickly <unk> up with [ ... ] Ray Of Light , a track that was quite simply as sublime as it was infectious " . In 2005 , Madonna performed " Ray of Light " during the Live 8 benefit concert . She later performed the song at the 2006 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in Indio , California . During her 2006 Confessions Tour , Madonna included a rock version of " Ray of Light " as the second song of the show 's third act , the Glam @-@ Punk segment . For this performance Madonna played the electric guitar and urged all the fans to jump through the song , it also featured six male backup dancers , dressed in black outfits and white ties doing a synchronized choreography . Rolling Stone called the performance " hard @-@ rocking " . 
 " Ray of Light " was also performed by Madonna during the 2007 Live Earth concert in London 's Wembley Stadium again accompanied by a guitar . Madonna 's performance at the event was watched by 4 @.@ 5 million people . For the 2008 – 09 Sticky & Sweet Tour , " Ray of Light " was included as the third song of the show 's final segment . This time , Madonna played the electric guitar again and wore a futuristic outfit with a breastplate and a short wig . She was accompanied by her dancers who were dressed in futuristic outfits and performed a robotic choreography . During the 2009 extension of the tour , the song became the second @-@ to @-@ last of the show and also slightly edited for selected performances , with the lyrics from Michael Jackson 's song " Man in the Mirror " : " If you wanna make the world a better place ... Take a look at yourself , and then make a change " appearing on the screens before the beginning of the song . Madonna also honored Jackson by wearing a black armband and a white glove . While reviewing the tour in 2008 , Jim Farber from New York Daily News called the performance of the song one of the " highest @-@ energy " dance numbers of the show . 
 = = Covers and usage in media = = 
 " Weird Al " Yankovic 's medley " Polka Power ! " from the 1999 album Running With Scissors includes a polka version of the chorus of " Ray of Light " . The 2000 compilation Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna , Vol . 2 features a cover of the song by Sigue Sigue Sputnik . On the 2004 compilation Platinum Blonde NRG , Vol . 2 : <unk> Madonna Classics , a Hi @-@ NRG cover is performed by Future Force . English singer Natasha Bedingfield recorded a cover version of " Ray of Light " for BBC Radio 1 's 40th anniversary . Played during the The Chris Moyles Show on September 19 , 2007 , it can be found on the Radio 1 . Established 1967 compilation album . Bedingfield commented : " I have so much respect for Madonna after learning how hard it is to sing that song . She has an amazing voice — the range you need to sing the song is incredible " . In 2008 , Iggy Pop and The Stooges played " Ray of Light " ( along with " Burning Up " ) during Madonna 's induction in the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . In 2010 , the song was played in the film Burlesque , while Ali ( Christina Aguilera ) was rehearsing for her new position as a dancer in the Burlesque Lounge , owned by Cher 's character Tess . In late 2012 , American singer Adam Lambert performed a cover version on VH1 Divas , dancing through laser lights while donning a priestly black and white tunic . 
 The song was used by Microsoft in its 2001 advertising campaign for Windows XP . It begins with a man leaping through a green field and then lifting off into a sunny sky — a landscape lifted from Windows XP 's default " bliss screen " . There is also a series of images of people using Windows XP for real @-@ time communications , to collaborate in an airy restaurant , to relay digital images of flying people , watch videos and listen to music . Then , a snipped from the song follows the phrase : " Faster than the speeding light she 's flying ... You soar . Yes you can " . The campaign was reworked after the September 11 attacks ; the tag line " Prepare to fly " was changed to " Yes you can " , to sidestep new concerns about air travel , said Stephanie Ferguson , director of the company 's PC Experience Solutions Marketing Group . In 2008 , a <unk> shampoo commercial included shots of Marilyn Monroe and Shakira with songs well known by them , and ends with several video shots of Madonna to the sounds of " Ray of Light " . Madonna reportedly received US $ 10 million for the song 's usage . The commercial premiered on Super Bowl XLII . In 2010 , Glee tribute episode " The Power of Madonna " featured " Ray of Light " playing in the background as the school 's cheerleading team performed a complicated stilts routine . In the 2011 Family Guy episode " New Kidney in Town " , Peter Griffin is seen in the " Ray of Light " video after drinking his first energy drink ( Red Bull ) . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – vocals , songwriting , producer 
 William Orbit – songwriting , producer 
 Clive Muldoon – songwriting 
 Dave Curtis – songwriting 
 Christine Leach – songwriting 
 Pat McCarthy – engineer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Ray of Light album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = History of the United Kingdom during World War I = 
 The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland — then consisting of England , Scotland , Wales , and the whole of Ireland — was one of the Allied Powers during the First World War of 1914 – 1918 , fighting against the Central Powers ( the German Empire , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Empire , the Ottoman Empire and the Kingdom of Bulgaria ) . The state 's armed forces were reorganised — the war marked the creation of the Royal Air Force , for example — and increased in size because of the introduction , in January 1916 , of forced conscription for the first time in the kingdom 's history as well as the raising of the largest all @-@ volunteer army in history , known as Kitchener 's Army , of more than two million men . The outbreak of war has generally been regarded as a socially unifying event , although this view has been challenged by more recent scholarship . In any case , responses in the United Kingdom in 1914 were similar to those amongst populations across Europe . 
 On the eve of war , there was serious domestic unrest in the UK ( amongst the labour and suffrage movements and especially in Ireland ) but much of the population rapidly rallied behind the government . Significant sacrifices were made in the name of defeating the Empire 's enemies and many those who could not fight contributing to philanthropic and humanitarian causes . Fearing food shortages and labour shortfalls , the government passed legislation such as the Defence of the Realm Act 1914 , to give it new powers . The war saw a move away from the idea of " business as usual " under prime minister H. H. Asquith , and towards a state of total war ( complete state intervention in public affairs ) under David Lloyd George , the first time this had been seen in Britain . The war also witnessed the first aerial bombardments of cities in Britain . 
 Newspapers played an important role in maintaining popular support for the war . Large quantities of propaganda were produced by the government under the guidance of such journalists as Charles Masterman and newspaper owners such as Lord Beaverbrook . By adapting to the changing demographics of the workforce ( or the " dilution of labour " , as it was termed ) , war @-@ related industries grew rapidly , and production increased , as concessions were quickly made to trade unions . In that regard , the war is also credited by some with drawing women into mainstream employment for the first time . Debates continue about the impact the war had on women 's emancipation , given that a large number of women were granted the vote for the first time in 1918 . The experience of individual women during the war varied ; much depended on locality , age , marital status and occupation . 
 The civilian death rate rose due to food shortages and Spanish Flu , which hit the country in 1918 . Military deaths are estimated to have exceeded 850 @,@ 000 . The Empire reached its zenith at the conclusion of peace negotiations . However , the war heightened not only imperial loyalties but also individual national identities in the dominions ( Canada , Newfoundland , Australia , New Zealand and South Africa ) and India . Irish nationalists after 1916 moved from collaboration with London to demands for immediate independence ( see Easter Rising ) , a move given great impetus by the Conscription Crisis of 1918 . 
 Military historians continue to debate matters of tactics and strategy . However , in terms of memory of the war , historian Adrian Gregory argues that : 
 " The verdict of popular culture is more or less unanimous . The First World War was stupid , tragic and futile . The stupidity of the war has been a theme of growing strength since the 1920s . From Robert Graves , through ' Oh ! What a Lovely War ' to ' Blackadder Goes Forth , ' the criminal idiocy of the British High Command has become an article of faith . " 
 = = Government = = 
 On 4 August , Britain ( and its Empire ) entered the World War with H. H. Asquith of the Liberal Party as British prime minister . Britain 's reasons for declaring war were complex : the Treaty of London of 1839 had committed it to safeguard Belgium 's neutrality , and the strategic risk posed by German control of the Belgian coast was unacceptable . Asquith 's Liberal government was brought down in May 1915 , due in particular to a crisis in inadequate artillery shell production and the failed Gallipoli Campaign in the Dardanelles . Reluctant to give in to demands for an election , Asquith proceeded to form a new coalition government on 25 May , with the majority of the new cabinet coming from his own Liberal party and the Unionist ( Conservative ) party brought in to shore up the government . By January 1915 , 184 members of parliament were serving with the armed forces . 
 = = = Lloyd George as Prime Minister = = = 
 This coalition government lasted until 1916 , when the Unionists became dissatisfied with Asquith and the Liberals ' conduct of affairs , particularly over the Battle of the Somme . What would prove to be the last majority @-@ Liberal government collapsed as a result of the political manoeuvrings of Andrew Bonar Law ( leader of the Conservatives ) , Sir Edward Carson ( leader of the Ulster Unionists ) , and David Lloyd George ( then a minister in the cabinet ) . Law , who had few allies outside his own party , lacked sufficient support to form a new coalition ; the Liberal Lloyd George , on the other hand , enjoyed much wider support and duly formed a majority @-@ Conservative coalition government . Asquith was still the party head but he and his followers moved to the opposition benches in Parliament . 
 Lloyd George immediately set about transforming the British war effort , taking firm control of both military and domestic policy . In the first 235 days of its existence , the War Cabinet met 200 times . Its creation marked the transition to a state of total war — the idea that every man , woman and child should play his or her part in the war effort . Moreover , it was decided that members of the government should be the men who controlled the war effort , primarily utilising the power they had been given under the Defence of the Realm Act . For the first time , the government could react quickly , without endless bureaucracy to tie it down , and with up @-@ to @-@ date statistics on such matters as the state of the merchant navy and farm production . The policy marked a distinct shift away from Asquith 's initial policy of laissez @-@ faire , which had been characterised by Winston Churchill 's declaration of " business as usual " in November 1914 . The success of Lloyd George 's government can also be attributed to a general lack of desire for an election , and the practical absence of dissent that this brought about . 
 In rapid succession in spring 1918 came a series of military and political crises . The Germans , having moved troops from the Eastern front and retrained them in new tactics , now had more soldiers on the Western Front than the Allies . On 21 March 1918 Germany launched a full scale Spring Offensive against the British and French lines , hoping for victory on the battlefield before United States troops arrived in numbers . The Allied armies fell back 40 miles in confusion , and facing defeat London realized it needed more troops to fight a mobile war . Lloyd George found half a million soldiers and rushed them to France , asked American President Woodrow Wilson for immediate help , and agreed to the appointment of the French Marshal Foch as commander in chief on the Western Front , so that Allied forces could be coordinated to handle the German offensive . 
 Despite strong warnings that it was a bad idea , the War Cabinet decided to impose conscription on Ireland in 1918 . The main reason was that labour in Britain demanded it as the price for cutting back on exemptions for certain workers . Labour wanted the principle established that no one was exempt , but it did not demand that conscription should actually take place in Ireland . The proposal was enacted , but never enforced . The Roman Catholic bishops for the first time entered the fray , calling for open resistance to compulsory military service , while the majority of Irish nationalists moved to supporting the intransigent Sinn Féin movement ( away from the constitutional Irish National Party ) . This proved a decisive moment , marking the end of Irish willingness to stay inside the Union . 
 On 7 May 1918 , a senior army officer on active duty , Major @-@ General Sir Frederick Maurice , prompted a second crisis when he went public with allegations that Lloyd George had lied to Parliament on military matters . Asquith , the Liberal leader in the House , took up the allegations and attacked Lloyd George ( also a Liberal ) . While Asquith 's presentation was poor , Lloyd George vigorously defended his position , treating the debate as a vote of confidence . He won over the House with a powerful refutation of Maurice 's allegations . The main results were to strengthen Lloyd George , weaken Asquith , end public criticism of overall strategy , and strengthen civilian control of the military . Meanwhile , the German offensive stalled and was ultimately reversed . Victory came on November 11 , 1918 . 
 = = = Collapse of the Liberal Party = = = 
 In the general election of 1918 , Lloyd George , " the Man Who Won the War " , led his coalition into another khaki election and won a sweeping victory over the <unk> Liberals and the newly emerging Labour Party . Lloyd George and the Conservative leader Andrew Bonar Law wrote a joint letter of support to candidates to indicate they were considered the official Coalition candidates – this " coupon " , as it became known , was issued against many sitting Liberal Members of Parliament to devastating effect . Asquith and most of his Liberal colleagues lost their seats . Lloyd George still claimed to be leading a Liberal government , but he was increasingly under the influence of the rejuvenated Conservative party . The Liberal party never recovered . 
 = = Monarchy = = 
 The British Royal House faced a serious problem during the First World War because of its blood ties to the ruling family of Germany , Britain 's prime adversary in the war . Before the war , the British royal family had been known as the House of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . In 1910 , George V became King of the United Kingdom on the death of his father , King Edward VII , and remained king throughout the war . He was the first cousin of the German Kaiser Wilhelm II , who came to symbolise all the horrors of the war . Queen Mary , although British like her mother , was the daughter of the Duke of Teck , a descendant of the German Royal House of Württemberg . During the war H. G. Wells wrote about Britain 's " alien and uninspiring court " , and George famously replied : " I may be uninspiring , but I 'll be damned if I 'm alien . " 
 On 17 July 1917 , to appease British nationalist feelings , King George issued an Order in Council that changed the name of the British Royal Family to the House of Windsor . He specifically adopted Windsor as the surname for all descendants of Queen Victoria then living in the United Kingdom , excluding women who married into other families and their descendants . He and his relatives who were British subjects relinquished the use of all German titles and styles , and adopted English surnames . George compensated several of his male relatives by creating them British peers . Thus , his cousin , Prince Louis of Battenberg , became Louis Mountbatten , 1st Marquess of Milford Haven , while his brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Duke of Teck , became Adolphus Cambridge , 1st Marquess of Cambridge . Others , such as Princess Marie Louise of Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Princess Helena Victoria of Schleswig @-@ Holstein , simply stopped using their territorial designations . The system for titling members of the royal family was also simplified . Relatives of the British royal family who fought on the German side were simply cut off ; their British peerages were suspended by a 1919 Order in Council under the provisions of the Titles Deprivation Act 1917 . 
 Developments in Russia posed another set of issues for the monarchy . Tsar Nicholas II of Russia was King George 's first cousin and the two monarchs looked very much alike . When Nicholas was overthrown in the Russian Revolution of 1917 , the British Government was prepared to offer asylum to the Tsar and his family . However , worsening conditions for the British people , and fears that revolution might come to the British Isles , led George V to think that the presence of the Romanovs in the United Kingdom might seem inappropriate to the public . Records of the King 's private secretary , Lord Stamfordham , suggest that George V opposed the granting of asylum for the Romanovs , against the advice of Lloyd George . 
 The Prince of Wales – the future Edward VIII – was keen to participate in the war but the government refused to allow it , citing the immense harm that would occur if the heir to the throne were captured . Despite this , Edward witnessed trench warfare at first hand and attempted to visit the front line as often as he could , for which he was awarded the Military Cross in 1916 . His role in the war , although limited , led to his great popularity among veterans of the conflict . 
 Other members of the royal family were similarly involved . The Prince Albert , Duke of York ( later George VI ) , was commissioned in the Royal Navy and saw action as a turret officer aboard HMS Collingwood against at the battle of Jutland but saw no further action in the war , largely because of ill health . Princess Mary , the King 's only daughter , visited hospitals and welfare organisations with her mother , assisting with projects to give comfort to British servicemen and assistance to their families . One of these projects was Princess Mary 's Christmas Gift Fund , through which £ 162 @,@ 000 worth of gifts was sent to all British soldiers and sailors for Christmas 1914 . She took an active role in promoting the Girl Guide movement , the Voluntary Aid Detachment ( VAD ) , the Land Girls and in 1918 , she took a nursing course and went to work at Great Ormond Street Hospital . 
 = = Defence of the Realm Act = = 
 The first Defence of the Realm Act ( DORA ) was passed on 8 August 1914 , during the early weeks of the war , though in the next few months its provisions were extended . It gave the government wide @-@ ranging powers , such as the ability to requisition buildings or land needed for the war effort . Some of the things the British public were prohibited from doing included loitering under railway bridges , feeding wild animals and discussing naval and military matters . British Summer Time was also introduced . Alcoholic beverages were now to be watered down , pub closing times were brought forward from 12 @.@ 30 am to 10 pm , and , from August 1916 , Londoners were no longer able to whistle for a cab between 10 pm and 7 am . It has been criticised for both its strength and its use of the death penalty as a deterrent – although the act itself did not refer to the death penalty , it made provision for civilians breaking these rules to be tried in army courts martial , where the maximum penalty was death . 
 = = His Majesty 's forces = = 
 = = = Army = = = 
 The British Army during World War I was small in size when compared to the other major European powers . In 1914 , the British had a small , largely urban English , volunteer force of 400 @,@ 000 soldiers , almost half of whom were posted overseas to garrison the British Empire . ( In August 1914 , 74 of the 157 infantry battalions and 12 of the 31 cavalry regiments were posted overseas . ) This total included the Regular Army and reservists in the Territorial Force . Together they formed the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , for service in France and became known as the Old Contemptibles . The mass of volunteers in 1914 – 1915 , popularly known as Kitchener 's Army , was destined to go into action at the battle of the Somme . In January 1916 , conscription was introduced , and by the end of 1918 , the army had reached its peak of strength of four million men . 
 = = = Royal Navy = = = 
 The Royal Navy at the start of the war was the largest navy in the world due , in the most part , to The Naval Defence Act 1889 and the two @-@ power standard which called for the navy to maintain a number of battleships such as their strength was at least equal to the combined strength of the next two largest navies in the world , which at that point were France and Russia . 
 The major part of the Royal Navy 's strength was deployed at home in the Grand Fleet , with the primary aim of drawing the German High Seas Fleet into an engagement . No decisive victory ever came . The Royal Navy and the German Imperial Navy did come into contact , notably in the battle of Heligoland Bight , and the battle of Jutland . In view of their inferior numbers and firepower , the Germans devised a plan to draw part of the British fleet into a trap and put it into effect at Jutland in May 1916 , but the result was inconclusive . In August 1916 , the High Seas Fleet tried a similar enticement operation and was " lucky to escape annihilation " . The lessons learned by the Royal Navy at Jutland made it a more effective force in the future . 
 In 1914 , the navy had also formed the 63rd ( Royal Naval ) Division from reservists , and this served extensively in the Mediterranean and on the Western Front . Almost half of the Royal Navy casualties during the War were sustained by this division , fighting on land and not at sea . 
 = = = British air services = = = 
 At the start of the war , the Royal Flying Corps ( RFC ) , commanded by David Henderson , was sent to France and was first used for aerial spotting in September 1914 , but only became efficient when they perfected the use of wireless communication at Aubers Ridge on May 9 1915 . Aerial photography was attempted during 1914 , but again only became effective the next year . In 1915 Hugh Trenchard replaced Henderson and the RFC adopted an aggressive posture . By 1918 , photographic images could be taken from 15 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) , and interpreted by over 3 @,@ 000 personnel . Planes did not carry parachutes until 1918 , though they had been available since before the war . On 17 August 1917 , General Jan Smuts presented a report to the War Council on the future of air power . Because of its potential for the ' devastation of enemy lands and the destruction of industrial and populous centres on a vast scale ' , he recommended a new air service be formed that would be on a level with the army and navy . The formation of the new service however would make the under utilised men and machines of the Royal Naval Air Service ( RNAS ) available for action across the Western Front , as well as ending the inter @-@ service rivalries that at times had adversely affected aircraft procurement . On 1 April 1918 , the RFC and the RNAS were amalgamated to form a new service , the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . 
 = = Recruitment and conscription = = 
 Particularly in the early stages of the war , many men , for a wide variety of reasons , decided to " join up " to the armed forces — by 5 September 1914 , over 225 @,@ 000 had signed up to fight for what became known as Kitchener 's Army . Over the course of the war , a number of factors contributed to recruitment rates , including patriotism , the work of the Parliamentary Recruiting Committee in producing posters , dwindling alternative employment opportunities , and an eagerness for adventure to escape humdrum routine . Pals battalions , where whole battalions were raised from a small geographic area or employer , also proved popular . Higher recruitment rates were seen in Wales and Scotland , though in the case of the Welsh and Irish , political tensions tended to " put something of a blight upon enlistment " . 
 Recruitment remained fairly steady through 1914 and early 1915 , but fell dramatically during the later years , especially after the Somme campaign , which resulted in 500 @,@ 000 casualties . As a result , conscription was introduced for the first time in January 1916 for single men , and extended in May – June to all men aged 18 to 41 across England , Wales and Scotland , by way of the Military Service Acts . 
 Urban centres , with their poverty and unemployment were favourite recruiting grounds of the regular British army . Dundee , where the female dominated jute industry limited male employment had one of the highest proportion of reservists and serving soldiers than almost any other British city . Concern for their families ' standard of living made men hesitate to enlist ; voluntary enlistment rates went up after the government guaranteed a weekly stipend for life to the survivors of men who were killed or disabled . After the introduction of conscription from January 1916 every part of the country was affected . 
 The policy of relying on volunteers had sharply reduced the capacity of heavy industry to produce the munitions needed for the war . Historian R. J. Q. Adams reports that 19 % of the men in the iron and steel industry entered the Army , 22 % of the miners , 20 % in the engineering trades , 24 % in the electrical industries , 16 % among small arms craftsmen , and 24 % of the men who had been engaged in making high explosives . In response critical industries were prioritised over the army ( " reserved occupations " ) , including munitions , food production and merchant shipping . 
 = = = Conscription Crisis of 1918 = = = 
 In April 1918 legislation was brought forward which allowed for extension of conscription to Ireland . Though this ultimately never materialised , the effect was " disastrous " . Despite significant numbers volunteering for Irish regiments , the idea of enforced conscription proved unpopular . The reaction was based particularly on the fact that implementation of conscription in Ireland was linked to a pledged " measure of self @-@ government in Ireland " . The linking of conscription and Home Rule in this way outraged the Irish parties at Westminster , who walked out in protest and returned to Ireland to organise opposition . As a result , a general strike was called , and on 23 April 1918 , work was stopped in railways , docks , factories , mills , theatres , cinemas , trams , public services , shipyards , newspapers , shops , and even official munitions factories . The strike was described as " complete and entire , an unprecedented event outside the continental countries " . Ultimately the effect was a total loss of interest in Home Rule and of popular support for the nationalist Irish Party who were defeated outright by the separatist republican Sinn Féin party in the December 1918 Irish general election , one of the precursors of the Anglo @-@ Irish War . 
 = = = Conscientious objectors = = = 
 The conscription legislation introduced the right to refuse military service , allowing for conscientious objectors to be absolutely exempted , to perform alternative civilian service , or to serve as a non @-@ combatant in the army , according to the extent to which they could convince a Military Service Tribunal of the quality of their objection . Around 16 @,@ 500 men were recorded as conscientious objectors , with Quakers playing a large role . 4 @,@ 500 objectors were sent to work on farms to undertake " work of national importance " , 7 @,@ 000 were ordered non @-@ combatant duties as stretcher bearers , but 6 @,@ 000 were forced into the army , and when they refused orders , they were sent to prison , as in the case of the Richmond Sixteen . Some 843 conscientious objectors spent more than two years in prison ; ten died while there , seventeen were initially given the death penalty ( but received life imprisonment ) and 142 were imprisoned on life sentences . Conscientious objectors who were deemed not to have made any useful contribution were disenfranchised for five years after the war . 
 = = Naval and air raids = = 
 At the start of the First World War , for the first time since the Napoleonic Wars , the population of the British Isles was in danger of attack from naval raids . The country also came under attack from air raids by zeppelins and fixed @-@ wing aircraft , another first . 
 = = = Naval raids = = = 
 The Raid on Yarmouth , which took place in November 1914 , was an attack by the German Navy on the British North Sea port and town of Great Yarmouth . Little damage was done to the town itself , since shells only landed on the beach once German ships laying mines offshore were interrupted by British destroyers . One British submarine was sunk by a mine as it attempted to leave harbour and attack the German ships , while one German armoured cruiser was sunk after striking two mines outside its own home port . 
 In December 1914 , the German navy carried out attacks on the British coastal towns of Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby . The attack resulted in 137 fatalities and 593 casualties , many of which were civilians . The attack made the German navy very unpopular with the British public , as an attack against British civilians in their homes . Likewise , the British Royal Navy was criticised for failing to prevent the raid . 
 = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = 
 In April 1916 a German battlecruiser squadron with accompanying cruisers and destroyers bombarded the coastal ports of Yarmouth and Lowestoft . Although the ports had some military importance , the main aim of the raid was to entice out defending ships which could then be picked off either by the battlecruiser squadron or by the full High Seas Fleet , which was stationed at sea ready to intervene if an opportunity presented itself . The result was inconclusive : nearby Royal Navy units were too small to intervene so largely kept clear of the German battlecruisers , and the German ships withdrew before the first British fast response battlecruiser squadron or the Grand Fleet could arrive . 
 = = = Air raids = = = 
 German zeppelins bombed towns on the east coast , starting on 19 January 1915 with Great Yarmouth . London was also hit later in the same year , on 31 May . Propaganda supporting the British war effort often used these raids to their advantage : one recruitment poster claimed : " It is far better to face the bullets than to be killed at home by a bomb " ( see image ) . The reaction from the public , however , was mixed ; whilst 10 @,@ 000 visited Scarborough to view the damage there , London theatres reported having fewer visitors during periods of " Zeppelin weather " — dark , fine nights . 
 Throughout 1917 Germany began to deploy increasing numbers of fixed @-@ wing bombers , the Gotha <unk> 's first target being Folkestone on 25 May 1917 , following this attack the number of airship raids decreased rapidly in favour of raids by fixed wing aircraft , before Zeppelin raids were called off entirely . In total , Zeppelins dropped 6 @,@ 000 bombs , resulting in 556 dead and 1 @,@ 357 wounded . Soon after the raid on Folkestone , the bombers began raids on London : one daylight raid on 13 June 1917 by 14 Gothas caused 162 deaths in the East End of London . In response to this new threat , Major General Edward Bailey Ashmore , a RFC pilot who later commanded an artillery division in Belgium , was appointed to devise an improved system of detection , communication and control , The system , called the Metropolitan Observation Service , encompassed the London Air Defence Area and would later extend eastwards towards the Kentish and Essex coasts . The Metropolitan Observation Service was fully operational until the late summer of 1918 ( the last German bombing raid taking place on 19 May 1918 ) . During the war , the Germans carried out 51 airship raids and 52 fixed @-@ wing bomber raids on the United Kingdom , which together dropped 280 tons of bombs . The casualties amounted to 1 @,@ 413 killed , and 3 @,@ 409 wounded . The success of anti @-@ air defence measures was limited ; of the 397 aircraft that had taken part in raids , only 24 Gothas were shot down ( though 37 more were lost in accidents ) , despite an estimated rate of 14 @,@ 540 anti @-@ air rounds per aircraft . Anti @-@ zeppelin defences were more successful , with 17 shot down and 21 lost in accidents . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Propaganda = = = 
 Propaganda and censorship were closely linked during the war . The need to maintain morale and counter German propaganda was recognised early in the war and the War Propaganda Bureau was established under the leadership of Charles Masterman in September 1914 . The Bureau enlisted eminent writers such as H G Wells , Arthur Conan Doyle , Rudyard Kipling as well as newspaper editors . By the summer of 1915 , the Bureau had printed over 2 @.@ 5 million books , speeches , official documents and pamphlets . Masterman also commissioned films about the war such as The Battle of the Somme , which appeared in August 1916 , while the battle was still in progress as a morale @-@ booster and in general it met with a favourable reception . The Times reported on 22 August 1916 that " Crowded audiences ... were interested and thrilled to have the realities of war brought so vividly before them , and if women had sometimes to shut their eyes to escape for a moment from the tragedy of the toll of battle which the film presents , opinion seems to be general that it was wise that the people at home should have this glimpse of what our soldiers are doing and daring and suffering in Picardy " . 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 Newspapers during the war were subject to the Defence of the Realm Act , which eventually had two regulations restricting what they could publish : Regulation 18 , which prohibited the leakage of sensitive military information , troop and shipping movements ; and Regulation 27 , which made it an offence to " spread false reports " , " spread reports that were likely to prejudice recruiting " , " undermine public confidence in banks or currency " or cause " disaffection to His Majesty " . Where the official Press Bureau failed ( it had no statutory powers until April 1916 ) , the newspaper editors and owners operated a ruthless self @-@ censorship . Having worked for government , press barons Viscount Rothermere , Baron Beaverbrook ( in a sea of controversy ) , and Viscount Northcliffe all received titles . For these reasons , it has been concluded that censorship , which at its height suppressed only socialist journals ( and briefly the right wing The Globe ) had less effect on the British press than the reductions in advertising revenues and cost increases which they also faced during the war . One major loophole in the official censorship lay with parliamentary privilege , when anything said in Parliament could be reported freely . The most infamous act of censorship in the early days of the war was the sinking of HMS Audacious in October 1914 , when the press was directed not to report on the loss , despite the sinking being observed by passengers on the liner RMS Olympic and quickly reported in the American press . 
 The most popular papers of the period included dailies such as The Times , The Daily Telegraph and The Morning Post , weekly newspapers such as The Graphic and periodicals like John Bull , which claimed a weekly circulation of 900 @,@ 000 . The public demand for news of the war was reflected in the increased sales of newspapers . After the German Navy raid on Hartlepool and Scarborough , the Daily Mail devoted three full pages to the raid and the Evening News reported that The Times had sold out by a quarter past nine in the morning , even with inflated prices . The Daily Mail itself increased in circulation from 800 @,@ 000 a day in 1914 to 1 @.@ 5 million by 1916 . 
 = = = News magazines = = = 
 The public 's thirst for news and information was in part satisfied by news magazines , which were dedicated to reporting the war . They included amongst others The War Illustrated , The Illustrated War News , and The War Pictorial , and were lavishly filled with photographs and illustrations , regardless of their target audience . Magazines were produced for all classes , and ranged both in price and tone . Many otherwise famous writers contributed towards these publications , of which H.G. Wells , Arthur Conan Doyle and Rudyard Kipling were three examples . Editorial guidelines varied ; in cheaper publications especially it was considered more important to create a sense of patriotism than to relay up @-@ to @-@ the @-@ minutes news of developments of the front . Stories of German atrocities were commonplace . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On 13 August 1914 , the Irish regiment the Connaught Rangers were witnessed singing " It 's a Long Way to Tipperary " as they marched through Boulogne by the Daily Mail correspondent George <unk> , who reported the event in that newspaper on 18 August 1914 . The song was then picked up by other units of the British Army . In November 1914 , it was sung in a pantomime by the well @-@ known music hall singer Florrie Forde , which helped contribute to its worldwide popularity . Another song from 1916 , which became very popular as a music hall and marching song , boosting British morale despite the horrors of that war , was " Pack Up Your Troubles in Your Old Kit @-@ Bag " . 
 = = = War poets = = = 
 There was also a notable group of war poets who wrote about their own experiences of war , which caught the public attention . Some died on active service , most famously Rupert Brooke , Isaac Rosenberg , and Wilfred Owen , while some , such as Siegfried Sassoon survived . Themes of the poems included the youth ( or naivety ) of the soldiers , and the dignified manner in which they fought and died . This is evident in lines such as " They fell with their faces to the foe " , from the " Ode of Remembrance " taken from Laurence Binyon 's For the Fallen , which was first published in The Times in September 1914 . Female poets such as Vera Brittain also wrote from the home front , to lament the losses of brothers and lovers fighting on the front . 
 = = Economy = = 
 On the whole the British successfully managed the economics of the war . There had been no prewar plan for mobilization of economic resources . Controls were imposed slowly , as one urgent need followed another . With the City of London the world 's financial capital , it was possible to handle finances smoothly ; in all Britain spent 4 million pounds everyday on the war effort . 
 The economy ( in terms of GDP ) grew about 14 % from 1914 to 1918 despite the absence of so many men in the services ; by contrast the German economy shrank 27 % . The War saw a decline of civilian consumption , with a major reallocation to munitions . The government share of GDP soared from 8 % in 1913 to 38 % in 1918 ( compared to 50 % in 1943 ) . The war forced Britain to use up its financial reserves and borrow large sums from the U.S. Shipments of American raw materials and food allowed Britain to feed itself and its army while maintaining his productivity . The financing was generally successful , as the City 's strong financial position minimized the damaging effects of inflation , as opposed to much worse conditions in Germany . Overall consumer consumption declined 18 % from 1914 to 1919 . Trade unions were encouraged as membership grew from 4 @.@ 1 million in 1914 to 6 @.@ 5 million in 1918 , peaking at 8 @.@ 3 million in 1920 before relapsing to 5 @.@ 4 million in 1923 . In Scotland , the shipbuilding industry expanding by a third . The trade unions enthusiastically supported the war , apart from the coal miners who were much less enthusiastic . 
 Women were available and many entered munitions factories and took other home front jobs vacated by men . 
 = = = Rationing = = = 
 In line with its " business as usual " policy , the government was initially reluctant to try to control the food markets . It fought off efforts to try to introduce minimum prices in cereal production , though relenting in the area of controlling of essential imports ( sugar , meat and grains ) . When it did introduce changes , they were only limited in their effect . In 1916 , it became illegal to consume more than two courses whilst lunching in a public eating place or more than three for dinner ; fines were introduced for members of the public found feeding the pigeons or stray animals . 
 In January 1917 , Germany started using U @-@ boats ( submarines ) in order to sink Allied and later neutral ships bringing food to the country in an attempt to starve Britain into surrender under their unrestricted submarine warfare programme . One response to this threat was to introduce voluntary rationing in February 1917 , a scheme said to have been endorsed by the king and queen themselves . Bread was subsidised from September that year ; prompted by local authorities taking matters into their own hands , compulsory rationing was introduced in stages between December 1917 and February 1918 , as Britain 's supply of wheat stores decreased to just six weeks worth . It is said to have in the most part benefited the health of the country , through the ' levelling of consumption of essential foodstuffs ' . To assist with rationing , ration books were introduced on 15 July 1918 for butter , margarine , lard , meat , and sugar . During the war , average calories intake decreased only three percent , but protein intake six percent . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 Total British production fell by ten percent over the course of the war ; there were , however , increases in certain industries such as steel . Although Britain faced a controversial shell shortage , this has been attributed to extraordinary orders placed by the government at the outbreak of war ( without concern for the capacity of its industry ) , rather than inefficient production . In 1915 , the Ministry of Munitions under David Lloyd @-@ George was formed to control munitions production and had considerable success . By April 1915 , just two million rounds of shells had been sent to France ; by the end of the war the figure had reached 187 million , and a year 's worth of pre @-@ war production of light munitions could be completed in just four days by 1918 . Aircraft production in 1914 provided employment for 60 @,@ 000 men and women ; by 1918 British firms employed over 347 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Labour = = = 
 Industrial production of munitions was a central feature of the war , and with a third of the men in the labour force moved into the military , demand was very high for industrial labour . Large numbers of women were employed temporarily . Trade unions gave strong support to the war effort , cutting back on strikes and restrictive practices . Membership doubled from 4 @.@ 1 million in 1914 , 28 @.@ 3 million in 1920 . 65 percent of union members had been associated with the Trades Union Congress ( TUC ) In 1914 , rising to 77 percent in 1920 . Labour 's prestige had never been higher , and it systematically placed its leaders into Parliament . 
 The Munitions of War Act 1915 followed the Shell Crisis of 1915 when supplies of material to the front became a political issue . The Act forbade strikes and lockouts and replaced them with compulsory arbitration . It set up a system of controlling war industries , and established munitions tribunals that were special courts to enforce good working practices . It suspended , for the duration , restrictive practices by trade unions . It tried to control labour mobility between jobs . The courts ruled the definition of munitions was broad enough to include textile workers and dock workers . 1915 act was repealed in 1919 , but similar legislation took effect during the Second World War . 
 It was only as late as December 1917 that a War Cabinet Committee on Manpower was established , and the British government refrained from introducing compulsory labour direction ( though 388 men were moved as part of the voluntary National Service Scheme ) . Belgian refugees became workers , though they were often seen as " job stealers " . Likewise , the use of Irish workers , because they were exempt from conscription , was another source of resentment . Worried about the impact of the dilution of labour caused by bringing external groups into the main labour pool , workers in some areas turned to strike action . The efficiency of major industries improved markedly during the war . For example , the Singer Clydebank sewing machine factory received over 5000 government contracts , and made 303 million artillery shells , shell components , fuzes , and airplane parts , as well as grenades , rifle parts , and 361 @,@ 000 horseshoes . Its labour force of 14 @,@ 000 was about 70 percent female at war 's end . 
 = = = Energy = = = 
 Energy was a critical factor for the British war effort . Most of the energy supplies came from coal mines in Britain , where the issue was labour supply . Critical however was the flow of oil for ships , lorries and industrial use . There were no oil wells in Britain so everything was imported . The U.S. pumped two @-@ thirds of the world 's oil . In 1917 , total British consumption was 827 million barrels , of which 85 percent was supplied by the United States , and 6 percent by Mexico . The great issue in 1917 was how many tankers would survive the German u @-@ boats . Convoys and the construction of new tankers solved the German threat , while tight government controls guaranteed that all essential needs were covered . An Inter @-@ Allied Petroleum Conference allocated American supplies to Britain , France and Italy . 
 Fuel oil for the Royal Navy was the highest priority . In 1917 , the Royal Navy consumed 12 @,@ 500 tons a month , but had a supply of 30 @,@ 000 tons a month from British Petroleum , using <unk> oil wells in Persia . 
 = = Social change = = 
 Variously throughout the war , serious shortage of able @-@ bodied men ( " manpower " ) occurred in the country , and women were required to take on many of the traditional male roles , particularly in the area of arms manufacture ; though this was only significant in the later years of the war , since unemployed men were often prioritised by employers . Women both found work in the munitions factories ( as " <unk> " ) despite initial trade union opposition , which directly helped the war effort , but also in the Civil Service , where they took men 's jobs , releasing them for the front . The number of women employed by the service increased from 33 @,@ 000 in 1911 to over 102 @,@ 000 by 1921 . The overall increase in female employment is estimated at 1 @.@ 4 million , from 5 @.@ 9 to 7 @.@ 3 million , and female trade union membership increased from 357 @,@ 000 in 1914 to over a million by 1918 — an increase of 160 percent . Beckett suggests that most of these were working class women going into work at a younger age than they would otherwise have done , or married women returning to work . This taken together with the fact that only 23 percent of women in the munitions industry were actually doing men 's jobs , would limit substantially the overall impact of the war on the long @-@ term prospects of the working woman . 
 When the government targeted women early in the war focussed on extending their existing roles – helping with Belgian refugees , for example — but also on improving recruitment rates amongst men . They did this both through the so @-@ called " Order of the White Feather " and through the promise of home comforts for the men while they were at the front . In February 1916 , groups were set up and a campaign started to get women to help in agriculture and in March 1917 , the Women 's Land Army was set up . One goal was to attract middle @-@ class women who would act as models for patriotic engagement in nontraditional duties . However the uniform of the Women 's Land Army included male overalls and trousers , which sparked debate on the propriety of such cross @-@ dressing . The government responded with rhetoric that explicitly feminized the new roles . In 1918 , the Board of Trade estimated that there were 148 @,@ 000 women in agricultural employment , though a figure of nearly 260 @,@ 000 has also been suggested . 
 The war also caused a split in the British suffragette movement , with the mainstream , represented by Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel 's Women 's Social and Political Union , calling a ' ceasefire ' in their campaign for the duration of the war . In contrast , more radical suffragettes , like the Women 's Suffrage Federation run by Emmeline 's other daughter , Sylvia , continued their ( at times violent ) struggle . Women were also allowed to join the armed forces in a non @-@ combatant role and by the end of the War 80 @,@ 000 women had joined the armed forces in auxiliary roles such as nursing and cooking . 
 Following the war , millions of returning soldiers were still not entitled to vote . This posed another dilemma for politicians since they could be seen to be withholding the vote from the very men who had just fought to preserve the British democratic political system . The Representation of the People Act 1918 attempted to solve the problem , enfranchising all adult males as long as they were over 21 years old and were resident householders . It also gave the vote to women over 30 who met minimum property qualifications . The enfranchisement of this latter group was accepted as recognition of the contribution made by women defence workers , though the actual feelings of members of parliament ( MPs ) at the time is questioned . In the same year the Parliament ( Qualification of Women ) Act 1918 allowed women over 21 to stand as MPs . 
 The new coalition government of 1918 charged itself with the task of creating a " land fit for heroes " , from a speech given in Wolverhampton by David Lloyd George on 23 November 1918 , where he stated " What is our task ? To make Britain a fit country for heroes to live in . " More generally , the war has been credited , both during and after the conflict , with removing some of the social barriers that had pervaded Victorian and Edwardian Britain . 
 = = Regional conditions = = 
 The War had a profound influence upon rural areas , as the U @-@ boat blockade required the government to take full control of the food chain , as well as agricultural labour . Cereal production was a high priority , and the Corn Production Act 1917 guaranteed prices , regulated wage rates , and required farmers to meet efficiency standards . The government campaigned heavily for turning marginal land into cropland . The Women 's Land Army brought in 23 @,@ 000 young women from the towns and cities to milk cows , pick fruit and otherwise replace the men who joined the services . More extensive use of tractors and machinery also replaced farm labourers . However , there was a shortage of both men and horses on the land by late 1915 . County War Agricultural Executive Committees reported that the continued removal of men was undercutting food production because of the farmers ' belief that operating a farm required a set number of men and horses . 
 Kenneth Morgan argues that , ' the overwhelming mass of the Welsh people cast aside their political and industrial divisions and threw themselves into the war with gusto . " Intellectuals and ministers actively promoted the war spirit . With 280 @,@ 000 men enrolled in the services ( 14 % of the population ) , the proportionate effort in Wales outstripped both England and Scotland . However Adrian Gregory points out that the Welsh coal miners , while officially supporting the war effort , refused the government request to cut short their vacation time . After some debate , the miners agreed to extend the working day . 
 Scotland 's distinctive characteristics have attracted significant attention from scholars . Unlike England , Scotland specialized in providing manpower , ships , machinery , food ( particularly fish ) and money . Daniel shows it supported the war effort with widespread enthusiasm . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 In the post war publication Statistics of the Military Effort of the British Empire During the Great War 1914 – 1920 ( The War Office , March 1922 ) , the official report lists 908 @,@ 371 ' soldiers ' as being either killed in action , dying of wounds , dying as prisoners of war or missing in action in the World War . ( This is broken down into the United Kingdom and its colonies 704 @,@ 121 ; British India 64 @,@ 449 ; Canada 56 @,@ 639 ; Australia 59 @,@ 330 ; New Zealand 16 @,@ 711 ; South Africa 7 @,@ 121 . ) Listed separately were the Royal Navy ( including the Royal Naval Air Service until 31 March 1918 ) war dead and missing of 32 @,@ 287 and the Merchant Navy war dead of 14 @,@ 661 . The figures for the Royal Flying Corps and the nascent Royal Air Force were not given in the War Office report . 
 A second publication , Casualties and Medical Statistics ( 1931 ) , the final volume of the Official Medical History of the War , gives British Empire Army losses by cause of death . The total losses in combat from 1914 to 1918 were 876 @,@ 084 , which included 418 @,@ 361 killed , 167 @,@ 172 died of wounds , 113 @,@ 173 died of disease or injury , 161 @,@ 046 missing presumed dead and 16 @,@ 332 died as a prisoner of war . 
 The Commonwealth War Graves Commission lists 888 @,@ 246 war dead from the UK and colonies ( excluding the dominions , which are listed separately ) . This figure includes identified burials and those commemorated by name on memorials ; there are an additional 187 @,@ 644 unidentified burials from the Commonwealth ( then Empire ) as a whole . 
 The civilian death rate exceeded the prewar level by 292 @,@ 000 , which included 109 @,@ 000 deaths due to food shortages and 183 @,@ 577 from Spanish Flu . The 1922 War Office report detailed the deaths of 1 @,@ 260 civilians and 310 military personnel due to air and sea bombardment of the United Kingdom . Losses at sea were 908 United Kingdom civilians and 63 fisherman killed by U @-@ boat attacks . 
 With a population of 4 @.@ 8 million in 1911 , Scotland sent 690 @,@ 000 men to the war , of whom 74 @,@ 000 died in combat or from disease , and 150 @,@ 000 were seriously wounded . At times Scottish troops made up large proportions of the active combatants , and suffered corresponding loses , as at the Battle of Loos , where there were three full Scots divisions and other Scottish units . Thus , although Scots were only 10 per cent of the British population , they made up 15 per cent of the national armed forces and eventually accounted for 20 per cent of the dead . Some areas , like the thinly populated Island of Lewis and Harris suffered some of the highest proportional losses of any part of Britain . Clydeside shipyards and the engineering shops of west @-@ central Scotland became the most significant centre of shipbuilding and arms production in the Empire . In the Lowlands , particularly Glasgow , poor working and living conditions led to industrial and political unrest . 
 = = Legacy and memory = = 
 The horrors of the Western Front as well as Gallipoli and Mesopotamia were seared into the collective consciousness of the twentieth century . To a large extent the understanding of the war in popular culture focused on the first day of the Battle of the Somme . Historian A.J.P. Taylor argued , " The Somme set the picture by which future generations saw the First World War : brave helpless soldiers ; blundering obstinate generals ; nothing achieved . " 
 Images of trench warfare became iconic symbols of human suffering and endurance . The post @-@ war world had many veterans who were maimed or damaged by shell shock . In 1921 1 @,@ 187 @,@ 450 men were in receipt of pensions for war disabilities , with a fifth of these having suffered serious loss of limbs or eyesight , paralysis or lunacy . 
 The war was a major economic catastrophe as Britain went from being the world 's largest overseas investor to being its biggest debtor , with interest payments consuming around 40 percent of the national budget . Inflation more than doubled between 1914 and its peak in 1920 , while the value of the Pound Sterling fell by 61 @.@ 2 percent . Reparations in the form of free German coal depressed the local industry , precipitating the 1926 General Strike . During the war British private investments abroad were sold , raising £ 550 million . However , £ 250 million new investment also took place during the war . The net financial loss was therefore approximately £ 300 million ; less than two years investment compared to the pre @-@ war average rate and more than replaced by 1928 . Material loss was " slight " : the most significant being 40 percent of the British merchant fleet sunk by German U @-@ boats . Most of this was replaced in 1918 and all immediately after the war . The military historian Correlli Barnett has argued that " in objective truth the Great War in no way inflicted crippling economic damage on Britain " but that the war only " crippled the British psychologically " ( emphasis in original ) . 
 Less concrete changes include the growing assertiveness of the Dominions within the British Empire . Battles such as Gallipoli for Australia and New Zealand , and Vimy Ridge for Canada led to increased national pride and a greater reluctance to remain subordinate to the United Kingdom . These battles were often portrayed favourably in these nations ' propaganda as symbolic of their power during the war . The war released pent @-@ up indigenous nationalism , as populations tried to take advantage of the precedent set by the introduction of self @-@ determination in eastern Europe . Britain was to face unrest in Ireland ( 1919 – 21 ) , India ( 1919 ) , Egypt ( 1919 – 23 ) , Palestine ( 1920 – 21 ) and Iraq ( 1920 ) at a time when they were supposed to be demilitarising . Nevertheless , Britain 's only territorial loss came in Ireland , where the delay in finding a resolution to the home rule issue , along with the 1916 Easter Rising and a failed attempt to introduce conscription in Ireland , increased support for separatist radicals , and led indirectly to the outbreak of the Irish War of Independence in 1919 . 
 Further change came in 1919 . With the Treaty of Versailles , London took charge of an additional 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 square miles ( 4 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 km2 ) and 13 million new subjects . The colonies of Germany and the Ottoman Empire were distributed to the Allied powers ( and to Australia , New Zealand and South Africa ) as League of Nations mandates , with the United Kingdom at least gaining control of Palestine and Transjordan , Iraq , parts of Cameroon and Togo , and Tanganyika . Indeed , the British Empire reached its territorial peak after the settlement . 
 = Siege of Krujë ( 1450 ) = 
 The first Siege of Krujë occurred in 1450 when an Ottoman army of approximately 100 @,@ 000 men laid siege to the Albanian town of Krujë . The League of Lezhë , led by Skanderbeg , experienced low morale after losing Svetigrad and Berat between 1448 and 1450 . Nevertheless , Skanderbeg 's exhortations and the support of the clergy , who claimed to have had visions of angels and victory , motivated the Albanians to defend the capital of the League , Krujë , at all costs . After leaving a protective garrison of 4 @,@ 000 men under his trusted lieutenant Vrana Konti ( also known as <unk> <unk> ) , Skanderbeg harassed the Ottoman camps around Krujë and attacked the supply caravans of Sultan Murad II 's army . By September the Ottoman camp was in disarray as morale sank and disease ran rampant . The Ottoman army acknowledged that the castle of Krujë would not fall by strength of arms , lifted the siege , and made its way to Edirne . Soon thereafter , in the winter of 1450 – 51 , Murad died in Edirne and was succeeded by his son , Mehmed II . 
 = = Campaigns of 1448 and early 1450 = = 
 After several failed invasions of Albania by Ottoman captains , Murad II laid siege to the fortress of Svetigrad ( which is thought to be today 's Demir Hisar ) on May 14 , 1448 , with a force of 80 @,@ 000 men . Svetigrad was an important strategic point , since it controlled the routes from Macedonia into Albania . The small garrison , composed of Albanians , Bulgarians , and other Europeans , held the fortress while <unk> attacked the Ottoman camp from outside . After the Ottomans poisoned the wells , a group of defenders decided to open the gates and let the Turks in , thus giving control of the fortress to the Ottomans . The Sultan retired from Albania and Skanderbeg laid siege to Svetigrad on September 23 , 1448 . After several failed assaults , Skanderbeg lifted the siege and retreated . In early 1450 , Berat was captured by the pasha of Gjirokastër through a night attack , causing Gjergj Arianit to desert <unk> 's cause . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Albanian morale before the siege = = = 
 The morale of the Albanians sank after the losses in the previous years . When the Turks began marching towards Krujë on April 5 , 1450 , the people claimed to have seen <unk> and angels flying over Albania . Skanderbeg himself claimed that he had received a vision of St. George handing him a flaming sword to " destroy the enemies of true religion ( Christianity ) . " This speech , along with many other visions of the clergy , raised Albanians ' morale , motivating them to fight . 
 = = = Albanian dispositions and preparations = = = 
 Before the siege began , Skanderbeg exited Krujë with 8 @,@ 000 men — among whom were many Slavs , Italians , Frenchmen and Germans . 2 @,@ 000 of these were infantry and 6 @,@ 000 were cavalry . Skanderbeg found Mount Tumenishta ( now known as Mount Skënderbeu ) to be a suitable position from which to attack the Ottomans . Krujë was left with a garrison of 4 @,@ 000 men under the command of Vrana Konti . Vrana had under his command several Germans , Italians , and Frenchmen , to whom he emphasized the importance of the siege and also ordered them to their positions . Krujë had enough supplies for a sixteen @-@ month siege . The women and children of Krujë were sent for protection to Venetian possessed cities , whereas the others were ordered to burn their crops and move into the mountains and fortresses . 
 = = = Ottoman dispositions and preparations = = = 
 Murad reached Krujë on May 14 with approximately 100 @,@ 000 of his best soldiers ( 60 @,@ 000 of which was cavalry ) . Murad proposed to Vrana that he should hand over the fortress , but Vrana refused . After receiving the refusal , Murad set his army to cast ten cannons , one of which could fire rocks weighing 400 pounds and another 200 pounds . Despite the firepower , the Turkish firing positions were at a disadvantage , since Krujë " was almost part of the mountain which it had been built . " The cannons could fire two or three times a day and were not accurate . Two large and four smaller guns were placed on the Tirana side , and the remainder were aimed at the main gateway . 
 = = Siege = = 
 = = = First phase = = = 
 Murad fired on Krujë for four days until a breach was finally made . The Sultan believed that he had the advantage and ordered his troops through the walls . The garrison managed to push the assault back , thus gaining time to repair the walls . Murad , fearing a counterattack from Skanderbeg , sent a scouting patrol towards the surrounding mountains to watch for an attack . Skanderbeg still managed to lead , at dusk , a raid on the Turkish encampment , killing several hundred men , capturing and destroying Turkish supplies , and almost losing his own life . When Skanderbeg returned to his men , his " shield was so battered that its shape was scarce to be discerned . " The raid cost Skanderbeg ten dead and even more wounded . The assault continued however , with the guns sounding from time to time . The defenders were not facing great difficulty , however . Sixty of them sallied forth to do whatever damage they could , and those at the walls repelled all attempts to enter . The main weight of the attack had come from the Tirana side , where the Turkish losses had been heavy . 
 = = = Second phase = = = 
 When the second assault began , the Turks tried to break through the gate with their lances . After heavy casualties , the attackers retreated and Murad held for the next two days a council of all his generals . An immediate precaution was to guard the camp against another surprise attack , which was responded to by placing a force of men , under the command of Prince Mehmed , where the first attack had taken place . Moisi Arianit Golemi feigned an attack with about 500 horsemen : the alarm was given and the Turks prepared for his attack . Meanwhile , Skanderbeg and his forces moved around the camp and broke in where least expected . Before an organized counterattack could be made , Skanderbeg retreated from the camp . The attacks made by Skanderbeg caused the Turks to aim some of their cannons towards the expected guerrilla forces , instead of the fortress . A large force of Turkish cavalry was sent out , which Skanderbeg followed up to the mouth of the <unk> River , until they turned back to Krujë . 
 While Skanderbeg had been away , a large Ottoman assault was made on Krujë from the Tirana side , but inadvertent friendly fire from the Turks forced them to call off the assault . The Ottomans then attempted to mine the fortress , but could not succeed , since the fortress had been built on rock . Since the food supplies were beginning to run out , the Turks received provisions from Venice , as did the Albanians . The Turkish attacks had made no headway and the Ottoman army had lost many dead or wounded , whereas Skanderbeg 's force had lost 1 @,@ 000 men thus far . Moisi Golemi and Tanush Thopia raised a couple thousand more and the force was split between the three , making attacks on the Turkish camp easier . Skanderbeg began to move towards the camp as the Turks had assembled 8 @,@ 000 men which began to move towards him . Skanderbeg slowly retired , while Moisi and Tanush broke into the camp . The Turkish force sent against Skanderbeg was lured towards the foothills and the next morning ( July 25 ) they were surrounded and completely destroyed . The next day , Skanderbeg was seen above the rocks of Krujë , in conference with Vrana Konti , surprising Murad . 
 = = = Final phase = = = 
 After Vrana had returned to the castle , a pasha was chosen to have a conference with Vrana bringing him many rich presents . The pasha tried to convince the count that Murad would be a more suitable master than Skanderbeg was , and that the siege was almost over , but Vrana refused to surrender . As a result , a fresh Ottoman assault began . Meanwhile , Murad sent an envoy trying to convince Skanderbeg to capitulate by offering 10 @,@ 000 crowns annually . Skanderbeg also refused replying : " Nay if Murad did divide with me and make me co @-@ partner with all his empire , I would never suffer the name of Albania to be stained and blemished with this blot of disgrace and infamy . " The assault continued , and the Albanian positions seemed desperate . On October 14 , Skanderbeg offered Krujë to the Venetians , threatening to capitulate the fortress to the Turks if they did not accept it . After Murad lifted the siege on October 26 , because of the arriving winter , the Venetians replied to Skanderbeg 's offer rejecting it and offered to help Skanderbeg to harmonize his relationship with Ottomans . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The siege cost 20 @,@ 000 Ottoman casualties and over 1 @,@ 000 Albanian casualties . Marin Barleti claims that Murad died of disease under the fortress of Krujë , but Murad in fact died in Edirne in 1451 . Murad began to retire from Albania out of fear of losing even more men from the Albanian winter , however the retreat itself caused the loss of thousands of Ottoman troops due to attacks from local Albanian militias . Skanderbeg was at the end of his resources . He travelled to Ragusa , urging for assistance , and the Ragusans informed Pope Nicholas V. Through financial assistance , Skanderbeg managed to hold Krujë and regain much of his territory . Skanderbeg 's success brought praise from all over Europe and ambassadors were sent to him from Rome , Naples , Hungary , and Burgundy . Skanderbeg then became a vassal of Alfonso V , on March 26 , 1451 , by the Treaty of Gaeta , gaining much needed men and supplies from the crown of Aragon . 
 According to legend , one night during the siege Skanderbeg sent out a herd of goats with a candle on each of the goats ' horns . The encamped Turks believed it to be an Albanian attack and made a movement against the herd . When the Turks advanced far enough , Skanderbeg launched an attack against the force , destroying it . After the siege was lifted , Skanderbeg commemorated his victory by designing a helmet with the head of a goat on it , as a reference to his " ingenious tactics " used that night . 
 = = Popular culture and legacy = = 
 Naim <unk> , a prominent Albanian poet , wrote of how the siege of Krujë had saved Europe from Ottoman invasion . Today , Albanians take pride in the actions performed during the siege . The Skanderbeg Museum , in Krujë , has many commemorations to the siege and the film Skënderbeu ( 1953 ) stages the siege . It is the setting of the novel The Siege by Albanian writer Ismail Kadare . 
 = J. K. Rowling = 
 Joanne " Jo " Rowling , OBE , FRSL ( / <unk> / ; born 31 July 1965 ) , pen names J. K. Rowling and Robert Galbraith , is a British novelist , screenwriter and film producer best known as the author of the Harry Potter fantasy series . The books have gained worldwide attention , won multiple awards , and sold more than 400 million copies . They have become the best @-@ selling book series in history and been the basis for a series of films which is the second highest @-@ grossing film series in history . Rowling had overall approval on the scripts and maintained creative control by serving as a producer on the final instalment . 
 Born in Yate , Gloucestershire , England , Rowling was working as a researcher and bilingual secretary for Amnesty International when she conceived the idea for the Harry Potter series while on a delayed train from Manchester to London in 1990 . The seven @-@ year period that followed saw the death of her mother , birth of her first child , divorce from her first husband and relative poverty until she finished the first novel in the series , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , in 1997 . There were six sequels , the last , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , in 2007 . Since then , Rowling has written four books for adult readers , The Casual Vacancy ( 2012 ) and — under the pseudonym Robert Galbraith — the crime fiction novels The Cuckoo 's Calling ( 2013 ) , The Silkworm ( 2014 ) and Career of Evil ( 2015 ) . 
 Rowling has lived a " rags to riches " life story , in which she progressed from living on state benefits to multi @-@ millionaire status within five years . She is the United Kingdom 's best @-@ selling living author , with sales in excess of £ <unk> . The 2008 Sunday Times Rich List estimated Rowling 's fortune at £ 560 million , ranking her as the twelfth richest woman in the United Kingdom . Forbes ranked Rowling as the 48th most powerful celebrity of 2007 , and Time magazine named her as a runner @-@ up for its 2007 Person of the Year , noting the social , moral , and political inspiration she has given her fans . In October 2010 , Rowling was named the " Most Influential Woman in Britain " by leading magazine editors . She has supported charities including Comic Relief , One Parent Families , Multiple Sclerosis Society of Great Britain and Lumos ( formerly the Children 's High Level Group ) . 
 = = Name = = 
 Although she writes under the pen name " J. K. Rowling " ( pronounced rolling ) , her name , before her remarriage , was simply " Joanne Rowling " . Anticipating that the target audience of young boys might not want to read a book written by a woman , her publishers asked that she use two initials rather than her full name . As she had no middle name , she chose K ( for " Kathleen " ) as the second initial of her pen name , from her paternal grandmother . She calls herself " Jo " . Following her marriage , she has sometimes used the name Joanne Murray when conducting personal business . During the Leveson Inquiry she gave evidence under the name of Joanne Kathleen Rowling and her entry in Who 's Who lists her name as Joanne Kathleen Rowling . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Birth and family = = = 
 Rowling was born to Peter James Rowling , a Rolls @-@ Royce aircraft engineer , and Anne Rowling ( née Volant ) , a science technician , on 31 July 1965 in Yate , Gloucestershire , England , 10 miles ( 16 km ) northeast of Bristol . Her parents first met on a train departing from King 's Cross Station bound for Arbroath in 1964 . They married on 14 March 1965 . One of her maternal great @-@ grandfathers , Dugald Campbell , was Scottish , born in Lamlash on the Isle of Arran . Her mother 's paternal grandfather , Louis Volant , was French , and was awarded the Croix de Guerre for exceptional bravery in defending the village of Courcelles @-@ le @-@ Comte during the First World War . Rowling originally believed he had won the Légion d 'honneur during the war , as she said when she received it herself in 2009 . She later discovered the truth when featured in an episode of the UK genealogy series Who Do You Think You Are ? , in which she found out it was a different Louis Volant who won the Legion of Honour . When she heard his story of bravery and discovered the croix de guerre was for " ordinary " soldiers like her grandfather , who had been a waiter , she stated the croix de guerre was " better " to her than the Legion of Honour . 
 = = = Childhood and education = = = 
 Rowling 's sister Dianne was born at their home when Rowling was 23 months old . The family moved to the nearby village Winterbourne when Rowling was four . She attended St Michael 's Primary School , a school founded by abolitionist William Wilberforce and education reformer Hannah More . Her headmaster at St Michael 's , Alfred Dunn , has been suggested as the inspiration for the Harry Potter headmaster Albus Dumbledore . 
 As a child , Rowling often wrote fantasy stories which she frequently read to her sister . Aged nine , Rowling moved to Church Cottage in the Gloucestershire village of <unk> , close to Chepstow , Wales . She attended secondary school at <unk> School and College , where her mother worked in the science department . When she was a young teenager , her great @-@ aunt gave her a copy of Jessica Mitford 's autobiography , Hons and Rebels . Mitford became Rowling 's heroine , and Rowling read all of her books . 
 Rowling has said that her teenage years were unhappy . Her home life was complicated by her mother 's illness and a strained relationship with her father , with whom she is not on speaking terms . Rowling later said that she based the character of Hermione Granger on herself when she was eleven . Steve Eddy , who taught Rowling English when she first arrived , remembers her as " not exceptional " but " one of a group of girls who were bright , and quite good at English " . Sean Harris , her best friend in the Upper Sixth , owned a turquoise Ford Anglia which she says inspired a flying version that appeared in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets . At this time , she listened to the Smiths and the Clash . Rowling took A @-@ levels in English , French and German , achieving two As and a B and was Head Girl . 
 In 1982 , Rowling took the entrance exams for Oxford University but was not accepted and read for a B.A. in French and Classics at the University of Exeter . Martin Sorrell , a French professor at Exeter , remembers " a quietly competent student , with a denim jacket and dark hair , who , in academic terms , gave the appearance of doing what was necessary " . Rowling recalls doing little work , preferring to listen to The Smiths and read Dickens and Tolkien . After a year of study in Paris , Rowling graduated from Exeter in 1986 and moved to London to work as a researcher and bilingual secretary for Amnesty International . In 1988 , Rowling wrote a short essay about her time studying Classics entitled " What was the Name of that Nymph Again ? or Greek and Roman Studies Recalled " ; it was published by the University of Exeter 's journal Pegasus . 
 = = = Inspiration and mother 's death = = = 
 After working at Amnesty International in London , Rowling and her then boyfriend decided to move to Manchester , where she worked at the Chamber of Commerce . In 1990 , while she was on a four @-@ hour @-@ delayed train trip from Manchester to London , the idea for a story of a young boy attending a school of wizardry " came fully formed " into her mind . 
 When she had reached her Clapham Junction flat , she began to write immediately . In December , Rowling 's mother Anne died after ten years suffering from multiple sclerosis . Rowling was writing Harry Potter at the time and had never told her mother about it . Her death heavily affected Rowling 's writing and she introduced much more detail about Harry 's loss in the first book , because she knew how it felt . 
 = = = Marriage , divorce , and single parenthood = = = 
 An advert in The Guardian led Rowling to move to Porto , Portugal , to teach English as a foreign language . She taught at night and began writing in the day while listening to Tchaikovsky 's Violin Concerto . After 18 months in Porto , she met Portuguese television journalist Jorge Arantes in a bar and found they shared an interest in Jane Austen . They married on 16 October 1992 and their child , Jessica Isabel Rowling Arantes ( named after Jessica Mitford ) , was born on 27 July 1993 in Portugal . Rowling had previously suffered a miscarriage . The couple separated on 17 November 1993 . Biographers have suggested that Rowling suffered domestic abuse during her marriage , although the full extent is unknown . In December 1993 , Rowling and her then @-@ infant daughter moved to Edinburgh , Scotland , to be near Rowling 's sister with three chapters of what would become Harry Potter in her suitcase . 
 Seven years after graduating from university , Rowling saw herself as a failure . Her marriage had failed , and she was jobless with a dependent child , but she described her failure as liberating and allowing her to focus on writing . During this period , Rowling was diagnosed with clinical depression and contemplated suicide . Her illness inspired the characters known as Dementors , soul @-@ sucking creatures introduced in the third book . Rowling signed up for welfare benefits , describing her economic status as being " poor as it is possible to be in modern Britain , without being homeless . " 
 Rowling was left in despair after her estranged husband arrived in Scotland , seeking both her and her daughter . She obtained an Order of Restraint , and Arantes returned to Portugal , with Rowling filing for divorce in August 1994 . She began a teacher training course in August 1995 at the Moray House School of Education , at Edinburgh University , after completing her first novel while living on State benefits . She wrote in many cafés , especially Nicolson 's Café ( owned by her brother @-@ in @-@ law , Roger Moore ) , and the Elephant House , wherever she could get Jessica to fall asleep . In a 2001 BBC interview , Rowling denied the rumour that she wrote in local cafés to escape from her unheated flat , pointing out that it had heating . One of the reasons she wrote in cafés was that taking her baby out for a walk was the best way to make her fall asleep . 
 = = = Harry Potter = = = 
 In 1995 , Rowling finished her manuscript for Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone on an old manual typewriter . Upon the enthusiastic response of Bryony Evens , a reader who had been asked to review the book 's first three chapters , the Fulham @-@ based Christopher Little Literary Agents agreed to represent Rowling in her quest for a publisher . The book was submitted to twelve publishing houses , all of which rejected the manuscript . A year later she was finally given the green light ( and a £ 1500 advance ) by editor Barry Cunningham from Bloomsbury , a publishing house in London . The decision to publish Rowling 's book owes much to Alice Newton , the eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Bloomsbury 's chairman , who was given the first chapter to review by her father and immediately demanded the next . Although Bloomsbury agreed to publish the book , Cunningham says that he advised Rowling to get a day job , since she had little chance of making money in children 's books . Soon after , in 1997 , Rowling received an £ 8000 grant from the Scottish Arts Council to enable her to continue writing . 
 In June 1997 , Bloomsbury published Philosopher 's Stone with an initial print run of 1 @,@ 000 copies , 500 of which were distributed to libraries . Today , such copies are valued between £ 16 @,@ 000 and £ 25 @,@ 000 . Five months later , the book won its first award , a Nestlé Smarties Book Prize . In February , the novel won the British Book Award for Children 's Book of the Year , and later , the Children 's Book Award . In early 1998 , an auction was held in the United States for the rights to publish the novel , and was won by Scholastic Inc . , for US $ 105 @,@ 000 . Rowling said that she " nearly died " when she heard the news . In October 1998 , Scholastic published Philosopher 's Stone in the US under the title of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer 's Stone , a change Rowling says she now regrets and would have fought if she had been in a better position at the time . Rowling moved from her flat with the money from the Scholastic sale , into 19 <unk> Terrace in Edinburgh . 
 Its sequel , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was published in July 1998 and again Rowling won the Smarties Prize . In December 1999 , the third novel , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , won the Smarties Prize , making Rowling the first person to win the award three times running . She later withdrew the fourth Harry Potter novel from contention to allow other books a fair chance . In January 2000 , Prisoner of Azkaban won the inaugural Whitbread Children 's Book of the Year award , though it lost the Book of the Year prize to Seamus Heaney 's translation of Beowulf . 
 The fourth book , Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , was released simultaneously in the UK and the US on 8 July 2000 and broke sales records in both countries . 372 @,@ 775 copies of the book were sold in its first day in the UK , almost equalling the number Prisoner of Azkaban sold during its first year . In the US , the book sold three million copies in its first 48 hours , smashing all records . Rowling said that she had had a crisis while writing the novel and had to rewrite one chapter many times to fix a problem with the plot . Rowling was named Author of the Year in the 2000 British Book Awards . 
 A wait of three years occurred between the release of Goblet of Fire and the fifth Harry Potter novel , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix . This gap led to press speculation that Rowling had developed writer 's block , speculations she denied . Rowling later said that writing the book was a chore , that it could have been shorter , and that she ran out of time and energy as she tried to finish it . 
 The sixth book , Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , was released on 16 July 2005 . It too broke all sales records , selling nine million copies in its first 24 hours of release . In 2006 , Half @-@ Blood Prince received the Book of the Year prize at the British Book Awards . 
 The title of the seventh and final Harry Potter book was announced on 21 December 2006 as Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . In February 2007 it was reported that Rowling wrote on a bust in her hotel room at the Balmoral Hotel in Edinburgh that she had finished the seventh book in that room on 11 January 2007 . Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows was released on 21 July 2007 ( 0 : 01 BST ) and broke its predecessor 's record as the fastest @-@ selling book of all time . It sold 11 million copies in the first day of release in the United Kingdom and United States . The book 's last chapter was one of the earliest things she wrote in the entire series . 
 Harry Potter is now a global brand worth an estimated US $ 15 billion , and the last four Harry Potter books have consecutively set records as the fastest @-@ selling books in history . The series , totalling 4 @,@ 195 pages , has been translated , in whole or in part , into 65 languages . 
 The Harry Potter books have also gained recognition for sparking an interest in reading among the young at a time when children were thought to be abandoning books for computers and television , although it is reported that despite the huge uptake of the books , adolescent reading has continued to decline . 
 = = = Harry Potter films = = = 
 In October 1998 , Warner Bros. purchased the film rights to the first two novels for a seven @-@ figure sum . A film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone was released on 16 November 2001 , and Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets on 15 November 2002 . Both films were directed by Chris Columbus . The film version of Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban was released on 4 June 2004 , directed by Alfonso Cuarón . The fourth film , Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , was directed by Mike Newell , and released on 18 November 2005 . The film of Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix was released on 11 July 2007 . David Yates directed , and Michael Goldenberg wrote the screenplay , having taken over the position from Steve Kloves . Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince was released on 15 July 2009 . David Yates directed again , and Kloves returned to write the script . Warner Bros. filmed the final instalment of the series , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows , in two segments , with part one being released on 19 November 2010 and part two being released on 15 July 2011 . Yates directed both films . 
 Warner Bros. took considerable notice of Rowling 's desires and thoughts when drafting her contract . One of her principal stipulations was the films be shot in Britain with an all @-@ British cast , which has been generally adhered to . Rowling also demanded that Coca @-@ Cola , the victor in the race to tie in their products to the film series , donate US $ 18 million to the American charity Reading is Fundamental , as well as several community charity programs . 
 The first four , sixth and seventh films were scripted by Steve Kloves ; Rowling assisted him in the writing process , ensuring that his scripts did not contradict future books in the series . She told Alan Rickman ( Severus Snape ) and Robbie Coltrane ( Hagrid ) certain secrets about their characters before they were revealed in the books . Daniel Radcliffe ( Harry Potter ) asked her if Harry died at any point in the series ; Rowling answered him by saying , " You have a death scene " , thereby not explicitly answering the question . Director Steven Spielberg was approached to direct the first film , but dropped out . The press has repeatedly claimed that Rowling played a role in his departure , but Rowling stated that she had no say in who directed the films and would not have vetoed Spielberg . Rowling 's first choice for the director had been Monty Python member Terry Gilliam , but Warner Bros. wanted a family @-@ friendly film and chose Columbus . 
 Rowling had gained some creative control on the films , reviewing all the scripts as well as acting as a producer on the final two @-@ part instalment , Deathly Hallows . 
 Rowling , producers David Heyman and David Barron , along with directors David Yates , Mike Newell and Alfonso Cuarón collected the Michael Balcon Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema at the 2011 British Academy Film Awards in honour of the Harry Potter film franchise . 
 In September 2013 , Warner Bros. announced an " expanded creative partnership " with Rowling , based on a planned series of films about Newt <unk> , author of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them . The first film will be scripted by Rowling , and be set roughly 70 years before the events of the main series . In 2014 , it was announced that the series would consist of three films . 
 = = = Financial success = = = 
 In 2004 , Forbes named Rowling as the first person to become a <unk> billionaire by writing books , the second @-@ richest female entertainer and the <unk> richest person in the world . Rowling disputed the calculations and said she had plenty of money , but was not a billionaire . The 2008 Sunday Times Rich List named Rowling the 144th richest person in Britain . In 2012 , Forbes removed Rowling from their rich list , claiming that her US $ 160 million in charitable donations and the high tax rate in the UK meant she was no longer a billionaire . In February 2013 she was assessed as the 13th most powerful woman in the United Kingdom by Woman 's Hour on BBC Radio 4 . 
 In 2001 , Rowling purchased a 19th @-@ century estate house , <unk> House , on the banks of the River Tay , near <unk> , in Perth and Kinross . Rowling also owns a £ 4 @.@ 5 million Georgian house in Kensington , West London , on a street with 24 @-@ hour security . 
 = = = Remarriage and family = = = 
 On 26 December 2001 , Rowling married Neil Michael Murray ( born 30 June 1971 ) , an anaesthetist , in a private ceremony at her home , <unk> House , near <unk> . Their son , David Gordon Rowling Murray , was born on 24 March 2003 . Shortly after Rowling began writing Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , she ceased working on the novel to care for David in his early infancy . 
 Rowling is a friend of Sarah Brown , wife of former prime minister Gordon Brown , whom she met when they collaborated on a charitable project . When Sarah Brown 's son Fraser was born in 2003 , Rowling was one of the first to visit her in hospital . Rowling 's youngest child , daughter Mackenzie Jean Rowling Murray , to whom she dedicated Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince , was born on 23 January 2005 . 
 In October 2012 , a New Yorker magazine article stated that the Rowling family lived in a seventeenth @-@ century Edinburgh house , concealed at the front by tall conifer hedges . Prior to October 2012 , Rowling lived near the author Ian Rankin , who later said she was quiet and introspective , and that she seemed in her element with children . As of June 2014 , the family resides in Scotland . 
 = = = The Casual Vacancy = = = 
 In July 2011 , Rowling parted company with her agent , Christopher Little , moving to a new agency founded by one of his staff , Neil Blair . On 23 February 2012 , Rowling 's new agency , the Blair Partnership , announced on its website that Rowling was set to publish a new book targeted at adults . In a press release , Rowling said that her new book would be quite different from Harry Potter . In April 2012 , Little , Brown and Company announced that the book was entitled The Casual Vacancy and would be released on 27 September 2012 . Rowling gave several interviews and made appearances to promote The Casual Vacancy , including at the London Southbank Centre , the Cheltenham Literature Festival , Charlie Rose and the <unk> Book Festival . In its first three weeks of release , The Casual Vacancy sold over 1 million copies worldwide . 
 On 3 December 2012 , it was announced that the BBC would be adapting The Casual Vacancy into a television drama miniseries . Rowling 's agent , Neil Blair acted as producer , through his independent production company and with Rick Senat serving as executive producer . Rowling collaborated on the adaptation , serving as an executive producer for the series . The series aired in three parts from 15 February to 1 March 2015 . 
 = = = Cormoran Strike = = = 
 Over the years , Rowling often spoke of writing a crime novel . In 2007 , during the Edinburgh Book Festival , author Ian Rankin claimed that his wife spotted Rowling " scribbling away " at a detective novel in a café . Rankin later retracted the story , claiming it was a joke , but the rumour persisted , with a report in 2012 in The Guardian speculating that Rowling 's next book would be a crime novel . In an interview with Stephen Fry in 2005 , Rowling claimed that she would much prefer to write any subsequent books under a pseudonym , but she conceded to Jeremy Paxman in 2003 that if she did , the press would probably " find out in seconds " . 
 In April 2013 , Little Brown published The Cuckoo 's Calling , the purported début novel of author Robert Galbraith , who the publisher described as " a former plainclothes Royal Military Police investigator who had left in 2003 to work in the civilian security industry " . The novel , a detective story in which private investigator Cormoran Strike unravels the supposed suicide of a supermodel , sold 1500 copies in hardback ( although the matter was not resolved as of 21 July 2013 ; later reports stated that this number is the number of copies that were printed for the first run , while the sales total was closer to 500 ) and received acclaim from other crime writers and critics — a Publishers Weekly review called the book a " stellar debut " , while the Library Journal 's mystery section pronounced the novel " the debut of the month " . 
 India Knight , a novelist and columnist for the Sunday Times , tweeted on 9 July 2013 that she had been reading The Cuckoo 's Calling and thought it was good for a début novel . In response , a tweeter called Jude Callegari said that the author was Rowling . Knight queried this but got no further reply . Knight notified Richard Brooks , arts editor of the Sunday Times , who began his own investigation . After discovering that Rowling and Galbraith had the same agent and editor , he sent the books for linguistic analysis which found similarities , and subsequently contacted Rowling 's agent who confirmed it was Rowling 's pseudonym . Within days of Rowling being revealed as the author , sales of the book rose by 4000 percent , and Little Brown printed another 140 @,@ 000 copies to meet the increase in demand . As of 18 June 2013 , a signed copy of the first edition sold for US $ 4 @,@ 453 ( £ 2 @,@ 950 ) , while an unsold signed first @-@ edition copy was being offered for $ 6 @,@ 188 ( £ 3 @,@ 950 ) . 
 Rowling said that she had enjoyed working under a pseudonym . On her Robert Galbraith website , Rowling explained that she took the name from one of her personal heroes , Robert Kennedy , and a childhood fantasy name she had invented for herself , Ella Galbraith . 
 Soon after the revelation , Brooks pondered whether Jude Callegari could have been Rowling as part of wider speculation that the entire affair had been a publicity stunt . Some also noted that many of the writers who had initially praised the book , such as Alex Gray or Val McDermid , were within Rowling 's circle of acquaintances ; both vociferously denied any foreknowledge of Rowling 's authorship . Judith " Jude " Callegari was the best friend of the wife of Chris Gossage , a partner within Russells Solicitors , Rowling 's legal representatives . Rowling released a statement saying she was disappointed and angry ; Russells apologised for the leak , confirming it was not part of a marketing stunt and that " the disclosure was made in confidence to someone he [ Gossage ] trusted implicitly " . Russells made a donation to the Soldiers ' Charity on Rowling 's behalf and reimbursed her for her legal fees . On 26 November 2013 the Solicitors Regulation Authority ( SRA ) issued Gossage a written rebuke and £ 1000 fine for breaching privacy rules . 
 On 17 February 2014 , Rowling announced that the second Cormoran Strike novel , named The Silkworm , would be released in June 2014 . It sees Strike investigating the disappearance of a writer hated by many of his old friends for insulting them in his new novel . 
 In 2015 , Rowling stated on Galbraith 's website that the third Cormoran Strike novel would include " an insane amount of planning , the most I have done for any book I have written so far . I have colour @-@ coded spreadsheets so I can keep a track of where I am going . " On 24 April 2015 , Rowling announced that work on the third book was completed . Titled Career of Evil , it was released on 20 October 2015 in the United States , and on 22 October 2015 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Subsequent Harry Potter publications = = = 
 Rowling has said it is unlikely she will write any more books in the Harry Potter series . In October 2007 she stated that her future work was unlikely to be in the fantasy genre . On 1 October 2010 , in an interview with Oprah Winfrey , Rowling stated a new book on the saga might happen . 
 In 2007 , Rowling stated that she planned to write an encyclopaedia of Harry Potter 's wizarding world consisting of various unpublished material and notes . Any profits from such a book would be given to charity . During a news conference at Hollywood 's Kodak Theatre in 2007 , Rowling , when asked how the encyclopaedia was coming along , said , " It 's not coming along , and I haven 't started writing it . I never said it was the next thing I 'd do . " At the end of 2007 , Rowling said that the encyclopaedia could take up to ten years to complete . 
 In June 2011 , Rowling announced that future Harry Potter projects , and all electronic downloads , would be concentrated in a new website , called Pottermore . The site includes 18 @,@ 000 words of information on characters , places and objects in the Harry Potter universe . 
 In October 2015 , Rowling announced via Pottermore , that a two part play she has co @-@ authored with playwrights Jack Thorne and John Tiffany , Harry Potter and the Cursed Child , was the ' eighth Harry Potter story ' and that it would focus on the life of Harry 's Potter 's youngest son Albus after the epilogue of the Deathly Hallows . On 28 October 2015 , the first round of tickets went on sale and sold out in several hours . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 In 2000 , Rowling established the Volant Charitable Trust , which uses its annual budget of £ 5 @.@ 1 million to combat poverty and social inequality . The fund also gives to organisations that aid children , one parent families , and multiple sclerosis research . 
 = = = Anti @-@ poverty and children 's welfare = = = 
 Rowling , once a single parent , is now president of the charity Gingerbread ( originally One Parent Families ) , having become their first Ambassador in 2000 . Rowling collaborated with Sarah Brown to write a book of children 's stories to aid One Parent Families . 
 In 2001 , the UK anti @-@ poverty fundraiser Comic Relief asked three best @-@ selling British authors – cookery writer and TV presenter Delia Smith , Bridget Jones creator Helen Fielding , and Rowling – to submit booklets related to their most famous works for publication . Rowling 's two booklets , Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them and Quidditch Through the Ages , are ostensibly facsimiles of books found in the Hogwarts library . Since going on sale in March 2001 , the books have raised £ 15 @.@ 7 million for the fund . The £ 10 @.@ 8 million they have raised outside the UK have been channelled into a newly created International Fund for Children and Young People in Crisis . In 2002 Rowling contributed a foreword to Magic , an anthology of fiction published by Bloomsbury Publishing , helping to raise money for the National Council for One Parent Families . 
 In 2005 , Rowling and MEP Emma Nicholson founded the Children 's High Level Group ( now Lumos ) . In January 2006 , Rowling went to Bucharest to highlight the use of caged beds in mental institutions for children . To further support the <unk> , Rowling auctioned one of seven handwritten and illustrated copies of The Tales of Beedle the Bard , a series of fairy tales referred to in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows . The book was purchased for £ 1 @.@ 95 million by on @-@ line bookseller Amazon.com on 13 December 2007 , becoming the most expensive modern book ever sold at auction . Rowling gave away the remaining six copies to those who have a close connection with the Harry Potter books . In 2008 , Rowling agreed to publish the book with the proceeds going to Lumos . On 1 June 2010 ( International Children 's Day ) , Lumos launched an annual initiative – Light a Birthday Candle for Lumos . In November 2013 , Rowling handed over all earnings from the sale of The Tales of Beedle the Bard , totalling nearly £ 19 million . 
 In July 2012 , Rowling was featured at the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony in London where she read a few lines from J.M. Barrie 's Peter Pan as part of a tribute to Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children . An inflatable representation of Lord Voldemort and other children 's literary characters accompanied her reading . 
 = = = Multiple sclerosis = = = 
 Rowling has contributed money and support for research and treatment of multiple sclerosis , from which her mother suffered before her death in 1990 . In 2006 , Rowling contributed a substantial sum toward the creation of a new Centre for Regenerative Medicine at Edinburgh University , later named the Anne Rowling Regenerative Neurology Clinic . In 2010 she donated a further £ 10 million to the centre . For reasons unknown , Scotland , Rowling 's country of adoption , has the highest rate of multiple sclerosis in the world . In 2003 , Rowling took part in a campaign to establish a national standard of care for MS sufferers . In April 2009 , she announced that she was withdrawing her support for Multiple Sclerosis Society Scotland , citing her inability to resolve an ongoing feud between the organisation 's northern and southern branches that had sapped morale and led to several resignations . 
 = = = Other philanthropic work = = = 
 In May 2008 , bookseller Waterstones asked Rowling and 12 other writers ( Sebastian Faulks , Doris Lessing , Lisa <unk> , Margaret Atwood , Lauren Child , Richard Ford , Neil Gaiman , Nick Hornby , Michael Rosen , Axel Scheffler , Tom Stoppard and Irvine Welsh ) to compose a short piece of their own choosing on a single A5 card , which would then be sold at auction in aid of the charities Dyslexia Action and English PEN . Rowling 's contribution was an 800 @-@ word Harry Potter prequel that concerns Harry 's father , James Potter , and godfather , Sirius Black , and takes place three years before Harry was born . The cards were collated and sold for charity in book form in August 2008 . 
 On 1 and 2 August 2006 , she read alongside Stephen King and John Irving at Radio City Music Hall in New York City . Profits from the event were donated to the Haven Foundation , a charity that aids artists and performers left <unk> and unable to work , and the medical NGO Médecins Sans Frontières . In May 2007 , Rowling pledged a donation reported as over £ 250 @,@ 000 to a reward fund started by the tabloid News of the World for the safe return of a young British girl , Madeleine McCann , who disappeared in Portugal . Rowling , along with Nelson Mandela , Al Gore , and Alan Greenspan , wrote an introduction to a collection of Gordon Brown 's speeches , the proceeds of which were donated to the Jennifer Brown Research Laboratory . After her exposure as the true author of The Cuckoo 's Calling led a massive increase in sales , Rowling announced she would donate all her royalties to the Army Benevolent Fund , claiming she had always intended to , but never expected the book to be a bestseller . 
 Rowling is a supporter of The Shannon Trust , which runs the Toe by Toe Reading Plan and the Shannon Reading Plan in prisons across Britain , helping and giving tutoring to prisoners who cannot read . 
 = = Influences = = 
 Rowling has named communist and civil rights activist Jessica Mitford as her " most influential writer " saying , " Jessica Mitford has been my heroine since I was 14 years old , when I overheard my formidable great @-@ aunt discussing how Mitford had run away at the age of 19 to fight with the Reds in the Spanish Civil War " , and claims what inspired her about Mitford was that she was " incurably and instinctively rebellious , brave , adventurous , funny and irreverent , she liked nothing better than a good fight , preferably against a pompous and hypocritical target " . Rowling has described Jane Austen as her favourite author , calling Emma her favourite book in O magazine . As a child , Rowling has said her early influences included The Lion , The Witch and The Wardrobe by C.S. Lewis , The Little White Horse by Elizabeth Goudge , and <unk> by Paul Gallico . 
 = = Views = = 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 In September 2008 , on the eve of the Labour Party Conference , Rowling announced that she had donated £ 1 million to the Labour Party , and publicly endorsed Labour Prime Minister Gordon Brown over Conservative challenger David Cameron , praising Labour 's policies on child poverty . Rowling is a close friend of Sarah Brown , wife of Gordon Brown , whom she met when they collaborated on a charitable project for One Parent Families . 
 Rowling discussed the 2008 United States presidential election with the Spanish @-@ language newspaper El País in February 2008 , stating that the election would have a profound effect on the rest of the world . She also said that Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton would be " extraordinary " in the White House . In the same interview , Rowling identified Robert F. Kennedy as her hero . 
 In April 2010 , Rowling published an article in The Times , in which she criticised Cameron 's plan to encourage married couples to stay together by offering them a £ 150 annual tax credit : " Nobody who has ever experienced the reality of poverty could say ' it 's not the money , it 's the message ' . When your flat has been broken into , and you cannot afford a locksmith , it is the money . When you are two pence short of a tin of baked beans , and your child is hungry , it is the money . When you find yourself contemplating shoplifting to get nappies , it is the money . " 
 As a resident of Scotland , Rowling was eligible to vote in the 2014 referendum on Scottish independence , and campaigned for the " No " vote . She donated £ 1 million to the Better Together anti @-@ independence campaign ( run by her former neighbour Alistair Darling ) , the largest donation it had received at the time . In a blog post , Rowling explained that an open letter from Scottish medical professionals raised problems with First Minister Alex Salmond 's plans for a common research funding . Rowling compared some Scottish Nationalists with the Death Eaters , characters from Harry Potter who are scornful of those without pure blood . 
 On 22 October 2015 a letter was published in The Guardian signed by Rowling ( along with over 150 other figures from arts and politics ) opposing the cultural boycott of Israel , and announcing the creation of a network for dialogue , called Culture for Coexistence . Rowling later explained her position in more detail , saying that although she opposed most of Benjamin Netanyahu 's actions she did not think the cultural boycott would bring about the removal of Israel 's leader or help improve the situation in Israel and Palestine . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Over the years , some religious people , particularly Christians , have decried Rowling 's books for supposedly promoting witchcraft . Rowling identifies as a Christian , and attended a Church of Scotland congregation while writing Harry Potter . Her eldest daughter , Jessica , was baptised there . She once said , " I believe in God , not magic . " Early on she felt that if readers knew of her Christian beliefs they would be able to predict her plot line . 
 In 2007 , Rowling described having been brought up in the Church of England . She said she was the only one in her family who regularly went to church . As a student she became annoyed at the " smugness of religious people " and worshipped less often . Later , she started to attend again at a church in Edinburgh . 
 In a 2006 interview with Tatler magazine , Rowling noted that , " like Graham Greene , my faith is sometimes about if my faith will return . It 's important to me . " She has said that she has struggled with doubt , that she believes in an afterlife , and that her faith plays a part in her books . In a 2012 radio interview , she said that she was a member of the Scottish Episcopal Church , a province of the Anglican Communion . 
 = = = Press = = = 
 Rowling has had a difficult relationship with the press . She admits to being " thin @-@ skinned " and dislikes the fickle nature of reporting . Rowling disputes her reputation as a recluse who hates to be interviewed . 
 By 2011 , Rowling had taken more than 50 actions against the press . In 2001 , the Press Complaints Commission upheld a complaint by Rowling over a series of unauthorised photographs of her with her daughter on the beach in Mauritius published in OK ! Magazine . In 2007 , Rowling 's young son , David , assisted by Rowling and her husband , lost a court fight to ban publication of a photograph of him . The photo , taken by a photographer using a long @-@ range lens , was subsequently published in a Sunday Express article featuring Rowling 's family life and motherhood . The judgement was overturned in David 's favour in May 2008 . 
 Rowling particularly dislikes the British tabloid the Daily Mail , which has conducted interviews with her estranged ex @-@ husband . As one journalist noted , " Harry 's Uncle Vernon is a grotesque philistine of violent tendencies and remarkably little brain . It is not difficult to guess which newspaper Rowling gives him to read [ in Goblet of Fire ] . " As of January 2014 , she was seeking damages from the Mail for libel over an article about her time as a single mother . Some have speculated that Rowling 's fraught relationship with the press was the inspiration behind the character Rita Skeeter , a gossipy celebrity journalist who first appears in Goblet of Fire , but Rowling noted in 2000 that the character predates her rise to fame . 
 In September 2011 , Rowling was named a " core participant " in the Leveson Inquiry into the culture , practices and ethics of the British press , as one of dozens of celebrities who may have been the victim of phone hacking . On 24 November 2011 , Rowling gave evidence before the inquiry ; although she was not suspected to have been the victim of phone hacking , her testimony included accounts of photographers camping on her doorstep , her fiancé being duped into giving his home address to a journalist masquerading as a tax official , her chasing a journalist a week after giving birth , a journalist leaving a note inside her then @-@ five @-@ year @-@ old daughter 's <unk> , and an attempt by the Sun to " blackmail " her into a photo opportunity in exchange for the return of a stolen manuscript . Rowling claimed she had to leave her former home in Merchiston because of press intrusion . In November 2012 , Rowling wrote an article for The Guardian in reaction to David Cameron 's decision not to implement the full recommendations of the Leveson inquiry , saying she felt " duped and angry " . 
 In 2014 , Rowling reaffirmed her support for " <unk> Off " and its campaign towards press self @-@ regulation by co @-@ signing with other British celebrities a declaration to " [ safeguard ] the press from political interference while also giving vital protection to the vulnerable . " 
 = = Legal disputes = = 
 Rowling , her publishers , and Time Warner , the owner of the rights to the Harry Potter films , have taken numerous legal actions to protect their copyright . The worldwide popularity of the Harry Potter series has led to the appearance of a number of locally produced , unauthorised sequels and other derivative works , sparking efforts to ban or contain them . 
 Another area of legal dispute involves a series of injunctions obtained by Rowling and her publishers to prohibit anyone from reading her books before their official release date . The injunction drew fire from civil liberties and free speech campaigners and sparked debates over the " right to read " . 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Rowling has received honorary degrees from St Andrews University , the University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh Napier University , the University of Exeter , the University of Aberdeen and Harvard University , for whom she spoke at the 2008 commencement ceremony . In 2009 Rowling was made a Chevalier de la Légion d 'honneur by French President Nicolas Sarkozy . 
 Other awards include : 
 1997 : Nestlé Smarties Book Prize , Gold Award for Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone 
 1998 : Nestlé Smarties Book Prize , Gold Award for Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets 
 1998 : British Children 's Book of the Year , winner Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone 
 1999 : Nestlé Smarties Book Prize , Gold Award for Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
 1999 : National Book Awards Children 's Book of the Year , winner Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets 
 1999 : Whitbread Children 's Book of the Year , winner Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
 2000 : British Book Awards , Author of the Year 
 2000 : Officer of the Order of the British Empire , for services to Children 's literature 
 2000 : Locus Award , winner Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban 
 2001 : Hugo Award for Best Novel , winner Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire 
 2003 : Premio Príncipe de Asturias , Concord 
 2003 : Bram Stoker Award for Best Work for Young Readers , winner Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix 
 2006 : British Book of the Year , winner for Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince 
 2007 : Blue Peter Badge , Gold 
 2007 : Named Barbara Walters ' Most Fascinating Person of the year 
 2008 : British Book Awards , Outstanding Achievement 
 2010 : Hans Christian Andersen Literature Award , inaugural award winner 
 2011 : British Academy Film Awards , Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema for the Harry Potter film series , shared with David Heyman , cast and crew 
 2012 : Freedom of the City of London 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Children = = = 
 = = = = Harry Potter series = = = = 
 Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone ( 26 June 1997 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets ( 2 July 1998 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban ( 8 July 1999 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire ( 8 July 2000 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix ( 21 June 2003 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Half @-@ Blood Prince ( 16 July 2005 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows ( 21 July 2007 ) 
 = = = = Related works = = = = 
 Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them ( supplement to the Harry Potter series ) ( 1 March 2001 ) 
 Quidditch Through the Ages ( supplement to the Harry Potter series ) ( 1 March 2001 ) 
 The Tales of Beedle the Bard ( supplement to the Harry Potter series ) ( 4 December 2008 ) 
 Harry Potter and the Cursed Child ( story concept ) ( play written by Jack Thorne ) ( 31 July 2016 ) 
 Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them ( film script ) ( 19 November 2016 ) 
 = = = = Short stories = = = = 
 Harry Potter prequel ( July 2008 ) 
 = = = Adults = = = 
 The Casual Vacancy ( 27 September 2012 ) 
 = = = = Cormoran Strike series = = = = 
 The Cuckoo 's Calling ( as Robert Galbraith ) ( 18 April 2013 ) 
 The Silkworm ( as Robert Galbraith ) ( 19 June 2014 ) 
 Career of Evil ( as Robert Galbraith ) ( 20 October 2015 ) 
 = = = Other = = = 
 = = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = = 
 McNeil , Gil and Brown , Sarah , editors ( 2002 ) . Foreword to the anthology Magic . Bloomsbury . 
 Brown , Gordon ( 2006 ) . Introduction to " Ending Child Poverty " in Moving Britain Forward . Selected Speeches 1997 – 2006 . Bloomsbury . 
 Sussman , Peter Y. , editor ( 26 July 2006 ) . " The First It Girl : J. K. Rowling reviews Decca : the Letters by Jessica Mitford " . The Daily Telegraph . 
 <unk> , Melissa ( 2008 ) . Foreword to Harry , A History . Pocket Books . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( 5 June 2008 ) . " The Fringe Benefits of Failure , and the Importance of Imagination " . Harvard Magazine . 
 J. K. Rowling , Very Good Lives : The Fringe Benefits of Failure and Importance of Imagination , illustrated by Joel Holland , Sphere , 14 April 2015 , 80 pages ( ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ) . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( 30 April 2009 ) . " Gordon Brown – The 2009 Time 100 " . Time magazine . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( 14 April 2010 ) . " The Single Mother 's Manifesto " . The Times . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( 30 November 2012 ) . " I feel duped and angry at David Cameron 's reaction to Leveson " . The Guardian . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( 17 December 2014 ) . Isn ’ t it time we left orphanages to fairytales ? The Guardian . 
 Rowling , J. K. ( guest editor ) ( 28 April 2014 ) . " Woman 's Hour Takeover " . Woman 's Hour , BBC Radio 4 . 
 = Dookie = 
 Dookie is the third studio album by the American punk rock band Green Day , released on February 1 , 1994 , through Reprise Records . It was the band 's first collaboration with producer Rob Cavallo and its major record label debut . Dookie became a worldwide commercial success , peaking at No. 2 on the US Billboard 200 and charting in seven countries . The album helped propel Green Day , and even punk rock music into mainstream popularity . Dookie was certified Diamond by the Recording Industry Association of America for the shipment of 10 million copies . 
 Dookie produced five hit singles for the band : " Longview " , " When I Come Around " , " Basket Case " , a re @-@ recorded version of " Welcome to Paradise " and the radio @-@ only single " She " . The album has garnered considerable acclaim , from its release to present day , winning a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album in 1995 and being ranked No. 193 on Rolling Stone 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . As of 2014 , Dookie is the band 's best @-@ selling album with more than 20 million copies sold worldwide . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the underground success of the band 's second studio album Kerplunk ( 1992 ) , a number of major record labels became interested in Green Day . Representatives of these labels attempted to entice the band to sign by inviting them for meals to discuss a deal , with one manager even inviting the group to Disneyland . The band declined these advances until meeting producer and Reprise representative Rob Cavallo . They were impressed by his work with fellow Californian band The Muffs , and later remarked that Cavallo " was the only person we could really talk to and connect with " . 
 Eventually , the band left their independent record label Lookout ! Records on friendly terms , and signed to Reprise . Signing to a major label caused many of the band 's original fans from the independent music club 924 Gilman Street to regard Green Day as sell @-@ outs . The club has banned Green Day from entering since the major label signing . Reflecting back on the period , lead vocalist Billie Joe Armstrong told Spin magazine in 1999 , " I couldn 't go back to the punk scene , whether we were the biggest success in the world or the biggest failure [ ... ] The only thing I could do was get on my bike and go forward . " 
 Cavallo was chosen as the main producer of the album , with Jerry Finn as the mixer . Green Day originally gave the first demo tape to Cavallo , and after listening to it during the car ride home he sensed that " [ he ] had stumbled on something big . " The band 's recording session lasted three weeks and the album was remixed twice . Armstrong claimed that the band wanted to create a dry sound , " similar to the Sex Pistols ' album or first Black Sabbath albums . " The band felt the original mix to be unsatisfactory . Cavallo agreed , and it was remixed at Fantasy Studios in Berkeley , California . Armstrong later said of their studio experience , " Everything was already written , all we had to do was play it . " 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 Much of the album 's content was written by Armstrong , except " <unk> <unk> " written by bassist Mike Dirnt , and the hidden track , " All by Myself " , which was composed and written by drummer Tré Cool . The album touched upon various experiences of the band members and included subjects like anxiety and panic attacks , masturbation , sexual orientation , boredom , mass murder , divorce , and ex @-@ girlfriends . 
 The single " Longview " had a signature bass line that bassist Dirnt wrote while under the influence of LSD . He originally forgot much of it , but the remembered portions were included in the song . Armstrong stated that the song was mainly about boredom , masturbation , and smoking cannabis , as evident in some of the lyrics ( " When masturbation 's lost its fun / You 're fucking lonely " , inaccurately quoted as " You 're fucking breaking " in the liner notes ) . 
 " Welcome to Paradise " , the second single from Dookie , was originally on the band 's second studio album , Kerplunk . The song was re @-@ recorded with a less grainy sound for Dookie . The song never had an official music video ; however , a certain live performance of the song is often associated as a music video . The video is located on Green Day 's official website . 
 The hit single " Basket Case " , which appeared on many singles charts worldwide , was also inspired by Armstrong 's personal experiences . The song deals with Armstrong 's anxiety attacks and feelings of " going crazy " prior to being diagnosed with a panic disorder . In the third verse , " Basket Case " references soliciting a male prostitute ; Armstrong noted that " I wanted to challenge myself and whoever the listener might be . It 's also looking at the world and saying , ' It 's not as black and white as you think . This isn 't your grandfather 's prostitute – or maybe it was . ' " The music video was filmed in an abandoned mental institution . This is one of the band 's most popular songs . 
 The radio @-@ only single , " She " , was written by Armstrong about a former girlfriend who showed him a feminist poem with an identical title . In return , Armstrong wrote the lyrics of " She " and showed them to her . She later moved to Ecuador , prompting Armstrong to put " She " on the album . The same ex @-@ girlfriend is also the topic of the songs " Sassafras Roots " and " Chump " . 
 The final single , " When I Come Around " , was again inspired by a woman , though this time being about Armstrong 's wife , then former girlfriend , Adrienne . Following a dispute between the couple , Armstrong left Adrienne to spend some time alone . The video featured the three band members walking around Berkeley and San Francisco at night , eventually ending up back at the original location . Future member of Green Day , Jason White , made a cameo in the video with his then @-@ girlfriend . Although not as popular as " Basket Case " , the song was actually more successful in the U.S. being the band 's first top ten single at number 6 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart and staying number 1 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart for 7 weeks or 2 weeks longer than " Basket Case " , it also hit number 2 on both the Mainstream Rock Tracks and the Mainstream Top 40 charts . 
 The song " Coming Clean " deals with Armstrong 's coming to terms with his bisexuality when he was 16 and 17 years old . In his interview with The Advocate magazine , he states that although he has never had a relationship with a man , his sexuality has been " something that comes up as a struggle in me " . 
 Billie Joe Armstrong wrote the song " In the End " about his mother and her husband . He is quoted saying : " That song is about my mother 's husband , it 's not really about a girl , or like anyone directly related to me in a relationship . In the End 's about my mother . " 
 Armstrong also wrote the song " Having a Blast " when he was in Cleveland in 1992 . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The name of the album is a reference to the band members often suffering from diarrhea , which they referred to as " liquid <unk> " , as a result of eating spoiled food while on tour . Initially the band was to name the album Liquid Dookie ; however , this was deemed " too gross " , and so they settled on the name Dookie . 
 Its album artwork caused controversy , which depicts bombs being dropped on people and buildings . In the center , there is an explosion , with the band 's name at the top . Armstrong has since explained the meaning of the artwork : 
 The back cover on early prints of the CD featured a plush toy of Ernie from Sesame Street , which was airbrushed out of later prints for fear of litigation ; however , Canadian and European prints still feature Ernie on the back cover . Some rumors suggest that it was removed because it led parents to think that Dookie was a child 's lullaby album or that the creators of Sesame Street had sued Green Day . 
 = = Release = = 
 Dookie was released on February 1 , 1994 . Upon its release , the album charted in seven countries . It peaked at number two on the Billboard 200 in the United States , and was a success in several other countries , peaking as high as number one in New Zealand ; the lowest peak in any country was in the United Kingdom at number 13 . While all the singles from the album charted in a few countries , the hit single " Basket Case " entered the top 10 in the United Kingdom and Sweden . Later in 1995 , the album received a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album , with " Longview " and " Basket Case " each being nominated for a Grammy . 
 Throughout the 1990s , Dookie continued to sell well , eventually receiving diamond certification in 1999 ; by 2013 , Dookie had sold over 20 million copies worldwide and remains the band 's best @-@ selling album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Dookie was released to critical acclaim . Bill Lamb at About.com regards it as an album that only gets better with time , calling it " one of the landmark albums of the 1990s " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described Dookie as " a stellar piece of modern punk that many tried to emulate but nobody bettered " . In 1994 , Time claimed Dookie as the third best album of the year , and the best rock album of 1994 . Jon Pareles from The New York Times , in early 1995 , described the sound of Dookie as , " Punk turns into pop in fast , funny , catchy , high @-@ powered songs about whining and channel @-@ surfing ; apathy has rarely sounded so passionate . " Rolling Stone 's Paul Evans described Green Day as " convincing mainly because they 've got punk 's snotty anti @-@ values down cold : blame , self @-@ pity , arrogant self @-@ hatred , humor , narcissism , fun " . 
 Neil Strauss of The New York Times , while complimentary on the album 's overall quality , noted that Dookie 's pop sound only remotely resembled punk music . The band did not respond initially to these comments , but later claimed that they were " just trying to be themselves " and that " it 's our band , we can do whatever we want " . Dirnt claimed that the follow @-@ up album , Insomniac , one of the band 's hardest albums lyrically and musically , was the band releasing their anger at all the criticism from critics and former fans . 
 Along with The Offspring 's Smash , Dookie has been credited for helping bring punk rock back into mainstream music culture . Thomas Nassiff at Fuse cited it as the most important pop punk album . 
 In April 2014 , Rolling Stone placed the album at No. 1 on its " 1994 : The 40 Best Records From Mainstream Alternative 's Greatest Year " list . A month later , Loudwire placed Dookie at No. 1 on its " 10 Best Hard Rock Albums of 1994 " list . Guitar World ranked Dookie at number thirteen in their list " Superunknown : 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994 " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Since its release , Dookie has been featured heavily in various " must have " lists compiled by the music media . Some of the more prominent of these lists to feature Dookie are shown below ; this information is adapted from Acclaimed Music . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Immediately following the release of Dookie , the band embarked on an international tour , beginning in the United States , for which they used a bookmobile belonging to Tré Cool 's father to travel between shows . An audience of millions saw Green Day 's performance at Woodstock ' 94 on Pay @-@ per @-@ view , helping the band attract more fans . This event was the location of the infamous mud " fight " between the band and the crowd , which continued beyond the end of Green Day 's set . During the fight , Dirnt was mistaken for a fan by a security guard , who tackled him and then threw him against a monitor , causing him to injure his arm and break two of his teeth . 
 The band also appeared at Lollapalooza and the Z100 Acoustic Christmas at Madison Square Garden , where Armstrong performed the song " She " naked . Having toured throughout the United States and Canada , the band played a few shows in Europe before beginning the recording sessions for the subsequent album , Insomniac . During the tour , Armstrong was quite homesick . His wife , Adrienne Armstrong , whom he had married shortly after the release of Dookie , was pregnant during most of the tour , and Armstrong was upset about being unable to help and care for her . 
 In August 2013 , Dookie was played in its entirety at the Brixton Academy in London and at Reading and Leeds Festivals as a celebration of the album 's upcoming 20th anniversary . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Billie Joe Armstrong , except where noted . All music composed by Green Day . 
 = = = iTunes edition = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Green Day 
 Billie Joe Armstrong — lead vocals , guitar 
 Mike Dirnt — bass , backing vocals 
 Tré Cool — drums , guitar and lead vocals on " All by Myself " 
 Technical personnel 
 Rob Cavallo ; Green Day — producer , mixing 
 Jerry Finn — mixing 
 Neill King — engineer 
 Casey <unk> — engineer 
 Richie Bucher — cover artist 
 Ken <unk> – photography 
 Pat Hynes – booklet artwork 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = = End of decade charts = = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Abbotsford Bridge = 
 Abbotsford Bridge is a steel Allan truss @-@ type bridge spanning the Murray River between <unk> , New South Wales , and Yelta , Victoria . It is the only remaining steel truss bridge with a lift span that crosses the Murray . It was also the second last lift span bridge to be built along the river after the <unk> Bridge opened in 1941 . It was built in 1928 by the New South Wales ( NSW ) Department of Public Works and was designed by Percy Allan . 
 The bridge was originally planned to carry the Mildura railway line over the Murray River and into New South Wales , though the line was never extended to the bridge . The bridge currently carries a single lane of road controlled by traffic lights . Abbotsford bridge was built largely to service significant cross @-@ border traffic relating to the fruit production industry . It was constructed over a three @-@ year period from 1925 onwards ; but was not originally planned to take so long to build , as there were delays due to problems with a contractor and industrial action . 
 In 1931 , there was a major accident at the bridge when a paddle steamer clipped the lift span , tearing apart the upper deck of the boat . 
 = = Description = = 
 Abbotsford Bridge is a steel Allan truss bridge that is about 240 m ( 790 ft ) in length . The bridge also contains a single lift span about 20 m ( 66 ft ) in length ; this span is still in working order . It is two lanes wide through most of its length , though the lift span is only capable of carrying a single lane . The entire bridge has been marked with a single lane and has traffic lights on both ends to control vehicular flow . 
 The bridge was completed in 1928 by the NSW Department of Public Works . The bridge was designed to be able to carry the loads required for a railway ; and although opened as a traffic bridge , it was intended to be converted to allow rail once the Mildura railway line was extended to the bridge . The line was never extended beyond Yelta , where the terminus remains to this day . The location of this bridge was thought of as convenient , as it provided a link to the Sturt Highway without travelling farther upstream to Mildura . It is the only remaining steel truss bridge with a lift span along the river . The bridge was built after the decline in commercial river traffic on the Murray , and was the last lift span bridge of any type to be built over the river . Due to its significance to the local area , it has been listed on the NSW State Heritage Register . 
 = = History = = 
 The nearby town of Wentworth was an important river port from which wool was shipped to the coast , and as such there was a variety of traffic in the area . In the 1890s , irrigated farming greatly expanded in Sunraysia region which is known for its fruit production , and traffic volumes increased further . It was decided to install a punt at this location ( then known as Abbot 's Ford ) . 
 New South Wales and Victoria had signed an agreement towards constructing bridges for railways over the Murray to serve the settlements on the northern side . In 1923 , a report was released that recommended going ahead with the building of four bridges , one of those being the future Abbotsford Bridge . It was said a bridge in this area would benefit <unk> , Wentworth , and a proposed irrigation scheme to the north . The cost was estimated at £ 78 @,@ 000 . It had been considered that it might be appropriate to combine these four bridges with locks , but this idea was rejected due to siting concerns . 
 In 1924 , residents of nearby settlements urged construction of the railway line to the proposed bridge site , but they were told this extension of the line was to be delayed . Within that year it was decided that a bridge was to be constructed due to increased traffic volume , and tenders were let for manufacture of the bridge spans , construction of abutments and piles , and transport of materials to the future construction site . 
 Early in 1925 , a foundation pile and some tents could be found at the site of the future bridge . Men in the region were also awaiting employment on the structure , and by the middle of the year unemployment problems were becoming a serious issue . Similarly government debt was increasing , although it was still expected the railway line to Abbotsford Bridge would be completed . In November , construction started and it was expected that the bridge would be opened around 25 September the following year . 
 During May 1926 , the approach road between Wentworth and the bridge was being progressively metalled , but could not be completed in its entirety until construction of the bridge itself was complete . In June , construction was halted due to contract requirements not being met . 
 By February the next year , construction had resumed . On 8 April 25 men working on the bridge went on strike . This was of concern due to time dependent concreting being undertaken at that time . As the construction was considered unemployment relief , the constructing authority began to look for men who would do the work in their places . By 13 April , further details had emerged ; the number of the men on strike was actually 32 , and it had been caused by the alleged wrongful dismissal of three men who had left for their lunch break early . The strike continued until at least 21 April . Work had resumed by early May , and the bridge was reported as being a little over half completed at that time . 
 It was reported in mid @-@ May that construction work was in progress on the last two piers of the bridge , though low river levels meant that staging could not be installed to allow further work on the bridge framework . The estimated time of completion at this point was by the end of the year . It was noted in early September that the extension of the railway from Yelta was expected to occur once the bridge was completed . 
 The bridge was still under construction in January 1928 , and at that time the estimated date of completion was only a month away . The bridge finally opened to traffic on 14 April . The official opening of the bridge by the NSW Governor Dudley de Chair occurred on 10 July , and was celebrated by the a cutting of the ribbon and an opening of the gates at each end of the lift span . In return he was presented with a silver cigarette case . 
 A major accident occurred at the bridge in August 1931 . The paddle steamer <unk> struck the lift span of the bridge . The span had not been raised to a high enough level , causing it to clip the top of the steamer 's funnel and rip apart the upper deck . High pressure steam was released during the accident causing some onlookers to believe the boat was on fire . It was at first thought the captain would be found amongst the wreckage of the upper deck , but he had been navigating the boat from the lower deck at that time . The captain displayed considerable skill ; he immediately realised that further raising of the span despite being given the all clear meant it was not quite high enough . And through his actions as the boat progressed downstream caught in the current , he prevented the boat becoming stuck at the bridge . 
 Much like in its early days , the bridge still carries much traffic related to the fruit production industry , especially during picking and harvesting seasons . Bridge lifts are timed to try and avoid traffic delays . The local community considers the bridge inadequate , and feel it now impedes commercial activity . 
 = Kate Beckinsale = 
 Kathrin <unk> " Kate " Beckinsale ( born 26 July 1973 ) is an English actress . After some minor television roles , she made her film debut in Much Ado About Nothing ( 1993 ) while still a student at the University of Oxford . She then appeared in British costume dramas such as Prince of Jutland ( 1994 ) , Cold Comfort Farm ( 1995 ) , Emma ( 1996 ) , and The Golden Bowl ( 2000 ) , in addition to various stage and radio productions . She began to seek film work in the United States in the late 1990s and , after appearing in small @-@ scale dramas The Last Days of Disco ( 1998 ) and <unk> Palace ( 1999 ) , she had a break @-@ out year in 2001 with starring roles in the war drama Pearl Harbor and the romantic comedy Serendipity . She built on this success with appearances in the Martin <unk> 's The Aviator ( 2004 ) and the comedy Click ( 2006 ) . 
 Since being cast as Selene in the Underworld film series ( from 2003 to 2017 ) , Beckinsale has become known primarily for her work in action films including Van Helsing ( 2004 ) , Whiteout ( 2009 ) , Contraband ( 2012 ) , and Total Recall ( 2012 ) . She also continues to make appearances in smaller dramatic projects such as Snow Angels ( 2007 ) , Nothing but the Truth ( 2008 ) , and Everybody 's Fine ( 2009 ) . In 2016 , she won acclaim for her role in Whit Stillman 's Jane Austen comedy Love & Friendship . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Beckinsale was born in Chiswick , London , England . She is the only child of actor Richard Beckinsale and actress Judy Loe . Her father was of one @-@ quarter Burmese descent . She made her first television appearance at the age of four , in an episode of This is Your Life dedicated to her father . When she was five years old , her 31 @-@ year @-@ old father died suddenly of a heart attack . Beckinsale was deeply traumatised by the loss and " started expecting bad things to happen . " Her widowed mother moved in with director Roy Battersby when Beckinsale was nine and she was brought up alongside his four sons and daughter . She has a close relationship with her step @-@ father , who was a member of the Workers Revolutionary Party during her childhood . Beckinsale helped to sell The News Line , a Trotskyist newspaper , as a child and has said the household phone was tapped following Battersby 's blacklisting by the BBC . Family friends included Ken Loach and Vanessa Redgrave . Beckinsale has a paternal half @-@ sister , actress Samantha Beckinsale , but they have not had regular contact . 
 Beckinsale was educated at Godolphin and Latymer School , an independent school for girls in Hammersmith , West London and was involved with the Orange Tree Youth Theatre . She was a two @-@ time winner of the WH Smith Young Writers Award for both fiction and poetry . She has described herself as a " late bloomer " : " All of my friends were kissing boys and drinking cider way before me . I found it really depressing that we weren 't making camp fires and everyone was doing grown @-@ up stuff . " " I loathed being a teenager . " She had a nervous breakdown and developed anorexia at the age of 15 and underwent Freudian psychoanalysis for four years . 
 Beckinsale read French and Russian literature at New College , Oxford , and was later described by a contemporary , journalist Victoria Coren , as " whip @-@ clever , slightly nuts , and very charming " . She was involved with the Oxford University Dramatic Society , most notably being directed by fellow student Tom Hooper in a production of A View from the Bridge at the Oxford Playhouse . As a Modern Languages student , she was required to spend her third year abroad , and studied in Paris . She then decided to quit university to concentrate on her burgeoning acting career : " It was getting to the point where I wasn 't enjoying either thing enough because both were very high pressure . " 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = 1991 – 1997 : Early acting roles = = = 
 Beckinsale decided at a young age that she wanted to be an actress : " I grew up immersed in film . My family were in the business . I quickly realised that my parents seemed to have much more fun in their work than any of my friends ’ parents . " She was inspired by the performances of Jeanne Moreau . She made her television debut in 1991 with a small part in an ITV adaptation of P. D. James ’ Devices and Desires . Also that year , she appeared as a young woman engaging in a forbidden affair with a Nazi officer in the Hallmark film One Against the Wind . In 1992 she starred alongside Christopher Eccleston in Rachel ’ s Dream , a 30 ‑ minute Channel 4 short , and in 1993 , she appeared in the pilot of the ITV detective series , Anna Lee , starring Imogen Stubbs . In 1993 , Beckinsale landed the role of Hero in Kenneth Branagh 's big @-@ screen adaptation of Much Ado About Nothing . It was filmed in Tuscany , Italy , during a summer holiday from Oxford University . She attended the film 's Cannes Film Festival premiere and later remembered it as an overwhelming experience . " Nobody even told me I could bring a friend ! " " I had Doc Martens boots on , and I think I put the flower from the breakfast tray in my hair . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone was won over by her " lovely " performance while Vincent Canby of the New York Times noted that she and Robert Sean Leonard " look right and behave with a certain naive sincerity , although they often seem numb with surprise at hearing the complex <unk> they speak . " The film earned over $ 22 million at the box office . She made three other films while at university . In 1994 , she appeared as Christian Bale 's love interest in Prince of Jutland , a film based on the Danish legend which inspired Shakespeare 's Hamlet , and starred in the murder mystery Uncovered . In 1995 , while studying in Paris , she filmed the French language Marie @-@ Louise Ou La Permission . 
 Shortly after leaving Oxford University in 1995 , Beckinsale starred in Cold Comfort Farm as Flora Poste , a newly orphaned 1930s socialite sent to live with distant family members in rural England . The John Schlesinger @-@ directed film was an adaptation of Stella Gibbons 's novel and also featured Joanna Lumley , Eileen Atkins , Ian McKellen , Rufus Sewell and Stephen Fry . Beckinsale was initially considered too young , but was cast after she wrote a pleading letter to the director . Emanuel Levy of Variety was reminded of " the strength of a young Glenda Jackson and the charm of a young Julie Christie . " Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times classed the actress as " yet another of those effortlessly skilled British beauties who light up the screen . " Janet Maslin of the New York Times felt she played the role " with the perfect snippy aplomb . " The film grossed over $ 5 million at the US box office . Also in 1995 , she appeared in Haunted , a ghost story in which Derek Elley of Variety felt she " holds the screen , with both physical looks and verbal poise . " 1995 also saw Beckinsale 's first professional stage appearance as Nina in The Seagull at Theatre Royal , Bath . She became romantically involved with co @-@ star Michael Sheen after meeting during play rehearsals . " He was the young lion of the theatre . " " I was all revved up to feel very intimidated . It was my first @-@ ever play and my mother had cut out reviews of him in previous productions . And then he walked in ... It was almost like , ' God , well , I 'm finished now . That 's it , then . ' ... He 's the most outrageously talented person I 've ever met . " Irving Wardle of The Independent felt that " the casting , including Michael Sheen 's volcanic Kostya and Kate Beckinsale 's steadily freezing Nina , is mainly spot @-@ on . " In early 1996 , she starred in two further plays ; Sweetheart at the Royal Court Theatre and Clocks and Whistles at the Bush Theatre . 
 Beckinsale next starred in an ITV adaptation of Jane Austen 's Emma , playing Emma to Mark Strong 's Mr Knightley and Samantha Morton 's Harriet Smith . " You shouldn 't necessarily like Emma , " Beckinsale has said of her character . " You do love her , but in the way the family of a teenage girl could be exasperated by her outrageous behaviour and still love her . " The programme was aired in autumn 1996 , just months after Gwyneth Paltrow had starred in a film adaptation of the same story . Caryn James of the New York Times felt that while " Ms. Beckinsale 's Emma is plainer looking than Ms. Paltrow 's , " she is " altogether more believable and funnier . " Jonathan Brown of The Independent has described Beckinsale 's interpretation as " the most enduring modern performance " as Emma . In 1997 , Beckinsale appeared opposite Stuart Townsend in the comedy Shooting Fish , one of the most commercially successful British films of that year . " I 'd just had my wisdom teeth out , " Beckinsale later recalled of the initial audition . " I was also on very strong painkillers , so it was not the most conventional of meetings . " Elley wrote of " an incredibly laid @-@ back performance " while Thomas felt she " just glows as an aristocrat facing disaster with considerable aplomb . " She narrated Austen 's Emma for Hodder & Stoughton <unk> and Diana Hendry 's The Proposal for BBC Radio 4 . Also in 1997 , she played Juliet to Michael Sheen 's Romeo in a radio production of Romeo and Juliet , directed by Sheen . 
 = = = 1998 – 2002 : Move to Hollywood = = = 
 At this point in her career , Beckinsale began to seek work in the United States , something she has said wasn 't " a conscious decision ... My boyfriend was in a play on Broadway so that 's why we ended up in New York , and my auditions happened to be for American films . " She starred opposite Chloë Sevigny in 1998 's The Last Days of Disco . The Whit Stillman film focused on a group of Ivy League graduates socializing in the Manhattan disco scene of the early 1980s . Beckinsale 's attempt at an American accent was widely praised . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times felt her role as the bossy Charlotte was " beautifully played . " Todd McCarthy of Variety was unimpressed by the film but noted that " compensations include Beckinsale , looking incredible in a succession of black dresses , whose character can get on your nerves even if the actress doesn 't . " Her performance earned her a London Critics ' Circle Film Award . The film grossed $ 3 million worldwide . Also that year , she starred as Alice in a Channel 4 production of Through the Looking @-@ Glass . In 1999 , Beckinsale appeared opposite Claire Danes in <unk> Palace , a drama about two teenage Americans forced to deal with the Thai justice system on a post @-@ graduation trip abroad . A then 26 @-@ year @-@ old Beckinsale played a teenager . Danes had hoped to become friends with Beckinsale during the shoot but found her " complicated " and " prickly . " McCarthy said the leads " confirm their status as two of the young actresses on the scene today most worth watching , " finding Beckinsale " very effective at getting across layered character traits and emotions . " " Danes and Beckinsale are exceptionally talented young actresses , " said Thomas , but " unfortunately , the script 's seriously underdeveloped context defeats their considerable efforts at every turn . " Stephen Holden of The New York Times felt that Beckinsale 's character " never comes into focus . " The film was a box office failure . 2000 's The Golden Bowl marked Beckinsale 's first role following the birth of her daughter . The Merchant / Ivory production was based on the novel by Henry James and also starred Uma Thurman and Jeremy Northam . Beckinsale 's partner , Michael Sheen , hit Northam on the film set after he followed Beckinsale to her trailer to scold her for forgetting a line . Holden noted that " the most satisfying of the four @-@ lead performances belong to the British cast members , Ms. Beckinsale and Mr. Northam , who are better than their American counterparts at layers of emotional concealment , " adding that each beat of Beckinsale 's performance " registers precisely . " Thomas felt her performance would take her to " a new career level . " Andrew Sarris of The New York Observer asserted that she " comes close to capturing the sublimity of Maggie , despite the obvious fact that no movie can capture the elegant <unk> of James ’ prose . " The film grossed over $ 5 million worldwide . 
 Beckinsale rose to fame in 2001 with a leading role in the war film Pearl Harbor as a nurse torn between two pilots , played by Ben Affleck and Josh Hartnett . She was drawn to the project by the script : " It 's so unusual these days to read a script that has those old @-@ fashioned values to it . Not morals , but movie values . It 's a big , sweeping epic .... You just never get the chance to do that . " Director Michael Bay initially had doubts about casting the actress : " I wasn 't sure about her at first ... she wore black leather trousers in her screen test and I thought she was a little nasty ... it was easy to think of this woman as a slut . " He eventually decided to hire her because she wasn 't " too beautiful . Women feel disturbed when they see someone ’ s too pretty . " He asked her to lose weight during filming . In a 2004 interview , the actress noted that his comments were " upsetting " and said she wore leather trousers because " it was snowing out . It wasn 't exactly like I had my nipple rings in . " She felt grateful that she had not had to deal with such criticism at a younger age : " If I had come on to a movie set at [ a younger ] age and someone had said , ' You 're a bit funny @-@ looking , can you go on a diet ? ' — I might have jumped off a building . I just didn 't have the confidence to put that into perspective at the time . " However , speaking in 2011 , she said she was " very fond " of Bay . Pearl Harbor received negative reviews . Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly praised " the avid eyed , ruby lipped Kate Beckinsale , the rare actress whose intelligence gives her a sensual bloom ; she 's like Parker Posey without irony . " A. O. Scott of the New York Times noted that " Mr. Affleck and Ms. Beckinsale do what they can with their lines , and glow with the satiny shine of real movie stars . " However , Mike Clark of USA Today felt that the " usually appealing Kate Beckinsale " is " inexplicably submerged — like her hospital colleagues — under heaps of tarty makeup that even actresses of the era didn 't wear . " The film was a commercial success , grossing $ 449 million worldwide . 
 Beckinsale 's second film appearance of 2001 was in the romantic comedy Serendipity as the love interest of John Cusack . It was filmed directly after Pearl Harbor and Beckinsale found it " a real relief to return to something slightly more familiar . " Turan praised the " appealing and believable " leads , adding that Beckinsale " reinforces the strong impression she made in Cold Comfort Farm , The Golden Bowl , and The Last Days of Disco " after " recovering nicely " from her appearance in the much @-@ maligned Pearl Harbor . Claudia Puig of USA Today felt that " Beckinsale 's talents haven 't been mined as effectively in any other film since Cold Comfort Farm . " McCarthy found her " energetic and appealing " while Elvis Mitchell of the New York Times described her as " luminous but determined . " In an uncomplimentary review of the film , Ebert described her as " a good actress , but not good enough to play this dumb . " The film has grossed over $ 77 million at the worldwide box office . In 2002 Beckinsale starred in Lisa <unk> 's Laurel Canyon as a strait @-@ laced academic who finds herself increasingly attracted to her free @-@ spirited future mother @-@ in @-@ law . The independent film was another opportunity for Beckinsale to work with Christian Bale , her Prince of Jutland co ‑ star . She found their sex scene awkward because she knew Bale well : " If it was a stranger , it would have been easier . " While Frances McDormand 's performance as Bale 's mother was widely praised , Beckinsale received negative reviews . Holden found the film " superbly acted , with the exception of Ms. Beckinsale , whose tense , colourless Alex conveys no inner life . " Schwarzbaum was unimpressed by the " tedious " characters and criticized " the fussy performances of Bale and Beckinsale " in particular . The film has grossed over $ 4 million worldwide . 
 = = = 2003 – 2006 : Action roles = = = 
 Beckinsale became known as an action star following an appearance as a vampire in 2003 's Underworld . It was markedly different from her previous work and Beckinsale has said she was grateful for the change of pace after appearing in " a bunch of period stuff and then a bunch of romantic comedies . " " It was quite a challenge for me to play an action heroine and pull off all that training when [ in real life ] I can ’ t catch a ball if it ’ s coming my way . " The film received negative to mixed reviews but was a surprise box @-@ office hit and has gained a cult following . Also that year , she starred in the little seen Tiptoes with Gary Oldman and Matthew McConaughey . In 2004 Beckinsale starred in the action horror film Van Helsing . She was " so surprised " to be appearing in her second action film in two years . " It just seemed like a very good role . " Beckinsale had just separated from her long @-@ term boyfriend Michael Sheen at the time of filming and appreciated the warm atmosphere created on set by director Stephen Sommers and co ‑ star Hugh Jackman : " I really did find that working with people like Stephen and Hugh made it possible to get through what I was going through . " The film grossed over $ 120 million at the U.S. box office and over $ 300 million worldwide , but it was not well @-@ reviewed . Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle described her as " a pretty actress doing her best to maintain dignity , vainly trying to craft a feminist statement from a filmmaker 's whimsy " while Rex Reed of The New York Observer felt she was " desperately in need of a new agent . " 
 Also in 2004 , Beckinsale portrayed Ava Gardner in Martin Scorsese 's Howard Hughes biopic The Aviator . Scorsese decided to cast Beckinsale because , " I ’ ve always liked her . I ’ ve seen all her work , and I was glad that she agreed to audition . " Beckinsale 's performance received mixed reviews . Ken Tucker of New York Magazine said she played the part " in full va @-@ va @-@ voom blossom " while LaSalle felt that she manages " to convince us that Ava was one of the great broads of all time . " However , Clark described it as " the one performance that doesn 't come off ( though Beckinsale has the requisite beauty ) " while Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian stated that " Gardner 's rich , voluptuous sexiness is completely absent as Beckinsale sleepwalks through the role as if she was advertising perfume . " The film grossed over $ 213 million worldwide . In 2006 , Beckinsale reprised her role as Selene in the successful vampire sequel Underworld : Evolution , directed by her husband . It was the first time she had " been involved with a movie from the moment it ’ s a germ of an idea right through the whole editing process . " Her daughter had a small role as the younger Selene . The film was a box office success , grossing $ 111 million worldwide . Beckinsale 's second film appearance of 2006 was opposite Adam Sandler and Christopher Walken in Click , a comedy about an overworked family man who discovers a magical remote control that allows him to control time . The opportunity to play a mother " was one of the things that was attractive to me " about the part . It was highly profitable , grossing $ 237 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 82 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = 2007 – 2008 : Focus on small @-@ scale drama = = = 
 Beckinsale then made a return to smaller @-@ scale projects : " My experience is that I sort of stepped away from the independent movies and did a couple of big movies . But that 's not necessarily how it 's perceived by everybody else , which I do understand . " " I enjoy an action movie as much as the next person [ but ] it ’ s not something that I would like to do solely . " She explained that she had originally decided to appear in Underworld because she felt typecast in classical roles — it was " assumed that I use a chamber pot and wear bloomers " — but that her action career " kind of took off a little too much . " In 2007 , Beckinsale starred opposite Sam Rockwell in the independent drama Snow Angels , based on the novel by Stewart O 'Nan . The harrowing film , in which she played an overwhelmed single mother , put Beckinsale " in kind of a tough place . " " I did have my kid , my husband and , in fact , my ex was around a lot , so it was very nice to come home to my people whom I love . " Puig felt " Beckinsale gives her best performance in years " while Richard Corliss of Time described it as " her sharpest work yet . " However , Scott felt that " her skill and discipline cannot overcome the sense that she is an exotic species transplanted into this grim ecosystem . Hard as she works to convince us otherwise , it ’ s a stretch to believe that a woman with the kind of poised confidence in her own beauty she manifests would wind up with an underachieving mouth breather like Glenn . " The film grossed just $ 414 @,@ 404 worldwide . Also in 2007 , Beckinsale appeared alongside Luke Wilson in Vacancy , a thriller set in an isolated motel . Sarah Jessica Parker was originally cast in the part , but dropped out before filming began . Bradshaw felt that " Wilson and Beckinsale have the chops for scary movies " while Gleiberman noted that " Luke Wilson , with his hangdog defensive <unk> , and Kate Beckinsale , all sexy severity , are ideally matched as a couple who hate each other . " However , Manohla Dargis of the New York Times was unimpressed , referring to Beckinsale as " the reigning queen of the bland B 's . " The film was profitable , grossing $ 35 million worldwide from a production budget of $ 19 million . 
 In 2008 , Beckinsale appeared in Winged Creatures , a film about how six different witnesses cope with the aftermath of a shooting . Beckinsale played a waitressing single mother in an ensemble cast which included Dakota Fanning , Jennifer Hudson , and Forest Whitaker . " It was a really , really nice experience but it was quick , " said Beckinsale of the filming process . " I just felt a bit like I was shot through a cannon . " Betsy Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times felt she played the role " with a white trash verve " and found that her character 's " raw ache for that someone with money and respectability is palpable . " However , Dargis felt that Beckinsale and her cast mates have a " tough time filling out characters that are at best abstractions of grief and often just clichés . " The film received a very limited theatrical release in New York and Los Angeles ; it was released simultaneously on DVD . Also in 2008 , Beckinsale starred in Nothing but the Truth as a journalist who refuses to reveal her source . The film , co ‑ starring Vera Farmiga and Matt Dillon , was inspired by the case of Judith Miller . As part of her research for the role , " I spent some time at The L.A. Times with some female reporters , and I spoke to Judith Miller about her experience .... I really researched the hell out of that one and it was an amazingly fulfilling , brilliant experience . " Ann Hornaday of The Washington Post asserted that Beckinsale and Farmiga played " two of the most fascinating female movie characters to hit screens in a long while , and they 've been brought to life by two gifted actresses , each working at the top of her game . " Beckinsale received a Critic 's Choice Award nomination for her performance . The film never received a full theatrical release after the distributor filed for bankruptcy and the film has grossed just $ 186 @,@ 702 worldwide . " I have prayed — prayed — for film companies to go bankrupt on films I 've made , and then this happens on the one I love , " said Beckinsale . " Usually it 's the ones you 're most embarrassed about that are on the side of every bus . " 
 = = = 2009 – 2015 : Career downturn = = = 
 In 2009 , Beckinsale starred in the comic @-@ book adaption Whiteout as a U.S. Marshal tasked with investigating a murder in Antarctica . It was filmed in Manitoba , Canada . She found the action scenes less physically demanding than those in Underworld because " three pairs of trousers and a parka gives you a bit more protection than the latex suit . " The film was critically panned and a box office failure , failing to recoup its budget . She also made a brief cameo in the prequel Underworld : Rise of the Lycans ; she appeared in flashforwards composed of footage from 2003 's Underworld . Also in 2009 , Beckinsale starred in the family drama Everybody 's Fine alongside Robert De Niro , Drew Barrymore , and Rockwell , her Snow Angels co @-@ star . Beckinsale was excited by the opportunity to work with De Niro , whom she had first encountered " years and years ago when I just had Lily and he was putting together a reading of The Good Shepherd . " . Everybody 's Fine was a box office flop , failing to recoup its production budget . In May 2010 , Beckinsale sat on the nine @-@ member 2010 Cannes Film Festival jury , chaired by director Tim Burton . Unable to find a script she felt passionate about , Beckinsale kept a low profile in 2010 and 2011 , opting to spend time with her daughter . 
 Beckinsale returned to acting in 2012 with appearances in three action films . Beckinsale first appeared in the action thriller Contraband . She had a supporting role as the wife of Mark Wahlberg 's character , a former criminal who gets forced back into a life of crime after his family members are threatened . The film was directed by Baltasar <unk> , who also starred in the Icelandic language version of the film , Reykjavík @-@ Rotterdam . The San Francisco Chronicle felt Beckinsale was " stuck in a bit of a thankless role as the victimised wife , but she does try to infuse a harder edge to the character . " The Hollywood Reporter stated that " Beckinsale , her innate <unk> calibrated down a few notches , has little to do but be supportive , worried and , eventually , besieged . " Entertainment Weekly felt that the " woman @-@ in @-@ peril stuff is second @-@ rate , giving off a whiff of exploitation " while Variety found the repeated violence towards Beckinsale 's character disturbing . The film had a production budget of $ 25 million and has grossed over $ 96 million worldwide . Beckinsale next reprised her role as Selene in the fourth installment of the vampire franchise Underworld : Awakening . The franchise was initially conceived of as a trilogy and Beckinsale was not " intending to do another one " but was convinced by the quality of the script . The Hollywood Reporter noted that " when she ’ s not actually fighting , her performance consists of little more than striding purposefully toward or away from the camera . " The Los Angeles Times remarked that she " finally manages to perfect the monotone delivery she 'd been honing for the series ' first two entries . " The film had a production budget of $ 70 million and has grossed over $ 160 million worldwide . With adjustments for inflation , Underworld : Awakening is the lowest grossing Beckinsale @-@ led film in the franchise . 
 Also in 2012 , Beckinsale appeared as the villainess in the sci @-@ fi action remake Total Recall , directed by her husband Len Wiseman . She has said that Wiseman joined the project because he was unable to receive studio financing for an original sci @-@ fi idea : " You ’ re constantly finding yourself having to defend doing a remake when you didn ’ t really want to make one in the first place . " The film received mainly negative reviews . Variety found her performance " one @-@ note " while The Hollywood Reporter described her as " one @-@ dimensional . " USA Today remarked that she " spends much of the movie strutting down hallways and looking relentlessly , though blandly , nasty . " The New York Post asserted that Beckinsale " vastly <unk> her welcome . " The film has grossed $ 198 million from a production budget of over $ 200 million . 
 In 2014 , Beckinsale starred in the legal thriller The Trials of Cate McCall opposite Nick Nolte and James Cromwell . The film received negative reviews and was released as a Lifetime movie . She next appeared in <unk> Asylum , a psychological thriller loosely based on Edgar Allan Poe 's short story . Jeannette Catsoulis of The New York Times said Beckinsale was " emoting as if an Oscar nomination depended on it " while Dennis Harvey of Variety found her performance " overwrought . " Also in 2014 , she provided the voice for Queen <unk> , a character in the The Elder Scrolls Online video game . In 2015 , she starred in the psychological thriller The Face of an Angel alongside Daniel Brühl . The film , directed by Michael Winterbottom , was inspired by the case of Meredith Kercher . Jesse Hassenger of The A.V. Club felt her " charismatic " performance was wasted . Also that year , she starred alongside Simon Pegg in the poorly reviewed Monty Python comedy Absolutely Anything . Tom Huddleston of Time Out said her character " is never really developed — which is perhaps a blessing , because her cut @-@ glass @-@ posh performance is almost as grating as Pegg ’ s . " 
 = = = 2016 : Love and Friendship and screenwriting = = = 
 Beckinsale will star in three 2016 films . In the romantic comedy Love & Friendship , which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2016 , she reunited with her Last Days of Disco collaborators Stillman and Sevigny . Justin Chang of Variety described the role as " one of the most satisfying screen roles of her career .... Beckinsale <unk> the screen in a way that naturally underscores how far ahead of everyone else she is : an effect that doesn ’ t always work to the movie ’ s advantage . " Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter remarked , " There aren ’ t great depths to the role , but Beckinsale excels with the long speeches and in defining her character as a very self @-@ aware egoist . " She will also appear in the horror film The Disappointments Room and the action movie Underworld : Blood Wars . 
 She is currently writing an adapted screenplay of the book The Chocolate Money , with screenwriter and childhood friend Emma Forrest . 
 = = Modeling career = = 
 Beckinsale has worked occasionally as a model . In 1997 , she appeared in the music video for George Michael 's Waltz Away Dreaming . She starred opposite Orlando Bloom in a 2002 Gap television advert directed by Cameron Crowe . She appeared in a Diet Coke television advert in 2004 , directed by Michael Gondry . She advertised Absolut Vodka in a 2009 print campaign photographed by Ellen von Unwerth . She has also promoted Lux shampoo in a Japanese television advert . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Beckinsale had an eight @-@ year relationship with actor Michael Sheen from 1995 until 2003 . They met when cast in a touring production of The Seagull in early 1995 and moved in together shortly afterwards . In 1997 , they appeared in a radio production of Romeo and Juliet . Their daughter , Lily , was born in London in 1999 . The actress has said she was " embarrassed " that Sheen never proposed , but felt as though she were married . Their relationship ended in early 2003 , after the filming of Underworld . Beckinsale and Sheen remain close friends . She remarked in 2016 : " He 's really dear , close family . He 's somebody I 've known since I was 21 years old . I really love him a lot . " 
 Beckinsale was married to director Len Wiseman for eleven years . They met on the set of 2003 's Underworld . Beckinsale persuaded Wiseman to cast Sheen in the film , but , while on set , she and Wiseman fell in love . All parties , aside from Wiseman 's then @-@ wife , have maintained that there was no infidelity . They married on 9 May 2004 in Bel @-@ Air , California and announced their divorce in November 2015 . 
 = = = Legal actions = = = 
 In July 2003 , the Press Complaints Commission dismissed a complaint filed by Beckinsale . Beckinsale had claimed that the Daily Mail invaded her and her daughter 's privacy by publishing photographs of the actress embracing and kissing her then new boyfriend Len Wiseman . The article was headlined " Mummy 's latest love scene leaves Lily unimpressed " and included a picture in which her four @-@ year @-@ old daughter appeared to be ignoring her mother 's romantic actions . The Commission found that " the photographs had been taken in a public place and did not reveal any private details about Lily — such as her health or schooling — but were restricted to general observations about her apparent reaction to her surroundings . " In August 2003 , Beckinsale received a published apology from the Daily Mail after the newspaper reported that she had " spent time in a clinic " following her split from boyfriend Michael Sheen . The apology was issued after the actress filed a complaint with the Press Complaints Commission . In 2009 Beckinsale was awarded £ 20 @,@ 000 in damages by the British High Court after taking legal action against Express Newspapers . The Daily Express had falsely reported that the actress was " facing heartbreak " after missing out on a part in a remake of Barbarella . 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 The British Heart Foundation has been Beckinsale 's charity of choice " ever since [ she ] was six years old . " She has also donated film memorabilia to the <unk> <unk> Medical Research Foundation , <unk> , Habitat For Humanity and the Entertainment Industry Foundation . In 2008 she hosted the 4th Annual Pink Party to raise funds for the Women ’ s Cancer Research Institute at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center and organised a screening of All About Eve for <unk> International . In 2012 Beckinsale joined Nestlé 's Share the Joy of Reading Program to raise awareness about the importance of children 's literacy . 
 = = Performances = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = = Stage = = = 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = New Zealand Division = 
 The New Zealand Division was an infantry division of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force raised for service in the First World War . It was formed in Egypt in early 1916 when the New Zealand and Australian Division was renamed after the detachment of its Australian personnel left the New Zealand Infantry Brigade , together with reinforcements from New Zealand , as the basis of the division . It was commanded by Major General Andrew Hamilton Russell for the duration of the war . 
 The division saw service on the Western Front in France and Belgium , fighting in major battles at the Somme , Messines and Broodseinde Ridge throughout 1916 and 1917 . All were notable successes for the New Zealanders but the division suffered a serious defeat at Passchendaele on 12 October 1917 , its most costly day of the war . 
 In early 1918 , the division helped blunt the German Spring Offensive at the Somme , before the Allies went on the offensive in August . During the Hundred Days ' Offensive that followed , it was one of the lead divisions of the Third Army and advanced 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) in 75 days . The division 's last major engagement of the war was at Le Quesnoy in early November 1918 . During the latter stages of the war , the New Zealand Division was one of the strongest divisions of the Dominion serving on the Western Front . After the armistice , it served on occupation duties in Germany before being disbanded in 1919 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the outbreak of the First World War , the New Zealand government authorised the formation of the New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( NZEF ) , under the command of Major General Alexander Godley , for service abroad . By October 1914 , there were sufficient volunteers to form two brigades , the New Zealand Infantry Brigade and the New Zealand Mounted Brigade . These two formations formed the main body of the NZEF and , together with the Australian 4th Infantry Brigade and the 1st Light Horse Brigade , were the basis of the New Zealand and Australian Division , which fought in the Gallipoli campaign against the Turks . 
 In December 1915 , the much depleted New Zealand and Australian Division was evacuated from Gallipoli , and was placed in reserve near the Suez Canal . Although there were concerns that the Turks might attack the canal , it was envisaged that the division would soon be called upon to serve elsewhere . Commanded by Major General Andrew Hamilton Russell , it was replenished with reinforcements from Australia and New Zealand and began a program of intensive training . 
 Since the deployment of the main body of the NZEF , the numbers of volunteers had steadily increased to the point that they could no longer be integrated into either of the two existing brigades . In January 1916 , the commander of the Mediterranean Expeditionary Force in Egypt , Lieutenant General Sir Archibald Murray , proposed the number of available New Zealand personnel warranted the establishment of two new brigades which , together with the existing brigade , would form a New Zealand infantry division for service on the Western Front . The New Zealand government , initially concerned by the prospect of maintaining three infantry brigades , concurred after Murray reassured it that the number of personnel in Egypt were sufficient to keep the new division up to strength in the short term . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The New Zealand Division officially came into being at Moascar , Egypt , on 1 March 1916 , when the New Zealand and Australian Division was so renamed . Russell , a well regarded senior officer of the Territorial Force who had performed well during the Gallipoli Campaign , was appointed the commander of the new formation . 
 The former New Zealand Infantry Brigade was to be the first of three infantry brigades of the division . The 1st Brigade was commanded by Brigadier General Francis Earl Johnston , who had led the original brigade at Gallipoli . The 2nd Brigade was formed from reinforcements currently in Egypt ; this was commanded by another Gallipoli veteran , Brigadier General William Garnett Braithwaite . The third infantry brigade , known as the Rifle Brigade , was commanded by Brigadier General Harry Fulton . The division also included the Otago Mounted Rifles Regiment ; one squadron was designated as the Divisional Mounted Troops while the remaining two squadrons were integrated into a pioneer battalion alongside Māori personnel . There were also three brigades of field artillery and one of howitzers . In total , the division had some 15 @,@ 000 men in its ranks . 
 Along with the Australian 1st and 2nd Divisions , the New Zealand Division was to form part of I ANZAC Corps , under the command of Godley . In early March , the New Zealand Division assumed responsibility for the section of the Suez Canal guarded by the 2nd Division , which began to embark for France . After three weeks of sentry duty , the New Zealand Division returned to its Moascar base before it too was shipped to France in early April . 
 = = Western Front = = 
 The divisions of I ANZAC Corps , now commanded by Lieutenant General William Birdwood with Godley taking over II ANZAC Corps , were initially based in the Armentières sector where they would undergo intensive training in trench warfare on the Western Front . The Armentières front line was regarded by the Allies as a nursery sector where new units could undergo familiarisation without being called upon for intensive offensive operations . 
 Nevertheless , it was not an easy introduction to the front for the New Zealanders . On arriving in their sector , they found the defensive arrangements to be poor and immediately set about improving the trenches and wire emplacements . Although the bulk of the division 's personnel manned secondary defences rearward of the front line to avoid the German artillery , the forward areas had to be constantly patrolled as a deterrent to an attack and to give the impression they were fully manned . The static nature of the war meant that the Divisional Mounted Troops , intended to be used as scouts , were redundant and , along with two Light Horse squadrons from the Australian infantry divisions , were soon transferred to a new formation designated 1st ANZAC Light Horse Regiment . In July , the New Zealand Division was transferred to the newly arrived II ANZAC Corps while I ANZAC moved south to the Somme . 
 The New Zealanders would follow in due course but in the meantime , General Sir Douglas Haig , the commander of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , called for diversionary actions to attract the attention of the German High Command away from the Allied preparations for the forthcoming offensive on the Somme . To achieve this , the New Zealanders mounted several trench raids . By the time the New Zealand Division was relieved in August , it had incurred 2 @,@ 500 casualties , including 375 dead . 
 = = = Battle of the Somme = = = 
 After a period of refit and training , in September 1916 the New Zealand Division was assigned to XV Corps which , at the time , was participating in the Somme Offensive . On 15 September , the 2nd Brigade and the Rifle Brigade , with the 1st Brigade in reserve , participated in the Battle of Flers @-@ Courcelette . The attack , as planned , was to capture a number of German @-@ held trench systems in successive advances by alternating battalions ; the first objective was the Switch trench complex , designated as the Green Line , with the next two being the Brown and Blue Lines . The Blue Line included the Flers trench network . The final objective was the Grove Alley trench complex , designated Red Line . The attack was to be preceded by a three @-@ day preparatory bombardment and the division was also to be supported by tanks , which were being used for the first time . Four tanks were assigned to the division 's sector . The advance of the New Zealanders was to be flanked by corresponding movements of the neighbouring British 41st and 47th Divisions . 
 At 6 : 20 am , following the creeping artillery barrage that had been laid down by the divisional guns , the 2nd Brigade 's Auckland and Otago Battalions advanced on their first objective , the Switch trench complex , and seized it within an hour . Losses were heavy on the left side of the advance ; the forward movement of the 47th Division was held up and this exposed the 2nd Otago Battalion to enfilade fire as they continued onto Switch trench . Sergeant Donald Brown won the division 's first Victoria Cross ( VC ) for his actions in dealing with machine gun posts that briefly delayed the advance . 
 It was planned for the 4th Battalion of the Rifle Brigade , with the benefit of tank support , to leapfrog the 2nd Brigade and move onto the next objective . However , the tanks suffered mechanical problems and failed to arrive on time . The battalion moved on regardless and secured the Brown Line by 7 : 50 am . The tanks followed on , and one was knocked out of action by artillery fire . The remaining tanks moved onto the Blue Line . The advance , now led by the 2nd and 3rd Battalions of the Rifle Brigade , was beginning to slow . The preparatory bombardment had failed to clear barbed wire ahead of the Flers trench and the infantry had gone to ground to await the tanks . Arriving at 10 : 30 am , they crushed the wire and allowed the 3rd Battalion to clear the trenches of its garrison , the 5th Bavarian Regiment ; 145 were taken prisoner . 
 Efforts were made to consolidate the newly captured positions . The 41st Division , on the right flank , had reached its portion of the Blue Line and captured Flers but the 47th Division lagged behind . The New Zealanders remained exposed to enfilade fire along their left flank and German artillery fire also hampered attempts to shore up their positions . The 1st Battalion of the Rifle Brigade began an attack on the final objective , Red Line , at 10 : 50 am and secured a portion of the Grove Alley trenches by midday despite heavy casualties . However , the 47th Division had still not been able to secure its first objective while the 41st Division had to withdraw from Flers village . This left the New Zealanders in a salient exposed to heavy machine gun fire on both flanks . At 2 : 00 pm Germans were spotted advancing from the northeast . Captain Lindsay Inglis , the senior surviving officer in this area of Grove Alley , gave orders to strengthen the corresponding section of the line . When a platoon began moving to effect the order , this was misinterpreted as a withdrawal and the remaining elements of the battalion began to pull out to Flers village . Inglis was able to check the withdrawal , but with only 120 men , he opted to dig in where they were rather than try to reoccupy Grove Alley . 
 Despite several counterattacks during the afternoon , the New Zealanders managed to hold their front line , including the village of Flers , although both flanks remained exposed due to the failure of 41st and 47th Divisions to reach or hold their frontage of the Blue Line . It was a successful day for the division ; it had captured the most ground of all the divisions of XV Corps involved in the battle . It had also reached all four of its objectives although it ended the day in possession of three plus Flers itself , which was actually in 41st Division 's sector . 
 To strengthen the division 's positions , the 1st Brigade was brought forward into the front lines overnight . The next day , an attack was launched by the brigade 's 1st Wellington Battalion . Supported by artillery , which suppressed an attack made by the Germans minutes before the start of the battalion 's advance from Flers Village , Grove Alley was captured . That evening the weather deteriorated and over the next few days rain filled trenches and shell holes , and turned the ground to thick mud . The New Zealanders were continually harassed by German artillery and localised attacks from the spur overlooking Grove Alley . Despite the conditions , the 1st Brigade carried out operations to strengthen the division 's exposed left flank , but it remained vulnerable to enfilade fire from the German positions . 
 An attack had been planned for 18 September but was postponed due to the poor weather . On 25 September , the attack went ahead . It was intended to extend the front to high ground that was known as Factory Corner . The high ground was undefended , and the 1st Brigade easily captured it under the cover of a creeping barrage . Two days later , Factory Corner formed the launchpad for a further attack by the brigade and the neighbouring 55th Division on two more <unk> , designated Gird Trench and Gird Support . This time , the attack was not as straightforward and it took an extra day before the entire objective was in New Zealand hands . On 1 October , as a preliminary to the Battle of Le <unk> , 2nd Brigade 's Otago and Canterbury battalions captured strongpoints near <unk> L <unk> , which fell to the 47th Division two days later . 
 By the time of its withdrawal from the front lines on 4 October , the New Zealand Division had suffered 7 @,@ 000 casualties ( killed in action , wounded and missing ) , 1 @,@ 500 of them fatal , since 15 September . On the opening day of the battle alone , there were 2 @,@ 050 casualties from the 6 @,@ 000 men who joined the fighting . 
 = = = Restructuring = = = 
 The division , now reattached to II ANZAC Corps , moved north in mid @-@ October and replaced the 5th Australian Division at Sailly . It remained here , patrolling the sector and mounting raids , into February 1917 . The men of the division had become fatigued through their service on the Western Front . While the 2nd and Rifle Brigades soon recovered , the 1st Brigade , having many Gallipoli veterans , continued to struggle as did Johnston , its commander . Consequently , Russell sent him on leave and reorganised the brigades . 
 The 1st Brigade swapped its two South Island battalions ( 1st Canterbury and 1st Otago ) with the two North Island battalions ( 2nd Auckland and 2nd Wellington ) of the 2nd Brigade . This placed all the North Island battalions in the 1st Brigade while all the South Island formations were in the 2nd Brigade . The four artillery brigades were reduced to three by distributing the batteries of the fourth amongst the others , one of which came under the direct control of II ANZAC Corps . 
 This period also saw the formation of the 4th Brigade in England , in response to a request made by the British War Office to the New Zealand government for another infantry division . Although their numbers were insufficient for a new division , personnel from New Zealand were arriving in the various NZEF depots in Europe at a much higher rate than they were being lost from the division due to casualties and attrition . By early 1917 , there was a reserve of around 10 @,@ 000 men available with which to draw upon for the new brigade without adversely affecting the ability to replace existing troops in the field , in the short term at least . The brigade 's core units were four infantry battalions designated as the 3rd Battalions of the Auckland , Wellington , Canterbury and Otago Regiments . Newly promoted Brigadier General Herbert Ernest Hart was appointed by Godley as the brigade 's commander , and after a rigorous training programme , curtailed by orders to report to France , it embarked for the front on 29 May 1917 . With four infantry brigades , the New Zealand Division was now the strongest Dominion formation fighting in France with 20 @,@ 000 personnel . However , Russell did not like his division 's four @-@ brigade structure ( the remainder of the British and Dominion infantry divisions had three brigades ) as he continually had to fend off requests to use the extra brigade for labouring work in the corps rear area . 
 In the meantime , the division had been moved to Flanders in February 1917 . Initially based at <unk> , the following month it shifted north to the Messines area , which was south of Ypres , to relieve the 36th Division . 
 = = = Battle of Messines = = = 
 By mid @-@ 1917 , Haig was planning an offensive in the heavily defended Ypres region of Flanders . His plan involved a series of steps , the first of which was the capture of Messines Ridge by II ANZAC Corps . The New Zealand Division , already in the Messines sector , was given the task of capturing Messines Village and it began intensive training for the forthcoming battle under the close supervision of Russell . Extensive preparatory work was carried out , with transportation infrastructure laid down and ample supplies of shells brought forward for the artillery . 
 The plan of attack , broken into three phases , called for the 2nd and Rifle Brigades to carry out an initial advance to the trenches on the western slopes of the Messines ridge as well as the village itself . The 1st Brigade was then to take over for the second phase and advance to the eastern slope of the ridge , an objective designated the Black Line . The final phase was also to involve the 1st Brigade , which was to push the front line out 270 metres ( 300 yd ) via a series of outposts , designated the Dotted Black Line . This outpost line would serve as the starting point for the advance of the 4th Australian Division , which was to continue the attack to what was designated as the Green Line , a mile from the crest of the ridge . 
 Following a preparatory artillery barrage which began on 3 June , the battle commenced in the early hours of 7 June with the explosion of several mines which had been dug under the German lines . Over a million pounds of explosive were used , and the tremors were felt as far away as London . The New Zealanders were in the centre of the II ANZAC front , flanked by the British 25th Division and the 3rd Australian Division . This marked the first time the Australians and New Zealanders had fought alongside each other in a major engagement on the Western Front . The 2nd and Rifle Brigades quickly moved forward ; the surviving German soldiers encountered initially were still dazed from the detonation of the mines and were quickly subdued and made prisoners of war . They continued to advance into stiffening resistance , but these opponents , soldiers of the 40th ( Saxon ) and 3rd ( Bavarian ) Divisions , were soon dealt with and the outskirts of Messines village were within sight . The Rifle Brigade 's 3rd Battalion was attacking the village when it was slowed by two machine gun posts . Corporal Samuel <unk> led his section on a successful foray to deal with them for which he was later awarded the VC . 
 As planned , the 1st Brigade reached the Black Line shortly after 5 : 00 am and began preparing for the next phase of the advance , the establishment of the Dotted Black Line . By 9 : 00 am , under the cover of a creeping artillery barrage , platoons from the brigade 's 2nd Auckland Battalion moved forward and formed a series of outposts , some of which were close to the Green Line . They were well dug in by midday , and handily placed to fend off German counterattacks . At 3 : 00 pm , the advance was continued by the 4th Australian Division , supported by the New Zealand artillery . The 1st Brigade in the meantime consolidated its positions . That evening , aware that the Germans were likely to lay down a retaliatory artillery barrage , Russell ordered that only a minimum number of troops were to remain in Messines and most personnel moved back to their original positions . The next day , the expected barrage began . The New Zealanders remained in position until 9 June , when they were relieved by the 4th Australian Division . 
 It was a successful operation for the division ; all objectives were achieved on schedule , with over 400 Germans , several field guns , and numerous machine guns and trench mortars being captured . Losses in the division amounted to 3 @,@ 700 casualties , most of which were actually incurred while holding the captured ground . These casualties were inflicted despite Russell 's attempts to keep the number of soldiers in the front line defences to a minimum and to rely on artillery and machine guns as his primary means for defending against counterattacks . The day after the battle , Russell was visiting the Le Moulin de l <unk> , captured by 1st Brigade , when an artillery barrage opened up . This killed the brigade 's commander , Brigadier General Charles Brown , the first general officer of the NZEF to be killed in action . On 12 June , the division was back manning the front lines to the southeast of Messines , mounting raids and pushing outposts forward into German territory and generally consolidating their positions . It was finally withdrawn from the sector at the end of the month for rest and recuperation . 
 The division returned to the area in mid @-@ July , tasked with minor operations intended to keep German attention away from the sector north of Ypres , which was to be the focus of renewed fighting as Haig continued with his planned offensive . Russell had his brigades man the division 's section in rotation ; those not in the trenches spent their time training . During this period , the New Zealanders captured the village of La <unk> but subsequently lost it to a German counterattack . At the end of the month , 2nd Wellington Battalion , 1st Brigade , retook the village with Lance @-@ Corporal Leslie Andrew playing a key role in the action ; he was later awarded the VC for his efforts . Over the following few weeks the men of the division worked to consolidate their positions in waterlogged trenches , rain having set in . Casualties were still incurred during this period including Brigadier General Johnston , killed by a sniper on 7 August while inspecting his new command , the Rifle Brigade . 
 = = = Ypres Offensive = = = 
 In September , II ANZAC Corps was detailed for the ongoing offensive in Ypres , the Battle of Passchendaele ( also known as the Third Battle of Ypres ) . Haig wanted Passchendaele Ridge in British hands by winter through a series of limited actions to be carried out across September and October . The initial role of the New Zealand Division was to launch an attack on Gravenstafel Spur , running off the Passchendaele Ridge , as part of what would become known as the Battle of Broodseinde . The attack was part of an overall strategy to capture the ridges running in front of Passchendaele , prior to an attack on the village itself . 
 = = = = Battle of Broodseinde = = = = 
 In the weeks leading up to the battle , the division repeatedly practiced the tactics it would employ in its attack on Gravenstafel Spur . When it moved into the front line , its frontage was approximately 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) . The 4th Brigade moved into the southern portion of the line on 2 October . On its right was the 3rd Australian Division , while on its left flank was the 1st Brigade . The 48th Division ( of XVIII Corps ) was to the left of the 1st Brigade . Together with the 1st Brigade , the 4th Brigade was tasked with two objectives , the Red Line and the Blue Line . The 1st Auckland and Wellington battalions of 1st Brigade , together with the 3rd Auckland and Canterbury battalions of 4th Brigade , were to advance to and secure the Red Line , running along the crest of the ridge . The other two battalions of the respective brigades would then leapfrog their predecessors through the Red Line to take the Blue Line , at the bottom of the Belluvue Spur . 
 On 4 October , preceded by an artillery barrage beginning at 6 : 00 am , the division began its offensive with the infantry advancing behind a creeping barrage , which caught a mass of German troops , preparing for their own attack , out in the open . The German infantry , battered by the artillery fire , were swiftly dealt with by the advancing New Zealanders . Despite the presence of pillboxes , the Red Line was reached on schedule , with some limited mopping up operations conducted forward of the line by parties from the advancing battalions . Having moved up to the Red Line behind the attacking forces , at 8 : 10 am , the next phase of the advance began as infantry from the remaining battalions of 1st and 4th Brigades moved forward to the Blue Line . Despite some resistance from machine gun nests and pockets of infantry sheltering in shell holes , the Blue Line was reached at 9 : 30 am . Rain began to fall later that afternoon , and the ground quickly became boggy . For the next two days , under the protection of heavy artillery support , both brigades consolidated their positions and established trench lines . The Germans mounted some small @-@ scale counterattacks but these were easily dealt with . From 5 October , the rain began to set in , making movement of men and equipment to the front line difficult . On 6 October , the New Zealanders were relieved by the 49th Division . 
 The attack was a success with the brigades taking all their objectives on schedule . The 4th Brigade captured 700 prisoners of war , for the loss of 130 men killed , and over 600 wounded . In the 1st Brigade , 192 were killed along with 700 wounded . From its starting positions , the division made gains of around 1 @,@ 000 metres . Both Godley and Russell were pleased with the outcome and pushed for further involvement by the New Zealand Division in the ongoing offensive . 
 Buoyed by the success of 4 October , Haig brought forward the next phase of the offensive , the Battle of Poelcappelle , by a day , to 9 October . The British divisions of Godley 's II ANZAC Corps were to be involved in the initial attack , which was to be followed by an advance on Passchendaele by the New Zealand Division on 12 October . 
 = = = = First Battle of Passchendaele = = = = 
 Godley 's II ANZAC Corps had limited time to prepare for the Battle of Poelcappelle , which was intended to set a good base for an attack on Passchendaele itself by capturing the Belluvue Spur . Its attack proved to be a failure , with no significant advancement of the front lines made by the two British divisions involved , the 49th and 66th Divisions . Several battalions were unable to reach their starting positions by the scheduled time and , once the attack began , they were held up by the mud and German defensive positions . For the sake of a few hundred metres , there were 5 @,@ 700 casualties . Despite this , Godley , keen for Passchendaele to fall to his II ANZAC Corps , pushed ahead with the 12 October attack . Haig , misled by erroneous reports from Godley 's headquarters that the Poelcappelle attack had achieved similar gains to those made on 4 October , concurred . Once Haig discovered the error , Godley reassured him that Passchendaele could still fall to his corps . Needing to restore Haig 's faith in his leadership , Godley disregarded the warnings of his senior artillery and engineer officers that ground conditions were not favourable ; the winter rain had set in following Broodseinde and , together with the time constraints , had been a key factor in the compromised preparations for the Poelcappelle attack . The Passchendaele attack , scheduled for 12 October , would likewise be hampered by limited preparation time and boggy terrain . 
 The attack was to involve the New Zealand Division 's 2nd and Rifle Brigades , with 4th Brigade in reserve , attacking along Belluvue Spur and onto Goudberg Spur while the 3rd Australian Division , on the right of the New Zealanders , attempted to take Passchendaele itself . On the division 's left was the 9th ( Scottish ) Division . The plan required both New Zealand brigades to advance with a one @-@ battalion frontage , with three battalions of each brigade leapfrogging each other in sequence to capture objectives designated Red , Blue and Green lines , the last of which was Goudberg Spur . 
 The New Zealanders had a number of preparatory hurdles to overcome before the battle . The men of the Rifle Brigade had , for the previous few weeks , been carrying out engineering work for II ANZAC Corps and were fatigued . The ongoing rainfall affected both the roads by which the division had to move to its starting positions and the placement of the supporting artillery . The muddy ground did not provide a stable platform for the guns and howitzers . Furthermore , the artillery barrage targeting the barbed wire emplacements protecting the strongpoints on the slopes of Belluvue Spur failed to destroy them , a fact determined by scouts on 11 October . Once this information reached the brigade commanders , Braithwaite and A. E. Stewart ( who took over command of the Rifle Brigade following Young 's wounding ) , they pressed Russell for cancellation of the attack ; this was refused . 
 Early in the morning of 12 October , the Germans , already on the alert , bombarded the areas where the New Zealand infantry were assembling prior to commencing their advance . This , along with several rounds of New Zealander artillery that fell short , inflicted numerous casualties until the New Zealanders completed their barrage at 5 : 25 am and began moving forward . Their advance was slowed by ground conditions and machine gun fire from both their front and flanks . They stalled after reaching the wire , arranged in two belts . The following battalions began to catch up to the leading unit , the 2nd Otago Battalion , filling its depleted ranks , but were also held up by the wire . Some parties , led by subalterns and non @-@ commissioned officers , managed to breach the wire and attack the German pillboxes beyond , but when their leaders were killed , the survivors began to dig in . It was 8 : 00 am and the front line had been advanced by barely 320 metres ( 350 yd ) . 
 By mid @-@ morning , it was apparent that the failure of the New Zealanders to advance their section of the front exposed the left flank of the neighbouring 3rd Australian Division , which had secured its first objective and was pushing on to its second . Likewise , on the New Zealand Division 's left , the 9th ( Scottish ) Division had managed to reach its final objective . Godley issued new instructions to the New Zealand Division ; abandoning any hope of getting to the Green Line , it was to push on to the Blue Line in an attack timed for 3 : 00 pm . However , by the early afternoon the flanking Scots had been pushed back while the Australians had failed to make further gains and were withdrawing due to enfilade gunfire on the flanks . Braithwaite , warned by his battalion commanders that capturing the Blue Line was impossible , twice pushed Russell for a cancellation of the attack . Russell 's initial response was to instruct the Rifle Brigade to continue , but shortly before the attack was to begin , it was abandoned . 
 The 4th Brigade moved up to the line to relieve the 2nd and Rifle Brigades and remained there until the division was withdrawn to a training area in late October , following the relief of II ANZAC Corps by the Canadian Corps . The division suffered heavy losses on 12 October : about 845 men were killed and a further 1 @,@ 900 wounded in the worst defeat in New Zealand military history . Although Russell blamed himself for the outcome of the attack and wrote to politicians in New Zealand stating so , in his private correspondence he made it clear that planning and preparation by Godley and his staff at II ANZAC Corps was inadequate and did not take into account the poor ground conditions at Passchendaele . 
 = = = Winter 1917 – 18 = = = 
 On 1 November 1917 , II ANZAC Corps ' 3rd Australian Division was transferred to I ANZAC Corps . As this left the New Zealand Division as the sole representative of the ANZAC divisions in II ANZAC Corps , it was renamed to XXII Corps . The renamed corps returned to the Ypres salient in mid @-@ November 1917 , holding a five @-@ mile front along Broodseinde Ridge from the village of Tiber to the <unk> stream . The New Zealand Division took the right sector of this front which was overlooked by a spur topped by the ruined Polderhoek Chateau , occupied by the Germans . On 3 December , the 1st Canterbury and 1st Otago Battalions of the 2nd Brigade mounted an attack against the chateau . The attack , launched at midday in an attempt to surprise the Germans , proved a relative failure ; although some ground was taken , the chateau remained in enemy hands . During this action , Private Henry James Nicholas dealt with a machine gun post that was holding up the advance of his company , and won the VC . Having advanced its front by 180 metres ( 200 yd ) , the brigade consolidated its positions until it was withdrawn two days later and replaced by units from IX Corps . 
 At this stage of the war , Braithwaite , a popular commander , was temporarily in charge of the division while Russell was on leave . The last of the brigade commanders who had embarked with the NZEF in 1914 , he was worn out and in January was evacuated to England for treatment . On recovery , Braithwaite rejoined his original British Army regiment rather than returning to the division . There were rumours amongst the soldiers of the division that this was a punishment for his refusal to carry on with the 12 October attack at Passchendaele . 
 By February 1918 , the losses in the New Zealand Division resulted in the disbandment of the 4th Brigade . When it was originally formed , New Zealand 's prime minister , William Massey , felt that New Zealand was already contributing more than its fair share to the war effort , and he determined that no additional reinforcements would be sent to maintain the brigade ; if needed , it would be broken up to supply divisional replacements . Consequently , the brigade 's personnel were redistributed amongst the remaining formations to bring them up to strength . The surplus troops formed the 1st , 2nd , and 3rd <unk> Battalions , one for each brigade , and this provided a pool of trained reinforcements for the division . In other organisational changes , a divisional machine gun battalion was formed from the companies belonging to each brigade while the New Zealand Pioneer Battalion divested itself of its squadron of Otago Mounted Rifles to leave a unit with solely Māori personnel , apart from its senior officers . This was designated the New Zealand Māori ( Pioneer ) Battalion . 
 = = = Spring Offensive = = = 
 On 21 March , the Germans launched their Spring Offensive which involved 60 divisions advancing across a front of 80 kilometres ( 50 mi ) . The Allies were quickly pushed back and a gap formed between the Third and Fifth Armies through which the Germans penetrated . The New Zealand Division was out of the line , recuperating following its tour of duty in the trenches over the winter months , and was deployed to cover a gap which had developed between IV and V Corps at the old Somme battlefield . After moving rapidly to the front , it was positioned at Hamel by 26 March and from there linked up with the 4th Australian Division . For the next several days , the New Zealanders dug in while fending off multiple advances by the Germans . They were initially without artillery support ; the infantry had been able to move much more quickly to the front . The artillery began arriving by the evening of 27 March . Supplies took longer to arrive and as rain began to fall on 28 March , many soldiers were without wet weather gear . 
 The New Zealanders ' defensive positions had been improved despite the weather and the harassment from German artillery , which killed Fulton , the original commander of the Rifle Brigade , when a barrage targeted his headquarters . The division undertook the first offensive action by the British forces during the Spring Offensive when three battalions seized the high ground of La Signy farm on 30 March . This success , although relatively trivial to the New Zealanders , was a morale booster for the rest of the beleaguered Third Army . 
 The Germans launched a renewed effort to push through to Amiens on 5 April , two armies attacking across the front of the British Third Army . The New Zealanders experienced a heavy bombardment which began at 5 : 00 am which cut off communications and later that day suffered two separate but disorganised attacks by infantry . The first was fended off but the second recaptured La Signy farm . An attempt to push on to the main trenches of the New Zealanders was rebuffed with heavy losses inflicted by the Wellington Company of the Machine Gun Battalion . 
 By 9 April , the pressure was decreasing on the New Zealand positions as the Germans shifted their offensive north to the area around Armentières . While the bulk of the New Zealand Division remained on the Somme and consolidated its defences , some of its artillery went to reinforce the British forces bearing the brunt of the renewed German attacks . Casualties for this period of the war were high ; nearly 1 @,@ 000 of the division 's personnel were killed through March and April and almost 2 @,@ 700 were wounded . 
 The New Zealand Division continued to man its trenches along its section of the Somme front and regularly mounted trench raids . To the amusement of the New Zealanders , the German soldiers manning the trenches opposite were warned to avoid being captured because they might be eaten . In June , the division was withdrawn to Authie . The New Zealanders returned to the Somme front in early July , and settled into a sector east of <unk> that included Rossignol Wood . As with the division 's previous stint on the Somme , trench raids were often carried out . During a raid mounted on 23 July , Sergeant Richard Travis performed actions that led to a posthumous award of the VC ; he was killed the next day . A prominent soldier and renowned for his scouting skills , his death was mourned across the division . 
 = = = Hundred Days ' Offensive = = = 
 On 8 August 1918 , the last major offensive of the Western Front commenced . It began with an attack by the Canadian and Australian Corps at Amiens , which rolled the German lines back 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) that day . The advance petered out after four days after the Germans began to regroup and shore up their defences . Haig recognised that it was time to put pressure elsewhere on the German front and for this , decided to use General Julian Byng 's Third Army . The New Zealand Division would continually be at the forefront of the advance of the Third Army for the remainder of the offensive . At this stage of the war , the New Zealand Division was still one of the strongest infantry divisions of the Dominion serving on the Western Front . It numbered 12 @,@ 243 men and there were 15 @,@ 000 reinforcements in England . Aided by the fact that New Zealand introduced conscription in August 1916 , the continuous supply of reinforcements prevented it from suffering the reduction in the number of battalions that affected the British and Australian divisions as their manpower reserves dried up . As the division advanced , it usually did so along a brigade @-@ sized front , with three battalions forward of a field artillery brigade . This allowed for rapid artillery support as the need arose . The brigades would leapfrog each other as they moved forward . 
 The New Zealand Division 's initial involvement in the offensive was on 21 August , when it joined four other divisions of the Third Army in an attack across a 15 @-@ kilometre ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) front from <unk> towards the Albert @-@ Arras railway . Its role was relatively minor in this action but a few days afterwards , the division played a significant part in what is now known as the Second Battle of Bapaume . The battle began on 24 August with a nighttime advance by the 1st and 2nd Brigades to clear the approaches to Bapaume , including <unk> Wood and <unk> . Progress was delayed by heavy machine gun fire and artillery took its toll on supporting tanks . On 29 August , Bapaume itself was captured by the New Zealanders when , after a heavy artillery barrage , they attacked into the town at the same time the Germans were withdrawing . The village of <unk> fell the following day . 
 The New Zealand Division continued to advance , with the 2nd Brigade capturing <unk> on 3 September following a failed attempt the previous day . It moved onto the outer defences of the Hindenburg Line , including <unk> Spur , which overlooked the German positions . In conjunction with 37th Division and elements of the 38th Division , the New Zealanders attacked the spur on 12 September . The crest of the spur was captured , although not the trench system on the far side . During this action , Sergeant Harry Laurent earned the VC for his exploits in leading a patrol that captured a company of Germans . 
 After two weeks out of the line , the division attacked the Hindenburg Line itself on 29 September , easily achieving its objectives and capturing 1 @,@ 000 prisoners . With the New Zealanders on the St. Quentin Canal and the adjacent Scheldt River , a platoon had managed to cross it and reach the village of Crèvecœur . However , it became pinned down until the 1st Auckland and 2nd Wellington Battalions of the 1st Brigade managed to cross the next day and capture the village . Private James Crichton , a member of the trapped platoon , earned the VC , the last of the war for the New Zealand Division , for his efforts in relaying messages between his companions and his company commander . He also defused demolition charges on the bridge spanning the Scheldt River . 
 On 8 October , IV Corps attacked Cambrai , to which the Germans had withdrawn after they abandoned their defences along the St. Quentin Canal . The New Zealand Division 's contribution was from the 2nd and Rifle Brigades , both of which easily achieved their objectives . In advance of their flanking units , they were handily placed to intervene when the Germans mounted a counterattack against the adjacent British 2nd Division . By 12 October , the division had advanced nearly 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) , including a crossing of the Selle River , and had captured 1 @,@ 400 prisoners and 13 field guns . Its own casualties amounted to 536 men . It withdrew from the front line for a brief rest before returning to the front on 20 October . 
 By the end of October , the New Zealand Division was positioned to the west of the fortified town of Le Quesnoy . On 4 November , the next phase of the Allied advance began with the Battle of the Sambre . The division was tasked with the capture of Le Quesnoy and extending the front line past the town . The Rifle Brigade encircled and , through the achievement of its 4th Battalion in scaling the ramparts that surrounded the town , pushed into Le Quesnoy by the close of the day while the 1st Brigade had established a line to the east . This was the division 's most successful day on the Western Front . 
 The day after the fall of Le Quesnoy , elements of the division moved through the Mormal Forest with the 1st Canterbury and 2nd Otago Battalions of the 2nd Brigade leading the way . As well as covering over 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) , they attacked and captured two houses occupied by German forces . Twenty men were killed in this last contact with the enemy , which marked the last offensive action of the division ; it was relieved that night . During the Hundred Days ' Offensive , it had advanced 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) in 75 days . It was moving into reserve at <unk> @-@ en @-@ Cambrésis , in the rear area of IV Corps , when the Armistice was signed on 11 November . 
 = = Occupation duties and disbandment = = 
 The New Zealand Division was chosen to form part of the Allied occupation force in Germany , to the displeasure of some personnel who had expected to return home . By mid @-@ December it had begun moving through Belgium towards Cologne where it arrived on 20 December . <unk> in the city 's suburbs , the division remained on active duty when not sightseeing . Educational programs were also implemented . Demobilisation began towards the end of December with the departure of those who had enlisted in 1914 or 1915 . The first unit to leave the division was the Pioneer Battalion , and additional men were sent to England on leave . They remained there until transportation to New Zealand could be arranged . Russell had taken ill in late January and departed for the warmer climate of Southern France , leaving the division 's artillery commander , Brigadier General G. Johnston , in charge of the division . The artillery was demobilised on 18 March 1919 , with the division formally disbanded on 25 March 1919 . Its occupation duties were taken up by the British 2nd Division . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 After the war , the New Zealand government instituted four national battlefield memorials to honour the New Zealand soldiers who died on the Western Front . The overwhelming majority of these fatalities , around 12 @,@ 400 , were men from the New Zealand Division . The memorials , designed by Samuel Hurst Seager , are located at Passchendaele , Messines , Le Quesnoy and the Somme . Each memorial includes the words " From the <unk> Ends of the Earth " . In contrast to other Dominions , the names of New Zealand soldiers with no known grave , of which there are about 4 @,@ 180 , are not listed on the Memorials to the Missing at Menin Gate and Thiepval . Instead , it was the policy of the New Zealand government to establish smaller Memorials to the Missing in cemeteries near where the soldiers went missing , one of which is at the Buttes New British Cemetery . 
 = Follo Line = 
 The Follo Line ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a planned 22 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) high @-@ speed railway between Oslo and Ski , Norway . Running parallel to the Østfold Line , it will be engineered for 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) . Terminal stations will be Oslo Central Station and Ski Station . Most of the line , 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) , will be in a single tunnel , which will be the longest railway tunnel in the country . Construction is estimated to start in 2014 , and may be completed by 2020 / 21 . The Follo Line will increase capacity from twelve to forty trains per hour along the South Corridor , and will allow express and regional trains to decrease travel time from Ski to Oslo from 22 to 11 minutes . The line is prospected to cost over 20 billion Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . 
 The project is a continuation of the Norwegian National Rail Administration 's plan to build four tracks along the three main corridors out of Oslo ; the Gardermoen Line was completed in 1998 , and the Asker Line has been completed in 2011 . Between 1989 and 1996 , the Østfold Line south of Ski to Moss was upgraded to double track and higher speeds . To take full advantage of this and allow the rest of the Østfold Line to be upgraded for high speeds , it is necessary to increase capacity through the bottleneck from Oslo to Ski . The first plans for the Follo Line were launched in 1995 , and also included an intermediate station at Vevelstad and Kolbotn . The new line is predicted to increase rush hour rail ridership 63 % , and increased freight on rail would remove 750 trucks daily from European Route E18 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first railway in the Follo district was the Østfold Line of the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) that opened on 2 January 1879 , between Oslo East Station and Halden . Later the same year , the line was extended to the Swedish border , where it connected to the Norway / Vänern Line . The importance of Ski Station increased on 24 November 1882 , when it became the station where the Eastern Østfold Line split , and went via Inner Østfold to Sarpsborg , where the two lines reconnected . Electrification of the section from Oslo to Kolbotn was completed on 18 January 1937 , and the section to Ski finished in 1939 ; the whole Østfold line was completed in 1940 . Between 1924 and 1939 , NSB built double track along the route between Ski and Oslo . From 1989 to 1996 , NSB upgraded the track to double track from Ski to <unk> , just north of Moss . This section is capable of speeds of 200 km / h ( 120 mph ) , however the maximum is 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) due to short distances between stops and limitations of the rolling stock . 
 In 1992 , the Norwegian Parliament decided to build the first high @-@ speed railway in Norway , from Oslo via the new Oslo Airport , Gardermoen to Eidsvoll . This line would run parallel to the Hoved Line , increasing the speed and capacity along the route . Fast express and regional trains could run along the new section , while slower commuter trains used the old tracks and could make many stops without disturbing other traffic . Projects were launched during the 1990s to create similar high @-@ speed bypasses from Oslo to Ski , and from Skøyen ( west of Oslo ) to Asker . Construction of the latter — christened the Asker Line — started in 2001 , and the first section from Asker to Sandvika opened in 2005 , while the second section is expected to open in 2011 . 
 The Østfold Line between Oslo and Ski remains the largest bottle @-@ neck on the Norwegian railway network . The line restrains the track to twelve trains per hour ( six per direction ) and hinders freight trains from using it during rush hour . The bottleneck occurs because there are up to four trains each hour making stops at all stations , and these stops delay all express and regional trains that follow . Travel time is 22 minutes for direct trains to Ski , and 31 minutes for commuter trains with a speed limit of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) along most of the line . Capacity on the upgraded double track from Ski to Moss cannot be fully utilized due to the limitations along the section from Ski to Oslo , and further growth in the number of freight trains along the South Corridor to Sweden and Continental Europe is impossible without reducing the number of passenger trains . 
 Despite the existing double track all the way from Oslo to Moss , a further upgrade southwards will not be able to increase capacity past the current single train per hour to Fredrikstad , Sarpsborg and Halden . The most optimistic plans involve finishing the first upgrades of track south of Moss simultaneously with the Follo Line . The Rail Administration and Ministry of Transport is working on proposals for a high @-@ speed railway between Oslo and Gothenburg in Sweden . This line would most likely use the Follo Line for the initial distance from Oslo . 
 = = Route = = 
 The initial plan from 1995 involved two intermediate stations , at Vevelstad and Kolbotn . The plans also suggested building the line in two phases , first between Ski and Kolbotn , and then from Kolbotn to Oslo . In 2008 , the National Rail Administration announced two possible plans for the right @-@ of @-@ way — both predominantly in tunnel . The one proposal included Kolbotn , the other did not . Both excluded Vevelstad as a station on the new line , since the station could not develop as a hub , and would still keep services along the existing commuter line . A report from Det Norske Veritas published in 2008 , and ordered by the Rail Administration , concluded that neither a station at Vevelstad or at Kolbotn could support the extra cost of construction . A direct line with no intermediate stops is estimated to cost NOK 11 billion , while a line via Kolbotn would cost 13 @.@ 5 billion . The report also argued that the intermediate stops would decrease capacity and increase travel time for all passengers departing south of Ski and traveling north . The exclusion of Kolbotn would also increase the importance of Ski as a regional public transport hub . In 2009 , the Rail Administration abandoned the plans to build the line via Kolbotn , stating that it was more important to secure a fast connection to Ski . At the same time , they promised to upgrade the existing station at Kolbotn . 
 The rail line is planned for at least 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) , although faster speeds are being considered . The earliest possible construction start is 2014 , which could allow completion by 2020 / 21 . Ski Station will also be upgraded as part of the project , and will be expanded to six tracks . Plans to connect the Eastern Østfold Line to the slower line were considered where the Eastern Østfold Line diverges from the Østfold Line at Ski . However this has changed so the local trains from Eastern Østfold can travel to Oslo faster along the new tracks . 
 Just south of Oslo Central Station , each of the two tracks will diverge , and follow different routes . The inbound track will hook up with the Østfold Line at <unk> , while the outbound track will diverge at <unk> . An additional connection to the Østfold Line will be made at Nordstrand . The Østfold Line connects to the Hoved Line and <unk> – Alnabru Line before reaching Oslo Central Station ( Oslo S ) . If the Kolbotn @-@ alternative for the Follo Line is chosen , the Østfold Line will be rebuilt to follow a similar path to the Kolbotn station , which will require a new station building to accommodate the two lines . For this alternate route the two lines will enter the Kolbotn station at two levels , with the Follo Line running in a tunnel below , and the Østfold Line running at @-@ grade above . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Follo Line will allow the capacity in the South Corridor from Oslo to increase from about twelve to forty trains per hour . Local and freight trains will use the Østfold Line , while regional and express trains will use the Follo Line . Travel time will be reduced from 22 to 11 minutes . With a new line , there will be 11 @,@ 000 more public transport trips through the corridor ; this includes a 67 % increase during rush @-@ hour and 43 % the rest of the day . This allows a reduction of 5 @,@ 800 car trips per day and reduces carbon dioxide emissions of 5 @,@ 474 tonnes . Rush hour capacity would be eight trains per hour to Kolbotn , with four continuing to Ski along the old line . The new line would be served by four trains to Moss , two to Mysen and two to Halden . There would be half the frequency during off @-@ peak hours . 
 The Østfold Line is the railway that connects Norway to Continental Europe , and 80 % of all land @-@ based , international freight transport goes through Østfold . Until the Follo Line opens , there cannot be a capacity increase on international freight trains to Norway . The Rail Administration has set a goal of tripling the amount of rail freight by 2040 , which for the South Corridor is equal to the removal of 750 trucks per day from European Route E18 . The Follo Line will also allow freight trains to pass during rush hour . 
 = Vaillancourt Fountain = 
 Vaillancourt Fountain , sometimes called Quebec libre ! , is a large fountain located in Justin Herman Plaza in San Francisco , designed by the Québécois artist Armand Vaillancourt in 1971 . It is about 40 feet ( 12 m ) high and is constructed out of precast concrete square tubes . Long considered controversial because of its stark , modernist appearance , there have been several unsuccessful proposals to demolish the fountain over the years . It was the site of a free concert by U2 in 1987 , when lead singer Bono spray painted graffiti on the fountain and was both praised and criticized for the action . 
 = = Location = = 
 The fountain is located in a highly visible spot on the downtown San Francisco waterfront , in Justin Herman Plaza , where Market Street meets The Embarcadero . The Hyatt Regency Hotel is at the edge of the plaza , adjacent to the other four highrise towers of the Embarcadero Center . Across The Embarcadero is the Ferry Building , and the eastern end of the California Street cable car line is on the other side of the Hyatt Regency Hotel . 
 When Vaillancourt designed the fountain , the Embarcadero Freeway or Interstate 480 , was still in existence along Market Street and the Embarcadero . The fountain was designed with the freeway environment in mind , but it was built to bring people there . At the time the city was expanding and wanted to build a plaza . What is now Justin Herman Plaza , was once an empty dirt lot under the freeway surrounded by piers , warehouses and ship yards . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Vaillancourt Fountain was a product of the redevelopment of San Francisco that took place in the 1950s and 1960s The Transamerica Pyramid was constructed from 1969 @-@ 1972 and BART was also being constructed , the Embarcadero Station would eventually open in 1976 . 
 Justin Herman , for whom the plaza was named , was a leading figure in this process and the executive director of the redevelopment agency in charge . Modernist landscape architect Lawrence Halprin was selected for the redesign of Market Street from the Embarcadero to the Civic Center , the most visible two mile thoroughfare in San Francisco . Halprin had designed other spaces in the city such as <unk> Square and the United Nations Plaza . He designed Justin Herman Plaza , but hired Armand Vaillancourt to design the fountain . Vaillancourt , 38 years old at the time , had won the invitational fountain design competition that Halprin had judged . Halprin was quoted as saying that if the fountain didn 't prove to be among the " great works of civic art ... I am going to slit my throat " . 
 The fountain is about 40 feet ( 12 m ) high , weighs approximately 700 short tons ( 640 t ) , and is constructed out of precast concrete square tubes . The fountain is positioned in a pool shaped like an irregular pentagon , and is designed to pump up to 30 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 110 @,@ 000 L ) of water per minute . Vaillancourt Fountain looks unfinished , like concrete that has not been mixed all the way . Up close it is very rough and textured , painfully sharp . There are several square pillars or cubed tubes that form a semi circle inside a pentagon shaped pool . The natural colored pillars jut out and crisscross from the corner of the plaza “ like the tentacles of some immense geometrical octopus … <unk> open . ” There are two bridges , or walk ways ( with stairs ) , that allow the public to stand in @-@ between the tubes and have a view overlooking the plaza and city . The fountain and plaza are easily accessible to the public at all times and in all conditions , rain or shine . The fountain 's budget was US $ 310 @,@ 000 , and it was dedicated on April 22 , 1971 . The Los Angeles Times reported that its actual cost was US $ 607 @,@ 800 . 
 Just before the dedication , the slogan " Quebec Libre " ( a reference to the Quebec sovereignty movement ) was painted on the fountain at night , and the graffiti was erased . During the dedication , attended by Thomas Hoving , director of New York 's Metropolitan Museum of Art , a rock band played , and Armand Vaillancourt himself painted " Quebec Libre " on the fountain in as many places as he could reach . A redevelopment agency employee started to paint over the slogans during the ceremony , but Herman stopped him , saying it could be done later . When asked about why he defaced his own fountain with graffiti he responded , “ No , no . It 's a joy to make a free statement . This fountain is dedicated to all freedom . Free Quebec ! Free East Pakistan ! Free Viet Nam ! Free the whole world ! ” Vaillancourt said his actions were " a powerful performance " intended to illustrate the notion of power to the people . " Quebec Libre " has been an alternate name for the fountain since . 
 = = Critical reaction = = 
 The fountain has been considered controversial since its construction , and criticism of it has continued over the years . Hoving , in his dedication speech , said of the fountain had some of the daring of Baroque sculpture and that " A work of art must be born in controversy . " Herman himself said it was " one of the greatest artistic achievements in North America . " 
 At the time of its dedication , the San Francisco chapter of the National Safety Council said that the fountain " may be a safety hazard " . Opponents of the work handed out leaflets at the dedication of the fountain describing it as a " loathsome monstrosity " , a " howling obscenity " , an " obscene practical joke " , " idiotic rubble " , and a " pestiferous eyesore " . Art critic Alfred Frankenstein of the San Francisco Chronicle responded that " its very outrageousness and extravagance are part of its challenge " and therefore , it " can 't be all bad . " He added that the fountain was intended to be participated in rather than just observed . An early comment by architecture critic Allan <unk> , often repeated over the years , describes " technological excrescences " that had been " deposited by a giant concrete dog with square intestines " . Another pithy remark that gained press attention , from critic Lloyd Skinner , was that the fountain was " Stonehenge , unhinged , with plumbing troubles " . 
 Artists have been critical of the work as well . Sculptor Benny <unk> called it " a jumble of nothing " , artist Willard Cox likened it to " dynamited debris " , and sculptor Humphrey <unk> said it had been created by " a figure of deranged talent " . 
 The fountain has been called the " least revered modernist work of art " in San Francisco . Due to its size , it has been said that it " dominates the landscape " of the north side of Justin Herman Plaza . It has also been said that the design intent was " to mock and mirror the clumsy , double @-@ decked roadway " , referring to the elevated Embarcadero Freeway which separated the fountain from the waterfront at the time of construction . 
 = = 1987 U2 free concert = = 
 On the first leg of The Joshua Tree Tour by the rock band U2 in 1987 , they performed concerts at the Cow Palace just south of San Francisco on April 24 and April 25 , 1987 . On the third leg of the tour , concerts had been announced for November 14 and 15 , 1987 , across the San Francisco Bay , at the Oakland Coliseum . 
 On the morning of November 11 , 1987 , local radio stations announced that U2 would hold a free concert that day in Justin Herman Plaza , with the stage set up in front of the Vaillancourt Fountain . Within a few hours , a crowd estimated at 20 @,@ 000 people gathered in the plaza . The concert was jokingly called " Save the <unk> " , in reference to the 1987 stock market crash that had taken place three weeks earlier . 
 The band closed their nine @-@ song performance with their hit " Pride ( In the Name of Love ) " . During the instrumental portion in the middle of the song , Bono , lead singer of the band , climbed onto the sculpture and spray painted graffiti on it , reading " Rock N Roll Stops The Traffic " . Mayor Dianne Feinstein , who had been waging a city @-@ wide campaign against graffiti that had resulted in over 300 citations during the year , was angry and criticized Bono for defacing a San Francisco landmark . She said , " I am disappointed that a rock star who is supposed to be a role model for young people chose to vandalize the work of another artist . The unfortunate incident marred an otherwise wonderful rock concert . " Bono was issued a citation for misdemeanor malicious mischief . U2 manager Paul McGuinness said , " This is clearly not an act of vandalism . This act was clearly in the spirit of the artwork itself . " The numerous callers to Ronn Owens ' radio talk show on KGO @-@ AM were evenly split , with younger listeners defending the singer 's action and older ones not . Bono soon apologized , saying " I really do regret it . It was dumb . " The singer explained that he thought that he was honoring the artist 's work and that the artist had agreed , but later Bono realized that the city owned the fountain . The group covered the cost of removal of the graffiti . 
 Armand Vaillancourt flew from Quebec to California after the incident , and spoke in favor of Bono 's actions at U2 's Oakland performance several days later . Vaillancourt said , " Good for him . I want to shake his hand . People get excited about such a little thing . " The sculptor spray @-@ painted a slogan of his own on the band 's stage , " Stop the Madness " . 
 The episode received further attention when it was featured in U2 's 1988 documentary film Rattle and Hum . There , footage of it was shown over , and interspersed with , the band 's opening number , " All Along the Watchtower " , a song by Bob Dylan that had been a big hit for Jimi Hendrix . This has led some people to misidentify the song being played when the spray painting occurred . In any case , the fountain and plaza ended up on one U2 fan site 's list of recommended group @-@ related places in the U.S. to visit . 
 = = Proposals to demolish = = 
 On October 17 , 1989 the context of the Bay Area changed because the Bay Bridge collapsed , and so did the Cypress Street structure ( Interstate 880 ) . A section of the bridge collapsed , resulting in 1 death . While in West Oakland , the upper level of the freeway collapsed onto the lower level crushing cars and killing 42 people . 
 The freeway around Vaillancourt Fountain was damaged by the quake , but the fountain was not . On that day , the twisted concrete design of Vaillancourt Fountain took on an appearance of ill fated irony . The city decided to remove the freeway rather than repair the old infrastructure and proposed an idea of turning the Embarcadero into a wide , palm @-@ lined boulevard . 
 An architect hired by the city proposed demolition of the fountain , but no decision was made . In 2004 , San Francisco Supervisor Aaron Peskin renewed the call to demolish the fountain . The water supply to the fountain had been turned off for several years , because of California 's energy crisis of those years . Armand Vaillancourt immediately pledged that he would " fight like a devil to preserve that work " . Debra <unk> , a member of the San Francisco Arts Commission , said that " it succeeds as a work of art if it provokes dialogue and discussion . Art that engages the public has had a measure of success . " 
 It is a reminder of , and a link to , old San Francisco . It was one of the first public artworks in the Embarcadero area . It has not lost its context because the freeway or water has been removed . The removal of the freeway and water has changed the context of the fountain into a monument or memorial . 
 = No. 78 Wing RAAF = 
 No. 78 Wing is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) operational training wing , headquartered at RAAF Base Williamtown , New South Wales . It comprises Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons , operating the BAE Hawk 127 lead @-@ in fighter , and No. 278 Squadron , a technical training unit . No. 79 Squadron , located at RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , is responsible for converting new pilots to fast jets , while No. 76 Squadron at Williamtown conducts introductory fighter courses ; both units also fly support missions for the Royal Australian Navy and the Australian Army . 
 Formed as a fighter wing in November 1943 , No. 78 Wing comprised three flying units , Nos. 75 , 78 and 80 Squadrons , operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks in the South West Pacific theatre of World War II . After the war , it re @-@ equipped with P @-@ 51 Mustangs at Williamtown . During the early 1950s , the wing was based at Malta on garrison duties with the Royal Air Force , operating two squadrons of De Havilland Vampire jet fighters . Re @-@ equipped with CAC Sabres , it deployed with Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons to Malaya in 1958 – 59 , flying sorties against communist insurgents in the final years of the Emergency . In the 1960s , it was tasked with providing regional air defence during the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia , and supplied the equipment and personnel for the RAAF contingent operating from Ubon Air Base in Thailand . No. 78 Wing was disbanded in November 1967 , and re @-@ formed for its present role as an operational training wing in February 2000 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 No. 78 Wing was established on 24 November 1943 at Townsville , Queensland , under the command of Wing Commander ( later Group Captain ) W.D. Brookes . Along with No. 77 Wing , it came under the control of No. 10 Operational Group , a mobile strike force formed to support the Allied armies as they advanced in the South West Pacific theatre . No. 78 Wing 's flying units were originally to have consisted of No. 80 Squadron , operating P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighters , and Nos. 452 and 457 Squadrons , operating Spitfires . However the Spitfire squadrons could not be released from duty in the North @-@ Western Area as planned , and Nos. 75 and 78 Squadrons took their place , making the formation an all @-@ Kittyhawk force . No. 78 Wing flew combat air patrols and ground attack missions during Operation Reckless , the assault on Hollandia and Aitape , New Guinea , in April 1944 . By the middle of the year , the wing 's flying hours in New Guinea were consistently higher than those of its counterparts in the US Fifth Air Force . 
 When No. 10 Operational Group was re @-@ formed as the Australian First Tactical Air Force ( No. 1 TAF ) in October 1944 , No. 78 Wing constituted its fighter contingent along with the recently arrived No. 81 Wing , which also operated Kittyhawks . The relegation of No. 1 TAF to areas of operations bypassed by the main Allied thrust towards the Philippines and Japan led to poor morale in late 1944 and early 1945 . In April 1945 , the newly appointed Officer Commanding No. 78 Wing , Group Captain Wilfred Arthur , helped bring about the so @-@ called " Morotai Mutiny " in protest at the employment of Australian fighter squadrons for apparently worthless ground attack missions . A subsequent inquiry cleared the pilots involved , finding their motives in tendering their resignations to be sincere . Arthur retained command of No. 78 Wing for the invasion of Tarakan , which commenced on 1 May . Augmented by No. 452 Squadron 's Spitfires , the wing was a last @-@ minute replacement for No. 81 Wing — which had been delayed while moving its aircraft forward from Noemfoor and northern Australia — and had only ten days to prepare for the operation . In addition to its flying squadrons , No. 78 Wing 's complement included No. 114 Mobile Fighter Control Unit ( No. 114 MFCU ) , No. 29 Air Stores Park , No. 28 Medical Clearing Station , and No. 11 Repair and Servicing Unit . On 25 May 1945 , Arthur was succeeded by Wing Commander Alan Rawlinson . In June and July , the wing took part in the assaults on Labuan and Balikpapan , undertaking convoy escort in the former and , joined once more by No. 452 Squadron , ground attack missions and close support of the Australian 7th Division in the latter . During July it flew 858 sorties , dropping over 250 @,@ 000 pounds ( 110 @,@ 000 kg ) of bombs and expending almost 350 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition , for the loss of six aircraft and four pilots killed or missing . 
 = = = Cold War and after = = = 
 Following the end of hostilities , No. 78 Wing , comprising Nos. 75 , 78 and 80 Squadrons , and No. 114 MFCU , departed Tarakan for Australia . Arriving in December 1945 , the formation was based initially at Deniliquin , New South Wales , where its squadrons were reduced to cadre status , and where No. 80 Squadron was disbanded in July 1946 . The wing and its remaining squadrons relocated in May and June to RAAF Station Schofields , New South Wales , and then in August to RAAF Station Williamtown , where they re @-@ equipped with P @-@ 51 Mustangs . Rawlinson , now a group captain , completed his appointment as officer commanding in December 1946 . No. 378 ( Base ) Squadron was formed under the aegis of No. 78 Wing at Williamtown in June 1947 ; the base squadron was an administrative and logistical unit intended to make its wing self @-@ supporting and mobile , in case of deployment . No. 478 ( Maintenance ) Squadron formed the same month to take responsibility for all aircraft and equipment operated by No. 78 Wing . Nos. 75 and 78 Squadrons disbanded in March and April 1948 , respectively . Nos. 478 and 378 Squadrons also disbanded in April , the latter re @-@ forming as Station Headquarters at Williamtown . For the remainder of the year , No. 78 Wing 's aircraft and staff were gradually transferred to other units ; by December it had been reduced to a strength of four airmen and no officers , and was declared " non @-@ operative " . 
 The wing was re @-@ established in January 1949 , comprising Nos. 75 , 76 , and 478 Squadrons , and No. 114 MFCU . It became the first wing in the RAAF to equip with jet aircraft , when its flying units took delivery of De Havilland Vampire <unk> fighters between 1949 and 1951 ; it was also allocated Mustangs and CAC Wirraways . The wing subsequently re @-@ equipped with Vampire <unk> leased from the Royal Air Force , in exchange for Australia 's commitment to support RAF operations in the Middle East . Comprising Nos. 75 and 76 ( Fighter ) Squadrons , No. 378 ( Base ) Squadron and No. 478 ( Maintenance ) Squadron , No. 78 Wing was deployed to Malta on garrisoning duties under Wing Commander ( later Group Captain ) Brian Eaton . As the RAAF 's presence was essentially a symbolic gesture to demonstrate the Commonwealth 's solidarity in the midst of the Cold War , the combat squadrons were half @-@ strength only , operating eight aircraft each . In addition to the Vampires , two Gloster Meteor trainers were provided . Personnel departed Australia in July 1952 ; the posting overseas being a minimum of two years , families were permitted to make the journey as well . Although under the operational control of the RAF 's No. 205 Group , the wing was under no circumstances to be used in combat without the express permission of the Australian government . The airmen participated in many NATO exercises while stationed at Malta , and one year took first and second place in the Middle Eastern Gunnery Contest for the " <unk> " Mason Cup . Originally based at the Royal Navy 's <unk> Far airfield , in south @-@ east Malta , the wing moved in June 1953 to the centrally located RAF Station Ta <unk> , command of which was given to Group Captain Eaton . By this time , with plans afoot to form a Far East Strategic Reserve to contain communist aggression in South East Asia , the British and Australian governments began to discuss withdrawing No. 78 Wing from the Middle East when its planned two @-@ year garrison was complete . Eaton handed over command to Wing Commander Geoff Newstead in September 1954 . The wing flew its last sorties in December , and returned to Australia the following month . 
 Following its tour in the Mediterranean , No. 78 Wing was reorganised at Williamtown . On 16 March 1955 , the wing headquarters was re @-@ formed , and Nos. 76 and 378 Squadrons were disbanded . No. 75 Squadron remained with the wing , augmented on 21 March by Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons . On 1 April , No. 478 Squadron absorbed the maintenance functions of No. 77 Squadron . Nos. 75 and 77 Squadrons initially operated Meteors from Williamtown and No. 3 Squadron was based at RAAF Station Canberra , where it flew P @-@ 51D Mustangs . By November 1956 the wing had re @-@ equipped with CAC Sabres and all of its units were stationed at Williamtown . Group Captain Glen Cooper took command of the wing in 1957 , deploying it between October 1958 and February 1959 to RAAF Base Butterworth in Malaya , where its flying units consisted of Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons . No. 75 Squadron remained at Williamtown , subsequently joining No. 81 Wing with a re @-@ formed No. 76 Squadron . Among the first aircraft to wear the Air Force 's new " leaping kangaroo " roundel , the Butterworth @-@ based Sabres flew ground @-@ attack missions against communist guerrilla forces in the last stages of the Malayan Emergency . Ground support for the aircraft was provided by No. 478 ( Maintenance ) Squadron . Armed with Sidewinder missiles , the Sabres were responsible for regional air defence during the Konfrontasi between Indonesia and Malaysia from 1963 until 1966 , though no combat took place . Between October and December 1965 , a detachment of six Sabres , initially from No. 77 Squadron and later from No. 3 Squadron , was based at Labuan to conduct combat patrols over the Indonesian – Malaysian border on Borneo . In May 1962 , in response to communist insurgency in Laos , No. 79 Squadron was re @-@ formed in Singapore utilising No. 78 Wing aircraft and personnel . For the next six years this squadron operated from Ubon Air Base in Thailand and was manned by personnel from No. 78 Wing serving on six @-@ month to one @-@ year rotations . The RAAF was careful to not acknowledge any connection between the two units , however , as Malaysia had a policy of neutrality towards war in South East Asia . The squadron was disbanded in July 1968 . No. 75 Squadron , equipped with Dassault Mirage III supersonic fighters , relieved No. 3 Squadron at Butterworth in May 1967 . 
 No. 78 Wing was disbanded in November 1967 , and Nos. 75 , 77 and 478 Squadrons became independent units under the command of Headquarters RAAF Butterworth . No. 77 Squadron returned to Williamtown in 1969 for conversion to Mirages , and was replaced at Butterworth by the Mirage @-@ equipped No. 3 Squadron . In 1986 , No. 79 Squadron was re @-@ formed at Butterworth from No. 3 Squadron , disbanding two years later . No. 75 Squadron redeployed from Butterworth to RAAF Base Darwin , Northern Territory , in October 1983 , and No. 478 Squadron was disbanded the same month . No. 78 Wing re @-@ formed in February 2000 to take charge of all aircrew and technical training on the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet and the BAE Hawk 127 . Headquartered at Williamtown , it comprised No. 76 Squadron at Williamtown and No. 79 Squadron at RAAF Base Pearce , Western Australia , both operating Hawks , and No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit ( No. 2 OCU ) at Williamtown , operating Hornets . Each of these units had previously been part of No. 81 Wing . No. 79 Squadron 's role was to convert graduates of No. 2 Flying Training School at Pearce to fast jets , No. 76 Squadron 's to conduct lead @-@ in fighter courses , and No. 2 OCU 's to convert pilots to the Hornet fighter . In February 2002 , No. 78 Wing came under the control of the newly established Air Combat Group , formed by merging Tactical Fighter Group and Strike Reconnaissance Group . The merger expanded the wing 's responsibilities , as it took on lead @-@ in training for the General Dynamics F @-@ 111Cs of No. 82 Wing . In July 2003 a technical training and simulator unit , No. 278 Squadron , with detachments at RAAF Bases Amberley , Tindal and Pearce , was added to the wing 's complement . No. 2 OCU subsequently returned to the control of No. 81 Wing . As of 2012 , No. 78 Wing 's strength consisted of Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons , operating Hawks , and No. 278 Squadron . No. 79 Squadron continues to provide fast @-@ jet conversion for recently graduated pilots , as well as refresher courses , while No. 76 Squadron conducts introductory fighter courses preparatory to students undertaking conversion to " classic " Hornets at No. 2 OCU or F / A @-@ 18F Super Hornets with No. 6 Squadron at Amberley . Both squadrons also fly close support missions for the Australian Army and the Royal Australian Navy . 
 = HMS Defence ( 1907 ) = 
 HMS Defence was a Minotaur @-@ class armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century , the last armoured cruiser built for the Royal Navy . She was stationed in the Mediterranean when the First World War began and participated in the pursuit of the German battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau . The ship was transferred to the Grand Fleet in January 1915 and remained there for the rest of her career . 
 Defence was sunk on 31 May 1916 during the Battle of Jutland , the largest naval battle of the war . Escorting the main body of the Grand Fleet , the ship was fired upon by one German battlecruiser and four dreadnoughts as she attempted to engage a disabled German light cruiser . She was struck by two salvoes from the German ships that detonated her rear magazine . The fire from that explosion spread to the ship 's secondary magazines , which exploded in turn . There were no survivors . 
 = = Description = = 
 Defence displaced 14 @,@ 600 long tons ( 14 @,@ 800 t ) as built and 16 @,@ 630 long tons ( 16 @,@ 900 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 519 feet ( 158 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 74 feet 6 inches ( 22 @.@ 7 m ) and a mean draught of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . She was powered by a pair of four @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which developed a total of 27 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 20 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 23 knots ( 43 km / h ; 26 mph ) . The engines were powered by 24 Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers . The ship carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 060 long tons ( 2 @,@ 090 t ) of coal and an additional 750 long tons ( 760 t ) of fuel oil that was sprayed on the coal to increase its burn rate . At full capacity , she could steam for 8 @,@ 150 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 090 km ; 9 @,@ 380 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Defence was designed to carry 779 officers and men . 
 The ship 's main armament consisted of four BL 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch Mark X guns in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft . Her secondary armament of ten BL 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mark II guns were mounted amidships in single turrets . Anti @-@ torpedo boat defence was provided by sixteen QF 12 @-@ pounder ( three @-@ inch ) 18 @-@ cwt guns . Defence also mounted five submerged 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one of which was mounted in the stern . 
 The waterline belt consisted of 6 inches ( 152 mm ) of Krupp cemented armour roughly between the fore and aft 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch gun turrets , but was reduced in steps to three inches to the ends of the ship . The gun turrets and barbettes were protected by 6 – 8 in ( 152 – 203 mm ) of armour . The thickness of the lower deck was 1 @.@ 5 – 2 inches ( 38 – 51 mm ) . The armour of the conning tower was 10 inches ( 254 mm ) thick . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 Defence was ordered as part of the 1904 – 05 naval construction programme as the last of three Minotaur @-@ class armoured cruisers . She was laid down on 22 February 1905 at the Royal Dockyard in Pembroke Dock , Wales . She was christened on 27 April 1907 by Lady Cawdor and commissioned on 3 February 1909 at the cost of £ 1 @,@ 362 @,@ 970 . The ship was briefly assigned to the 5th Cruiser Squadron of the Home Fleet until she was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron when the Home Fleet reorganised on 23 March 1909 . Three months later Defence was reassigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron . She escorted the ocean liner RMS Medina in 1911 – 1912 while the latter ship served as the royal yacht for the newly crowned King George V 's trip to India to attend the Delhi Durbar . After the ship returned to Plymouth in early 1912 , Defence was transferred to the China Station , where she remained until December when she was ordered to rejoin the 1st Cruiser Squadron in the Mediterranean as flagship . 
 At the start of the First World War , she was involved in the pursuit of the German warships Goeben and Breslau , but Rear @-@ Admiral Ernest Troubridge decided not to engage Goeben due to the latter 's more powerful guns , heavier armour and faster speed . She then blockaded the German ships inside the Dardanelles until the ship was ordered on 10 September to the South Atlantic to take part in the hunt for Admiral Graf von Spee 's East Asia Squadron . The order was cancelled on 14 September when it became clear that the German squadron was still in the Eastern Pacific and Defence returned to the Dardanelles . The Admiralty again ordered the ship to the South Atlantic in October to join Rear @-@ Admiral Christopher Cradock 's squadron searching for the German ships . Defence , however , had only reached Montevideo , Uruguay by 3 November 1914 when she received word that most of Admiral Cradock 's squadron had been destroyed two days previously at the Battle of Coronel . The ship rendezvoused with the battlecruisers HMS Inflexible and HMS Invincible later that month and transferred her long @-@ range radio equipment to Invincible before sailing to South Africa to escort a troop convoy to Great Britain . Defence departed Table Bay , Cape Town on 8 December and rejoined the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Grand Fleet as its flagship upon her arrival . 
 Defence received a QF 12 @-@ pounder ( 3 @-@ inch ) 12 cwt anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun and a QF 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ) AA gun in 1915 – 16 . The 12 @-@ pounder gun was mounted on the aft superstructure and the 3 @-@ pounder on the quarterdeck at the extreme rear . 
 During the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 , she was the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Robert Arbuthnot , leading the First Cruiser Squadron . The squadron formed the starboard flank of the cruiser screen , ahead of the main body of the Grand Fleet . Defence was just to the right of the centre of the line . At 5 : 47 p.m. , Defence , and HMS Warrior , the leading two ships of the squadron , spotted the German II Scouting Group and opened fire . Their shells fell short and the two ships turned to port in pursuit , cutting in front of the battlecruiser HMS Lion , which was forced to turn away to avoid a collision . Shortly afterwards , they spotted the disabled German light cruiser SMS Wiesbaden and closed to engage . When the two ships reached a range of 5 @,@ 500 yards ( 5 @,@ 000 m ) from Wiesbaden they were spotted in turn at 6 : 05 by the German battlecruiser SMS Derfflinger and four battleships who were less than 8 @,@ 000 yards ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) away . The fire from the German ships was heavy and Defence was hit by two salvoes from the German ships that caused the aft 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch magazine to explode . The resulting fire spread via the ammunition passages to the adjacent 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch magazines which detonated in turn . The ship exploded at 6 : 20 with the loss of all men on board ; between 893 and 903 men were killed . 
 = = Defence today = = 
 At the time , it was believed that Defence had been reduced to fragments by the explosion , but the wreck was discovered in mid @-@ 1984 by Clive Cussler and a NUMA survey of the North Sea and English Channel at coordinates 56 ° 58 ′ 02 ″ N 05 ° 49 ′ 50 ″ E. It was dived upon in 2001 by a team led by nautical archaeologist Innes McCartney and found to be largely intact , despite the violence of her sinking . Defence , along with the other Jutland wrecks , was belatedly declared a protected place under the Protection of Military Remains Act 1986 , to discourage further damage to the resting place of approximately 900 men . 
 = Maya ( M.I.A. album ) = 
 Maya ( stylised as <unk> Λ Y Λ ) is the third studio album by English recording artist M.I.A. , released on 7 July 2010 on her own label , N.E.E.T. Recordings , through XL Recordings and Interscope Records . Songwriting and production for the album were primarily handled by M.I.A. , Blaqstarr and Rusko . M.I.A. ' s long @-@ time associates Diplo , Switch and her brother Sugu Arulpragasam also worked on the album , which was mainly composed and recorded at M.I.A. ' s house in Los Angeles . 
 The album 's tracks centre on the theme of information politics and are intended to evoke what M.I.A. called a " digital ruckus " . Elements of industrial music were incorporated into M.I.A. ' s sound for the first time . A deluxe edition was released simultaneously , featuring four bonus tracks . Critics ' opinions of the album were generally favourable although divided , with both its musical style and lyrical content each attracting praise and criticism . In its first week of release , the album entered the UK Albums Chart at number 21 , becoming her highest @-@ charting album in the UK . It also became her highest @-@ charting album in the US , reaching number nine on the Billboard 200 , and debuted in the top 10 in Finland , Norway , Greece and Canada . 
 M.I.A. promoted the album by releasing a series of tracks online , including " XXXO " , " It Takes a Muscle " and " Born Free " , which was accompanied by a short film @-@ music video , which generated controversy due to its graphic imagery . She also performed at music festivals in the US and Europe to coincide with the album 's release . During her promotion of the album , she became embroiled in a dispute with Lynn Hirschberg of The New York Times . 
 = = Composition and recording = = 
 English @-@ Tamil musician M.I.A. ( Mathangi " Maya " Arulpragasam ) released her second album Kala in 2007 , which achieved widespread critical acclaim , and was certified gold in the United States and silver in the United Kingdom . Six months after giving birth to her son <unk> in February 2009 , she began composing and recording her third studio album in a home studio section of the Los Angeles house she had bought with her partner Ben Bronfman . She used instruments such as the portable dynamic @-@ phrase synthesizer Korg <unk> to compose . She took the beat machine and began recording atop Mayan pyramids in Mexico . Much of the work on the album was undertaken at her house in Los Angeles , in what she called a " commune environment " , before it was completed in a rented studio in Hawaii . She collaborated with writer @-@ producer Blaqstarr because , in her opinion , " he simply makes good music " . M.I.A. ' s collaboration with Derek E. Miller of Sleigh Bells on the track " Meds and Feds " prompted her subsequent signing of the band to her label N.E.E.T. , and according to Miller , this experience gave him the confidence to record the band 's debut album Treats . 
 Her creative partnership with the comparatively unknown Rusko grew from a sense of frustration at what she saw as her now more mainstream associates suggesting sub @-@ standard tracks due to their busy schedules . Diplo worked on the track " Tell Me Why " , but at a studio in Santa Monica rather than at the house . He claimed in an interview that , following the break @-@ up of his personal relationship with M.I.A. some years earlier , he was not allowed to visit the house because " her boyfriend really hates me " . 
 Tracks for the album were whittled down from recording sessions lasting up to 30 hours . Producer Rusko , who played guitar and piano on the album , described the pair getting " carried away " in the studio , appreciating the " mad distorted and hectic " sound they were able to create . Rusko said " She 's got a kid , a little one year old baby , and we recorded his heart beat . We 'd just think of crazy ideas " . Rusko has described M.I.A. as the best artist he has ever worked with , saying that she had " been the most creative and I really had a good time making music with her " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 M.I.A. called the new project " schizophrenic " , and spoke of the Internet inspiration that could be found in the songs and the artwork . She also said that the album centred on her " not being able to leave [ Los Angeles ] for 18 months " and feeling " disconnected " . She summed up the album 's main theme as information politics . During the recording of the album , she spoke of the combined effects that news corporations and Google have on news and data collection , while stressing the need for alternative news sources that she felt her son 's generation would need to ascertain truth . Maya was made to be " so uncomfortably weird and wrong that people begin to exercise their critical @-@ thinking muscles " . M.I.A. said " You can Google ' Sri Lanka ' and it doesn 't come up that all these people have been murdered or bombed , it 's ' Come to Sri Lanka on vacation , there are beautiful beaches ' ... you 're not gonna get the truth till you hit like , page 56 , and it 's my and your responsibility to pass on the information that it 's not easy anymore " . Following these comments , M.I.A. received death threats directed at her and her son , which she also cited as an influence on the songs on the album . She summed up the album as a mixture of " babies , death , destruction and powerlessness " . The singer revealed that going into recording the album , she had still not accepted that she was a musician , saying " I 'm still in denial , listening to too much Destiny 's Child " . With Maya , she stated " I was happy being the retarded cousin of rap ... Now I 'm the retarded cousin of singing . " 
 M.I.A. opted to sing , as opposed to rap , on several tracks on the album , telling Rolling Stone in early 2010 that she wished to produce something different from her previous album , which had " more emphasis on production " . In a January 2010 interview with NME she spoke of being inspired by the film Food , Inc. and described the album as being about " exploring our faults and flaws " and being proud of them . The closing track , " Space " , which was reportedly recorded using an iPhone app , is a ballad which Mikael Wood , writing in Billboard , described as " dreamy " and " sound [ ing ] like a Sega Genesis practicing its pillow talk " . In contrast , Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune described " Lovalot " as sounding " like it was recorded in a dank alley , the singer 's voice reverberating amid percussion that sounds like doors creaking and rats scurrying across garbage cans " . " XXXO " draws its inspiration from M.I.A. ' s " cheesy pop side " , and is based on the theme of the creation of a sex symbol . " Teqkilla " is the only track to address her relationship with Bronfman , through a reference to Seagram , the company owned by his family . " It Takes a Muscle " is a cover version of a track originally recorded in 1982 by Dutch group Spectral Display , and is performed in a reggae style . The opening track " The Message " , featuring a male lead vocalist , parodies the words of the traditional song " Dem Bones " to link Google to " the government " . Kitty Empire wrote in The Observer that these conspiratorial government connections to Google and the thoughts of <unk> <unk> , the Russian teenager who bombed Moscow 's tube system in revenge for the death of her husband , were inner @-@ world issues pondered in " Lovalot " with " a mixture of nonsense rhyme , militant posturing and pop @-@ cultural free @-@ flow ; her London glottal stop mischievously turns ' I love a lot ' into ' I love Allah ' " . Ann Powers in the Los Angeles Times said that " M.I.A. turns a call to action into a scared girl 's nervous tic . Synths click out a jittery , jagged background . The song doesn 't justify anything , but it reminds us that there is a person behind every lit fuse " . Powers also commented on how " Born Free " mixed the boasting style often found in hip hop music with lines depicting the lives of those enduring poverty and persecution . " <unk> " , a track found only on the deluxe edition of the album , is written from the point of view of an abused but tough teenager , whom critic Robert Christgau said could be the " kid @-@ sister @-@ in @-@ metaphor " of the swaggering persona adopted by M.I.A. on the track " Steppin Up " . 
 Samples used on the album were taken from artists as diverse as the electronic duo Suicide and gospel choir the Alabama Sacred Harp Singers . " Internet Connection " , one of four bonus tracks on the deluxe edition of the album , was recorded in collaboration with a group of Filipino Verizon workers . M.I.A. described the sound and imagery of the album as capturing a " digital ruckus " , adding that " so many of us have become typists and voyeurs " . We need a digital <unk> like we 've never seen , harder than how people were doing it in the punk era . We need that energy , but digitally " . Julianne Escobedo Shepherd of The Fader commented on the increasingly industrial feel of the tracks made available prior to the album 's release , a style which had not previously been incorporated into her music . M.I.A. herself picked out " Steppin Up " , " Space " and " Teqkilla " as her favourite tracks on the album . She said that she contemplated using only the sound of drills as the backing for " Steppin Up " , but concluded that this was " too experimental " an approach . 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 The album was originally set to be released on 29 June 2010 , but in May M.I.A. ' s record label announced a new release date of 13 July . In late April , the artist posted a <unk> of the track listing for the new album . She also commented that at the time she was " open to suggestions " regarding the album 's title . Two weeks later , a blog posting on her record label 's official website revealed that the album would be entitled / \ / \ / \ Y / \ , the punctuation marks spelling Maya , M.I.A. ' s own forename . The title follows on from previous albums named after her father ( 2005 's Arular ) and mother ( 2007 's Kala ) . Some reviewers used the stylised title while others did not . M.I.A. ' s official Myspace page uses both titles . The album was released in conventional physical and digital formats and as an iTunes LP . 
 The album 's cover features the singer 's face almost completely hidden by YouTube player bars . MTV 's Kyle Anderson described the cover , which was previewed in June 2010 , as " a typically busy , trippy , disorienting piece of art " and speculated that it might be " a statement about 21st century privacy " . Additional art direction for the album was provided by Aaron Parsons . M.I.A. used her mother 's Tamil <unk> to find a wedding photographer to provide images for the album . Photographers for the album were Ravi <unk> , M.I.A. and Jamie Martinez . Elements of the artwork had previously been used in one of a series of billboard images , all designed by musicians , which were projected onto landmarks in London by a guerrilla project called <unk> during the 2010 British general election . The deluxe edition of the album features a lenticular slipcase . Music website Prefix listed it as one of the 10 worst album covers of 2010 , likening it to a " child 's first computer @-@ class @-@ assignment " . 
 When questioned about the difficulty of finding her album title on search engines such as Google , she noted that she chose to use forward slashes and backward slashes due to their ease at being typed and because she liked the way the album title looked on music players such as iTunes . She also suggested that it was a deliberate attempt to avoid detection by internet search engines . The Guardian 's Sian Rowe commented that M.I.A. ' s deliberate " shrinking away from a mainstream audience " by the use of difficult , <unk> symbols was part of a growing new underground scene perhaps trying to create a " generation gap " , where only " the youngest and the most enthusiastic " would seek out such band names by reading the right online sources . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In January 2010 , M.I.A. posted a video clip on Twitter , which featured a new song but revealed no information about it other than the heading " <unk> space for ol dat I see " ( sic ) . The following day her publicist confirmed that the track was entitled " Space Odyssey " and had been produced in collaboration with Rusko to protest a travel piece about Sri Lanka printed in The New York Times . The track appears on the new album under the revised title " Space " . The same month , she filmed a short film for the song " Born Free " . At the end of April the track was released as a promotional single , and the short film accompanying the song was released . The film , directed by Romain Gavras , depicts a military unit rounding up red @-@ headed young men who are then shot or forced to run across a minefield . The film , which also features nudity and scenes of drug use , caused widespread controversy and was either removed or labelled with an age restriction on YouTube . In the weeks following the release of the film , M.I.A. was the most blogged about artist on the Internet , according to MP3 blog aggregator The Hype Machine . M.I.A. found the controversy " ridiculous " , saying that videos of real @-@ life executions had not generated as much controversy as her video . In the run @-@ up to the album 's release , " XXXO " , which Entertainment Weekly described as the " first official single " from the forthcoming album , " Steppin Up " , " Teqkilla " and " It Takes a Muscle " were released online . On 6 July 2010 she made the entire album available via her Myspace page . In December , " It Takes a Muscle " was released as a two @-@ track promotional single . 
 The new album was publicised during Jay @-@ Z 's performance at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April , when a blimp flew across the venue announcing that M.I.A. ' s new album would be released on 29 June 2010 . M.I.A. promoted the album with a series of appearances at music festivals , including the Hard festival in New York and The Big Chill in Herefordshire . Her performance at the latter was cut short due to a stage invasion by fans . She also performed at the Flow Festival in Finland , where she was joined onstage by Derek E. Miller playing guitar during her performance of " Meds and Feds " , and the <unk> in Lokeren , Flanders , Belgium , where her performance drew a crowd of 13 @,@ 500 , the biggest of the 10 @-@ day music festival . In September she announced a tour that would last until the end of the year . 
 M.I.A. also promoted the album with an appearance on the " Late Show with David Letterman " , during which she performed " Born Free " with Martin Rev of Suicide playing keyboards , backed by a group of dancers styled to look like M.I.A. In November 2010 she appeared on the British television show Later ... with Jools Holland , performing " Born Free " and " It Takes a Muscle " , the latter with members of The Specials . While promoting the album , M.I.A. became involved in a dispute with Lynn Hirschberg of The New York Times , who interviewed her in March 2010 and whose resulting article portrayed the singer as pretentious and attention seeking . In response , M.I.A. posted Hirschberg 's telephone number on her Twitter page and later uploaded her own audio recording of the interview , highlighting the discrepancies between what she said and what was reported . The piece was criticised for its yellow journalism by some , however M.I.A. received varying degrees of support and criticism for the ensuing fallout from the media . Benjamin Boles wrote in Now that , while Hirschberg 's piece came across as a " vicious ... character assassination " , M.I.A 's subsequent actions were " childish " and made her " the laughing stock of the internet " . The paper later printed a correction on the story , acknowledging that some quotes had been taken out of context . The incident prompted Boots Riley of the band Street Sweeper Social Club to comment on how artists had access to media that allowed writers to be held accountable and that M.I.A. ' s move was " brilliant " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Maya received moderately positive reviews from critics . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly called the album " surely the year 's most divisive major @-@ label release " . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 based on reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 68 based on 41 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Reviews of the album began to appear a month before its release after the album leaked in low quality onto the internet . Charles Aaron , writing in Spin , gave the album four and a half out of five stars , his review deeming the song " Lovalot " her " riskiest gambit yet " . Matthew Bennett of Clash gave a similar score , calling it a " towering work " . Mojo writer Roy Wilkinson called it a " startling fusillade of to @-@ the @-@ moon pop music " . Writing for the BBC Online , Matthew Bennett characterised the album as " loud , proud , and taking no prisoners " and also praised the album 's lighter tracks , such as " Teqkilla " , which he called " enjoyably demented but utterly catchy " . Rolling Stone writer Rob Sheffield said the album was M.I.A. ' s " most aggressive , confrontational and passionate yet " , praising her " voracious ear for alarms , sirens , explosions , turning every jolt into a breakbeat " and her consequent lyrics as " expansive " . Los Angeles Times writer Ann Powers commended the album as " an attempt by an artist who 's defined herself through opposition to engage with the system that she has entered , for better or worse , and to still remain recognizable to herself " characterising Maya 's foregrounded ideas as " a struggle worthy of a revolutionary " . In his consumer guide for MSN Music , critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A rating and complimented its " beats and the spunky , shape @-@ shifting , stubbornly political , nouveau riche bundle of nerves who holds them together " . 
 Other critics were not as complimentary towards the album . Charlotte Heathcote of British newspaper the Daily Express said that , while M.I.A. could " still lay claim to being one of our most imaginative , uncompromising artists " , there were " only glimmers of brilliance " on the album . Chicago Tribune writer Greg Kot gave the album two and a half out of four stars and expressed a mixed response towards M.I.A. ' s " [ embracing ] pop more fervently than ever . Entertainment Weekly 's Leah Greenblatt was critical of the album , stating that it sounded " murky and almost <unk> discordant , as if the album has been submerged underwater and then set upon by an arsenal of exceptionally peeved power tools " . She went on to state that nothing on the album sounded " truly vital " , or as revolutionary as M.I.A. wanted the public to believe . Stephen <unk> , writing in Uncut , described the album as " anti @-@ climactic " and " self @-@ satisfied " and said that it suffered from " diminished horizons " . Mehan Jayasuriya of PopMatters noted M.I.A. ' s " self @-@ aggrandizing " as a weakness , adding that Maya lacks " the focus and confidence of M.I.A. ' s previous albums " . Jesse Cataldo of Slant Magazine noted that the album " has the feel of a vanity project " and wrote " It may be an above @-@ average album , but its aesthetic matches her persona only at its shallowest levels , in the thinness of its ideas and the often @-@ forceful ugliness of its message " . Chris Richard of The Washington Post called it " a disorienting mix of industrial clatter and digital slush " and noted " there isn 't much to sing along to " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In December 2010 , the NME named " XXXO " and " Born Free " the number two and number 11 best tracks of the year respectively . Maya appeared in a number of magazines ' lists of the best albums of the year . The album was placed at number five on the " 2010 Pitchfork Readers Poll " list of the " Most Underrated Album " of the year . Spin placed Maya at number eight in its list of the best releases of 2010 , and Rolling Stone listed it at number 19 in its countdown . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Maya debuted at number 21 on the UK Albums Chart on first @-@ week sales of 7 @,@ 138 copies , 18 places higher than the peak position achieved by Kala , immediately making it M.I.A. ' s highest @-@ charting album in the UK . The following week it dropped out of the top 40 . It also charted in a number of other European countries , reaching the top 10 in Finland , Greece and Norway . In the United States , it debuted at number nine on the Billboard 200 , nine places higher than the peak position achieved by Kala , although it sold only 28 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , compared with the 29 @,@ 000 which the earlier album sold in the same period . Maya fell to number 34 in its second week on the chart , selling 11 @,@ 000 copies . As of September 2013 , the album had sold 99 @,@ 000 copies in the US . The album also topped Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Albums chart and reached the top five on two of the magazine 's other charts . Maya also entered the top 10 on the Canadian Albums Chart . The single " XXXO " reached the top 40 in Spain and the UK , and " Teqkilla " reached number 93 on the Canadian Hot 100 on digital downloads alone . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " Lovalot " incorporates elements of " I Said It " by Opal . 
 " It Takes a Muscle " is a cover of " It Takes a Muscle to Fall in Love " by Spectral Display . 
 " Born Free " contains a sample from " Ghost Rider " by Suicide . 
