 = = Geographic divisions = = 
 A concurrent use registration can be very detailed in the geographic divisions laid down . It may , for example , allow one party to own the right to use a mark within a fifty @-@ mile radius around a handful of selected cities or counties , while the other party owns the right to use the same mark everywhere else in the country . It may even divide the rights to use a mark within a particular city by reference to roads or other landmarks in that city . 
 The TTAB succinctly describes its territorial analysis in Weiner King , Inc. v. Wiener King Corp. : 
 The TTAB has found that in concurrent use proceedings , " [ t ] he area for which registration is sought is usually more extensive than the area in which applicant is actually using the mark . " " As a general rule , a prior user of a mark is entitled to a registration covering the entire United States limited only to the extent that the subsequent user can establish that no likelihood of confusion exists and that it has concurrent rights in its actual area of use , plus its area of natural expansion . " 
 Between lawful concurrent users of the same mark in geographically separate markets , the senior registrant has the right to maintain his registration for at least those market areas in which it is using the mark . However , the senior registrant does not always maintain the right to use the mark in territories not yet occupied by either party . In Pinocchio 's Pizza , for example , the first applicant ( but the junior user of the mark in commerce ) owned one small restaurant in Maryland and had expressed no plans for expansion , while the second applicant ( but senior user of the mark in commerce ) owned multiple restaurants in Texas and was planning aggressive expansion . The TTAB held that " purpose of the statute is best served by granting [ the second ] applicant a registration for the entire United States except for registrant ’ s trading area . " The TTAB therefore restricted the first applicant ’ s registration to permit exclusive use in Maryland , and within 50 miles of the first applicant ’ s restaurant in areas crossing into other states . 
 Furthermore , although the general rule provides that the entire United States should be covered by the respective registrations , it is permissible for parties to a proceeding to resolve the issue of territorial rights in a way that leaves some part of the country uncovered entirely . In a contested proceeding In re Beatrice Foods Co . , the court held that the senior user of a mark was entitled to a registration covering the entire United States , outside of the junior user 's area of actual use . However , the court went on to say : 
 The few courts that have considered the antitrust implications of concurrent use registration have determined that it does not raise any violation of antitrust laws . Although it is considered a violation of such laws for companies to agree to divide up geographic territories for the sale of goods , concurrent use agreements dividing up trademark territories are specifically provided for by Congress . Furthermore , even with such an agreement in place , a company can still sell competing products in the trademark territory of another company , so long as the intruding party sells that product under a different mark . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The availability of concurrent use registration is not commonly invoked , even where the applicant might stand an excellent chance of demonstrating the existence of geographically distinct markets . Proceedings before the TTAB , like proceedings before any court , can be expensive and time @-@ consuming . A contested concurrent use proceeding may last for two or three years before the resolution of a claim , and the outcome will remain uncertain until the end . The outcome of the proceeding will then be subject to an appeal before the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit , or to a collateral challenge in a United States District Court . 
 Perhaps the most notable instance of a continuing concurrent use registration is that of Holiday Inn . Although the national chain owns numerous trademark registrations , there is one registration for an unrelated " Holiday Inn " which is " restricted to the area comprising the town of Myrtle Beach , S.C. " . The Myrtle Beach hotel had used that name since the 1940s , and initiated a concurrent use proceeding in 1970 . While this proceeding was pending , the national chain commenced an action in the United States District Court . The concurrent use proceeding was suspended during the pendency of the federal litigation , which resulted in a judgment in 1973 authorizing the Myrtle Beach hotel to use a distinctive , <unk> Holiday Inn service mark within the Town of Myrtle Beach . The concurrent use proceeding resumed , and in 1976 , the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals awarded the Myrtle Beach hotel a federal trademark registration . 
 Even where a concurrent use registration is issued , the parties may eventually come to an agreement under which one party will surrender its registration . In some instances , a party will simply happen to cease using the mark in favor of a new brand name , and the registration will lapse . In other cases , the larger company will eventually acquire the smaller . 
 A final note is that concurrent use registration was devised before the advent of the Internet , which serves to diminish geographic distinctions between sellers . John L. Welch , a Harvard @-@ educated attorney who writes a well @-@ known blog on the proceedings of the TTAB , has noted that " vigorously contested proceedings may well make it clear that concurrent use registrations are , in this Internet Age , a dying breed " . 
 = TV Everywhere = 
 TV Everywhere ( also known as authenticated streaming or authenticated video on @-@ demand ) refers to a business model wherein access to streaming video content from a television channel requires users to " authenticate " themselves as current subscribers to the channel , via an account provided by their participating pay television provider , in order to access the content . 
 Under the model , broadcasters offer their customers the ability to access content from their channels through internet @-@ based services and mobile apps — either live or on @-@ demand , as part of their subscription to the service . Time Warner Cable first proposed the concept in 2009 ; in 2010 , many television providers and networks began to roll out TV Everywhere services for their subscribers , including major networks such as TBS and TNT ( whose owner was an early supporter of the concept ) , ESPN , and HBO among others . Broadcast television networks also began to adopt TV Everywhere restrictions for their online content . 
 Although providers have touted the advantages of being able to access content across multiple platforms ( including on the internet , and on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets ) as part of their television subscription , TV Everywhere services have been criticized for being difficult for end @-@ users to set up , while media activists have criticized the concept for being a paywall that extends the existing oligarchy of the subscription television industry to the internet , and considering it to be collusion against " cord cutters " — those who drop cable and satellite entirely in favor of accessing content via terrestrial television , the internet , and subscription video on demand ( SVOD ) services . 
 = = Rationale = = 
 TV Everywhere services were developed in an attempt to compete with the market trend of " cord cutting " , where consumers drop traditional pay television subscriptions in favor of accessing TV content exclusively through over @-@ the @-@ air television and / or online on @-@ demand services , including Hulu , Netflix , YouTube , and other sources . <unk> streaming and video on @-@ demand services allow traditional television providers to directly compete with these competitors , and add value to existing television subscriptions in an effort to retain subscribers . 
 In particular , broadcasters and providers have emphasized the use of TV Everywhere services to allow multi @-@ platform access to their content , on devices such as personal computers , smartphones , tablets , and video game consoles . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 ESPN first introduced a TV Everywhere @-@ like concept with ESPN360 , a service which allowed users to stream sports programming from its networks either live or on @-@ demand through a website . However , access to ESPN360 was restricted to the users of internet service providers who had negotiated deals with ESPN to offer the service ; a model closer in nature to cable television carriage . Similar tactics were soon used by several other channels , such as NFL Network ( who used the technique to restrict access to its Game Extra service for Thursday Night Football ) and Epix . David <unk> , ESPN 's executive vice president for affiliate sales and marketing , foresaw a future in the model , believing that access to exclusive content would soon play a greater role in competition between high @-@ speed internet providers . Although the model was deemed a violation of the principles of net neutrality by critics , the FCC 's policies on net neutrality only apply to ISPs and not content providers . 
 = = = Introduction and adoption = = = 
 In 2009 , Time Warner Cable announced an initiative known as TV Everywhere , a set of principles which were " designed to serve as a framework to facilitate deployment of online television content in a way that is consumer friendly , pro @-@ competitive . " The concept would enable users of their respective cable television services to access live and on @-@ demand online content from channels that they subscribe to by using an account @-@ based authentication system . TWC CEO Jeffrey <unk> believed that the TV Everywhere principles were " good concepts " that are " likely to be the general direction for all TV networks and all the distribution connections that are out there . " That summer , both TWC and Comcast began trials of services based on the system ; Turner Broadcasting was an early supporter of the system , providing access to TBS and TNT content as part of the trials . Comcast officially launched a public beta of its TV Everywhere @-@ based portal , Xfinity Fancast , in December 2009 for all double @-@ play television and internet customers . Afterwards , other providers began to follow suit . 
 In 2010 , broadcasters and television providers began a wider roll @-@ out of TV Everywhere @-@ based services ; for the 2010 Winter Olympics , NBC Sports offered live and video on @-@ demand access to events throughout the Games that required users to authenticate for access . Also in February , HBO launched HBO Go , a video on demand service exclusive to HBO subscribers on participating providers . In September 2010 , Disney would begin launching an array of TV Everywhere @-@ based services , including WatchESPN ( allowing users to stream ESPN 's entire suite of channels ) , accompanied by the later launches of similar " Watch " services for Disney Channel and Disney XD . 
 In August 2011 , Fox became the first over @-@ the @-@ air network to restrict on @-@ demand access with a TV Everywhere @-@ based system ; " next day " on @-@ demand episodes ( either through its website or Hulu , itself a joint venture between Fox , NBC , and ABC at the time ) would only be available online to users authenticating themselves as a subscriber to a cable or satellite provider , or those who subscribe to the Hulu Plus service . All other users would be subject to an 8 @-@ day delay . On September 1 , 2011 , fellow Fox property Big Ten Network ( a college sports network dedicated to the Big Ten Conference , operated in partnership with Fox Sports ) also launched a TV Everywhere service known as <unk> . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 Matt Strauss , Comcast senior vice president of digital and emerging platforms , considered the 2012 Summer Olympics to be a " watershed " event for TV Everywhere services ; NBCUniversal announced that a total of nearly 10 million authenticated devices accessed its online coverage during the Games across both the <unk> site and NBC Olympics Live Extra app ; in particular , parent company Comcast accounted for 3 @.@ 3 million devices from 1 @.@ 5 million users . Following the Games , the NBC Olympics Live Extra app was re @-@ launched as NBC Sports Live Extra , serving as a general TV Everywhere app for NBC Sports . TV Everywhere services also began to appear in Canada , with the Canadian launch of HBO Go in 2012 , and the 2013 announcement of TV Everywhere services from Bell Media ( beginning with Bravo Go , and also including CTV Go and TSN Go ) and Shaw Media ( beginning with Global ) . The majority of Canadian broadcasters are vertically integrated ; both Bell and Shaw operate internet service providers and national satellite television services . 
 In May 2013 , ABC released its Watch ABC mobile app , which allows viewers on participating providers to access live streams from participating ABC affiliates . In December 2013 , ABC confirmed that it would impose a similar restriction to Fox for " next day " on @-@ demand episodes beginning on January 6 , 2014 , with 7 @-@ day exclusivity for authenticated users and Hulu Plus subscribers . NBC unveiled its own plans for a similar TV Everywhere app to its affiliate board in April 2014 . 
 In November 2015 , after negotiations surrounding revenue sharing and infrastructural mandates ( including a proposed requirement that the games only be available through the league 's existing apps ) , Major League Baseball reached a three @-@ year deal with Fox to allow it to offer in @-@ market online streaming on Fox Sports Go ( though streamed using MLB Advanced Media infrastructure ) for the 16 teams that it holds regional rights to through the Fox Sports Networks division . In December 2015 , Discovery Communications , a long hold @-@ out on the concept , launched Discovery Go , a centralized TV Everywhere service and mobile app for Discovery Channel , TLC , as well as sister networks American Heroes Channel , Animal Planet , Destination America , Discovery Life , Investigation Discovery , Science Channel , and Velocity . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The TV Everywhere concept has been met with mixed reception . Some broadcasters were initially hesitant to introduce TV Everywhere services , with concerns that they might affect advertising revenue and not be adequately counted by Nielsen ratings . Media activists have criticized the system for protecting the existing closed , <unk> oligarchy of multichannel television by tying internet @-@ based content to traditional television providers , thus harming competitors that are purely internet @-@ based . Public Knowledge believed that " under the ' TV Everywhere ' plan , no other program distributors would be able to emerge , and no consumers will be able to ' cut the cord ' because they find what they want online . As a result , consumers will be the losers . " 
 In 2010 , Free Press released a report entitled " TV Nowhere : How the Cable Industry Is <unk> to Kill Online TV " , contending that " under TV Everywhere , traditional cable TV distributors will continue to serve only consumers within their current geographically limited footprints , not competing with providers in other areas " and that " by tying programming to local cable subscriptions , while denying content to pure online TV distributors , the incumbent industry hopes to artificially reproduce the lack of competition for TV distribution to which it is accustomed , based on geographical fiefdoms and turf . " The National Cable and Telecommunications Association ( NCTA ) denied many of Free Press ' arguments , stating that " [ TV Everywhere ] is an effort to ensure more content than ever is distributed over the Internet at no extra charge to consumers . " On the other hand , Songwriters Guild of America president Rick Carnes praised the TV Everywhere concept and other recent developments for helping to provide easier , legal access to premium content online . 
 In July 2014 , <unk> analyst Richard Greenfield criticized the video on demand services offered through TV Everywhere systems for being ad @-@ supported . In examples from FX and TNT , he noticed that ads often repeated , and that in TNT 's case , its version of an episode of The Last Ship included 20 minutes of unskippable ads across 45 minutes of programming . In conclusion , he contended that viewers would rather wait for programs to appear on commercial @-@ free SVOD services rather than use TV Everywhere services . 
 = = = Viewer awareness = = = 
 Despite efforts by broadcasters to educate viewers on TV Everywhere services and how to utilize them ( including Fox , who featured a promotional video with Jane Lynch as her Glee character Sue Sylvester , describing the process as being less painful than waterboarding ) , critics and end @-@ users criticized the registration and authentication processes for being frustrating and difficult . In response , providers took steps to improve their user experiences ; Disney reported that use of its TV Everywhere services increased after it simply changed its process to use the term " verify " instead of " authenticate " , Comcast and Cablevision introduced systems that automatically verify users with their residential gateways , and <unk> ( a provider of authentication platforms used by providers ) added the ability for users to link their provider account to a social network login , such as Facebook or Twitter . 
 For the 2012 Summer Olympics and 2014 Winter Olympics , NBC worked closer with providers to help educate users , and produced customized marketing materials and video tutorials featuring Carson Daly ( 2012 ) and Ryan Seacrest ( 2014 ) to help inform users . As an incentive , NBC also allowed authenticated users to enter a sweepstakes to win a trip to London ( 2012 ) or Rio de Janeiro ( 2014 ) . Still , dissatisfaction with the system and the quality of NBC 's overall coverage led to an increase in the use of virtual private network ( VPN ) services to access the more comprehensive online coverage of the Games being provided by broadcasters in Canada ( CTV in London , CBC in Sochi ) and the United Kingdom ( BBC ) , which did not use authentication , but cannot normally be viewed inside the United States due to territorial rights restrictions . 
 In April 2014 , the Cable & Telecommunications Association for Marketing ( <unk> ) unveiled an industry @-@ wide initiative for marketing and educating subscribers about TV Everywhere services provided by broadcasters and providers ; these efforts include a stylized " tv everywhere " logo which the organization intends providers to use as a unified brand to denote TV Everywhere services . The logo consists of interlocking rectangles , representing multiple " screens " ( platforms ) for viewing content . The association also provided design recommendations for TV Everywhere user experiences , aiming to alleviate the confusion that had been experienced by users during the authentication process . 
 = = = Adoption = = = 
 In a December 2013 survey of 4 @,@ 205 pay television subscribers , NPD Group found that 21 % of them used a TV Everywhere service at least once per month , and that 90 % of them were satisfied with the experience . NPD analyst Russ <unk> felt that " aggressive " use of the model was helping to counter cord cutting , which " speaks to the level of engagement they have with programming and a comfort in using the Internet to both access and interact with that programming . " The study also found that 3 out of 10 pay television subscribers who were also subscribed to an SVOD service used TV Everywhere services at least once a week ( in comparison to 2 out of 10 for those who were not ) . 
 Amid criticism of NBC 's coverage , adoption of NBC 's TV Everywhere services during the 2014 Winter Olympics was still significantly large : on February 21 , 2014 , coverage of the Men 's hockey semi @-@ final featuring the U.S. and Canada recorded the largest Live Extra audience in NBC Sports history , with 2 @.@ 12 million unique viewers , augmenting the average NBCSN television audience of 3 @.@ 9 million . ESPN 's coverage of the 2014 FIFA World Cup drew similarly heavy online viewership : during a group stage match between the U.S. and Portugal , at least 1 @.@ 7 million concurrent viewers were using WatchESPN ( though , not all of the viewers were necessarily watching the game ) . 
 In December 2015 , research firm GfK estimated that 53 % of the United States ' pay television subscribers have used a TV Everywhere service — an increase from 42 % in 2012 , that overall use had doubled since 2012 , and 79 % of those surveyed found the login process easy . However , only 25 % of those surveyed were aware of the term " TV Everywhere " or the <unk> logo , leading to the firm believing that consumer awareness and education was still a " critical missing piece " in the adoption of these services . 
 = = = Platform non @-@ neutrality = = = 
 In 2014 , Comcast was criticized for its decision to arbitrarily block access to HBO Go on PlayStation 3 and Roku devices , but still allowing its use on competing Apple TV and Xbox 360 . Comcast similarly blocked access to Showtime Anytime on Roku as well . A spokesperson for the provider stated that " with every new website , device or player we authenticate , we need to work through technical integration and customer service which takes time and resources . Moving forward , we will continue to prioritize as we partner with various players . " 
 During both the FCC 's net neutrality hearings and comments regarding Comcast 's then @-@ proposed merger with Time Warner Cable ( which , by contrast , allows HBO Go access on all supported devices ) , Roku criticized the provider for contradicting the TV Everywhere concept by discriminating against specific devices , thus prioritizing its own on @-@ demand platform over external services . The company argued that providers could selectively favor certain platforms over others , further stating that " a large and powerful <unk> may use this leverage in negotiations with content providers or operators of streaming platforms , ultimately favoring parties that can either afford to pay for the privilege of authentication , or have other business leverage that can be used as a counterweight to discriminatory authentication . " 
 On December 15 , 2014 , Comcast enabled the ability to use HBO Go and Showtime Anytime on Roku devices . However , Comcast still blocks HBO Go on PlayStation consoles . 
 = Stanley Internment Camp = 
 Stanley Internment Camp ( Chinese : <unk> ) was a civilian internment camp in Hong Kong during World War II . Located in Stanley , on the southern end of Hong Kong Island , it was used by the Japanese imperial forces to hold non @-@ Chinese enemy nationals after their victory in the Battle of Hong Kong , a battle in the Pacific campaign of World War II . About 2 @,@ 800 men , women , and children were held at the non @-@ segregated camp for 44 months from early January 1942 to August 1945 when Japanese forces surrendered . The camp area consisted of St. Stephen 's College and the grounds of Stanley Prison , excluding the prison itself . 
 = = Evacuation and arrival at camp = = 
 In 1939 , the British government had drawn up evacuation plans for the British and other European residents of Hong Kong , which was a Crown colony of the United Kingdom ( UK ) at the time . The War Office by the Chief of the Imperial General Staff thought the city would inevitably fall to Japanese forces in the event of an attack , so it should not be reinforced with more defensive forces . The presence of a large number of British women and children would have been an " embarrassment " for the government when the Japanese forces take Hong Kong , and additionally it was thought the internment of thousands of British civilians would cause unnecessary suffering and serve the Japanese as propaganda material . In July 1940 , the colonial government of Hong Kong received orders from the UK to proceed with the evacuations . By 3 August , all service families and registered non @-@ service British women and children were moved to the Philippines . However , the hurried compulsory evacuations prompted criticism from many evacuees , their husbands , and their employees , who felt the evacuations were premature and unnecessary . According to Bernice Archer and Kent <unk> , respectively of the University of Essex and the University of the West of England , the local Chinese population were angered by their exclusion from the evacuations and condemned the plans as racist . Additionally , the plans excluded British passport holders who were not of European ancestry . Amidst the criticism , the government subsequently made the evacuations non @-@ compulsory . Existing evacuations already ordered were cancelled provided evacuees volunteered for auxiliary roles , such as nursing or administrative work . 
 On 8 December 1941 , Japanese forces attacked Hong Kong , marking the start of the Battle of Hong Kong . Seventeen days later , on Christmas Day of 1941 , which came to be known as " Black Christmas " , the Hong Kong government surrendered , and Hong Kong came under Japanese occupation . On 4 January 1942 , a notice appeared in an English @-@ language newspaper that all " enemy nationals " were to assemble on Murray Parade Grounds . Many people did not see the notice , but about 1 @,@ 000 people were eventually gathered on the grounds . In addition to those who gathered voluntarily , there were people forcibly removed from their homes . 
 The people assembled were marched to and initially interned in hotel @-@ brothels on the waterfront near the present @-@ day Macau Ferry Pier . The conditions there were dirty and overcrowded , and the food was poor . After 17 days , the internees were taken by boat to Stanley . The " enemy nationals " who failed to assemble on Murray Parade Grounds avoided internment at the hotel @-@ brothels . However , by the end of January , most of the civilians to be interned were moved to Stanley . Upon arrival at camp , the internees discovered little was prepared for them there . There were no cooking facilities , no furniture , little crockery or cutlery . The toilet facilities were dirty , inadequate , and without water . The rooms were soon overcrowded with random assortments of people unrelated to each other , and with little attention paid to hygiene or public health . 
 = = Camp grounds = = 
 The Stanley site was chosen by the Japanese through consultation with two Hong Kong government officials – Dr. P. S. Selwyn @-@ Clarke , Director of Medical Services , and F. C. Gimson , the Colonial Secretary . Located on Stanley Peninsula , which was about nine kilometres from the city at the time , the camp consisted of St. Stephen 's College and the grounds of Stanley Prison , excluding the prison itself ; the prison was used by the Japanese authorities to hold what they considered " criminals " from Hong Kong . Several hundred internees lived at St. Stephen 's , while the majority of them lived on the prison grounds . Prior to Japanese occupation , St. Stephen 's was a secondary school whose facilities , in addition to classrooms , included an assembly hall , bungalows for teachers , and science laboratories . Over twenty internees occupied each bungalow , which was built for one family , and more than that occupied each science laboratory , living between partitions of sacking and old blankets . Almost all the buildings in the camp were used for housing . 
 Certain buildings and areas on the prison grounds had specific functions : 
 The Prison Officers ' Club was used for multiple functions ; it was used as a canteen , a kindergarten , Catholic church , and recreation centre . 
 Two main divisions of quarters existed – the Warders ' Quarters and the Indian Quarters . Before the war , the Warders ' Quarters housed European warders , with large flats designed for one family each , and the Indian Quarters housed Indian prison guards , built with smaller flats . An average of thirty internees lived in each Warders ' Quarters flat , and an average of six internees lived in each Indian Quarters flat . 
 A building which had housed single Indian warders before the war was turned into a hospital called Tweed Bay Hospital . 
 Two houses , originally used as homes for the prison superintendent and the prison doctor , were turned into the Japanese headquarters for the camp . 
 The cemetery on the grounds became a popular spot for quiet relaxation as well as a place for intimate meetings between male and female internees . 
 = = Life at camp = = 
 The internees numbered at 2 @,@ 800 , where an estimated 2 @,@ 325 to 2 @,@ 514 were British . The adult population numbered at 1 @,@ 370 men and 858 women , and children 16 years of age or younger numbered at 286 , with 99 of whom were below the age of 4 . The camp was under the control of the Japanese Foreign Affairs Department , but according to historian Geoffrey Charles Emerson , the Japanese forces had not made plans for dealing with enemy civilians in Hong Kong . As such , the camp was provided with few necessities , and the internees were left to govern the camp themselves . Committees were formed for such matters as housing , food , and medical care . The national groups remained mostly independent of each other except for matters of welfare and medical care . Very few government servants were selected to serve on these committees , due to anti @-@ government sentiments ; most internees blamed the government for the quick surrender of Hong Kong . 
 The biggest concern was food ; ensuring there was enough food occupied most of the internees ' time . Little food was provided by the Japanese authorities , and it was of poor quality – frequently containing dust , mud , rat and cockroach excreta , cigarette ends , and sometimes dead rats . Everyday , the internees were served rice congee at 8 am , and meals consisting of rice with stew at both 11 a.m. and 5 p.m. Additionally , they relied on food mailed from friends or relatives in the city , Red Cross aid , garden @-@ grown vegetables , and bought food from the canteen or the black market . 
 Another concern was the health and medical care of the internees . Although medical facilities were inadequate , the internees counted amongst them about 40 doctors , 2 dentists , 6 pharmacists , 100 trained nurses , and a large number of volunteer auxiliary nurses . Because of this , according to historian G. B. <unk> , no major epidemic occurred . The most common sickness amongst the internees were malaria , malnutrition and its associated diseases , beriberi , and pellagra . The shortage of medical supplies and equipment posed a challenge for those in charge of medical care , with the lack of soap and disinfectant being a particularly troublesome concern . 
 The women and children contributed to a sense of normality as their presence provided conventional social , family , and gender relations . The internees believed the children 's presence made them less selfish , as it forced them to think of the latter 's welfare . The women organised Christmas and birthday celebrations . Other diversions such as musicals , plays , recitals , and variety shows were also staged . Although the camp lacked books and educational equipment , the teachers and educational administrators amongst the internees were able to provide lessons for the children at the primary and secondary levels . Additionally , extensive adult education was available for the adults : language courses for Chinese , Malay , and French , and also lectures on photography , yachting , journalism , and poultry @-@ keeping . In addition to the personal diaries kept by internees , many of them now held by the Imperial War Museum , a record of life in the camp was created using a double bed sheet . The Day Joyce Sheet was embroidered and <unk> with 1100 names , signs and figures including a diary in code . 
 = = Deaths = = 
 Records show that 121 internees died in the camp , mostly due to illness , with half the deaths being of internees over the age of 50 . There were also a few accidental deaths . Two internees died from falls and one child had drowned . The worst camp accident occurred on 16 January 1945 , when an American plane accidentally bombed Bungalow 5 at St. Stephen 's College , killing 14 internees . These internees were buried at Stanley Military Cemetery . 
 Another seven internees were executed by the Japanese authorities . These internees had possessed a radio set which they used to pass messages in and out of camp . The radio was discovered by the Japanese and the internees were arrested . The other internees were forced to watch their public torture . Military trials were subsequently held and on 29 October 1943 , some of the internees were executed by being shot and at least one , John Fraser , was beheaded . Aside from this , the Japanese authorities had executed by decapitation , three Chinese policemen for bringing cigarettes and tobacco to the camp 's internees . 
 = = Escape attempts = = 
 A number of factors made escape attempts daunting for the internees ; they would have to navigate through Japanese @-@ occupied territory , find food , and , as few internees actually spoke Cantonese , they would also have to deal with language difficulties in Hong Kong if they succeeded in escaping . Despite the difficulties , there were three major escape attempts , with two being successful in March 1942 . One group of eight internees escaped on a small boat to neighbouring Macau . Another group , consisting of two internees , escaped through the New Territories and into mainland China . The third group , four policemen , in April 1942 managed to escape the camp grounds but were caught within a few miles of camp . They were subsequently imprisoned and released back to camp after a few weeks . 
 = = Early <unk> = = 
 Repatriation was one of the two most talked @-@ about subject at camp ( the other being the subject of food ) . On 6 May 1942 , the Japanese authorities informed the internees repatriation for the Americans would take place on 15 June . Japanese treatment of the American internees improved during this period before the actual repatriation took place ; more and better food was given to them , and they were allowed contacts with Chinese friends outside of camp . American journalists were interviewed by a Japanese news agency and asked questions about the war and the camp . The internees came to find out later the interview became war propaganda for the Japanese , in the form of an article claiming that American journalists had complimented the Japanese military and the camp itself , stating the camp was " probably the most comfortable in the world . " It was not until 29 June that repatriation for the Americans finally took place , after Japanese and Thai citizens held in the US and South America boarded ships in late June in preparation for exchange of internees . Those being repatriated were given smallpox vaccination , cholera inoculation , and thorough medical examinations . No books , bibles , diaries , or addresses were allowed to leave with the Americans , but the remaining internees were each allowed to write a 150 @-@ word letter for the Americans to take with them . The American internees boarded the ship , the Asama Maru , along with other Americans who had been allowed to stay in Hong Kong outside of the camp . After picking up Americans for repatriation from other locations in Asia , the Asama Maru arrived at Maputo , Mozambique ( then called Lourenço Marques ) on 22 July , where the Americans and Japanese exchanged internees . The Americans were to finally reach New York City on 25 August . Reportedly a total of 377 Americans were repatriated from Hong Kong . 
 Repatriation of Canadian internees and remaining American internees were announced in August 1943 ( not all American internees had been repatriated in June 1942 ) . Preparations similar to the prior repatriation were made , including messages and reports to be delivered . The ship , the <unk> Maru , reached Hong Kong on 23 September , taking on board 73 Canadian internees , 24 American internees , and 13 Latin American internees . The ship sailed to Goa , where an exchange of prisoners and internees with Japan took place . 
 There were indications and notices to the British internees that their repatriation was possible ; Gimson told them a Swiss Red Cross representative had spoken " encouragingly " about repatriation , the Japanese authorities twice informed them ( on 24 May 1943 and 2 November 1943 ) that they would be repatriated , and 25 May 1943 issue of the Hong Kong News reported negotiations for repatriation were " going on rather smoothly " . Despite this , the British internees were not repatriated until the end of the war . 
 = = Freedom = = 
 The internees were freed on 16 August 1945 , the day after Emperor Hirohito broadcast his acceptance of the Potsdam Proclamation in surrender . About two weeks later , the British fleet came for the internees , and several weeks after that , the camp was closed . Many internees went back to the city and began to adjust back to their former lives , and many others , particularly those of poor health , remained on the camp grounds to await for ships to take them away . Historian Geoffrey Charles Emerson wrote the " probable " reason the British internees were not repatriated before the end of the war was related to the Allied forces refusing to release Japanese nationals held in Australia . These nationals were the only sizeable group of Japanese nationals held by the Allies after the repatriation of the American and Canadian internees . They had been pearl fishermen in Australia before the war , and knew the Australian coastline well . Their knowledge would have been " militarily important " to the Japanese if an invasion of Australia was attempted , hence the Allied refusal to release them . 
 = = Compensation = = 
 In 1948 , the US government , through the War Claims Act , authorised the payment of US $ 60 for every month an adult spent in an internment camp , and US $ 25 per month for child internees . Some also received US $ 1 per day for " missed meals " . In the UK , from 1952 to 1956 , about 8 @,@ 800 British internees , specifically those who normally resided in the UK when the war began , received a sum of ₤ 48 @.@ 50 as reparation . Payments for American and British internees were made from the proceeds of Japanese assets seized per the Treaty of San Francisco . Dutch internees each received a sum of US $ 100 , with the payments funded by a separate agreement signed between the Dutch and the Japanese in 1957 . 
 The rise of Japan as an economic power and the opening of World War II files at the UK 's Public Record Office created a sentiment in the 1990s that not enough had been done to redress the suffering of internees and prisoners @-@ of @-@ war . In November 2000 , the British government announced a compensation scheme for British civilians who had been interned in World War II . The scheme called for a package of £ 167 million , and by February 2001 , the first raft of payments of £ 10 @,@ 000 were being made . Initially , the plan excluded British persons who had no " bloodlink " to Britain , a point of distinction that was made between those who were " British citizens " and those who were " British subjects " . 
 In reaction to this , former Stanley internee Diana Elias launched a civil action case against the British government , alleging the distinction of " bloodlink " made by the compensation scheme was discriminatory , and that the Japanese authorities had made no such distinction in their treatment of the internees . Elias ' family , including her parents and her grandparents , were all holders of British passports . The " bloodlink " distinction , however , made her ineligible for compensation because she is of Iraqi Jewish ancestry . In July 2005 , the High Court in London ruled in her favour , and was subsequently backed by the Court of Appeals when the Ministry of Defence appealed the High Court 's decision . This allowed for hundreds of surviving civilian internees to collect the compensation earlier denied to them by the " bloodlink " distinction . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 St. Stephen 's College was re @-@ opened in 1945 after the war . St. Stephen 's Chapel was built on the grounds of the school in 1950 ; the memorial window over its west door was a donation , serving to remember the suffering at Stanley Internment Camp . 
 = = Notable internees = = 
 Sir C. Grenville Alabaster – Attorney General of Hong Kong 
 Morris Abraham Cohen 
 Kenelm Hutchinson Digby 
 Elly <unk> 
 Sir Atholl MacGregor – Chief Justice of Hong Kong 
 Lewis Morley 
 Hilda Selwyn @-@ Clarke 
 Francis Arthur Sutton 
 = Monster Cable = 
 Monster Inc. is an American company that manufactures and markets 6 @,@ 000 different products , but is best known for audio and video cables . It also produces speakers , headphones , power strips , mobile accessories and audio devices for automobiles . The company was founded by an audiophile and engineer , Noel Lee , in 1979 by experimenting with different ways to build audio cables . It grew by doing demonstrations to convince the industry that audio cables made a difference in audio quality and by establishing relationships with retailers that were attracted to the cable 's profit margins . 
 Over the years it created new divisions like Monster Music , Monster Game , Monster Mobile , Monster Photo and Monster Power . In the 2000s , Monster had legal trademark disputes regarding other companies or products that have " Monster " in their name , such as <unk> and the film Monsters , Inc . Monster said it needed to defend its premium brand , while critics said it was pursuing litigation against companies that do not have confusingly similar products . It began manufacturing headphones in a partnership with Dr. Dre in 2008 , which ended in 2012 , and it created other celebrity branded or Monster @-@ branded headphone products . 
 Several tests done by audiophile publications , news reporters and academics have conflicting viewpoints on whether more expensive audio or video cables like those from Monster make a difference in audio or video quality when compared to generic cables . Instead of advertising , Monster offers incentives to retailers and their salespeople to sell the cables . Retailers bundle high profit @-@ margin cables with larger purchases that have smaller margins in order to improve profitability . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Monster was founded in 1979 by Noel Lee as Monster Cable Products . Lee , an audiophile and engineer , was experimenting with different copper qualities , wire constructs and winding methods of audio cables in his family 's garage and comparing them while listening to Tchaikovsky 's 1812 Overture . He became convinced that audio cables could be engineered to improve audio quality by conducting electricity more efficiently . Using a borrowed portion of somebody 's booth at the 1978 Consumer Electronics Show , he did demonstrations of his cables in comparison to standard wires . After a positive reception at CES , he quit his job at Lawrence Berkeley Lab and started Monster Cable Products with $ 250 @,@ 000 in bank financing . Monster 's first cables were manufactured by Lee by hand and sold door @-@ to @-@ door . 
 Initial sales were slow , because at the time electronics retailers provided low @-@ cost lamp cords to consumers for free or at low prices and audiophiles didn 't believe audio cables made a difference in the sound . Monster is credited with creating the market for high @-@ end audio cables in the 1980s through Lee 's " marketing prowess . " He did demonstrations comparing the audio of standard cables to Monster cables for retailers and trained their salespeople to do the same for customers . 
 = = = Diversification = = = 
 In 1980 , Monster Cable Products moved out of Lee 's garage and into a San Francisco facility . It also introduced its second audio cable , <unk> . The company grew through word @-@ of @-@ mouth and an increasing number of retailers that carried Monster products . It attempted to enter the market for audio devices for automotive briefly , but withdrew to focus on home entertainment . Its first product intended for the mass @-@ market was introduced in 1987 . 
 Monster re @-@ entered the auto audio market in the early 1990s with a new line of speaker cables and its first speaker product , the Persona One . Its high @-@ end M @-@ series product line was introduced in 1992 . It also expanded internationally , especially in Asia . Monster had a Taiwanese distributor file its trademark in the region , which led to the distributor continuing to sell products under the Monster brand after their agreement with Monster was terminated . This led to a lengthy legal battle and eventually a settlement . Monster acquired the <unk> in @-@ car audio brand in 1998 . 
 Monster 's program for retailers was formalized in 1993 as the M4 Dealer Success Program . The " M4 " stands for four " M " s : Mix ( product mix ) , Merchandising ( displays ) , <unk> ( training ) and Management commitment . In the 1990s , the business grew from $ 20 million in annual revenues to $ 100 million . By 1998 , Monster was producing 1 @,@ 000 different products out of a distribution and manufacturing center in Brisbane , California that was established that year . It had created a record label company , Monster Music , in 1989 , which was followed by Monster Power for power products such as power cords and surge protectors , in 1998 , Monster Game for video game accessories in 2000 and the Monster Mobile division which markets cell phone and digital camera accessories in 2001 . A Monster Photo product line was created in 2003 that includes power cells , cables and bags for digital cameras , followed by Monster Signature Series Power . In 2004 , it created a spin @-@ off called M @-@ Design , run by Lee 's son , which sells furniture with electronics built in . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 In September 2004 , Monster paid $ 6 million in an agreement with the San Francisco 49ers and the city of San Francisco to rename the football team 's home stadium from Candlestick Park to Monster Park for four years . $ 3 million of it was given to the football team and the other $ 3 million to the San Francisco Recreation and Parks Department . Critics of local politician Matt Gonzales said it was inappropriate for the city to sell the name of a public facility to a corporation and a ballot was passed ensuring that the name of the park reverted back to Candlestick Park in 2008 . 
 Monster 's first wireless products , a receiver and transmitter for connecting televisions and devices was introduced in 2008 . In 2012 , the company changed its name from " Monster Cable Products " to just " Monster Inc . " . 
 = = = = Trademark disputes = = = = 
 As of 2004 , Monster owned about 300 trademarks , 70 of which are related to the word " Monster " . By 2009 , the company had made 190 filings with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office . Most filings were to delay potentially infringing trademark applications so Monster could study them . Some were formal oppositions and about 30 have resulted in lawsuits . Most lawsuits were settled with non @-@ disclosed terms . Critics and defendants say that Monster is too aggressive in pursuing trademark protections against companies that do not have confusingly similar products and that it is trying to own a common word , not protect a brand . Monster representatives say they are doing what most " premium " brands do to protect their marks and that their products include things like clothes , mints and music . 
 In the 2000s , Monster had legal disputes over its trademarks with the Discovery Channel for its show Monster Garage . Monster also had trademark disputes with Bally Gaming International over its slot machines , Monster <unk> , with Hansen Beverage Co. for its Monster Energy drink , and the Chicago Bears , who use the nickname " Monsters of the Midway . " Other trademark disputes include a 2001 lawsuit against The Walt Disney Company for products related to the film Monsters , Inc . , and a claim against an online used clothing retailer , <unk> LLC . In 2004 , Monster filed a complaint about the trademark application from Snow Monsters , a video website with skiing content for kids . The Snow Monsters owner initiated a lawsuit against Monster pre @-@ emptively . It has also had a trademark dispute with the job site , <unk> 
 In 2006 Monster brought a suit against Monster Mini Golf , a company selling franchise Mini Golf locations throughout the US . After an unsuccessful legal mediation , Monster Mini Golf launched a grassroots campaign against Monster Cable on the Internet . As a result , Monster received more than 200 complaints from the public . Monster Cable dropped the lawsuit and agreed to pay up to $ 200 @,@ 000 of Monster Mini Golf 's legal fees . In 2009 Monster Cable CEO Noel Lee said on Fox Business that the company has had to balance their trademark protection efforts with the public 's point @-@ of @-@ view . 
 = = = = Headphones = = = = 
 Monster established a partnership with rap artist Dr. Dre and Interscope Records in 2007 to design and manufacture the Beats Electronics line of headphones called " Beats by Dr. Dre " . This led to a trend among headphone manufacturers to create celebrity @-@ endorsed products . Monster created similar partnerships with Lady Gaga for the Heartbeats brand of headphones in 2009 , <unk> 's <unk> in May 2010 and LeBron James later that year . In 2010 , Monster began developing a series of products for the Chinese market that were co @-@ branded with basketball player Yao Ming . According to analyst firm NPD Group , the Beats brand that Monster distributed exclusively grew to own 53 percent of a $ 1 billion headphones market . A 51 percent interest in Beats was sold to HTC in August 2011 . At the end of the five @-@ year agreement between Monster and Dr. Dre in 2012 , Dre decided not to renew . According to Bloomberg , both parties said the separation was " amicable " but they had disagreements on who deserves credit and the share of revenues . The partnership was responsible for a substantial portion of Monster 's revenues . After the split , Monster created its own headphones product line and other celebrity @-@ branded headphones with music groups Earth , Wind & Fire and Miles Davis . 
 = = Products = = 
 Monster manufactures 6 @,@ 000 different products , including headphones , speakers , surge protectors , televisions , and accessories for cars and mobile devices . The company is best known for its speaker cable . It created the market for high @-@ end audio cables in the 1980s . According to a reporter from <unk> Network , it " has retained a huge lead " for high @-@ end audio cables ever since . 
 Monster also makes cables for TVs , DVDs , computers , printers , gaming consoles , cameras and for audio equipment in cars . As high @-@ definition televisions grew in popularity , the company expanded into HDMI and high @-@ def cables , including a lower @-@ cost HDMI Basic and HDMI cables with five different speed ratings . It also produces cables intended for specific gaming consoles and Apple products . 
 Monster began manufacturing and marketing USB and ethernet cables as well as power strips and power management products in 2009 . It 's been producing its own line of headphones since 2012 and also manufactures celebrity @-@ branded headphones . Monster sells speakers under the Clarity and Katana brands and mobile accessories like an iPod dock and a line @-@ up of Tron @-@ branded products . 
 In the 2000s , it entered into markets for " lifestyle products " like amplifiers , speakers and furniture with electronics built @-@ in , as well as wireless products . 
 = = Pricing and performance questions = = 
 Many audiophiles and reporters disagree on whether more expensive cables have an effect on audio quality . In 1980 Speaker Builder said that Monster audio cables were " a reasonable investment " and that they out @-@ perform generic 24- or 18- gauge cables . Tests by Stereo Review Magazine in 1983 concluded that Monster cables did not make a difference in the sound and were " indistinguishable " from 16 @-@ gauge lamp cord . Smaller gauge numbers equate to larger wire , so this is a comparison to heavier ( 16 gauge ) wire than 18 or 24 gauge speaker wires . The same publication in 1990 said that whether the cables are worth it depends on the application and the user 's willingness to pay a premium . 
 Whether someone can hear the difference varies from person to person . Many reporters and audiophiles have done double @-@ blind a / b listening tests and are unable to hear the difference . The New York Times and PC World have reported not hearing a difference in the sound , while USA Today said Monster had " a slight edge . " According to PC Magazine , Monster is " often accused of selling over @-@ priced cables that you can buy elsewhere for a fraction of the price . " 
 Gizmodo tested Monster @-@ branded HDMI cables and compared them to generic cables using a Digital Serial Analyzer . They found that the cables performed relatively equally over a short distance of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , but inexpensive cables experienced distortion when ran over longer distances . <unk> also said Monster 's HDMI cables made a difference over 10 @-@ metre ( 33 ft ) distances , but that , " with Monster , you pay a staggering premium for durability and good looks . " In tests by PC World , Monster 's <unk> video cables had the least distortion out of all the cables tested , being within 1 ohm of the standard 75 ohm impedance . 
 Monster CEO Noel Lee claims the average consumer may not be able to tell the difference on @-@ screen , but that Monster 's video cables have higher bandwidth , are future @-@ proofed , are more durable and that they perform better over long distances . Many reviewers stress in turn that Monster cables are not needed for lower @-@ resolution televisions or over short distances and that the difference in audio quality is not substantial enough . 
 = = Relationship with retailers = = 
 Monster Cable and similar " boutique " cables are a substantial source of revenue for retailers of electronics , such as DVD players and TVs . While the profit margins of DVD players and TVs may be low , the profit margins of Monster Cables and similar products provide supplemental revenue for these retailers . Employees of such retailers are trained to market and bundle Monster Cable and similar products in order to increase profitability . 
 According to The New York Times , profit margins for retailers can be 40 percent or more and The Consumerist reported that one retailer was selling some cables at an 80 percent markup . This has led to criticisms that sales staff are motivated to sell high @-@ end cable products to customers that don 't need them and to be aggressive in order to obtain incentives . Monster has responded by saying that markups are determined by the retailer and are usually less than those found on clothing , jewelry and furniture . 
 As of 1998 , Monster spent $ 13 million a year in training and incentive programs for salespeople . The sales staff are provided data on their performance in selling the cables and top @-@ performers are sent on all @-@ expenses @-@ paid vacations . Monster also hosts its Retailer Awards at CES each year , which the Las Vegas Sun called , " one of the biggest events on the CES party circuit . " 
 = SummerSlam ( 2007 ) = 
 SummerSlam ( 2007 ) was the twentieth annual SummerSlam professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It was presented by THQ 's Stuntman Ignition . It took place on August 26 , 2007 , at the Continental Airlines Arena in East Rutherford , New Jersey and featured talent from each of WWE 's three brands : Raw , SmackDown , and ECW . Tickets for SummerSlam went on sale December 30 and sold out in forty minutes . 
 The main feud , a staged rivalry between wrestlers , heading into the event from the Raw brand was between John Cena and Randy Orton . On the July 23 episode of Raw , Jonathan Coachman announced Orton as the number one contender to the WWE Championship . Over the proceeding weeks , Orton provoked Cena by interfering and attacking him during his matches . From SmackDown , the predominant feud was between The Great Khali and Batista . After Khali defeated Batista and Kane in a Triple Threat match , a match between three wrestlers contested under standard rules , Theodore Long booked Khali to defend the World Heavyweight Championship against Batista at SummerSlam . The primary feud from ECW was between John Morrison and CM Punk . By defeating Morrison in a 15 Minutes of Fame match , Punk became the number one contender to the ECW Championship at SummerSlam . 
 Several of the existing feuds carried on after the event . Notably , CM Punk continued to face John Morrison , defeating him for the ECW Championship the following month on ECW on Sci Fi . The day after SummerSlam , Orton , as part of the scripted events , interfered in a match between Cena and King Booker and intensified the feud by attacking Cena 's father . Khali and Batista faced each other at Unforgiven , the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , as part of a Triple Threat match ; Batista was victorious in this match and won the World Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = Background = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment had originally planned a storyline between the cast of the Jackass TV series and Umaga , with the conclusion in a match at SummerSlam . It was scheduled to begin at the previous pay @-@ per @-@ view event , The Great American Bash , but was canceled after the Jackass cast dropped out due to the negative media attention surrounding the Chris Benoit double murder and suicide . 
 The main staged rivalry heading into SummerSlam on the Raw brand was between John Cena and Randy Orton over the WWE Championship . At The Great American Bash , Cena defeated Bobby Lashley to retain the WWE Championship . The next night on Raw , one of three main television programs of WWE ( along with WWE SmackDown and ECW on Sci Fi ) , after a Handicap match involving Cena , Orton came out and executed an RKO on Cena . Shortly thereafter , Executive Assistant Jonathan Coachman announced Orton as the new number @-@ one contender to the WWE Championship . Before that , Orton claimed that he had never faced Cena in a one @-@ on @-@ one WWE Championship match . On the July 30 episode of Raw , Carlito defeated Cena in a non @-@ title match after Orton interfered and distracted Cena . Three weeks later , on the August 18 episode of Saturday Night 's Main Event , Cena faced off against Carlito in another non @-@ title match , which Cena won . After the match , Orton came out and attacked Cena , which led to a RKO from Orton through a steel chair . 
 The main storyline on the SmackDown brand was between The Great Khali and Batista over the World Heavyweight Championship . On the July 6 episode of SmackDown , Khali issued an open challenge for a match at The Great American Bash , which was accepted by Batista later that night . On SmackDown the following week , the match between Khali and Batista was made official after a contract signing . That same night , then @-@ World Heavyweight Champion Edge , who was scheduled to face Kane for the title at The Great American Bash , suffered a real injury — a left pectoral muscle tear — after Kane interrupted his Mardi Gras style celebration . On the July 20 episode of SmackDown , Edge was forced to vacate the World Heavyweight Championship due to the severity of his injury . He later <unk> 
 I ’ m still the rightful champion . My pectoral muscle is hanging on by a single fiber ; literally hanging from the bone . Theodore Long comes out and strips me of what I ’ ve worked for my entire career — from childhood until now . My mood is obviously not great right now . I ’ m disgusted . 
 I go out there and put my body through hell . I ’ ve broken my neck , dislocated my shoulder twice , torn my other <unk> , my elbows are mush , I have two protruding discs in my lower back . I even got bit by a brown recluse spider that turned into a flesh @-@ eating disease — the list goes on . I still go out there and prove that I am the best . 
 Why do I still do this ? Not for them . I do it for my pride . I don 't give a rat 's ass what the fans think . I never have . That 's not how I operate . I know that fans will be happy with this , and that pisses me off . I 've come to the realization that our fans never will appreciate me . But they had to live with me as their champion , and when I return and become a four @-@ time World Champion , they 'll have to deal with me again . 
 SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long then announced that there would be a 20 @-@ man Battle Royal later that night to determine a new World Heavyweight Champion . Khali won the Battle Royal and became the new World Heavyweight Champion by last eliminating Kane and Batista . Khali defeated the two and retained the title at The Great American Bash . Five days later on SmackDown , Batista interrupted Khali 's celebration and challenged him to a match at SummerSlam . The next week , on the August 3 episode of SmackDown , Long announced that Khali would defend his title against Batista at SummerSlam . 
 Another main rivalry on the Raw brand heading into SummerSlam was between the returning Triple H against King Booker . At New Year 's Revolution , during a World Tag Team Championship match between Rated @-@ RKO ( Edge and Randy Orton ) and D @-@ Generation X ( Shawn Michaels and Triple H ) , Triple H suffered a legitimate torn right quadriceps during the match that left him out of action . On July 16 , Booker T , who is referred as King Booker after winning the 2006 King of the Ring tournament started using Triple H 's entrance music " King of Kings " . King Booker declared that neither Triple H nor Jerry Lawler could be known as " The King " . On August 6 episode of Raw , King Booker defeated Lawler in a match where the loser had to crown the winner the next week . When the time came , Lawler refused , declaring that Triple H was still a king and announcing that King Booker would face Triple H at SummerSlam . Booker then attacked Lawler , throwing him into the ring post and hitting him with a TV monitor . 
 The predominant staged rivalry from the ECW brand was between John Morrison and CM Punk over the ECW Championship . Morrison won the title at Vengeance : Night of Champions , the pay @-@ per @-@ view two months before SummerSlam by defeating CM Punk . At the following pay @-@ per @-@ view , The Great American Bash , Morrison defeated Punk to retain the ECW Championship . On the July 31 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , Punk defeated Tommy Dreamer and Elijah Burke in a Triple threat match to earn a 15 Minutes of Fame match with Morrison . The following week , on ECW on Sci Fi , Punk defeated Morrison by pinfall after executing a GTS ( Go To Sleep ) . As a result of this victory , Punk earned himself a championship match against Morrison at SummerSlam . 
 One of the primary preliminary matches was a standard one @-@ on @-@ one match between Rey Mysterio and Chavo Guerrero . Their storyline first began in July 2006 at The Great American Bash . Guerrero interfered in Mysterio 's World Heavyweight Championship match with King Booker by hitting Mysterio with a steel chair . Guerrero defeated Mysterio the following month at SummerSlam 2006 , winning the match after performing a frog splash At No Mercy , the pay @-@ per @-@ view two months after SummerSlam , Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a Falls Count Anywhere match , pinning him after performing a crossbody off a guard rail . Two weeks later , Guerrero defeated Mysterio in an " I Quit " match forcing him to quit after hitting his left knee repeatedly with a steel chair . During the match , Mysterio suffered a real injury — an ACL and patella tendon tear in his left knee . Ten months later , on the August 3 episode of SmackDown ! , a match between Mysterio and Guerrero was booked for SummerSlam . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event went live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , World Tag Team Champions Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch defeated Paul London and Brian Kendrick in a dark match . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired was between Kane and Finlay . Kane controlled the opening minutes of the match , performing a variety of moves including a scoop slam and a big boot . After some back and forth action , Finlay was able to hit Kane with a shillelagh in the ribs . Kane kicked out of the pin attempt and executed a chokeslam , pinning him afterwards for the win . 
 Next was a Triple Threat match for the WWE Intercontinental Championship that involved Umaga , Carlito , and Mr. Kennedy . Kennedy attempted to form an alliance with Carlito in the beginning , but Umaga quickly turned the match in his favor . Kennedy and Carlito soon gained the upper hand after Carlito dropkicked Umaga to the outside . Shortly thereafter , Carlito turned on Kennedy and attempted to pin him with a roll @-@ up . After a back and forth match between the three , Umaga regained control and performed a Samoan Spike on Kennedy , which led to Umaga pinning Kennedy for the win and successfully retaining the WWE Intercontinental Championship . 
 The third match was Rey Mysterio versus Chavo Guerrero , which was Mysterio 's first match since Guerrero injured his knee in October 2006 . Mysterio gained the early advantage when he was able to perform an arm drag and a plancha on Guerrero . Mysterio then performed a low dropkick to Guerrero 's left knee , followed by a diving hurricanrana . Towards the end of the match , Guerrero was able to perform a Gory Bomb on Mysterio after Mysterio had missed a crossbody . Mysterio kicked out of the pin attempt and performed a 619 followed by a springboard splash for the pinfall victory . 
 Next was an Interpromotional Divas Battle Royal involving Beth Phoenix , Melina , Mickie James , Jillian Hall , and Maria from Raw , Michelle McCool , Torrie Wilson , Kristal Marshall , and Victoria from SmackDown , and Kelly Kelly , Layla , and Brooke from ECW . Shortly after the match began , Phoenix threw Brooke over the top rope . Soon after , Hall eliminated Maria and Layla was thrown out by Melina . Kristal then eliminated Victoria , but was then thrown over the ropes by James and accidentally knocked off the apron by McCool . Shortly after , Phoenix and Hall eliminated Kelly , and Hall and James began pulling each other over the ropes . Wilson threw Hall out to the floor whilst Melina knocked James off the apron . McCool and Wilson then worked together to eliminate Melina . The two continued their alliance , but Phoenix was able to get the upper hand , first eliminating Wilson , followed by throwing McCool over the ropes to win the match and a future WWE Women 's Championship match . 
 Shortly after the match ended , WWE United States Champion Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) came to the ring and challenged Matt Hardy to a beer drinking contest . Hardy declined and named a replacement , Stone Cold Steve Austin . Austin came out and mocked MVP by doing several warm @-@ up exercises similar to those MVP does before a match . As the contest was set to start , Austin delivered a Stone Cold Stunner to MVP and left the ring . 
 Next on the card was John Morrison versus CM Punk for the ECW Championship . Punk gained early control when he was able to perform a scoop slam as well as a springboard dropkick ; however , Morrison was able to counter a shoulder block attempt into a neckbreaker on the ring apron . After Morrison controlled the match for several minutes , Punk was able to put the match back in his favor after performing a diving crossbody followed by an enzuigiri . Morrison , however , countered a Frankensteiner attempt into a pin @-@ cover while using the ropes for leverage . He got the win , thus retaining the ECW Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The sixth match of the event was between the returning Triple H and King Booker , who was accompanied by Queen Sharmell . Triple H gained the early advantage as the match began ; however , Booker was able to gain control after performing a low dropkick . Triple H regained control after countering Booker and performing a variety of moves , which included a corner clothesline and a spinebuster . Booker put the match back in his favor after reversing a clothesline attempt into a Book End , which was followed by a sidewalk slam . After Booker missed a diving somersault leg drop , Triple H was able to recover and perform a Pedigree . Triple H pinned Booker afterwards to gain the victory . 
 The World Heavyweight Championship match between champion The Great Khali and challenger Batista was next . Khali controlled most of the match and performed a variety of moves , which included a brain chop , a big boot , and multiple clotheslines . Batista won the match after Khali intentionally disqualified himself by hitting him with a steel chair . Since a championship cannot change hands via countout or disqualification , Khali retained the title . 
 Next was the main event , which saw John Cena defend the WWE Championship against Randy Orton . After back and forth action in the opening minutes , Orton gained the advantage over Cena after Cena missed a flying shoulder block attempt . Orton followed up by applying a reverse chinlock and attacking Cena 's leg . After Orton controlled the match for several minutes , Cena gained the advantage and performed various maneuvers , which included a twisting belly to belly side slam and the Five Knuckle Shuffle ; Orton , however , was able to counter an FU attempt into an inverted headlock backbreaker . Cena countered a running punt attempt into the STFU submission hold . Orton , however , got to the bottom rope , and performed an RKO . Cena kicked out of the pin attempt and performed an FU for the pinfall victory , thus retaining the WWE Championship . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the event , John Cena provoked his feud with Randy Orton . On the August 27 episode of Raw , Cena faced King Booker in a non @-@ title match . When Cena appeared close to winning , Randy Orton interfered and attacked him , causing Booker to lose by disqualification . After the match ended , Orton attacked Cena 's father , who was sitting at ringside , and kicked him in the head . The two faced each other in a rematch at Unforgiven for the WWE Championship . Cena was disqualified in the match for continuously punching Orton . Orton won the match but not the title . Afterwards , Cena 's father kicked Orton in the head , in the same way Orton had kicked his one @-@ month prior . 
 On the August 31 episode of SmackDown , Rey Mysterio , Finlay , Kane , and Batista participated in a four @-@ man Championship Competition tournament . Mysterio defeated Batista and Finlay and became the number @-@ one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship at Unforgiven . On the September 7 episode of SmackDown , Mysterio defeated Chavo Guerrero in an " I Quit " match . After the match , The Great Khali attacked Mysterio until Batista came out and executed a spear on Khali . Batista was then included in the one @-@ on @-@ one title match at Unforgiven , making it a Triple Threat match . At the event , Batista won the championship for a third time . 
 The feud between Matt Hardy and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) continued when they were forced to team up against Deuce ' n Domino on the August 31 episode of SmackDown . They won the match and the WWE Tag Team Championship . The following month at Unforgiven , MVP and Hardy defeated Deuce ' n Domino to retain the WWE Tag Team Championship . That October , at No Mercy , Hardy defeated MVP in a pizza @-@ eating contest . On the November 16 episode of SmackDown , MVP and Hardy lost the WWE Tag Team Championship to the team of The Miz and John Morrison . 
 Umaga lost the WWE Intercontinental Championship to Jeff Hardy on the September 3 episode of Raw . Afterwards , Umaga started a feud with Triple H and faced off against him in a Street Fight two months later at Cyber Sunday . At Unforgiven , Candice Michelle defeated Beth Phoenix to retain the WWE Women 's Championship . Phoenix , however , later defeated Candice at No Mercy to win the title . On the September 4 episode of ECW on Sci Fi , CM Punk defeated John Morrison to win the ECW Championship . At Cyber Sunday , Punk retained the title by defeating The Miz . The following month , at Survivor Series , Punk defeated Morrison and The Miz in a Triple Threat match to retain the ECW Championship . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The event grossed over US $ 1 million in ticket sales from an attendance of 17 @,@ 441 out of a 17 @,@ 040 maximum capacity building . Due to the production of the event , however , the capacity of the arena was set at a lower standard , and as a result the arena reached its maximum capacity . This was confirmed by the ticket sales and by WWE 's official website on August 28 , 2007 . According to a press release by WWE in late @-@ 2007 , the event received 537 @,@ 000 buys , which was higher than the previous year 's SummerSlam buys of 529 @,@ 000 . The buys from SummerSlam helped the promotion 's revenue , which was $ 18 @.@ 8 million , a sum lower than the prior year of $ 19 @.@ 7 million . Canadian Online Explorer and its professional wrestling section rated the entire event a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The rating was higher than the previous year 's SummerSlam rating , a 5 @.@ 5 out of 10 . The main event from the Raw brand was rated a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 ; while the main event from the SmackDown brand was rated a 1 out of 10 . The event had 537 @,@ 000 buys , up slightly on the SummerSlam 2006 figure of 529 @,@ 000 buys . 
 The event was released on DVD on September 25 , 2007 . The DVD was distributed by the label , Genius Products . The DVD reached a peak position of first on Billboard 's Weekly Video Sales chart for the week of October 27 , 2007 . The DVD remained on the charts for twelve consecutive weeks ; though , after the week of October 27 , 2007 , the DVD ranked lower . During its final week on the chart , January 18 , 2008 , it ranked 19th . The DVD also received reviews from customers , as the average customer rating from Amazon.com was a 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 . The average customer rating however , from CD Universe was a 5 out of 5 stars . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Magia ( Shakira album ) = 
 Magia ( English : Magic ) is the debut album by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira . It was released in June 1991 by Sony Music Colombia , with whom she signed a three @-@ album recording contract . The record is a collection of pop ballads Shakira wrote since she was eight years old , with themes inspired from the experience hanging out with males , adventure stories , and dreams of living on the coast . 
 The album 's live performances helped Shakira receive attention on Colombian media , and the LP earned her an award at the Viña del Mar International Song Festival . However , it was not a commercial success , with sales estimated at between 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 200 copies . By Shakira 's request , Magia and its follow @-@ up Peligro ( 1993 ) were removed from music markets . " Magia " was released as promotional single in 1991 . 
 = = Development and composition = = 
 Born in Barranquilla , Colombia , Shakira began writing songs at the age of eight years , her first one being " Tus <unk> <unk> " . Her performances at local competitions led to a meeting with local theater producer Monica Ariza , who later held an audition for her in Bogotá . She performed three songs for executives of Sony Music Columbia , who were impressed enough to sign her , at the age of 13 , to record three albums , which were Magia , Peligro and Pies Descalzos . 
 The low @-@ budget Magia was put in almost three months of pre @-@ production , which involved choreography of live performances for the album , singing lessons for Shakira , and arranging the songs . The concept of the music still reflected her personality , despite the fact that it was managed by the record label . The tracks deal with emotions of a person 's first time falling in love , and range from a love poem ( " Sueños " ) to a celebration of dance ( " Esta noche <unk> <unk> " ) . These were influenced from experiences with males such as her ex @-@ boyfriend Oscar Pardo , stories told by her father , and dreams of living on the coast . In the book Shakira : Woman Full of Grace , Ximena Diego wrote that the album " demonstrated her [ Shakira 's ] indisputable potential . " 
 Magia is a collection of songs written by Shakira between the ages of 8 and 12 , and mainly consists of pop ballads . It was produced by Miguel E. Cubillos and Pablo Tedeschi , and recorded at Aga Studios in Bogotá , when Shakira was 13 . A Sony Music Columbia representative said that the recording process was simple and went perfectly fine . But for Shakira , the process was problematic , as she had no ability to decide which tracks would be included and no input into the rhythmic structure or artistic production of the songs . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 To promote the launch of the album , as a suggestion from Shakira , live performances were held in locations such as Teatro Amira de la Rosa , Cartagena , Santa Marta , <unk> , Medellín , Cali , Bogotá , and other various theaters and events , all of which received print , radio and television coverage . The performances featured additional dancers and background vocalists such as Cesar Navarro , Guillermo Gomez , Mauricio Pinilla , and Richard Ricardo . A music video was done for " Magia " , which Navarro also starred in . Navarro found working with Shakira enjoyable and relaxing , and recalled her as sensitive and energetic : " She was a tireless worker , but more than anything , she was a total blast . " The choreography for the performances was done by Gary Julio and Ray Silva . The album won an award at the Viña del Mar International Song Festival in 1991 , although Shakira was not able to attend the ceremony due to her age of under 16 years . Despite the live performances and the amount of media coverage , the LP did not fare well commercially ; between 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 200 copies were sold in her home country . Shakira has refused to allow the re @-@ release of both Magia and her next album , Peligro , because of their " immaturity " ; neither has ever been released in the U.S. 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits from liner notes : 
 Shakira – songwriter , vocals 
 Sergio Solano – acoustic and electric guitars 
 Antonio " <unk> " <unk> – saxophone 
 Miguel Enrique Cubillos N. – producer , songwriter , music direction , artistic arrangement , vocal direction , chorus 
 Ana Maria <unk> @-@ Liliana Avila – chorus 
 Juanita <unk> – songwriter 
 Miguel E. Cubillos – producer , songwriter , music direction , artistic arrangement , vocal direction 
 Pablo Tedeschi – producer , songwriter , musical direction , arrangement , computer programming , synthesizer programming , drum programming 
 Alvaro Eduardo Ortiz Q – design 
 Gabriel Muñoz – general coordination 
 Luis Miguel <unk> – sound engineer , mixing engineer 
 Leo <unk> – album artwork 
 = Goodies ( album ) = 
 Goodies is the debut studio album by American recording artist Ciara . It was released on September 28 , 2004 via LaFace Records . After writing songs for several established acts , Ciara 's talents were noticed by Jazze Pha , and she began to work on what became Goodies . The album 's conception came through the which the title track , created as a female crunk counterpart to Usher 's " Yeah " and Petey Pablo 's " Freek @-@ a @-@ Leek . " Ciara worked with several writers and producers on the album , including Jazze Pha , Lil Jon , Bangladesh , R. Kelly , Johntá Austin , Sean Garrett , and Keri Hilson , among others . 
 With Goodies , Ciara was hailed as the " Princess " or " First Lady of Crunk & B. " The album uses dance music while utilizing pop , R & B , and hip @-@ hop influences . The album delivers contradictory lyrical content , featuring female empowerment and independence @-@ promoting lyrics in songs like the title track , while others show interest in adult activities . Critics gave the album positive to mixed reviews , commending the " Goodies " -esque songs , while deeming others as unoriginal and noting Ciara 's limited vocal abilities . Most critics compared the work to singer Aaliyah , and also said it had qualities of Destiny 's Child . 
 Commercially the album was a success , in the United States , the album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling 124 @,@ 750 copies in its opening week . It was later certified triple platinum by the RIAA , and as of June 2010 , had sold over 2 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States . The album also fared well internationally being certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) and Silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . Goodies earned Ciara two Grammy nominations at the 48th Grammy Awards including Best New Artist and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " 1 , 2 Step . " 
 = = Background = = 
 In her mid @-@ teens , Ciara formed the all @-@ girl group Hearsay with two of her friends . The group recorded demos , but as time went on , they began to have differences and eventually parted ways . Despite this setback , Ciara was still determined to reach her goal and signed a publishing deal as a songwriter . After leaving the group Hearsay , Texas native Ciara earned a writing job via her manager , for Atlanta 's Tricky Stewart and The @-@ Dream 's RedZone Entertainment , penning songs for Mýa and Fantasia among others . According to Ciara , no one believed in her dreams of hearing her own music on the radio until she met producer Jazze Pha in 2002 . Within five months of meeting her , Pha signed her to his Sho <unk> label and they had already recorded five tracks . About Ciara , Jazze Pha said , " What was really lacking is the Janet Jackson , high @-@ energy dance [ music ] . Ciara fills that void . She 's pretty , she can dance , she can write music , and kids love her . Everyone loves her . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 After graduating from Riverdale High School in Riverdale , Georgia in 2003 , she was signed by LaFace Records executive , L.A. Reid , whom she was introduced to by Jazze Pha . She began production on her debut album later that year . Recording sessions for the album took place at Chocolate Factory , Chicago , IL ; Circle House Studios , Miami , FL ; <unk> Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Doppler Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Futuristic Recording Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Ground Breaking Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Hit Factory Criteria , Miami , FL ; <unk> , Atlanta , GA ; Patchwerk Recordings , Atlanta , GA ; Phoenix Ave . Studios , Atlanta , GA ; Sony Music Studios , New York , NY ; Studio 609 Recordings , Philadelphia , PA ; The Studio , Philadelphia , PA . 
 In early 2004 , Ciara wrote a demo with record producer , Sean Garrett , co @-@ writer of Usher 's crunk hit " Yeah . " After hearing a demo , crunk producer Lil Jon , who also produced and was featured on " Yeah " , began to work on the full record , to have it released on LaFace , which was also Usher 's label . Originally , Ciara was reluctant to work with the track produced by Lil Jon , reportedly disliking crunk music at first . However , she decided to use the song to go against the grain and deliver lyrics in contrast of female promiscuity lines delivered by fellow female artists . To give her a title to stand out , Lil Jon dubbed Ciara as the " Princess of Crunk & B. " Dubbed the female counterpart to " Yeah " and fellow crunk hit " Freek @-@ a @-@ Leek " by Petey Pablo , it looked to capitalize on the success of the previous songs . In addition to working with Jazze Pha , whom produced most of the album , Lil Jon , and Garrett , she worked with several other Atlanta @-@ based writers and producers including Bangladesh , Johntá Austin , Jasper Cameron , and others , while featuring collaborations from Atlanta 's T.I. and Ludacris . R & B singer R. Kelly wrote and produced a track . 
 When talking about the album 's theme , Ciara said it was universal , stating , " It 's about everybody . You 'll have songs with different emotions , happy , sad , ' my heart is broken . ' What everybody goes through . " On her success with the <unk> title track , Ciara said , " I 'm very content right now . I take everything a day at a time . Every time I hear good news , I 'm shouting out , ' Praise God . ' Everybody around me is so excited , I still haven 't got it . I haven 't really felt it like they 're feeling it for me . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album consists of bouncy dance music mixed with crunk , combined with either R & B , pop or hip hop music . The ballads on the set utilize Ciara 's breathy vocals , as the uptempo pieces . Lyrical content varies on the album . Songs like " Goodies " issue a message of female empowerment and abstinence , and this is contradicted as she hints at teasing sex . Slant Magazine compared this to Britney Spears @-@ esque " layer of tease to the mature " in her early work . Utilizing influences from 80 's dance music , qualities of the work of Destiny 's Child and Aaliyah are evident . 
 " Goodies " is heavily influenced by male counterpart crunk song " Yeah " and also has been compared to Kelis 's " Milkshake . " The song makes use of a repeated whistle , " faux operated vocals " in parts and a western guitar riff near the end . " 1 , 2 Step , " which continues the club music theme , is built around a simple dance and features Missy Elliott in a pas de <unk> and according to Mike <unk> of The Times , " owes plenty to classic New York electro . " " Oh , " a downtempo song , features a heavy bassline and has been called " brooding electronic grind , " and , according to Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian , " sounds like R & B reimagined by Gary Numan . " " Pick Up the Phone " was described as a rip @-@ off of Aaliyah 's " Rock the Boat " by Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine . " Next to You , " written by R. Kelly , is part of the album 's second half of ballads , and was said to capture " Ciara 's youthful indecisiveness . " " Hotline " features a " funky clap " and beatboxing . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Goodies ' lead single , the title track , featuring Petey Pablo , was released on June 8 , 2004 . Conceived as a crunk female counterpart to Usher 's " Yeah , " the lyrical content goes against the grain , speaking of abstinence , rejecting advances because " the goodies will stay in the jar . " Critics hailed it as an " anthem of the summer " and one of the best singles of the year , complementing its dance @-@ feel and beat , and the irony of the " clever " lyrics . The single performed well worldwide , topping the charts in Canada , the United States and the United Kingdom , and charting in the top ten of other charts , receiving Platinum certification in the United States . The music video shot for the song features Ciara partying with friends . " 1 , 2 Step , " featuring Missy Elliott , was released as the second single , incorporating a hip @-@ hop and dance @-@ pop feel , deriving influences from 1980s electro music . While topping the charts in Canada , it additionally appeared the in top ten of six other countries , and was certified Platinum or Gold in multiple regions . The accompanying music video features Ciara and others performing the dance . The song was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards . 
 " Oh , " featuring Ludacris , proclaimed as a love song to Atlanta , was released as the album 's third single on March 5 , 2005 . Carrying a slow , dark tone , critics noted " Oh " as a standout track from Goodies . The song performed well worldwide , appearing the top ten of seven charts , and certified either Platinum or Gold in multiple regions . The song 's music video , which is similar to that of " Goodies , " takes place at a block party , and was nominated for Best R & B Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards . The album 's final single , " And I , " was released on August 30 , 2005 , and only managed to peak at ninety @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 . The music video for " And I " is loosely based on the 1992 film , The Bodyguard , and NBA player Carmelo Anthony portrayed Ciara 's love interest . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Raymond Fiore of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a B and commented , " If Aaliyah had lived to make another CD , it might have sounded like Goodies , " and said that other album cuts " prove she 's no one @-@ track pony . " Noting the singles " Goodies , " " 1 , 2 Step , " and " Oh " as standout tracks , Allmusic gave the album three and a half out of five stars . Steve Jones of USA Today said , " The voice doesn 't blow you away , but as with Goodies , she takes a lyrically intriguing offbeat path from time to time . Though not every song is a goodie , she does have a few treats in store . " Even though he said the album wasn 't a perfect work , Azeem Ahmad of musicOMH said , " The talent is obviously there but if we are to carry out Ciara 's wish of forgetting about " the other chicks " then there 's some fine @-@ tuning needed . For now there 's no direct threat to any other hip @-@ hop divas , but the void left by Aaliyah is still there for someone to try and fill . There 's no reason why Ciara can 't one day hold her own with the best . " <unk> Burrell of PopMatters commented that " Goodies is nothing new , but it is executed well . " 
 Although pointing out the flaws of Goodies , Dorian Lynskey of The Guardian said , " Ciara has no conviction as a sweet @-@ talker but her disconnected style clicks perfectly with the cold , clinical ( in a good way ) hits . " Mike Pattenden of The Times said , " Goodies has some tasty treats , but they 're all stacked on top of the jar , " commenting that Ciara 's " whispery , girlish voice that is often relegated to the background by stronger performers , suggesting she is little more than a pretty mouthpiece for Jon and his posse of producers . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani compared it to the work to Aaliyah , stating some of it was not up to par with the late singer , but complimented the title track @-@ esque tracks . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 , selling 124 @,@ 750 copies in its initial week . It topped the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart , before being dethroned by the Usher 's Confessions . Goodies had a seventy @-@ one week stint on the Billboard 200 , and certified three times @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on October 10 , 2006 , and has sold around 2 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States as of June 2010 . 
 Charting at twenty @-@ two on the Canadian Albums Chart , it was certified Platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association . The album charted at twenty @-@ six in on the UK Albums Chart , and spent twenty weeks on the chart . It was certified Silver by the British Phonographic Industry , remaining to be Ciara 's sole certified album in the UK . Goodies charted moderately in other countries , including the top forty on the New Zealand Albums Chart and Irish Albums Chart . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With the release of her debut single " Goodies " , Ciara was referred to as the Princess of Crunk & B. Allison Stewart of The Washington Post commented that she has a " reedy , agile voice , capable of conveying the only three emotions ( sexy , sassy , sad ) an R & B singer needs . Randall Roberts of Los Angeles Times commented that " Ciara has been the most synthetic of the R & B divas over the past decade , an electro @-@ leaning vocalist whose instrumental palate has heavily favored stark 808 beats , sassy and seductive vocal lines . " In the early to mid @-@ 2000s , some crunk music hits like " Get Low " , " Goodies " , " Yeah ! " and " Freek @-@ a @-@ Leek " produced by Lil Jon climbed to the Top 10 of the Billboard Hot 100 charts . Both " Yeah ! " and " Goodies " were the first tracks to introduce the <unk> of crunk music and contemporary R & B , called crunk & B , to the public . Both of those tracks ( performed by Usher and Ciara , respectively ) were the main mainstream hits of 2004 . Since then , crunk & B has been one of the most popular genres of sung African @-@ American music , along with electropop , the genre that replaced crunk and crunk & B in the charts in 2008 . After the album 's lead single reached the summit of the US Billboard Hot 100 , it spent seven weeks at number one , becoming the longest @-@ running number @-@ one debut single by a female artist since 1977 
 The album 's lead singles success exemplified urban music 's commercial dominance during the early 2000s , which featured massive crossover success on the Billboard charts by R & B and hip hop artists . In 2004 , all 12 songs that topped the Billboard Hot 100 were African @-@ American recording artists and accounted for 80 % of the number @-@ one R & B hits that year . Along with Usher 's streak of singles , Top 40 radio and both pop and R & B charts were topped by OutKast 's " Hey Ya ! " , Snoop Dogg 's " Drop It Like It 's Hot " , Terror Squad 's " Lean Back " , and Ciara 's " Goodies " . Chris <unk> of The Village Voice later remarked that " by the early 2000s , urban music was pop music . " 
 The work helped Ciara earn several nominations , including Best New Artist at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards . Several Goodies singles received several nominations at different ceremonies , which included " 1 , 2 Step " being nominated at the 48th Grammy Awards for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration . The song " 1 , 2 Step " from the album Goodies has received numerous awards , including both " Best Performed Songs in the ASCAP Repertory " and " Most Performed Songs " from the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers , " Best Collaboration " from the BET Awards , and " Best Dance Cut " from the Soul Train Lady of Soul Music Awards , and " Choice Music R & B / Hip Hop Track " from the Teen Choice Awards . Ciara has received nine nominations from the BET Awards , winning one of them . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " The Title " contains a sample from " Love Ballad " , written by Skip Scarborough , as performed by <unk> 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Adapted from Goodies at Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 2012 – 13 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season = 
 The 2012 – 13 Big Ten men 's basketball season began with practices in October 2012 , followed by the start of the 2012 – 13 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season in November . Conference play began in early @-@ January 2013 , and concluded in March with the 2013 Big Ten Men 's Basketball Tournament at the United Center in Chicago . All conference regular season and tournament games were broadcast nationally . For the 37th consecutive season , the conference led the nation in attendance . 
 The conference enjoyed nine postseason invitations including seven to the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament ( NCAA Tournament ) . Eight of the nine <unk> participants posted at least one win . The Conference compiled a 19 – 9 postseason record including a 14 – 7 record in the NCAA Tournament . Michigan was runner up in the NCAA Tournament and Iowa was <unk> in the 2013 National Invitation Tournament . 
 Trey Burke won almost every National Player of the Year award ( Oscar Robertson Trophy , John R. Wooden Award , Associated Press POY , Sports Illustrated POY , NABC Player of the Year and Naismith College Player of the Year ) , while Victor Oladipo won the Sporting News POY and Adolph Rupp Trophy . Oladipo also shared NABC Defensive Player of the Year with Jeff Withey . Four Big Ten athletes ( Burke , Oladipo , Cody Zeller and Deshaun Thomas ) earned 2013 NCAA All @-@ American recognition ( Burke , Oladipo and Zeller as consensus All @-@ Americans ) . In addition , Jordan Hulls won the Senior CLASS Award and Aaron Craft earned Men 's Basketball Academic All @-@ American of the Year . Burke was the Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year , Oladipo was the Big Ten Defensive Player of the Year , and Craft was the Most Outstanding Player at the 2013 Big Ten Tournament . Craft earned national defensive player of the year recognition by <unk> Burke also earned the Bob Cousy Award . 
 With Oladipo , Zeller and Burke being selected 2nd , 4th and 9th respectively in the 2013 NBA Draft , the Big Ten had its first trio of top ten selections since the 1990 NBA Draft . All five players who declared early for were drafted ( Hardaway 24th and Thomas 58th ) . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Five teams were ranked in the preseason AP Poll and USA Today / ESPN Coaches ' poll : Indiana ( number 1 AP / number 1 Coaches ) , Ohio State ( 4 / 4 ) Michigan ( 5 / 5 ) , Michigan State ( 14 / 14 ) and Wisconsin ( 23 / 21 ) . Minnesota was also receiving votes . 
 = = = Preseason watchlists = = = 
 Below are lists selected by notable committees prior to the season that represent what they anticipate to be the most likely candidates to be recognized at the end of the season for their specific awards . They are called watchlists because they are lists of players to watch for each award . 
 = = = Preseason honors = = = 
 The following players were selected to the CBS Sports , Associated Press , Sporting News and ESPN preseason All @-@ American teams and the preseason media All @-@ Big Ten team . 
 = = = Preseason national polls = = = 
 = = Preconference schedules = = 
 Ohio State won the four @-@ team Hall of Fame Tipoff tournament on November 18 at Mohegan Sun Arena . Indiana won the four @-@ team Legends Classic on November 20 at Barclays Center . Illinois won the eight @-@ team Maui Invitational Tournament on November 21 at Lahaina Civic Center . Michigan won the sixteen @-@ team NIT Season Tip @-@ off tournament on November 23 at Madison Square Garden . On November 24 , Northwestern won the four @-@ team South Padre Island Invitational . 
 = = = Early @-@ season tournament victories = = = 
 * Although these tournaments include more teams , only the number listed play for the championship . 
 = = = 2012 ACC – Big Ten Challenge = = = 
 ACC – Big Ten Challenge results : 
 * All Times Eastern 
 = = Rankings = = 
 By achieving high rankings throughout the season , the Big Ten was able to keep at least three teams in the top 10 of the national polls during 10 of the 11 weeks of the conference portion of the season . As a result , the Big Ten set a record for most matchups between two top 10 opponents in conference play with a total of 9 such games . Michigan played in six with a 3 – 3 record and Indiana played in five , winning all of them . Michigan State , Minnesota and Ohio State also played in top 10 games . 
 = = Conference Schedules = = 
 Before the season , it was announced that for the sixth consecutive season , all regular season conference games and conference tournament games would be broadcast nationally by CBS Sports , ESPN Inc. family of networks including ESPN , ESPN2 and ESPNU , and the Big Ten Network . During the season , the Big Ten led the nation in attendance for the 37th consecutive season with an average attendance of 13 @,@ 114 , which paced the nation 's conferences by over 2 @,@ 400 per game . 
 = = = Conference Matrix = = = 
 This table summarizes the head @-@ to @-@ head results between teams in conference play . ( x ) indicates games remaining this season . 
 On February 2 , 2013 , Michigan ( number 1 AP / number 2 Coaches ) and Indiana ( 3 / 3 ) appeared on ESPN 's College GameDay at Assembly Hall . Indiana won 81 – 73 , and the television broadcast of the game on ESPN set a Big Ten record for viewership with 4 @.@ 035 million viewers . 
 The Iowa vs. Nebraska game , scheduled for February 21 , 2013 at the <unk> Center , was rescheduled for February 23 due to a winter storm . 
 = = Big Ten Tournament seeding = = 
 These are the Big Ten standings including tiebreakers and conference tournament games . Bold indicates the winner of the Big Ten Tournament . 
 * Regular season record 
 * * Conference record including Big Ten Tournament games 
 All tournament games were nationally broadcast . The tournament set an attendance record with 124 @,@ 000 spectators attending 6 sessions , shattering the 109 @,@ 769 total set for the 2001 tournament . 
 = = Player of the week = = 
 Players of the week 
 Throughout the conference regular season , the Big Ten offices named one or two players of the week each Monday . 
 On December 11 , Paul also earned United States Basketball Writers Association Oscar Robertson National Player of the Week recognition . On January 8 , Burke earned the Oscar Robertson National Players of the Week . On April 1 , Burke earned ESPN.com Player of the Week recognition . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 = = = Big Ten Tournament = = = 
 March 14 – 17 , 2013 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament , United Center , Chicago , IL . 
 = = = NCAA Tournament = = = 
 The Big Ten entered seven teams in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , ranging from Indiana making its 37th trip and earning a number one seed to Minnesota making its 8th appearance and <unk> an eleven seed . The Big Ten became the first conference to send four teams to the Sweet Sixteen in back @-@ to @-@ back years since the 1997 and 1998 tournaments . Although it was the Big Ten 's fifth time advancing four teams , it was the first time with consecutive occurrences . Entering Sweet Sixteen round with four strong contenders spread across four regions , there was talk of the conference matching or surpassing the 1985 Big East Conference performance with three final four entrants . Only Michigan advanced . Burke was named South Regional Tournament Most Outstanding Player . Michigan made its fourth appearance in the final four , giving the conference a total of 43 such appearances . Michigan was part of the highest attendance National Championship game to date with an attendance of 74 @,@ 326 . 
 = = = National Invitation Tournament = = = 
 Iowa made the school 's first trip to the NIT semifinals at Madison Square Garden and marked the conference 's second consecutive year sending a team to the semifinals . 
 = = = College Basketball Invitational = = = 
 = = = CollegeInsider.com Postseason Tournament = = = 
 There were no entrants from the Big Ten Conference in the CollegeInsider.com Postseason Tournament . 
 = = = 2013 NBA Draft = = = 
 Junior Deshaun Thomas declared for the draft on April 5 . On April 9 , junior Oladipo entered the draft . On April 10 sophomore Zeller announced plans to enter the draft . On April 14 , sophomore Burke entered the Draft . On April 17 , Hardaway declared for the NBA Draft . Those 5 first team All @-@ Big Ten selections were the only players from the conference to declare early for the NBA Draft . Burke , Hardaway , Trevor <unk> , Oladipo , Brandon Paul , Thomas , and Zeller were among the 60 players invited to the 2013 NBA Draft Combine . The following all @-@ conference selections were listed as seniors : Jared Berggren , <unk> , Paul , Christian Watford and D. J. Richardson . 
 Victor Oladipo ( 2nd ) , Cody Zeller ( 4th ) and Burke ( 9th ) combined to give the Big Ten its first top ten trio since the 1990 NBA Draft . Hardaway ( 24th ) joined his father ( 14th in 1989 NBA Draft ) as a first round selection . 
 = = Honors and Awards = = 
 = = = Watchlists = = = 
 On January 9 , 4 Big Ten points guards ( Burke , Keith Appling , Craft and Andre Hollins ) among the 20 Cousy Award finalists . On January 10 the Wooden Award midseason top 25 list was announced and it included Burke , Brandon Paul and Deshaun Thomas . On January 31 , Burke , Victor Oladipo , Thomas and Cody Zeller were named to the Oscar Robertson Trophy ( USBWA National Player of the Year ) midseason top 12 list , while Yogi Ferrell , Glenn Robinson III and Nik Stauskas were named to the Wayman Tisdale Award ( USBWA National Freshman of the Year ) top 12 midseason list . Jared Berggren , Aaron Craft , Jordan Hulls and Zeller were first team All @-@ District selections placing them among the 40 candidates for the 15 @-@ man Academic All @-@ American team . On February 26 , Oladipo , Zeller , Thomas , Paul , Burke and Berggren were among the top 30 finalists for the Naismith Award . On March 4 , Burke , Oladipo , Thomas and Zeller were announced on the 14 @-@ man Robertson watchlist , while Gary Harris was among 8 players on the Tisdale watchlist . On March 9 , Burke , Oladipo , Thomas and Zeller were named as top 15 Wooden Award finalists . On March 11 , Burke was named one of five finalists for the Cousy Award . On March 24 , Burke and Oladipo was named among four finalists for the Naismith Award . 
 = = = All @-@ Americans = = = 
 Jordan Hulls was named a finalist for the Senior CLASS Award , making him one of ten Senior All @-@ Americans . Craft , a repeat Academic All @-@ America selection , was named the Men 's Basketball Academic All @-@ America Team Members of the Year . He was joined on the Academic All @-@ America first team by Zeller , and Hulls was a third team selection . 
 Burke and Oladipo were named a first @-@ team All @-@ American by Sporting News ( TSN ) on March 11 , while Thomas was a second @-@ team selection and Zeller was named to the third @-@ team . Burke and Oladipo were also named to the first team by the USBWA On March 18 , while Zeller was named to its second team . Burke and Zeller were named All @-@ American by Sports Illustrated ( SI ) on March 19 . On March 20 Burke and Oladipo were named to the CBSSports.com All @-@ American first team , while Thomas was a second team selection , Zeller was a third team selection and Craft was Defensive Player of the Year . On March 26 , Burke , Oladipo , Thomas , and Zeller were selected to the 21 @-@ man 2013 Lute Olson All @-@ America Team . On March 28 , Burke and Oladipo were named first team All @-@ American by the NABC , while Zeller was a second team selection and Thomas was a third team selection . On April 1 , the Associated Press gave the Big Ten the same recognitions as the NABC : 1st team : Burke and Oladipo , 2nd team : Zeller and 3rd team : Thomas . On the same day , Burke , Oladipo , Zeller and Thomas were named to the 10 @-@ man Wooden All @-@ American team of finalists for the Wooden Award . Also on April 1 , Glenn Robinson III and Gary Harris were named to the 21 @-@ man 2013 Kyle Macy Freshman All @-@ America team . 
 = = = National awards = = = 
 TSN named Oladipo National Player of the Year on March 13 . SI also named Burke National Player of the Year on the 19th . On April 4 , Burke was named Associated Press College Basketball Player of the Year . Burke also won the Bob Cousy Award on April 4 . On April 5 , Burke won the Oscar Robertson Trophy from the USBWA as well as the John R. Wooden Award . Jordan Hulls won the Senior CLASS Award . On April 7 , Burke won the NABC Player of the Year and Naismith College Player of the Year awards . Oladipo was named co @-@ National Defensive Player of the Year ( along with Jeff Withey ) by the NABC . Oladipo also won the Adolph Rupp Trophy . 
 = = = All @-@ Big Ten Awards and Teams = = = 
 On March 11 , The Big Ten announced most of its conference awards . On March 27 , 38 Big Ten men 's basketball players were recognized as Winter Academic All @-@ Big Ten honorees for maintaining 3 @.@ 0 averages . 
 = = = USBWA = = = 
 On March 12 , the U.S. Basketball Writers Association released its 2012 – 13 Men 's All @-@ District Teams , based upon voting from its national membership . There were nine regions from coast to coast , and a player and coach of the year were selected in each . The following lists all the Big Ten representatives selected within their respective regions . 
 = = = NABC = = = 
 The National Association of Basketball Coaches announced their Division I All ‐ District teams on March 26 , recognizing the nation ’ s best men ’ s collegiate basketball student @-@ athletes . Selected and voted on by member coaches of the NABC , 240 student @-@ athletes , from 24 districts were chosen . The selections on this list were then eligible for the State Farm Coaches ’ Division I All @-@ America teams . The following list represented the District 7 players chosen to the list . 
 = = = Coaching = = = 
 Tom Izzo will be recognized with the 2013 Wayman Tisdale Humanitarian Award on April 15 . John Beilein was selected as an assistant coach for the 2013 World University Games . Bo Ryan earned the NABC 's Coaches vs. Cancer Champion Award . 
 = = = USA Basketball = = = 
 In addition to Beilein being a coach for the World University Games , the Big Ten was represented at the games by Yogi Ferrell , Will <unk> , Aaron White and Adreian Payne . 
 = Cool Hand Peter = 
 " Cool Hand Peter " is the eighth episode of the tenth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . In the episode , Peter Griffin and his friends Joe , Quagmire and Cleveland ( who has returned to Quahog ) decide to go on a road trip to New Orleans , Louisiana . Whilst driving they are stopped by a police officer , arrested and thrown in jail by the sheriff who abuses his power , and plants marijuana in their car . The group then attempt to escape the prison due to their stay being extended indefinitely , and return to Quahog . 
 The episode served as a follow @-@ up to the exit of the main character Cleveland Brown , who left Family Guy in order to star in his own Fox spin @-@ off , entitled The Cleveland Show . Main cast member and former series writer Mike Henry returned to the series to provide the voice of Cleveland . The episode also featured a crossover between Family Guy and The Cleveland Show , both of which were created by executive producer Seth MacFarlane , and included cameo appearances by two of The Cleveland Show 's main characters . 
 First announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , the episode was written by Artie Johann and Shawn Ries , and directed by Brian Iles . The episode received mixed reviews , praising its structure and humor , but criticizing it for not living up to the 1967 drama film Cool Hand Luke , which the episode was named after . According to Nielsen ratings , it was watched by 7 @.@ 14 million people in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Ralph Garman , Bob Gunton , Sanaa Lathan , Julius Sharpe , and Jennifer Tilly , along with several recurring guest voice actors from the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Cleveland Brown returns to Quahog for a week , he visits his old friends Peter , Joe and Quagmire . When Peter gets tired of his wife constantly demanding that he do chores , the group decides to take a road trip to New Orleans . While their husbands are away , Lois , Bonnie and Donna proceed to enjoy " girl time " , eventually resulting in wine @-@ induced childish antics , such as making Brian wear a bumblebee costume . 
 While driving through a rural area in Georgia , Peter and his group are pulled over by the local sheriff , and Peter makes every effort to talk as annoyingly and rudely to him as possible . The Sheriff is more offended by Cleveland 's attempt to calmly explain themselves , prompting him to punch out one of their headlights and plant a bag of marijuana in their trunk . The group is then sentenced to work at a county work camp for two weeks . As their stay nears its scheduled end , the warden approaches them and tells them that their stay has been extended , without any judicial oversight . Learning from another prisoner that they might be locked up forever , the group decides to break out of the prison when the prison guard 's eyes are diverted . Successful in their attempt , they soon come across a house where they discover a set of handcuff and shackle keys . 
 They then discover that they are in the sheriff 's home , who returns soon after . Peter , who almost gives them away after accidentally farting , pretends to be the sheriff 's wife while hiding in a closet , and he convinces the sheriff to let the fugitives go free . This exchange ends with the sheriff asking for a hug , prompting Peter to jump out of the closet and reveal the group , causing the sheriff to give chase to them after revealing that he was never married . The entire police force then chases them , until they are able to jump on a train and arrive in Quahog , only to be met by the Georgia sheriff and his deputies . Joe , however , had called ahead and arranged for the Quahog police department to arrive and rescue them . Joe then smashes the sheriff 's vehicle and shoots him in the leg as retribution for the sheriff 's corruption and abuse towards the group . Joe tells the sheriff that just because he has a badge does not mean he can treat anyone the way he wants to . Without hesitation , Joe angrily demands that the sheriff and his deputies leave Quahog , which they reluctantly do . The gang congratulates Joe when Mayor West appears , riding on a bike and says , " Hey , what are you guys , on a date ? Gay ! " At the end of the show , Peter acknowledges that they 've done a wrap @-@ up of what they 've learned hundreds of times and just mumbles the cadence , which is then picked up by Lois and the family . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was directed by series regular Brian Iles and written by Artie Johann and Shawn Ries , in their first episode of the series . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Spencer Porter , Anthony Blasucci , Mike Desilets , and Deepak Sethi serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . The episode saw the re @-@ appearance of former main cast member Mike Henry as the voice of Cleveland Brown . The actor had previously left the role on Family Guy , in order to star as the character in his own spinoff , entitled The Cleveland Show , which was co @-@ created by Henry . Sanaa Lathan , who portrays Donna Tubbs on The Cleveland Show , also guest starred as her character in the episode . " Cool Hand Peter " was first announced at the 2011 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 23 , 2011 by series showrunners and executive producers Steve Callaghan and Mark Hentemann . 
 In addition to the regular cast and Lathan , actor Bob Gunton , voice actor Julius Sharpe , and actress Jennifer Tilly , who portrayed the sheriff , warden , UPS Guy and Bonnie Swanson , respectively , guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , voice actor Ralph Garman , and writer John Viener made minor appearances throughout the episode . Recurring cast members Adam West , and Patrick Warburton also appeared in the episode , portraying the characters of Adam West and Joe Swanson , respectively . Bob Gunton 's voicing of the warden is probably a nod to his most famous role , that of the warden in the film The Shawshank Redemption . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is a reference to the 1967 American film Cool Hand Luke . In the opening scene of the episode , while Peter , Joe , Cleveland and Quagmire are drinking at the local bar , Peter 's wife , Lois , calls him on his phone . The theme song from The Cleveland Show then begins playing as Peter 's ringtone . While the group drives to New Orleans , they attempt to pass the time by playing various games in the car . One of the games involves deciding whether to be a " hobo , " or former German Nazi leader Adolf Hitler . After the group is pulled over by the sheriff , and arrested for drug possession , they are all taken to court , where the jury is revealed to be various characters from the Fox animation series The Simpsons . The warden of the prison resembles the warden in the movie The Shawshank Redemption , who is also authoritarian and cruel . In fact , the voice of the warden is the voice of Bob Gunton , the actor who portrayed the warden in The " Shawshank Redemption " . After the group escapes from jail , Peter remarks that he is filled with hunger , and would like to stop at a " Burger Queen " or " McDaniels " along the way back to Quahog , a reference to the American fast food restaurants Burger King and McDonalds , as indicated by Quagmire . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Cool Hand Peter " was broadcast on Fox in the United States on December 4 , 2011 . It was watched by 7 @.@ 14 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with the Desperate Housewives on ABC , The Good Wife on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 6 / 8 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating Allen Gregory and The Cleveland Show , in addition to significantly edging out both shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings increased significantly from the previous week 's episode , " Amish Guy " . 
 The episode received mixed reviews , with Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club calling the storyline " disappointing . " He wrote of the episode , " At this juncture , disappointment is an expectation , something I have to fight against whenever I sit down to watch the show in an attempt to give each episode a fair shake . " He continued , " This week , I was at a bit of a loss , because despite a return to an older , more successful formula , with a clearly plotted path , Family Guy didn 't muster up enough material to fill out the A @-@ plot of a half hour . " McFarland also stated that the episode did not live up to the 1967 drama film Cool Hand Luke , that the title of the episode was named after . He concluded his review of the episode by giving the episode a grade of C. <unk> R. Moore of Ology also found the episode to be unimpressive , noting , " It 's good fun while it 's on , but nothing here really sticks or adds to anything new to love about Family Guy . " Moore also commented , " it 's a pretty weak episode of Family Guy , where the most memorable joke of the night involves a thought bubble where Quagmire pulls a string of beads out of a woman 's vagina . " In the conclusion of the review , Moore gave the episode a 6 / 10 score . 
 = University of Campinas = 
 The University of Campinas ( Portuguese : Universidade <unk> de Campinas ) , commonly called Unicamp , is a public research university in the state of São Paulo , Brazil , and one of the best universities in the country and in Latin America . 
 Established in 1962 , Unicamp was designed from scratch as an integrated research center unlike other top Brazilian universities , usually created by the consolidation of previously existing schools and institutes . Its research focus reflects on almost half of its students being graduate students , the largest proportion across all large universities in Brazil , and also in the large number of graduate programs it offers : 153 compared to 70 undergraduate programs . It also offers several non @-@ degree granting open @-@ enrollment courses to around 8 @,@ 000 students through its extension school . 
 Its main campus occupies 3 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 860 acres ) located in the Barão Geraldo district , a suburban area 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the center of Campinas , and , built shortly after the creation of the university . It also has satellite campuses in Limeira , Piracicaba and Paulínia , and manages two technical high schools located in Campinas and Limeira . Funding is provided almost entirely by the state government and , like other Brazilian public universities , no tuition fees or administrative fees are charged for undergraduate and graduate programs . 
 Unicamp is responsible for around 15 % of Brazilian research , a disproportionately high number when compared to much larger and older institutions in the country such as the University of São Paulo . It also produces more patents than any other research organization in Brazil , being second only to the state @-@ owned oil company , Petrobras . Multiple international university rankings place it amongst the best universities in the world , with QS placing it in the Top 200 globally and ranking it the 11th best university under 50 years , and in 2015 it was rated as the best university in the country by Brazil 's Ministry of Education . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1960s : Foundation = = = 
 In the early 1960s the Government of the State of São Paulo planned to open a new research center in the interior of the state to promote development and industrialization in the region , and commissioned Zeferino Vaz , founder of the University of São Paulo 's School of Medicine in <unk> Preto , to organize it . In parallel , a medical school was being planned in Campinas , a demand from the local population that dated from the early 1940s . The School of Medicine of Campinas was created by law in 1959 , but actual implementation never took place . 
 The new university was created by law on December 28 , 1962 , but effective functioning begun in 1966 . Before that , only the School of Medicine functioned . In April of 1963 the first vestibular , the general admissions exam , happened , with 1 @,@ 592 candidates competing for 50 spots in the medicine program . The first lecture in the newly created University of Campinas took place on May 20 of the same year . By 1965 , the organizing commission for the new university started looking for a location for a new campus . 
 A large area comprising 110 hectares ( 270 acres ) was donated by the Almeida Prado family , located in a valley in the district of Barão Geraldo in the city of Campinas , near the intersections of multiple highways . Until then , Barão Geraldo was a small village surrounded by farmland , in particular sugar cane plantations . The new development brought dramatic change to the district , resulting in entire new neighborhoods being zoned , planned and built , usually by the same Almeida Prado family . 
 Work on the new campus begun on October 5 , 1966 , and the first building completed was the Institute of Biology , followed by administrative buildings . In the same year , Zeferino Vaz was nominated the rector . In parallel to the new campus , new units were opened in other cities , absorbing local schools . The Dental School of Piracicaba was absorbed in 1967 , and in 1969 the Engineering School of Limeira . 
 = = = 1970 – 1990 : Growth and crisis = = = 
 Over the following two decades , the new university expanded rapidly . The campus quickly grew to 19 institutes and schools , and after Zeferino Vaz died in 1981 was named after him . With the campus construction completed , the School of Medical Sciences ( formerly the School of Medicine of Campinas ) was moved into the new campus , and its teaching hospital , Hospital de <unk> , became the largest public hospital in the region . 
 Expansion on the campus continued rapidly , with new buildings , institutes and expansions being added nearly every year . But by the late 1970s , the university faced a crisis . During its fast expansion , it relied on draft bylaws , mostly borrowed from the University of São Paulo , and lacked formal internal regulations with the aging Zeferino Vaz , while no longer the rector , acting as a moderating force between parties with conflicting interests , in particular the leftist academic community and the State 's government , appointed by the conservative military regime ruling the country . 
 After Zeferino 's death in 1981 , a conflict took place between the university 's General Coordinator , appointed and backed by the government , and the Directive Council , composed of directors of the different institutes . The rector introduced new rules reducing the power of the General Coordinator . As retaliation , the State 's government removed 6 members of the Directive Council , replacing them with people from the state 's Education Council , loyal to the governor , Paulo <unk> . 
 Tensions between the academic community and the government @-@ appointed counselors increased , with the future Minister of Education , Paulo Renato Costa Souza , then president of the Faculty Association , classifying the episode as a " white intervention " . Following the dismissal of several institute heads and members of the administration , the administrative workers went on strike , with the support of students and faculty . With activities in the university frozen by the strike , the governor declared a formal intervention in the university in October 1981 . 
 Despite the police @-@ backed intervention , the university continued on strike . The appointed institute heads failed to break the stalemate between internal and external forces , and by early 1982 , discussions begun on a new list of candidates to the rectorship . Eventually , José <unk> Pinotti , a former dean of the School of Medical Sciences generally considered a moderate , was selected by the academic community and accepted by the governor . In the following week , on April 19 , 1982 , the intervention was lifted , and academic activities resumed normally . 
 After the crisis , Unicamp saw a period of renewal and restructuring . In 1983 the bylaws were rewritten , ensuring the autonomy of the academic community , and the new management structure for the campus was implemented . In 1986 the newly created University Council replaces the previous Directive Council as the supreme body of the university . The last years of the 1980s saw a reformulation of the admissions exam , expansion of the laboratories and the completion of the first units of the student housing . 
 = = = 1990 onwards = = = 
 With a new administrative structure capable of supporting continuous growth and with its autonomy secured , Unicamp went through a period of consolidation in the 1990s . There was an increase in night programs , created to provide an alternative for low @-@ income students who had to work during the day , and to increase utilization of classrooms and the existing infrastructure , reaching one third of total available places . 
 The period also saw an expansion of the technology industry in the region , centered around Unicamp , with Motorola , IBM , <unk> , Lucent Technologies and many others set up research labs and production centers in the region driven by the large number of highly qualified students graduating every year , culminating in the opening of the Institute of Computing in 1996 . 
 In the 2000s Unicamp consolidated itself as one of the leading research and education centers in Latin America but also brought new challenges : just as with other public universities in Brazil , the high payroll costs ( over 90 % of the total budget ) constrain investment and expansion . This is further aggravated by the economic depression that Brazil is facing since 2014 , the largest in the country 's history . 
 = = Campus = = 
 = = = Main campus = = = 
 The flagship campus of the University of Campinas is located in the district of Barão Geraldo , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the center of Campinas . It currently occupies an area of 350 hectares ( 860 acres ) situated in a valley surrounded by gentle rolling hills and is bounded on the west by the urban area of Barão Geraldo , on the south and east by farmland and to the north by a lake and a new industrial park built in the 2000s . 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 The campus has a unique design , with the main library , student service buildings and restaurant in a central circular plaza , and most of the academic buildings located in blocks emanating from the center in a radial fashion . The different areas of study are grouped in larger sections , but neighboring other areas with which they share similarities : the philosophy buildings mark the frontier between human sciences , mathematics and economics , while the School of Food Engineering is bordered by the chemical engineering and biology buildings . The architect responsible for the overall design of the campus was João Carlos Bross . 
 Streets are named after significant contributors to each field , including Elis Regina and Carlos Gomes Streets , a Brazilian singer and a composer , respectively , Alan Turing Avenue and others . 
 = = = = History = = = = 
 The area occupied by the campus was part of the much larger Rio das <unk> farm , owned by the prominent Almeida Prado family . To set up a new campus , Zeferino Vaz was looking for a large , flat area in the outskirts of the city , where he would have the freedom to design the campus and its surroundings from scratch . Interested in developing the area of the farm around Barão Geraldo , the family donated an initial area of 110 hectares ( 270 acres ) to the university . The remainder of the farmland was eventually zoned and developed into multiple neighborhoods , but the main historical farmhouse and its surroundings remain , now a protected heritage site and a natural reserve . 
 With the land secured , the campus was designed in a way to ensure the maximum collaboration between the different sciences , with buildings laid along radial streets emanating from a central circular plaza , which also hosted administrative buildings . The layout of the campus would eventually be used on the design of the university 's logo , created by Max <unk> , which is essentially a simplified map of the core circle of the campus . This design is similar to the University of California , Irvine campus , build around the same time . 
 Construction started in 1966 , with General Castello Branco , the first president of Brazil 's military regime , laying the cornerstone of the Institute of Biology , which was inaugurated in 1968 , and classes started in the new campus on the following year . In 1971 the area of the campus was expanded by 130 hectares ( 320 acres ) , more than doubling its size , to accommodate the move of the School of Medical Sciences , until then located across several buildings in Campinas , to the new campus . This expansion saw the construction of a massive public hospital , the Hospital das <unk> ( HC ) , which began serving the public in 1979 . 
 While initial construction was considered complete by 1978 , the campus has grown through continuous addition of new buildings and institutes . In 2014 , after years of negotiation , the university decided to buy the Argentina Farm , located on the east side of the campus , increasing the total area by 60 % to 350 hectares ( 860 acres ) . This purchase will allow for expansion of the medical sciences and athletics areas , as well as new laboratories . 
 = = = = Medical center = = = = 
 Unicamp 's main campus houses the School of Medical Sciences ' teaching hospital , the Hospital das <unk> . Construction started in 1975 and the hospital opened its first clinics and patient facilities in 1979 , but was only fully operational in 1985 , when the School of Medical Sciences was transferred from Campinas ' maternity to the new campus . 
 The hospital has almost 1 @,@ 000 beds , and serves half a million people every year through Brazil 's unified public health system , SUS , performing on average 40 surgeries and 13 births every day . In the 2000 's , the hospital was changed from a primary and secondary care to a specialized tertiary care center , receiving complex cases from other hospitals and clinics in the region , but around 60 % of patients in the hospital are still cases that could be handled by local health centers . 
 The hospital directly employs 3 @,@ 100 people , and also serves as a practice center for the university 's faculty and a training and residency center for the students of medicine , nursery and speech therapy . 
 = = = = Synchrotron lab = = = = 
 While not part of Unicamp , the National Synchrotron Light Laboratory ( <unk> ) is a research institution focused on physics , structural biology and nanotechnology that maintains close ties with the university and is operated as part of the National Center for Research in Energy and Materials ( <unk> ) . The laboratory was designed in 1983 and began operating in 1997 , located next to the main campus . The <unk> has Latin America 's only particle accelerator , a synchrotron , used as a synchrotron light source designed and built in Brazil for various physical , chemical , geological , and biological studies . 
 = = = Limeira = = = 
 Unicamp 's presence in Limeira , a city about 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from Campinas , dates from the late 1960s , when the young university absorbed the Engineering School of Limeira , which became the School of Civil Engineering . While this school was eventually transferred to the Campinas campus in 1989 , new programs were launched by the university in Limeira , creating <unk> , the School of Technology of Limeira , which still exists and is located near the center of the city , focused on technical higher education . 
 In 2008 Unicamp decided to establish a new campus in Limeira , and in 2008 the School of Applied Sciences was created , offering programs such as public administration , business management , nutrition and industrial engineering . The total undergraduate class size for the new campus is 480 students per year . 
 = = = Piracicaba = = = 
 In 1967 Unicamp absorbed the School of <unk> of Piracicaba , founded in 1955 and located 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) northwest of the main campus in Campinas . With over 1 @,@ 000 students , the school was initially located in a historic building near the center of the city , and in the 1970s a new campus was built , occupying an area of 60 hectares ( 150 acres ) in what was then the outskirts of the city , and a short distance from USP 's <unk> . 
 = = = Paulínia = = = 
 In the neighboring city of Paulínia , the university operates a multidisciplinary research center focused on <unk> , acquired in 1986 from Monsanto and integrated into the university as <unk> . As part of the acquisition , Unicamp gained access and continued research into subjects previously explored at the center , specially agricultural sciences . Research is usually funded by external parties , such as companies and other universities . 
 = = = COTUCA and COTIL = = = 
 In addition to the higher education programs , Unicamp is also responsible for running and funding two technical high schools , the Technical High School of Campinas ( COTUCA ) and the Technical High School of Limeira ( COTIL ) . <unk> was located for 50 years in a historical building near the center of the city built in 1918 which also housed Unicamp for a brief period before the current campus was built . In 2014 it was transferred to the main campus as the old building went through renovations . Both schools are amongst the best public high schools in the country , and are highly competitive , with admissions done through a selection exam open to middle @-@ school students . 
 = = Organization and administration = = 
 Similarly to other Brazilian institutions , Unicamp is composed of several semi @-@ autonomous teaching units , designated as schools and institutes . Each unit is headed by a director from the faculty , equivalent to a dean , elected by the faculty and student representatives . 
 The university 's administration is structured in a way similar to other public universities in Brazil . The supreme decision body is the University Council ( <unk> ) , composed of all deans , plus several representatives from the academic community , students , administrative staff and the external community . The council meets roughly 4 to 5 times per year , ruling on high level administrative decisions such as approving the budget and has the final word in internal administrative processes . Routine administration is left to the rector , similar to a university chancellor in English @-@ speaking countries , and the rectorate . 
 = = = Rectors = = = 
 The rector is chosen by the governor of the State of São Paulo from a list of 3 candidates elected by the university 's community , including students and administrative staff . Traditionally , the governor always selects the candidate with the largest number of votes , but it retains the power to choose a different one should it decide to do so . The rector serves for a term of 4 years before a new election is held , and can not be reelected in the following term . Zeferino Vaz was the first rector and held the position for 12 years until his mandatory retirement . 
 Zeferino Vaz ( 1966 – 1978 ) 
 <unk> Alves de Moraes ( 1978 – 1982 ) 
 José <unk> Pinotti ( 1982 – 1986 ) 
 Paulo Renato Costa Souza ( 1986 – 1990 ) 
 Carlos Vogt ( 1990 – 1994 ) 
 José Martins Filho ( 1994 – 1998 ) 
 <unk> Tavares ( 1998 – 2002 ) 
 Carlos Henrique de Brito Cruz ( 2002 – 2005 ) 
 José <unk> Jorge ( 2005 – 2009 ) 
 Fernando Ferreira Costa ( 2009 – 2013 ) 
 José <unk> Jorge ( 2013 – present ) 
 = = = Schools and Institutes = = = 
 Unicamp is composed of a total of 24 units , 10 of which are institutes and 14 are schools . The university is also home to 22 interdisciplinary centers which conduct research and outreach on topics ranging from dance ( such as <unk> ) to computing and education ( such as <unk> ) . 
 Unicamp is also responsible for two technical high schools , the Technical High School of Campinas ( COTUCA ) and the Technical High School of Limeira ( COTIL ) . 
 = = = Funding & financial information = = = 
 Like other public universities in Brazil , Unicamp is almost entirely funded by the government , in this particular case of the State of São Paulo . Funding is provided mainly from sales taxes , but a small percentage of total budget is obtained from donations , paid extension programs and corporate sponsors . 
 The total budget proposed for 2016 is of R $ 2 @.@ 3 billion , a decrease by almost 7 % in real terms when compare to 2015 . Fixed costs ( payroll , interest and debt service ) will account for 92 @.@ 2 % of the government funding . And additional 4 % is spent on student assistance and 2 % on utilities . 
 A problem faced by Unicamp , and other public universities in Brazil , is the high dependency on economic conditions , that directly impact tax earnings , while most of the expenses , payroll specially , are indexed to inflation . While not as critical as in similar universities ( at the University of São Paulo payroll accounted for over 106 % of the total funding available in 2014 ) , Unicamp currently faces a funding crisis , with total funding expected to decrease in real terms while payroll , which takes around 85 % of total university funding , is expected to increase in line with inflation . This situation is aggravated by the long @-@ running trend of raising staff salaries above inflation as a response to the annual strikes led by the workers ' union , STU . 
 = = Academics = = 
 At Unicamp , academic studies are usually divided into four main areas : exact sciences ( which includes formal and physical sciences ) , human sciences ( roughly equivalent to social science , including Arts ) , biological sciences ( roughly equivalent to life sciences ) and technologies ( including engineering and technical studies ) . This division reflects on how the university are structured how the campuses was designed . 
 = = = Undergraduate programs = = = 
 Unicamp offers 70 different degree @-@ granting undergraduate programs , covering nearly all different areas of science . Completing an undergraduate program grants either a bachelor 's degree or a licentiate degree , although some programs offer both degrees . In line with the Brazilian educational system , no graduate education is required to practice any profession , including law and medicine , so undergraduate programs vary in length to provide all the necessary training . Most programs at Unicamp last a total of 4 years , with engineering programs typically lasting 5 years and medicine lasting 6 years . 
 The academic year is aligned with the calendar year , with classes usually starting in late February , and ending in early December , the beginning of summer in Brazil . The year is divided into two semester terms , and all courses are a semester long . While there is a suggested curriculum for each program , students are free to choose any classes to attend during a specific semester , and class attribution is done in the basis of grade average , with higher @-@ graded students having priority when choosing classes . 
 Students are admitted to a single program and are expected to take all the classes required to complete that program in the number of semesters prescribed , although they can take 50 % longer before facing administrative measures . While each program is usually managed by a single school or institute ( exceptions apply , such as Computer Engineering , co @-@ managed by the Institute of Computing and the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering ) , classes are usually ministered across different institutes or schools . 
 Program class sizes usually range between 30 and 60 students per year for each program , but some programs can have over 100 students per year , and are named by the year of admission : the class of 2015 is composed of all students entering in the year of 2015 , regardless of the program length or expected graduation . There is no campus @-@ wide graduation ceremony , with each school or institute conducting its own . 
 = = = Graduate programs = = = 
 Unicamp offers 153 postgraduate programs , with about half of those being masters , serving almost 16 thousand students , one third of which come from outside the State of São Paulo , and around 5 % are international students . Just as with undergraduate studies , students pay no tuition fees . While the programs are coordinated by the rectorship , the individual institutions have a lot of freedom on defining the focus , length and admission process of each program . 
 = = = Extension programs and community outreach = = = 
 Unicamp offers over one thousand extension programs to the community , with different levels of minimum requirements ( high school degree , undergraduate degree , etc . ) and across all areas of study , focusing mainly on specialization courses and community outreach . The programs are mainly coordinated by the Pro @-@ <unk> for Extension and Outreach ( Pró @-@ <unk> de <unk> e <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) . <unk> aims to promote actions of extension and culture through integration with society , disseminating and acquiring knowledge through the academic community . 
 Specialization programs are either offered by Unicamp 's extension school , <unk> , or directly by the schools and institutes . In the past 25 years , over 100 @,@ 000 students have been reached and in 2014 , Unicamp joined <unk> and currently eight online courses are being offered , two of them are between the most popular <unk> courses in Brazil . Outreach actions take a variety of forms , including events , publications , technological , educational , cultural and social products and services . The Department for Cultural Development hosts several events , usually open for the surrounding community . Events are also held at the Casa do Lago Cultural Space and at the Cultural Center for Social Inclusion and Integration . 
 Every year , Unicamp also hosts an open doors event ( Unicamp de Portas <unk> , UPA ) , in which the main campus is visited by over 50 thousand high school students from across the country . The event provides presentations and discussions on the role of the university in the society , as well as career presentations and tours , with the students visiting several areas of the university and gaining a better understanding of the different areas of study . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 Unicamp employs close to 1 @,@ 800 professors , nearly all with at least a doctoral degree . The faculty career is structured in three major tiers : 
 Doctor Professor ( Professor <unk> , equivalent to assistant professor ) : candidates must have a doctoral or equivalent degree 
 Associate Professor ( Professor Associado ) : candidates must have a Livre <unk> title , similar to the German <unk> 
 <unk> Professor ( Professor Titular ) – MS @-@ 6 ( top rank , only MS @-@ 6 professors are allowed to hold positions such as Dean of a Faculty / School or Rector of the University ) 
 Hiring is done through a civil service examination , including a written test , a teaching examination , academic history analysis and other additional criteria . The same process is required for professors changing tiers : an associate professor pursuing a tenure position must go through the same examination process compete with other external candidates for the position . The two initial tiers also include sub levels , and professors are promoted between them for merit . Monthly starting salary for a full @-@ time assistant professorship is around R $ 10 thousand , and for a tenured position around R $ 15 thousand . Uniquely among public universities in Brazil , Unicamp has a career focused on full @-@ time research . Currently there are approximately 100 full @-@ time researchers at the university . 
 = = = Library system = = = 
 The university 's library system ( Sistema de <unk> da Unicamp ; SBU ) comprises a large central library named in honor of César <unk> , and 27 other satellite libraries , located in the individual institutions , housing over 1 million volumes , in addition to hundreds of thousands of ebooks and academic journals . The system was officially created in 1983 , aggregating the several independent libraries that operated across the university . The large central library was inaugurated six years later , in 1989 . 
 The library system is automated and its collections may be accessed and searched on the Internet . Its Digital Library section supports a database with more than 25 @,@ 000 dissertations presented in the university , as well access to the largest electronic libraries of academic journals in the world . It also includes several historical libraries and media archives focused on specific authors and topics , such as the Edgard <unk> Archive and collections honoring César <unk> , Sérgio Buarque de Holanda , Monteiro Lobato and others . 
 = = Admissions = = 
 = = = Undergraduate programs = = = 
 Similarly to other Brazilian public universities , admissions to undergraduate programs are through a comprehensive general examination , called vestibular . While other Brazilian public universities , specially federally managed ones , which use the National High School Exam ( <unk> , in Portuguese <unk> Nacional do <unk> <unk> ) as an entrance exam , Unicamp has its own national entrance exam applied yearly by its <unk> Commission ( <unk> , in Portuguese <unk> <unk> para os <unk> ) in two rounds . Generally , the first round happens in November and is a test composed of 90 multiple @-@ choice general knowledge questions . Students applying to programs that require specific skills ( such as music , architecture , dance , and others ) must take a specific knowledge test even before the first phase . 
 Selection in the admissions process is program @-@ specific . Applicants that score a minimum standardized grade in the first round are selected to participate in the second round , which takes place over three days in January , where they must answer 48 short @-@ answer written questions , plus write two long @-@ form essays , on themes selected by the evaluation board . 
 The Unicamp national exam is very competitive and is considered one of the most difficult in Brazil . In 2015 there were 77 @,@ 145 applications for only 3 @,@ 320 possible places , with 23 candidates competing for each position in an undergraduate program , an average acceptance rate of 4 @.@ 3 % . The exam covers all topics taught in the Brazilian high school system , including Portuguese , mathematics , Brazilian and world history , geography , biology , physics , chemistry , sociology , philosophy , arts and English . Despite that , questions in the exams are generally interdisciplinary . 
 The most competitive undergraduate programs are Medicine with a 0 @.@ 5 % acceptance rate , Architecture and Urbanism with 0 @.@ 6 % , and Communication with 2 % . Such high <unk> leads many students to take preparatory courses during or after the last regular high school year called <unk> in Portuguese , generally privately offered or managed by some association or organization . Many private <unk> have special classes focused on highly competitive programs like medicine , making them very expensive . It is common to find students admitted in Medicine , Engineering and other programs after several years of preparatory courses . 
 While the selection process is need @-@ blind and race @-@ blind , most of the best high schools and preparatory schools in Brazil are private and very expensive , and represent a majority of admissions in Brazilian public universities , leading to increased inequality in the country . To remedy this , Unicamp introduced in 2004 the Social Inclusion and Affirmative Action Program ( <unk> , in Portuguese Programa de <unk> <unk> e <unk> Social ) that allows high schoolers coming from public schools to receive a bonus score in their overall vestibular score . While not focused on racial and ethnical factors , over the years , the <unk> initiative has increased the number of admission of minorities from public high school , especially black and native @-@ Brazilians , historically the most economical and social fragile groups in Brazil . With this program , around 30 % of admissions come from public schools , and the participation of minorities increased from 10 % to around 30 % . 
 = = = Graduate programs = = = 
 Unlike undergrad admissions , there is no single admission process for graduate students . Each institution inside Unicamp has its own set of procedures , which usually include an admissions exam which can be specific for Unicamp or a standard exam applied across the country ( such as <unk> ( in Portuguese ) for economics , and <unk> ( in Portuguese ) for computer science . Besides the exam , the process usually includes an academic history analysis , interviews and in many cases requires a submission of a research project to be undertaken during the graduate studies . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 Similarly to other Brazilian universities , Unicamp offers no large @-@ scale in @-@ campus housing , and most students live either near the campus or in Campinas . A student tradition in Brazil , inherited from the Portuguese universities , is the <unk> , a fraternity @-@ style private housing where multiple students rent large houses or apartments and live together . Dues to the suburban campus and the large number of students coming from other cities , <unk> play a key role in the student life , serving as centers for social life , parties and also study and work areas . While some <unk> have existed for decades , sometimes moving from one house to another , most are formed by students in the same or similar classes , and last for a few years . 
 Besides <unk> , studio apartments are very common around the university . While more expensive than the shared houses , they afford more privacy and have more flexible contracts , are well as being furnished . 
 = = = = University housing = = = = 
 Unicamp provides a limited amount of free housing to low income students in the Student Residence compound . Built in 1992 , it is located near the center of Barão Geraldo , about four kilometers from Unicamp , and is served by a university shuttle that takes student to the campus and back free of charge . The compound has 226 houses of 60 square metres ( 650 sq ft ) , with a capacity of four students per house , and 27 studios of 46 square metres ( 500 sq ft ) , for couples with children , a total of 904 vacancies in houses and 54 adults in the studios . Assignment criteria is means @-@ based , with lower income students receiving priority . 
 The Student Residence supports several cultural projects developed by voluntary and worker students and open to the participation of internal and external community . It encourages interdisciplinary training and integration between the resident students and the external community . The diversity of races and cultures , brought by colleagues from other states and countries is an advantage for the residents who live in the house , facilitating full citizenship , through the exercise of their rights and duties within the community . 
 = = = University restaurants = = = 
 There are multiple restaurants operated and subsidized by the university serving only the academic community . Commonly called <unk> ( " large tray " in Portuguese ) due to the metal trays used to serve the students , the restaurants provide up to three meals per day , each one costing R $ 2 , a price that has not been updated in over a decade , despite the strong inflation . The main <unk> is located near the center of the circular campus , receiving students from all different areas of the university and acting as the informal social heart of the university where events , parties and political campaigns are announced to the students . 
 The restaurants at the University are staffed with nutritionists and food engineers , often students at the university , offering balanced menu that meets the nutritional needs of the university population , serving over 10 thousand meals per day at the main campus . The menu usually consists of rice and beans , a traditional staple food in Brazil , a type of meat ( chicken , beef , sausage , pork , etc . ) , textured soy protein for vegetarians , salad , juice , and dessert . 
 There are three such restaurants in the main campus , with two additional restaurants located in the Limeira and Piracicaba campuses . In all of them access is restricted to those who have a university @-@ issued smart card ID , which is also used to pay for the food . In addition to the subsidized restaurants , there are several smaller , privately ran restaurants across the campus and many more located in Barão Geraldo , often just a short walk away from the campus . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 There are no university @-@ sponsored athletic programs at Unicamp , and sporting competitions , either internal or played with other schools , are entirely organized by the students . The Liga das <unk> da Unicamp , a university @-@ wide league of the different athletic associations , is responsible for organizing internal sporting events , such as the Unicamp Olympics . 
 In addition to internal competitions , there are multiple external competitions between several universities focused on different areas of study : in the <unk> medical students from different universities compete against each other , and in the <unk> , engineering students gather to play sports . The games are usually held in the city of one of the participating universities over a long weekend , with students being housed in public schools , farms and hotels . 
 The university has a sports center with courts for basketball , volleyball , a full size regulation football field , an athletics field with running tracks , a competition swimming pool , a covered gymnasium for indoor spectator sports , attached to a convention center . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Varginha incident = = = 
 Unicamp is generally regarded by the Brazilian population as Brazil 's Area 51 , with the government running a secret underground area purportedly called Pavilion 18 , located under the Institute of Chemistry . In 1996 there were reports of an extraterrestrial sighting in the city of Varginha , commonly called the Varginha Incident , followed by additional reports of military intervention in the region and that the extraterrestrial would have been taken to the secret Pavilion 18 area at Unicamp . 
 = Ones ( album ) = 
 Ones ( Spanish : <unk> ) is the twelfth compilation album by American Tejano singer Selena , released in the United States on October 1 , 2002 by EMI Latin . It was released on November 11 , 2002 in Spanish @-@ speaking countries , while the limited edition included a bonus DVD of her music videos . Ones was released building on the popularity of the 1997 biographical film Selena . The singer 's father Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. and sister Suzette Quintanilla told CBS TV host Julie Chen that the album was aimed at Selena 's new generation of fans . Ones was released as part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection — a nine @-@ disc series of her studio , live , soundtrack and compilation albums . The recording features six number one singles namely , " Amor Prohibido " , " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , " No Me Queda Más " , " Fotos y Recuerdos " , and her duets with Alvaro Torres on " Buenos Amigos " and Barrio Boyzz on " Donde Quiera Que Estés " . 
 Selena 's brother , A.B. Quintanilla III , remixed three of her singles ( " Amor Prohibido " , " Como la Flor " and " Si Una Vez " ) into a medley mash @-@ up entitled " Con Tanto Amor Medley " , the same tracks found on the album . The track was released as a promotional single to radio stations , and received a mixed response from music critics . The album also received a mixed reception , with Jon O 'Brien of AllMusic noting that the record label ignored Selena 's self @-@ titled debut album from the track listing on Ones . The recording peaked at number four on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums charts . Ones peaked at number 159 on the Billboard 200 chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , signifying shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Selena 's family was interviewed by Julie Chen of The Early Show about Ones . Chen asked Selena 's father and manager , Abraham Quintanilla , Jr . , about his intention to re @-@ release her songs on Ones . Quintanilla , Jr. told Chen that because of the success of the 1997 biopic about Selena 's life , many new fans know who she was . Chris Pérez , her widower , told Chen that the recording was released for Selena 's new fans ; building on the film 's popularity , explaining that the family used the DVD to showcase the singer for those who never saw her perform live . 
 The recording was released as part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection series , a retrospective of Selena 's musical career . Ones was released on October 1 , 2002 by EMI Latin , and included audio statements by her family , friends and members of Selena y Los Dinos , her former band . On November 11 , 2002 , <unk> was released in Spanish @-@ speaking countries with the same track listing as the American edition . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The first of Selena 's number ones on the album was " Buenos Amigos " , a duet with Salvadoran singer Álvaro Torres . " Baila Esta Cumbia " and " No Quiero Saber " are from Selena 's second studio album , Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) ; the latter track peaked at number six on the US Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart . " Como la Flor " , Selena 's signature song , and " La Carcacha " are both originally on 1992 's Entre a Mi Mundo . " Como la Flor " launched her on the Latin music scene , according to journalists . The song was acclaimed by music critics and was credited as Selena 's first solo number one single in popular culture despite Billboard 's official record of the single peaking at number six . " No Debes Jugar " , the lead single from 1993 's Live ! , and " La Llamada " made the album cut . Sally Jacobs of the Boston Globe called " No Debes Jugar " one of " her cumbia signature songs " and " most popular cumbia song [ s ] " . Four of the six number ones on the album are singles from Selena 's last studio album , Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) . The song of the same name was number one on the Hot Latin Tracks chart for nine consecutive weeks , one week short of the record for most weeks at number one on the Hot Latin Songs chart . " Bidi Bidi Bom Bom " , the second single off of Amor Prohibido , spent five consecutive weeks at the top of the Hot Latin Tracks chart . The third single from Amor Prohibido to be featured on the album , " No Me Queda Más " , peaked at number one for seven weeks . 
 " Si Una Vez " peaked at number four on the Regional Mexican Songs chart , while " El Chico del Apartamento 512 " failed to chart . Her posthumous number one single " Fotos y Recuerdos " spent seven consecutive weeks atop the Hot Latin Tracks chart . " Techno Cumbia " peaked at number four on Billboard 's Latin charts . " Donde Quiera Que Estés " , a duet with the Barrio Boyzz , is Selena 's second number one duet . " I Could Fall in Love " and " Dreaming of You " are the only English @-@ language tracks on Ones , and are her most recognizable recordings to American music fans . Both tracks were taken from her crossover attempt , Dreaming of You ( 1995 ) , which was released posthumously . The only other track from that album , " Tú Sólo Tú " , also appears on Ones , Selena 's sixth number one single on the album . " Siempre Hace Frio " was originally released on Siempre Selena ( 1996 ) , her first remix album . Quintanilla III and Pete Astudillo composed " Con Tanto Amor Medley " , a medley mash @-@ up of " Amor Prohibido " , " Si Una Vez " and " Como la Flor " . The track was produced by Kike Santander and Jose Luis <unk> . Tatiana Morales of CBS called it a " beautiful ballad " , but John Lannert had the impression that the medley was composed to " fit [ in ] various Latin radio formats . " He noted that the recording had a pop twist with acoustic guitar and " discreet strings " , calling it " tasteful bolero @-@ like percussion " . Because of the mariachi trumpets used in the " Como la Flor " part of the medley , Lannert thought the track was aimed at regional Mexican radio stations . He was disappointed by the dissolution of the " saucy cumbia beats " that " originally took these songs to the top of the charts " , but called " Con Tanto Amor Medley " " [ a ] rare medley that achieves a seamless transition from track to track " and " manages to sound cohesive , generic arrangements notwithstanding " . Lannert ended his review by calling the track " an appropriate balance for an homage . " 
 = = Reception and chart performance = = 
 The album was met with mixed reviews from music critics . Ramiro Burr of the San Antonio Express News compared Ones to the greatest hit collections of musicians such as Buddy Holly , Janis Joplin and Jimi Hendrix . Jon O 'Brien of AllMusic wrote that Ones ignores Selena 's self @-@ titled EMI debut album , focusing on her career between 1990 and 1995 . Ones was nominated for Latin Greatest Hits Album of the Year at the 2003 Billboard Latin Music Awards . It debuted ( and peaked ) at number four on the US Billboard Top Latin Albums and Latin Pop Albums chart , achieving a Hot Shot Debut on October 19 , 2002 . The album debuted at number 162 on the Billboard 200 chart . It peaked two weeks later at number 159 the week of November 9 , 2002 . Ones was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in February 2003 , signifying 100 @,@ 000 units shipped in the United States . The recording became the 13th Top Latin Album of 2002 and the ninth Top Latin Pop Album of that year , ranking number 88 on the Top Latin Album of the 2000s chart . 
 Ones reentered the Top Latin Albums chart the week of February 7 , 2004 at number 74 before slipping off and reentering the chart the week of March 13 at number 65 . After 77 weeks of release , Ones was in 70th position on the Top Latin Albums chart the week of April 10 , 2004 . The following week ( April 17 ) it rose to number 11 , achieving " greatest gainer " status from its previous position . Ones slipped off the chart the week of May 29 from number 66 . The 14th anniversary of Selena 's death sparked a 51 @-@ percent increase in sales for Ones , which rose to number four on the Top Latin Albums chart ( up 61 percent from its previous position ) . In February 2010 the RIAA certified the album gold , denoting shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = Day One ( Torchwood ) = 
 " Day One " is the second episode of the first series of the British science fiction television series Torchwood . Directed by Brian Kelly , the episode was first broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three on 22 October 2006 with the series pilot , " Everything Changes " , and later repeated on terrestrial channel BBC Two on 25 October . It was the first work in the Doctor Who universe to be written by future Doctor Who showrunner Chris Chibnall . 
 The episode centres on Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) working her first case with Torchwood Three in Cardiff . A purple alien gas is loose in the city and takes Carys Fletcher ( Sara Lloyd Gregory ) host ; the gas kills its victims by orgasm , leaving behind a pile of dust . Over the course of the episode , the team hunt for Carys before the gas kills her . In the end they track her down to a fertility clinic ; the gas leaves Carys to take Gwen host , but is stopped by a portable prison cell and dies out . 
 Originally entitled " New Girl " , the episode was written to interpret Gwen 's " first day in hell " . On the sex gas , series creator Russell T Davies stated " when we 're launching a new adult science fiction drama , it 's kind of inevitable you 're going to do the sex monster " . The episode was filmed during a three- to four @-@ week period in May 2006 , with much of it filmed before the first episode in the same production block . " Day One " was originally seen by 2 @.@ 3 million viewers , making it one of the highest @-@ rated BBC Three broadcasts of all time , but was met with generally mixed reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A date between Gwen Cooper and her boyfriend Rhys Williams ( Kai Owen ) is cut short when they witness a meteor crashing outside Cardiff . Gwen receives a message on her mobile phone , and is called into action . As the Army secures the area , Torchwood investigate the meteor . Colleague Owen Harper ( Burn Gorman ) taunts Gwen by calling her the " new girl " . In an attempt to retaliate , she throws a chisel at him , but misses and cracks open the meteor , allowing a purple gas entity to escape . The gas finds a young woman , Carys Fletcher , outside a nightclub and takes her host . In the club , a possessed Carys seduces a man and takes him to a restroom , where they proceed to have sex . At the moment of climax however , the man dissolves into dust while Carys absorbs the energy that remains . 
 The Torchwood team become aware of the bizarre death and realises through CCTV that the gas has taken over Carys . Gwen feels guilty at having caused the man 's death , but team leader Captain Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) assures her that everybody makes mistakes . Gwen also learns that she is the only team member who 's in a relationship , as the others are too busy working to find time . They later find where Carys lives and arrives there before she could harm a postman . When she tries to escape , Owen traps her using a portable prison cell , much to Jack 's chagrin , as he forbids the removal of alien technology from Torchwood 's base without his permission . 
 Carys is placed in a Torchwood holding cell . As tests are run on Carys , Gwen feels uncontrollable urges to kiss her , showing that Carys is emitting high levels of pheromones , effectively becoming a " walking aphrodisiac " , but the gas is also slowly killing her . Later , Carys escapes from her cell after seducing Owen . Jack attempts to apprehend her , but she manages to get hold of a jar containing a severed hand , which Jack finds valuable . He allows her to leave for the jar 's safety , but she destroys it anyway . 
 In an attempt to capture her again , the team run on Toshiko Sato 's ( Naoko Mori ) hunch that she will be after her ex @-@ boyfriend ; they arrive at his house to find Carys already killed him . Later they discover Carys works as a temp at a fertility clinic . They race to the clinic to find Carys has been inside for some time killing some of the clients . After eventually cornering Carys , they find that she has moments before she dies . Jack buys her some time by kissing her , transferring some of his " excess " of life onto her . Gwen offers the gas presence her own body as a host to save Carys ; it leaves Carys , but before it could enter Gwen , Jack throws the portable prison cell at it . Since it cannot survive in Earth 's atmosphere for long , the gas dies out . As Jack inspects its remains , Gwen kisses Jack on the lips , saying " thank you " , leaving Jack puzzled . 
 In the end , Carys is reunited with her father . The team returns to Torchwood , and as she leaves for home , Jack advises Gwen not to let the job consume her because her perspective is important to the team . He then encourages Gwen to go home and spend time with Rhys . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The working title for the episode was " New Girl " , which changed to the current " Day One " by the beginning of October 2006 . Head writer Chris Chibnall , who wrote the episode , found that writing the second episode was hard , as there was a challenge to demonstrate how Torchwood works , and set the formula for the rest of the series . He wanted to write an episode that would centre on Gwen about her " first day in hell " , and show the audience that Torchwood is unlike any normal job , as one small mistake can have major ramifications on the city . The scene where Gwen accidentally opens the meteor was meant to " extend the metaphor of breaking the photocopier on your first day at work " . It is also set to show the separate dynamic between the team and Gwen . Series creator Russell T Davies stated that as the rest of the team are for the aliens , science , technology and mythology , Gwen is for " the people " ; she 's the only person in the team who cares about what happens to Carys . Eve Myles also noted in the episode 's audio commentary that throughout the episode , it added a mix between her domestic life and the science fiction . 
 The idea behind using the sex gas came from Chibnall , but he admitted to having " genuinely no idea where the episode came from " . Davies stated " when we 're launching a new adult science fiction drama , it 's kind of inevitable you 're going to do the sex monster . " He also emphasised that the episode is not solely about " having a laugh " with the sex gas , as it also has " something to say about the world " . The scene where Carys walks down the street featuring sex in advertisements and couples kissing in public was one of Davies ' favourite scenes in the episode , as it explores how sexualised the Western world is . The episode was originally much lighter in tone , however , the majority of the comedic moments had to be cut on the final script , as they got in the way of the plot . Also , Carys was originally meant to have two or three boyfriends , but because of scheduling restrictions , there could only be one . This ended up being beneficial to the episode , as it made it more emotive . There was a scene that would be filmed with Carys and a second boyfriend , but that would be cut and added on the deleted scenes on the DVD boxset of the first series . 
 After it was written , BBC controller of fiction , Jane Tranter , fed back to the producers and suggested that the Torchwood team take a " breather " and talk about the mysteries behind Captain Jack while having a Chinese <unk> . Through the read through of the script before filming , Burn Gorman noted that he saw " big smiles " and giggling from several readers because of its content . Sara Gregory read the script with her mother . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Much of the episode was filmed in the first production block along with " Everything Changes " , but much of it was filmed before the pilot . It took place during a three- to four @-@ week period in May 2006 in and around Cardiff , the city where the series was set . The majority of the episode was filmed during the night , to keep with the style that the majority of the series is set during the night as well . However , because it was approaching summer , where nights are shorter , night sequences had to be shot between 10 pm and 4 : 30 am during each night of filming . Even the scenes set in the Torchwood hub were mostly filmed at nighttime . The first sequence to be shot was where the team stop Carys from having sex with the postman . However , the sequence had to be shot again twelve days later . 
 The meteor crash site was filmed at a natural erosion site just outside Cardiff , which the location managers found by chance , and felt it was the perfect location for a crash site . The producers included an easter egg in the Torchwood Hub set by including the picture of Craig @-@ y @-@ Nos Castle , used as a location of Torchwood House in the Doctor Who episode " Tooth and Claw " ; in the end of the episode the Torchwood Institute was established by Queen Victoria . To film the scene where Gwen and Carys kiss , actresses Eve Myles and Sara Gregory discussed how they would execute it beforehand and agreed that they have to imagine Gregory as Johnny Depp , and Myles as Brad Pitt . To film the exploding rat sequence , episode director Brian Kelly filmed a rat in a cage , and then replace it with a fur covered condom filled with " chicken bits " and red dye to simulate guts , then exploded with a squib . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 " Day One " was the first episode to include a teaser in the beginning with shots from the series . The episode 's visual effects were produced by The Mill . To complete the effect of the gas , 3D artist Paul Burton based his design of the alien from the water creature in The Abyss . 
 = = Continuity = = 
 The Doctor 's severed hand appears in this episode when Carys uses it as her bargaining chip to escape . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Day One " was broadcast on Sunday , 22 October 2006 on BBC Three , just after the first episode , " Everything Changes " . The second episode received overnight viewing figures of 2 @.@ 3 million with a 13 @.@ 8 % audience share , holding the majority of the audience from the first episode . Together both episodes received the largest multichannel audience for a UK @-@ originated non @-@ sports programme and the at the time largest audience for BBC Three . The finale figure for the episode was 2 @.@ 498 million viewers . The record would be held until the broadcast of EastEnders Live : The Aftermath on 19 February 2010 . The repeat of " Day One " on analogue channel BBC Two on 25 October was seen by 2 @.@ 8 million with a 13 % audience share . " Day One " was given an Appreciation Index of 83 . 
 Daniel Montesinos @-@ Donaghy of Den of Geek stated " After the excellent pilot episode , ' Day One ' is both a step forward and a step backward . As silly as the idea of a nymphomaniac extra @-@ terrestrial gas is , the cast throw themselves into it with aplomb , quipping their way to the relatively gripping conclusion . " Patrick Holm of Total Sci @-@ Fi felt that the second episode " equates the word ' adult ' with sex and swearing – more of a playground definition than a serious drama . In the conclusion of his review , Jonathan Capps of Noise to Signal felt that the episode was " certainly nothing to get excited about , but I think it won 't be too indicative of later episodes , as we 're still getting to know these characters , and that has to take the fore in the first few episodes . However , Chris ' [ Chibnall ] painfully simplistic , heavy @-@ handed and often clichéd interpretation of sci @-@ fi ( some of Jack 's techno @-@ babble is frankly embarrassing ) could prove to be a worrying factor later in the series . " A reviewer of TV Fodder felt " Day One " was a " great second episode " , adding " there doesn 't seem to be anything I don 't like about this show " . 
 = 808s & Heartbreak = 
 808s & Heartbreak is the fourth studio album by American recording artist Kanye West , released on November 24 , 2008 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . It was recorded during September and October 2008 at Glenwood Studios in Burbank , California and Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii , with the help of producers No I.D. , Jeff Bhasker and others . 
 Conceived in the wake of a series of distressing personal events , 808s & Heartbreak marked a major musical departure for West from his previous rap records , instead featuring a sparse , electronic sound and West singing through an Auto @-@ Tune vocal processor . His lyrics explored themes of loss , alienated fame , and heartache , while the album 's production abandoned conventional hip hop sounds in favor of a minimalist sonic palette , which included prominent use of the titular Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine . Despite varying responses from audiences , the album received positive reviews from most critics and was named one of 2008 's best records in several year @-@ end lists . 
 808s & Heartbreak debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 , selling 450 @,@ 145 copies in its first week . By 2013 , it had sold 1 @.@ 7 million copies in the United States . Four singles were released to promote the record , including the hit singles " Love Lockdown " and " Heartless " . In the years since its release , 808s & Heartbreak has been cited as a prominent influence on subsequent hip hop , pop , and R & B music , as a new wave of rappers , singers , and producers came to adopt aspects of its style and thematic content . In 2014 , Rolling Stone named it one of the 40 most groundbreaking albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of his third studio album Graduation , the remainder of 2007 and the following year featured events that profoundly affected Kanye West . On November 10 , 2007 , West 's mother Donda West died due to complications arising from cosmetic surgery involving a tummy tuck and breast reduction procedure . Months later , West and fiancée Alexis Phifer ended their engagement and their long @-@ term intermittent relationship , which had begun in 2002 . At the same time , West struggled to adapt to his newfound pop star status he had once striven to achieve , often becoming the subject of media scrutiny . The loss , loneliness and longing for companionship and a sense of normality served to inspire 808s & Heartbreak . West stated that " This album was therapeutic – it 's lonely at the top . " A photograph taken by Danny Clinch of West kissing his mother on the cheek was included in the album 's booklet liner notes . 
 West felt that his emotions could not be fully expressed simply through rapping , which he said had limitations . There were " melodies that were in me " , he explained . " What was in me I couldn 't stop . " West went to classify 808s & Heartbreak as a pop album , asserting his disdain towards the contemporary backlash to the concept of pop music and expressed admiration for what some pop stars have accomplished in their careers . He later stated that he wishes to present the music as a new genre called " pop art , " clarifying that he was well aware of the visual art movement of the same name and wished to present a musical equivalent . " Either call it ' pop ' or ' pop art , ' either one I 'm good with , " he later stated . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The album was recorded over a span of approximately three weeks from September to October 2008 . Recording sessions took place at Glenwood Studios in Burbank , California and at Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii . As implied by its title , 808s & Heartbreak prominently features the Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine . Drawing inspiration from 1980s synthpop and electropop performers such as Phil Collins , Gary Numan , TJ Swan and Boy George , West felt that the 808 is a resourceful instrument that can be used to evoke emotion ; the concept was introduced to him by Jon Brion . West utilized the sounds created by the 808 and manipulated its pitch to produce a distorted , electronic sound , an effect he referred to as " heartbreak " . He felt the characteristic of the sound was representative of his state of mind . According to West , the fact that Hawaii 's area code was " 808 " was coincidental , as he had already developed the album 's title before being informed . The realization inspired him to pursue his direction with the album , however . In terms of musical direction , West 's intentions , according to Mike Dean , were to go against the typical sound of hip hop beat , instead evoking the presence of tribal drums . Overall , West maintained a " minimal but functional " approach towards the album 's studio production . 
 The album makes prominent use of the voice audio processor technology of Auto @-@ Tune . West had previously experimented with the technology on The College Dropout for the background vocals of " Jesus Walks " and " Never Let Me Down " , but he had not used it for lead vocals until 2008 . " We were working on the remixes for Lil Wayne 's ' Lollipop ' and Young Jeezy 's ' Put On ' and he fell in love with the Auto @-@ Tune " , producer Mike Dean explained . Towards the end , West enlisted T @-@ Pain for coaching on how to utilize the technology . West himself openly stated that he loved using Auto @-@ Tune and was dismayed that the term has been commonly associated with being " wack " . He considers the technology " the funnest thing to use " and compared the situation to when he was a child and thought the color pink was cool until someone told him " it was gay " , producing an analogy of how the views of society can rob people of their confidence and self @-@ esteem . He later went on to state that he enjoyed the electronic feel produced by Auto @-@ Tune and sought out to juxtapose the mechanical sounds with the traditional sounds of taiko drums and choir monks . 
 Rapper Kid Cudi , who had signed onto West 's G.O.O.D. Music label , contributed to two of the album 's songs . Young Jeezy contributed a rap verse on the track " Amazing " while " See You in My Nightmares " is a duet with Lil Wayne . Singer @-@ songwriter <unk> provided the few female vocals found on the album ; credited under birth name Jenny @-@ Bea Englishman , she co @-@ wrote three tracks . When " RoboCop " appeared on the Internet , West disclaimed responsibility and was upset that the leak had occurred as the track was an unfinished version . Mike Dean had previously stated that the track was expected to receive additional treatment by Herbie Hancock before the album 's release . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 808s & Heartbreak is a radical departure from West 's previous hip hop albums . According to 33 ⅓ writer Kirk Walker Graves , 808s & Heartbreak is an avant @-@ garde electropop album . Rolling Stone magazine called it an " introspective , synthpop album , " while The 405 described it as West 's " experimental pop record . " According to The Independent , West abandoned his customary hip hop sound in favor of sparse , drum machine @-@ based electropop . Pitchfork Media 's Scott Plagenhoef also categorized the album as " an introspective , minimal electro @-@ pop record " , but added that it is " steeped in regret , pain , and even more self @-@ examination than a typical Kanye West album " . Music writer Robert Christgau called it a " slow , sad @-@ ass and self @-@ involved ... breakup album " and analyzed that West 's choice to " <unk> as well as pitch @-@ correct his voice both undercuts his self @-@ importance and adds physical reality to tales of alienated fame that might otherwise be pure pity parties " . Christgau asserted that its final track " Pinocchio Story " is " the only track here about what 's really bringing [ West ] down : not the loss of his girlfriend but the death of his mother , during cosmetic surgery that somewhere not too deep down he 's sure traces all too directly to his alienated fame . " Andre Grant of HipHopDX wrote that " to combat this trenchant melancholia , he poured himself into an all @-@ <unk> R & B album " which would prove divisive in hip hop . West 's singing has been characterized as " flat " and " nearly unmelodic " which " underscores his own <unk> detachment . " Canadian writer Stephen Marche viewed that West used " the shallow musical gimmickry of Auto @-@ Tune , a program designed to eliminate individuality , and produced a hauntingly personal album . " 
 The music of 808s & Heartbreak draws heavily on electronic elements , particularly virtual synthesis , the Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine , and explicitly auto @-@ tuned vocal tracks . Tracks on the album utilize step input drum machine and synth @-@ bass parts . Step input sequencing , a product of vintage analogue devices limited to recording only 16 individual notes , was popular in music production during the 1980s , but also became available in digital workstations . The album 's music features austere production and elements such as dense drums , lengthy strings , droning synths , and somber piano . Andy Kellman of AllMusic writes of the music , " Several tracks have almost as much in common with irrefutably bleak post @-@ punk albums , such as New Order 's Movement and The Cure 's Pornography , as contemporary rap and R & B. " These musical elements help convey moods of despair and dejection that reflect the album 's subject matter . Critic Trist McCall wrote that the record " stripped modern art @-@ pop down to its iconic rudiments — beats , charismatic personalities , hand @-@ selected melodies , and computer @-@ assisted vocals . " Most of the lyrics are directed at an ex @-@ lover ; West refers to her treatment of him as " the coldest story ever told " on " Heartless " , and on " RoboCop " , she is called a " spoiled little L.A. girl " and is compared to the antagonist in the 1990 film Misery . On " Welcome to Heartbreak " , West 's character faces an existential crisis as he dispassionately recounts sitting alone on a flight , with a laughing family seated ahead of him . He longs for his late mother on the album 's penultimate track " Coldest Winter " , which samples the desolate 1983 song " Memories Fade " by Tears for Fears . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On September 24 , West announced that he had finished the album and would be releasing it sometime in November . In his blog post , he wrote " I changed my album to November something cause I finished the album and I felt like it .. I want y 'all to hear it as soon as possible " . West later stated that the album would be released on November 25 , 2008 . However , Island Def Jam , the distributing label , brought the date forward by one day to capitalize on Thanksgiving weekend . 808s & Heartbreak was also released on November 24 , 2008 in the United Kingdom and the Philippines . A limited edition in a digipak case was first released in Germany on November 21 , 2008 . A special edition of the album was released on December 16 that contains the album in CD and dual LP format , and also features album artwork redone by the artist of the original cover , <unk> . 
 On October 16 , West released an excerpt of " Coldest Winter " on the radio station Power 106 in Los Angeles . The track recreates elements of the song " Memories Fade " by the band Tears for Fears . The song " Paranoid " later leaked onto the Internet and features Mr. Hudson in the chorus . A remixed version of " Paranoid " was reported to feature pop singer Rihanna , but did not materialize . Also appearing prior to the release date were " Amazing " featuring Young Jeezy , " See You in My Nightmares " featuring Lil Wayne , " Street Lights " , " Say You Will " , " Welcome to Heartbreak " and " Bad News " . An additional track , " Pinocchio Story " is a freestyle recorded at a live concert in Singapore . It was included in the album at the request of Beyoncé Knowles . 
 On October 14 , West , in collaboration with Italian artist Vanessa Beecroft , hosted a promotional album listening event at Ace Gallery . Over 700 guests were invited to preview the entirety of 808s & Heartbreak . Under Beecroft 's guidance , the event featured approximately forty nude women wearing nothing besides wool masks who silently stood in the center of the room . The women were illuminated by multicolored lights that would change as the music progressed . When it came time for him to speak , West stated that he 'd been a fan of Beecroft 's work and strong imagery , saying that he liked the idea of nudity because " society told us to wear clothes at a certain point " . Beecroft had been contacted a month prior and conceptualized and generated the installation in a week . Beecroft admitted that while he had caught her <unk> , she had the opportunity to hear the album for herself and heard things that touched her own life . Five days later , promotional photos for the album by photographer Willy <unk> were released . The images portrayed West wearing a grey glen plaid suit , large <unk> glasses , and a heart @-@ shaped pin . 
 In October 2009 , West was scheduled to embark on a tour , Fame Kills : Starring Kanye West and Lady Gaga tour , in promotion of Gaga 's The Fame , and West 's 808s & Heartbreak . It was canceled on October 1 , 2009 , without reason . Several songs from the album were performed by West during his live VH1 Storytellers performance , such as " Heartless " , " Amazing " and " Say You Will . " In the interim , director Nabil Elderkin directed two additional promotional videos for the album . " Welcome to Heartbreak " , which featured an artistic use of liberal compression artifacts , was released in June 2009 . A remixed version of " Coldest Winter " was released in February 2010 . This video featured a woman in a wedding gown running away from a cult group through a moonlit forest . 
 = = Public reaction = = 
 Before its release , reaction to 808s & Heartbreak was mixed , ranging from anticipation to bewilderment and indifference to the album 's concept . Upon the unveiling of the lead single " Love Lockdown " at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards , music audiences were taken aback by the uncharacteristic production style and the presence of Auto @-@ Tune . The negative feedback intensified when West revealed that the entire album would be primarily sung with Auto @-@ Tune rather than rapped and would focus on themes of love and heartache . 
 Numerous hip hop fans and certain rappers mocked West for becoming " sappy " while others deemed the upcoming LP as a throwaway experimental album . Comparisons were drawn to Electric Circus , an album recorded by West 's labelmate and close friend Common . MTV eventually interviewed Common to share his thoughts and views on the artistic direction of the album . Common expressed both his understanding and his support for West 's intentions , stating " I love it . I 'mma tell you , as an artist , you wanna be free . I 'mma do what I feel . You can 't just cater to the audience . You gotta say , ' Hey , y 'all , this is where I 'm at . ' For him to do an album called 808s and Heartbreak , you know that 's where he is at this moment . I heard some songs , and I think it 's fresh . I think the people are ready for it . " 
 West received similar approval from Lil Wayne and Young Jeezy , both of whom contributed to the album . During an interview , when asked what music today inspires him , Wayne stated " everybody 's doing their thing , but they 're not exciting . Everybody is doing the same thing . That 's terrible . Do I love the music that 's out right now ? I love it with a passion . Does it motivate me ? Not one bit . That 's because 808s & Heartbreak isn 't out yet . " Despite the approval from the rap superstars , as well as the record @-@ breaking chart performances of the first two singles , hip hop audiences remained indifferent towards the album , predicting it would flop . Responding to reviews , West stated that he didn 't care about sales or getting good ratings , saying that it came from the heart and that 's all that matters to him . When asked about the current state of hip hop , West compared it to a high school , stating that hip hop used to be all about being fearless and standing out , and that now it is about being afraid and fitting in . 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 In its first week of sales , 808s & Heartbreak reached the number one spot on Billboard 200 , selling 450 @,@ 145 units in its first week . In the last week of the year , 808s & Heartbreak sold 165 @,@ 100 copies , jumping from the eleventh spot back up to the number five on the Billboard 200 . The album moved up again the following week , selling 70 @,@ 900 units and landing at number three . On January 27 , 2009 , 808s & Heartbreak was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , serving as West 's fourth album to ship one million copies in the United States . As of June 14 , 2013 , it has sold 1 @.@ 7 million copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 Despite the debate and uncertainty surrounding the album 's conception , its preceding singles demonstrated outstanding chart performances . Upon its release , the lead single " Love Lockdown " debuted at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and became a " Hot Shot Debut " . It is the highest debut of West 's career , the second highest debut on the Hot 100 that year and the tenth song of the millennium to debut in the top three . Grossing over 1 @.@ 3 million copies at the iTunes Store alone , the single was certified platinum by the RIAA by the end of the year . On August 18 , 2010 , it was certified triple platinum by the RIAA , for shipments of three million units in the US . The single was also met by positive reviews from music critics , eventually culminating with being crowned " Song of the Year " by Time . The second single , " Heartless " performed similarly and became his second consecutive " Hot Shot Debut " by debuting at number four on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was certified double platinum by the RIAA , having shipped two million units in the US . Due in part to the momentum produced by the album 's release , certain tracks were met by chart success despite not actually being released as singles . The tenth track " See You in My Nightmares " became yet another " Hot Shot Debut , " peaking at number twenty @-@ one in the US and at number twenty @-@ two in Canada while the fourth track " Amazing " charted at 81 on the Hot 100 . Following suit , " Welcome to Heartbreak " peaked at number eighty @-@ seven on the Pop 100 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 808s & Heartbreak received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 75 , based on 36 reviews . Chris Richards from The Washington Post called it " an information @-@ age masterpiece " , while USA Today critic Steve Jones said " West deftly uses the 808 drum machine and Auto @-@ Tune vocal effect to channel his feelings of hurt , anger and doubt through his well @-@ crafted lyrics " . Dan Cairns from The Times stated , " This so should not work ... Yet 808s & Heartbreak is a triumph , recklessly departing from the commercially copper @-@ bottomed script and venturing far beyond West ’ s comfort zone . " Rolling Stone 's Jody Rosen commended West 's incorporation of the Roland TR @-@ 808 drum machine and described the album as " Kanye 's would @-@ be Here , My Dear or Blood on the Tracks , a mournful song @-@ suite that swings violently between self @-@ pity and self @-@ loathing " . In the Chicago Tribune , Greg Kot called it West 's " most radical yet " and said while West 's fans may be disappointed , " this one is for him . It remains to be seen if he goes back to making records for everybody else . For now , this is one fascinatingly perverse detour . " PopMatters critic Dave Heaton was impressed by West 's " song and album construction , and with the way he captures a particular feeling through unusual , evocative , carefully crafted music that ’ s both simple and complex , cold and warm , mechanical and human , melodic and harsh " . Writing for MSN Music , Robert Christgau found it " brilliant " with a unique " dark sound " and " engaging tunes " , despite a second @-@ half drop @-@ off , and praised West 's use of Auto @-@ Tune , which he felt " both undercuts his self @-@ importance and adds physical reality to tales of alienated fame that might otherwise be pure pity parties " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review , The Independent found West 's " immersion in personal misery " uncomfortable and commented that the " stylistic tropes quickly become irritating " . AllMusic editor Andy Kellman stated " no matter its commendable fearlessness , the album is a listless , bleary trudge along West 's permafrost " . Charles Aaron of Spin criticized the songs ' musical structures , calling the album " a long processional that starts and restarts and never reaches the ceremony " . Slant Magazine 's Wilson McBee panned West 's singing , while Jon Caramanica from The New York Times singled it out as the " weakness for which this album will ultimately be remembered , some solid songs notwithstanding . " Caramanica wrote that , " at best , it is a rough sketch for a great album , with ideas he would have typically rendered with complexity , here distilled to a few words , a few synthesizer notes , a lean drumbeat . At worst , it ’ s clumsy and underfed , a reminder that all of that ornamentation served a purpose " . Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Jim DeRogatis stated , " If West had interspersed the more mechanical tracks with some that were the exact opposite — say , simple piano interludes provided by his old collaborators John Legend or Jon Brion — he might have made a masterpiece . Instead , he 's merely given us an extremely intriguing , sporadically gripping , undeniably fearless and altogether unexpected piece of his troubled soul . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 808s & Heartbreak was voted the tenth best album of 2008 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of prominent American critics . The album was also named one of the ten best albums of 2008 by a number of publications , including the Associated Press ( number four ) , The Hartford Courant ( number seven ) , NOW ( number four ) , The Observer ( number eight ) , Vibe ( no order ) and Time ( number six ) . Pitchfork Media named 808s & Heartbreak the twenty @-@ first best album of 2008 . Dan Leroy of LA Weekly cited it as one of the top ten hip hop albums of the year . Jam ! named it the top album of 2008 . Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Jim DeRogatis included the album on his list of the year 's ten best albums and wrote , " With every listen , the poignancy of these personal tales of loss grows deeper , perfectly matched by the cold , lonely , robotic but nevertheless winning grooves that accompany them . Upon further reflection , it is a brave and daring 4 @-@ star effort that deserves to be heard by any fan of adventurous pop music . " Time Out New York featured the album on its list of the Best and Worst Albums of 2008 . The magazine 's writer Colin St. John cited 808s & Heartbreak as one of the worst of 2008 , and editor Steve Smith named it third on his best @-@ of list , while calling the album " the year 's most misunderstood triumph . " 
 Despite its accolades , 808s & Heartbreak was largely overlooked as a contender for the 52nd Grammy Awards . According to Vibe magazine editor @-@ in @-@ chief Jermaine Hall , West 's controversial incident at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards and the ensuing backlash against West " probably hurt him " , but perceived West 's stylistic change on the album as the primary reason for it not being nominated . West received one solo nomination , Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for " Amazing " , and five other nominations for his guest appearances and <unk> work . 808s & Heartbreak received a nomination for Outstanding Album at 40th annual NAACP Image Awards . The album also received a nomination for Best Album at the 2009 MOBO Awards . In 2009 , Rolling Stone ranked it number 63 on its list of the 100 Best Album of the Decade , and Q named it the decade 's 81st best record . On similar lists , Slant Magazine and PopMatters ranked it 124th and 42nd , respectively . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Although West designed it as a melancholic pop album , 808s & Heartbreak had a significant effect on hip hop music . While his decision to sing about love , loneliness , and heartache for the entirety of the album was at first heavily criticized by music audiences and the album predicted to be a flop , its subsequent critical acclaim and commercial success encouraged other mainstream rappers to take greater creative risks with their music . During the release of The Blueprint 3 , New York rap mogul Jay @-@ Z revealed that his next studio album would be an experimental effort , stating , " ... it 's not gonna be a # 1 album . That 's where I 'm at right now . I wanna make the most experimental album I ever made . " Jay @-@ Z elaborated that like West , he was unsatisfied with contemporary hip hop , was being inspired by indie @-@ rockers like Grizzly Bear and asserted his belief that the indie rock movement would play an important role in the continued evolution of hip hop . 
 The album impacted hip hop stylistically and laid the groundwork for a new wave of hip hop artists who generally eschewed typical rap braggadocio for intimate subject matter and introspection , including B.o.B , Kid Cudi , Childish Gambino , Frank Ocean , The Weeknd , and Drake . Jake Paine of HipHopDX dubbed the album as " our Chronic " , noting West 's effect on hip hop with 808s & Heartbreak as " a sound , no different than the way Dr. Dre 's synthesizer challenged the boom @-@ bap of the early ' 90s . " Fact described the record as an " art @-@ pop masterpiece [ which ] broke the shackles of generations of one @-@ upmanship [ in hip hop ] . " Rolling Stone journalist Matthew Trammell asserted that the record was ahead of its time and wrote in a 2012 article , " Now that popular music has finally caught up to it , 808s & Heartbreak has revealed itself to be Kanye ’ s most vulnerable work , and perhaps his most brilliant . " 
 According to Greg Kot , 808s & Heartbreak initiated the " wave of inward @-@ looking sensitivity " and " emo " -inspired rappers during the late 2000s : " [ It ] presaged everything from the introspective hip @-@ hop of Kid Cudi 's Man on the Moon : The End of Day ( 2009 ) to the wispy crooning , plush keyboards and light mechanical beats of Bon Iver 's Justin Vernon and British dub @-@ step balladeer James Blake . " Consequence of Sound credited it with shaping subsequent developments in " indie R & B or electropop or whatever you want to call it " : " 808s ' is flooded with R & B and it digitizes the raw emotion and isolated feelings that [ James Blake and The Weeknd ] have carved their brands out of today . " Craig D. Linsey from The Village Voice wrote that the album 's " naked humanity ... practically set off the emo @-@ rap / r & b boom that everyone from Drake to Frank Ocean to The Weeknd now traffic in . " Marcus Scott of <unk> said rappers such as B.o.B , Drake , and Kid Cudi followed West 's album with similarly @-@ minded works , citing West 's introspective , emotional themes and synthpop / " Vangelis @-@ inspired " music as influences . In the opinion of Billboard senior editor Alex Gale , the album was " the equivalent of ( Bob ) Dylan going electric , and you still hear that all the time , in hip @-@ hop and outside of hip @-@ hop . " Drake 's 2009 mixtape So Far Gone received comparisons from critics to 808s & Heartbreak . Todd Martens of the Los Angeles Times cited 808s & Heartbreak as " the template [ ... ] for essentially the entirety of Drake 's young career " , and that wrote that he " shares West 's love for mood and never @-@ ending existential analysis " . In a 2009 interview , Drake cited West as " the most influential person " in shaping his own sound . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Songwriting credits , production credits , and notes for tracks 1 – 11 adapted from the liner notes of 808s & Heartbreak . Songwriting credits for track 12 adapted from BMI . 
 Notes 
 ^ [ a ] co @-@ producer 
 " RoboCop " embodies portions of " Kissing in the Rain " , written by Doyle . 
 " Bad News " contains a sample of the recording " See Line Woman " as performed by Nina Simone and written by Bass . 
 " Coldest Winter " embodies an interpolation of " Memories Fade " , written by <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for 808s & Heartbreak adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = History of supernova observation = 
 The known history of supernova observation goes back to 185 CE , when , supernova SN 185 appeared , the oldest appearance of a supernova recorded by humankind . Several additional supernovae within the Milky Way galaxy have been recorded since that time , with SN 1604 being the most recent supernova to be observed in this galaxy . 
 Since the development of the telescope , the field of supernova discovery has expanded to other galaxies . These occurrences provide important information on the distances of galaxies . Successful models of supernova behavior have also been developed , and the role of supernovae in the star formation process is now increasingly understood . 
 = = Early history = = 
 The supernova explosion that formed the Vela Supernova Remnant most likely occurred 10 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 years ago . In 1976 , NASA astronomers suggested that inhabitants of the southern hemisphere may have witnessed this explosion and recorded it symbolically . A year later , archaeologist George <unk> recalled some incomprehensible ancient markings in Bolivia that were left by Native Americans . The carvings showed four small circles flanked by two larger circles . The smaller circles resemble stellar groupings in the constellations Vela and Carina . One of the larger circles may represent the star Capella . Another circle is located near the position of the supernova remnant , George <unk> suggested this may represent the supernova explosion as witnessed by the indigenous residents . 
 In 185 CE , Chinese astronomers recorded the appearance of a bright star in the sky , and observed that it took about eight months to fade from the sky . It was observed to sparkle like a star and did not move across the heavens like a comet . These observations are consistent with the appearance of a supernova , and this is believed to be the oldest confirmed record of a supernova event by humankind . SN 185 may have also possibly been recorded in Roman literature , though no records have survived . The gaseous shell <unk> 86 is suspected as being the remnant of this event , and recent X @-@ ray studies show a good match for the expected age . 
 In 393 CE , the Chinese recorded the appearance of another " guest star " , SN 393 , in the modern constellation of Scorpius . Additional unconfirmed supernovae events may have been observed in 369 CE , 386 CE , 437 CE , 827 CE and 902 CE . However these have not yet been associated with a supernova remnant , and so they remain only candidates . Over a span of about 2 @,@ 000 years , Chinese astronomers recorded a total of twenty such candidate events , including later explosions noted by Islamic , European , and possibly Indian and other observers . 
 The supernova SN 1006 appeared in the southern constellation of Lupus during the year 1006 CE . This was the brightest recorded star ever to appear in the night sky , and its presence was noted in China , Egypt , Iraq , Italy , Japan and Switzerland . It may also have been noted in France , Syria , and North America . Egyptian physician , astronomer and astrologer Ali ibn Ridwan gave the brightness of this star as one @-@ quarter the brightness of the Moon . Modern astronomers have discovered the faint remnant of this explosion and determined that it was only 7 @,@ 100 light @-@ years from the Earth . 
 Supernova SN 1054 was another widely observed event , with Arab , Chinese , and Japanese astronomers recording the star 's appearance in 1054 CE . It may also have been recorded by the Anasazi as a petroglyph . This explosion appeared in the constellation of Taurus , where it produced the Crab Nebula remnant . At its peak , the luminosity of SN 1054 may have been four times as bright as Venus , and it remained visible in daylight for 23 days and was visible in the night sky for 653 days . 
 There are fewer records of supernova SN 1181 , which occurred in the constellation Cassiopeia just over a century after SN 1054 . It was noted by Chinese and Japanese astronomers , however . The pulsar <unk> may be the stellar relic from this event . 
 The Danish astronomer Tycho Brahe was noted for his careful observations of the night sky from his observatory on the island of <unk> . In 1572 he noted the appearance of a new star , also in the constellation Cassiopeia . Later called SN 1572 , this supernova was associated with a remnant during the 1960s . 
 A common belief in Europe during this period was the Aristotelian idea that the world beyond the Moon and planets was immutable . So observers argued that the phenomenon was something in the Earth 's atmosphere . However Tycho noted that the object remained stationary from night to night — never changing its parallax — so it must lie far away . He published his observations in the small book De nova et nullius <unk> memoria <unk> visa stella ( Latin for " Concerning the new and previously unseen star " ) in 1573 . It is from the title of this book that the modern word nova for cataclysmic variable stars is derived . 
 The most recent supernova to be seen in the Milky Way galaxy was SN 1604 , which was observed October 9 , 1604 . Several people noted the sudden appearance of this star , but it was Johannes Kepler who became noted for his systematic study of the object . He published his observations in the work De Stella nova in <unk> <unk> . 
 Galileo , like Tycho before him , tried in vain to measure the parallax of this new star , and then argued against the Aristotelian view of an immutable heavens . The remnant of this supernova was identified in 1941 at the Mount Wilson Observatory . 
 = = Telescope observation = = 
 The true nature of the supernova remained obscure for some time . Observers slowly came to recognize a class of stars that undergo long @-@ term periodic fluctuations in luminosity . Both John Russell Hind in 1848 and Norman <unk> in 1863 had charted stars that underwent sudden changes in brightness . However these received little attention from the astronomical community . Finally , in 1866 , English astronomer William Huggins made the first spectroscopic observations of a nova , discovering lines of hydrogen in the unusual spectrum of the recurrent nova T Coronae Borealis . Huggins proposed a cataclysmic explosion as the underlying mechanism , and his efforts drew interest from other astronomers . 
 In 1885 , a nova @-@ like outburst was observed in the direction of the Andromeda galaxy by Ernst Hartwig in Estonia . S Andromedae increased to 6th magnitude , outshining the entire nucleus of the galaxy , then faded in a manner much like a nova . In 1917 , George W. Ritchey measured the distance to the Andromeda Galaxy and discovered it lay much farther than had previously been thought . This meant that S Andromedae , which did not just lie along the line of sight to the galaxy but had actually resided in the nucleus , released a much greater amount of energy than was typical for a nova . 
 Early work on this new category of nova was performed during the 1930s by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky at Mount Wilson Observatory . They identified S Andromedae , what they considered a typical supernova , as an explosive event that released radiation approximately equal to the Sun 's total energy output for 107 years . They decided to call this new class of cataclysmic variables super @-@ novae , and postulated that the energy was generated by the gravitational collapse of ordinary stars into neutron stars . The name super @-@ novae was first used in a 1931 lecture at Caltech by Zwicky , then used publicly in 1933 at a meeting of the American Physical Society . By 1938 , the hyphen had been lost and the modern name was in use . 
 Although supernovae are relatively rare events , occurring on average about once every 50 years in the Milky Way , observations of distant galaxies allowed supernovae to be discovered and examined more frequently . The first supernova detection patrol was begun by Zwicky in 1933 . He was joined by Josef J. Johnson from Caltech in 1936 . Using a 45 @-@ cm Schmidt telescope at Palomar observatory , they discovered twelve new supernovae within three years by comparing new photographic plates to reference images of extragalactic regions . 
 In 1938 , Walter Baade became the first astronomer to identify a nebula as a supernova remnant when he suggested that the Crab Nebula was the remains of SN 1054 . He noted that , while it had the appearance of a planetary nebula , the measured velocity of expansion was much too large to belong to that classification . During the same year , Baade first proposed the use of the Type Ia supernova as a secondary distance indicator . Later , the work of Allan Sandage and Gustav <unk> helped refine the process so that Type Ia supernovae became a type of standard candle for measuring large distances across the cosmos . 
 The first spectral classification of these distant supernovae was performed by Rudolph Minkowski in 1941 . He categorized them into two types , based on whether or not lines of the element hydrogen appeared in the supernova spectrum . Zwicky later proposed additional types III , IV , and V , although these are no longer used and now appear to be associated with single peculiar supernova types . Further sub @-@ division of the spectra categories resulted in the modern supernova classification scheme . 
 In the aftermath of the Second World War , Fred Hoyle worked on the problem of how the various observed elements in the universe were produced . In 1946 he proposed that a massive star could generate the necessary thermonuclear reactions , and the nuclear reactions of heavy elements were responsible for the removal of energy necessary for a gravitational collapse to occur . The collapsing star became rotationally unstable , and produced an explosive expulsion of elements that were distributed into interstellar space . The concept that rapid nuclear fusion was the source of energy for a supernova explosion was developed by Hoyle and William Fowler during the 1960s . 
 The first computer @-@ controlled search for supernovae was begun in the 1960s at Northwestern University . They built a 24 @-@ inch telescope at <unk> Observatory in New Mexico that could be repositioned under computer control . The telescope displayed a new galaxy each minute , with observers checking the view on a television screen . By this means , they discovered 14 supernovae over a period of two years . 
 = = 1970 – 1999 = = 
 The modern standard model for Type Ia supernovae explosions is founded on a proposal by Whelan and Iben in 1973 , and is based upon a mass @-@ transfer scenario to a degenerate companion star . In particular , the light curve of <unk> in NGC <unk> , which was observed for more than a year , was followed long enough to discover that after its broad " hump " in brightness , the supernova faded at a nearly constant rate of about 0 @.@ 01 magnitudes per day . Translated to another system of units , this is nearly the same as the decay rate of cobalt @-@ 56 ( 56Co ) , whose half @-@ life is 77 days . The degenerate explosion model predicts the production of about a solar mass of nickel @-@ 56 ( 56Ni ) by the exploding star . The 56Ni decays with a half @-@ life of 6 @.@ 8 days to 56Co , and the decay of the nickel and cobalt provides the energy radiated away by the supernova late in its history . The agreement in both total energy production and the fade rate between the theoretical models and the observations of <unk> led to rapid acceptance of the degenerate @-@ explosion model . 
 Through observation of the light curves of many Type Ia supernovae , it was discovered that they appear to have a common peak luminosity . By measuring the luminosity of these events , the distance to their host galaxy can be estimated with good accuracy . Thus this category of supernovae has become highly useful as a standard candle for measuring cosmic distances . In 1998 , the High @-@ Z Supernova Search and the Supernova Cosmology Project discovered that the most distant Type Ia supernovae appeared dimmer than expected . This has provided evidence that the expansion of the universe may be accelerating . 
 Although no supernova has been observed in the Milky Way since 1604 , it appears that a supernova exploded in the constellation Cassiopeia about 300 years ago , around the year 1667 or 1680 . The remnant of this explosion , Cassiopeia A — is heavily obscured by interstellar dust , which is possibly why it did not make a notable appearance . However it can be observed in other parts of the spectrum , and it is currently the brightest radio source beyond our solar system . 
 In 1987 , Supernova 1987A in the Large Magellanic Cloud was observed within hours of its start . It was the first supernova to be detected through its neutrino emission and the first to be observed across every band of the electromagnetic spectrum . The relative proximity of this supernova has allowed detailed observation , and it provided the first opportunity for modern theories of supernova formation to be tested against observations . 
 The rate of supernova discovery steadily increased throughout the twentieth century . In the 1990s , several automated supernova search programs were initiated . The Leuschner Observatory Supernova Search program was begun in 1992 at Leuschner Observatory . It was joined the same year by the Berkeley Automated Imaging Telescope program . These were succeeded in 1996 by the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope at Lick Observatory , which was primarily used for the Lick Observatory Supernova Search ( LOSS ) . By 2000 , the Lick program resulted in the discovery of 96 supernovae , making it the world 's most successful Supernova search program . 
 In the late 1990s it was proposed that recent supernova remnants could be found by looking for gamma rays from the decay of titanium @-@ 44 . This has a half @-@ life of 90 years and the gamma rays can traverse the galaxy easily , so it permits us to see any remnants from the last millennium or so . Two sources were found , the previously discovered Cassiopeia A remnant , and the RX J0852.0 @-@ 4622 remnant , which had just been discovered overlapping the Vela Supernova Remnant 
 This remnant ( RX J0852.0 @-@ 4622 ) had been found in front ( apparently ) of the larger Vela Supernova Remnant . The gamma rays from the decay of titanium @-@ 44 showed that it must have exploded fairly recently ( perhaps around 1200 AD ) , but there is no historical record of it . The flux of gamma rays and x @-@ rays indicates that the supernova was relatively close to us ( perhaps 200 parsecs or 600 ly ) . If so , this is a surprising event because supernovae less than 200 parsecs away are estimated to occur less than once per 100 @,@ 000 years . 
 = = 2000 to present = = 
 The " SN <unk> " was discovered in a forming galaxy in 2003 . The appearance of this supernova was studied in " real @-@ time " , and it has posed several major physical questions as it seems more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit would allow . 
 First observed in September 2006 , the supernova SN 2006gy , which occurred in a galaxy called NGC 1260 ( 240 million light @-@ years away ) , is the largest and , until confirmation of luminosity of SN <unk> in October 2007 , the most luminous supernova ever observed . The explosion was at least 100 times more luminous than any previously observed supernova , with the progenitor star being estimated 150 times more massive than the Sun . Although this had some characteristics of a Type Ia supernova , Hydrogen was found in the spectrum . It is thought that SN 2006gy is a likely candidate for a pair @-@ instability supernova . SN <unk> , which was discovered by Robert Quimby who also discovered SN 2006gy , was about twice as bright as SN 2006gy and about 300 times as bright as a normal type II supernova . 
 On May 21 , 2008 , astronomers announced that they had for the first time caught a supernova on camera just as it was exploding . By chance , a burst of X @-@ rays was noticed while looking at galaxy NGC 2770 , 88 million light @-@ years from Earth , and a variety of telescopes were aimed in that direction just in time to capture what has been named SN <unk> . " This eventually confirmed that the big X @-@ ray blast marked the birth of a supernova , " said Alicia Soderberg of Princeton University . 
 One of the many amateur astronomers looking for supernovae , Caroline Moore , a member of the Puckett Observatory Supernova Search Team , found supernova SN 2008ha late November 2008 . At the age of 14 she has now been declared the youngest person ever to find a supernova . However , in January 2011 , 10 @-@ year @-@ old Kathryn Aurora Gray from Canada was reported to have discovered a supernova , making her the youngest ever to find a supernova . Ms. Gray , her father , and a friend spotted SN <unk> , a magnitude 17 supernova in galaxy UGC <unk> in the constellation Camelopardalis , about 240 million light years away . 
 In 2009 , researchers have found nitrates in ice cores from Antarctica at depths corresponding to the known supernovae of 1006 and 1054 AD , as well as from around 1060 AD . The nitrates were apparently formed from nitrogen oxides created by gamma rays from the supernovae . This technique should be able to detect supernovae going back several thousand years . 
 On November 15 , 2010 , astronomers using NASA 's Chandra X @-@ ray Observatory announced that , while viewing the remnant of SN <unk> in the galaxy Messier 100 , they have discovered an object which could be a young , 30 @-@ year @-@ old black hole . NASA also noted the possibility this object could be a spinning neutron star producing a wind of high energy particles . 
 On August 24 , 2011 , the Palomar Transient Factory automated survey discovered a new Type Ia supernova ( SN 2011fe ) in the Pinwheel Galaxy ( M101 ) shortly after it burst into existence . Being only 21 million lightyears away and detected so early after the event started , it will allow scientists to learn more about the early developments of these types of supernovae . 
 On 16 March 2012 , a Type II supernova , designated as SN <unk> , was discovered in <unk> . 
 On January 22 , 2014 , students at the University of London Observatory spotted an exploding star SN <unk> in the nearby galaxy M82 ( the Cigar Galaxy ) . At a distance of around 12 million light years , the supernova is one of the nearest to be observed in recent decades . 
 = = Future = = 
 The estimated rate of supernova production in a galaxy the size of the Milky Way is about one every 50 years . This is much higher than the actual observed rate , implying that a portion of these events have been obscured from the Earth by interstellar dust . The deployment of new instruments that can observe across a wide range of the electromagnetic spectrum , along with neutrino detectors , means that the next such event will almost certainly be detected . 
 = W. B. Yeats = 
 William Butler Yeats ( / <unk> / ; 13 June 1865 – 28 January 1939 ) was an Irish poet and one of the foremost figures of 20th @-@ century literature . A pillar of both the Irish and British literary establishments , in his later years he served as an Irish Senator for two terms . Yeats was a driving force behind the Irish Literary Revival and , along with Lady Gregory , Edward Martyn , and others , founded the Abbey Theatre , where he served as its chief during its early years . In 1923 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature as the first Irishman so honoured for what the Nobel Committee described as " inspired poetry , which in a highly artistic form gives expression to the spirit of a whole nation " . Yeats is considered to be one of the few writers who completed their greatest works after being awarded the Nobel Prize ; such works include The Tower ( 1928 ) and The Winding Stair and Other Poems ( 1933 ) . 
 William Butler Yeats was born in Sandymount , Ireland and educated there and in London ; he spent his childhood holidays in County Sligo . He studied poetry in his youth and from an early age was fascinated by both Irish legends and the occult . Those topics feature in the first phase of his work , which lasted roughly until the turn of the 20th century . His earliest volume of verse was published in 1889 , and its slow @-@ paced and lyrical poems display Yeats 's debts to Edmund Spenser , Percy Bysshe Shelley , and the poets of the Pre @-@ Raphaelite Brotherhood . From 1900 , Yeats 's poetry grew more physical and realistic . He largely renounced the transcendental beliefs of his youth , though he remained preoccupied with physical and spiritual masks , as well as with cyclical theories of life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Of Anglo @-@ Irish descent , William Butler Yeats was born at Sandymount in County Dublin , Ireland . His father , John Butler Yeats ( 1839 – 1922 ) , was a descendant of Jervis Yeats , a Williamite soldier , linen merchant , and well @-@ known painter who died in 1712 . Benjamin Yeats , Jervis 's grandson and William 's great @-@ great @-@ grandfather , had in 1773 married Mary Butler of a landed family in County Kildare . Following their marriage , they kept the name Butler in the family name . Mary was a descendant of the Butler of Ormond family from the <unk> ( pronounced <unk> ) Gowran branch of the family . They were descendants of the first Earls of Ormond . 
 At the time of his marriage , William 's father John Yeats was studying law but abandoned his studies to study art at Heatherley 's Art School in London . His mother , Susan Mary Pollexfen , came from a wealthy merchant family in Sligo , who owned a milling and shipping business . Soon after William 's birth the family relocated to the Pollexfen home at Merville , Sligo to stay with her extended family , and the young poet came to think of the area as his childhood and spiritual home . Its landscape became , over time , both literally and symbolically , his " country of the heart " . The Butler Yeats family were highly artistic ; his brother Jack became an esteemed painter , while his sisters Elizabeth and Susan Mary — known to family and friends as Lollie and Lily — became involved in the Arts and Crafts Movement . 
 Yeats grew up as a member of the former Protestant Ascendancy at the time undergoing a crisis of identity . While his family was broadly supportive of the changes Ireland was experiencing , the nationalist revival of the late 19th century directly disadvantaged his heritage , and informed his outlook for the remainder of his life . In 1997 , his biographer R. F. Foster observed that Napoleon 's dictum that to understand the man you have to know what was happening in the world when he was twenty " is manifestly true of <unk> " Yeats 's childhood and young adulthood were shadowed by the power shift away from the minority Protestant Ascendancy . The 1880s saw the rise of Parnell and the home rule movement ; the 1890s saw the momentum of nationalism , while the Catholics became prominent around the turn of the century . These developments had a profound effect on his poetry , and his subsequent explorations of Irish identity had a significant influence on the creation of his country 's biography . 
 In 1867 , the family moved to England to aid their father , John , to further his career as an artist . At first the Yeats children were educated at home . Their mother entertained them with stories and Irish folktales . John provided an erratic education in geography and chemistry , and took William on natural history explorations of the nearby Slough countryside . On 26 January 1877 , the young poet entered the Godolphin school , which he attended for four years . He did not distinguish himself academically , and an early school report describes his performance as " only fair . Perhaps better in Latin than in any other subject . Very poor in spelling " . Though he had difficulty with mathematics and languages ( possibly because he was tone deaf ) , he was fascinated by biology and zoology . For financial reasons , the family returned to Dublin toward the end of 1880 , living at first in the suburbs of Harold 's Cross and later Howth . In October 1881 , Yeats resumed his education at Dublin 's Erasmus Smith High School . His father 's studio was nearby and William spent a great deal of time there , where he met many of the city 's artists and writers . During this period he started writing poetry , and , in 1885 , the Dublin University Review published Yeats 's first poems , as well as an essay entitled " The Poetry of Sir Samuel Ferguson " . Between 1884 and 1886 , William attended the Metropolitan School of Art — now the National College of Art and Design — in Thomas Street . 
 His first known works were written when he was seventeen , and included a poem — heavily influenced by Percy Bysshe Shelley — that describes a magician who set up a throne in central Asia . Other pieces from this period include a draft of a play about a bishop , a monk , and a woman accused of paganism by local shepherds , as well as love @-@ poems and narrative lyrics on German knights . The early works were both conventional and , according to the critic Charles Johnston , " utterly <unk> " , seeming to come out of a " vast murmurous gloom of dreams " . Although Yeats 's early works drew heavily on Shelley , Edmund Spenser , and on the diction and colouring of pre @-@ Raphaelite verse , he soon turned to Irish mythology and folklore and the writings of William Blake . In later life , Yeats paid tribute to Blake by describing him as one of the " great artificers of God who uttered great truths to a little clan " . In 1891 , Yeats published " John Sherman " and " <unk> " , one a novella , the other a story . 
 = = = Young poet = = = 
 The family returned to London in 1887 . In March 1890 Yeats joined the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn . That same year Yeats and Ernest Rhys co @-@ founded the <unk> ' Club , a group of London @-@ based poets who met regularly in a Fleet Street tavern to recite their verse . Yeats later sought to mythologize the collective , calling it the " Tragic Generation " in his autobiography , and published two anthologies of the <unk> ' work , the first one in 1892 and the second one in 1894 . He collaborated with Edwin Ellis on the first complete edition of William Blake 's works , in the process rediscovering a forgotten poem , " Vala , or , the Four <unk> " . In a late essay on Shelley , Yeats wrote , " I have re @-@ read Prometheus Unbound ... and it seems to me to have an even more certain place than I had thought among the sacred books of the world . " 
 Yeats had a life @-@ long interest in mysticism , spiritualism , occultism and astrology . He read extensively on the subjects throughout his life , became a member of the paranormal research organisation " The Ghost Club " ( in 1911 ) and was especially influenced by the writings of Emanuel Swedenborg . As early as 1892 , he wrote : " If I had not made magic my constant study I could not have written a single word of my Blake book , nor would The Countess Kathleen ever have come to exist . The mystical life is the centre of all that I do and all that I think and all that I write . " His mystical interests — also inspired by a study of Hinduism , under the Theosophist Mohini Chatterjee , and the occult — formed much of the basis of his late poetry . Some critics disparaged this aspect of Yeats 's work ; W. H. Auden called it the " deplorable spectacle of a grown man occupied with the mumbo @-@ jumbo of magic and the nonsense of India . " 
 His first significant poem was " The Island of Statues " , a fantasy work that took Edmund Spenser and Shelley for its poetic models . The piece was serialized in the Dublin University Review . Yeats wished to include it in his first collection , but it was deemed too long , and in fact was never republished in his lifetime . <unk> Books published the poem in complete form for the first time in 2014 . His first solo publication was the pamphlet <unk> : A Dramatic Poem ( 1886 ) , which comprised a print run of 100 copies paid for by his father . This was followed by the collection The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems ( 1889 ) , which arranged a series of verse that dated as far back as the mid @-@ 1880s . The long title poem contains , in the words of his biographer R.F. Foster , " obscure Gaelic names , striking repetitions [ and ] an unremitting rhythm subtly varied as the poem proceeded through its three sections " ; 
 We rode in sorrow , with strong hounds three , 
 Bran , <unk> , and <unk> , 
 On a morning misty and mild and fair . 
 The mist @-@ drops hung on the fragrant trees , 
 And in the blossoms hung the bees . 
 We rode in sadness above Lough Lean , 
 For our best were dead on <unk> 's green . 
 " The Wanderings of Oisin " is based on the lyrics of the Fenian Cycle of Irish mythology and displays the influence of both Sir Samuel Ferguson and the Pre @-@ Raphaelite poets . The poem took two years to complete and was one of the few works from this period that he did not disown in his maturity . Oisin introduces what was to become one of his most important themes : the appeal of the life of contemplation over the appeal of the life of action . Following the work , Yeats never again attempted another long poem . His other early poems , which are meditations on the themes of love or mystical and esoteric subjects , include Poems ( 1895 ) , The Secret Rose ( 1897 ) , and The Wind Among the Reeds ( 1899 ) . The covers of these volumes were illustrated by Yeats ' friend Althea Gyles . 
 During 1885 , Yeats was involved in the formation of the Dublin Hermetic Order . The society held its first meeting on 16 June , with Yeats acting as its chairman . The same year , the Dublin Theosophical lodge was opened in conjunction with Brahmin Mohini Chatterjee , who travelled from the Theosophical Society in London to lecture . Yeats attended his first séance the following year . He later became heavily involved with the Theosophical Society and with hermeticism , particularly with the eclectic Rosicrucianism of the Golden Dawn . During séances held from 1912 , a spirit calling itself " Leo Africanus " apparently claimed it was Yeats 's Daemon or anti @-@ self , inspiring some of the speculations in Per <unk> <unk> <unk> . He was admitted into the Golden Dawn in March 1890 and took the magical motto Daemon est Deus <unk> — translated as Devil is God inverted or A demon is a god reflected . He was an active recruiter for the sect 's Isis @-@ Urania Temple , and brought in his uncle George Pollexfen , Maud Gonne , and Florence Farr . Although he reserved a distaste for abstract and dogmatic religions founded around personality cults , he was attracted to the type of people he met at the Golden Dawn . He was involved in the Order 's power struggles , both with Farr and Macgregor Mathers , and was involved when Mathers sent Aleister Crowley to repossess Golden Dawn paraphernalia during the " Battle of Blythe Road " . After the Golden Dawn ceased and splintered into various offshoots , Yeats remained with the Stella <unk> until 1921 . 
 = = = Maud Gonne = = = 
 In 1889 , Yeats met Maud Gonne , then a 23 @-@ year @-@ old English heiress and ardent Irish Nationalist . Gonne was eighteen months younger than Yeats and later claimed she met the poet as a " paint @-@ stained art student . " Gonne had admired " The Island of Statues " and sought out his acquaintance . Yeats developed an obsessive infatuation with her beauty and outspoken manner , and she had a significant and lasting effect on his poetry and his life thereafter . 
 In later years he admitted , " it seems to me that she [ Gonne ] brought into my life those days — for as yet I saw only what lay upon the surface — the middle of the tint , a sound as of a Burmese gong , an over @-@ powering tumult that had yet many pleasant secondary notes . " Yeats ' love initially remained unrequited , in part due to his reluctance to participate in her nationalist activism . 
 In 1891 , he visited Gonne in Ireland and proposed marriage , but she rejected him . He later admitted that from that point " the troubling of my life began " . Yeats proposed to Gonne three more times : in 1899 , 1900 and 1901 . She refused each proposal , and in 1903 , to his horror , married the Irish nationalist Major John MacBride . His only other love affair during this period was with Olivia Shakespear , whom he first met in 1894 , and parted from in 1897 . 
 Yeats continually sought to deride and demean John MacBride both in his letters and his poetry , but there were two main reasons why he was horrified by Gonne 's marriage to him . Firstly , to lose his muse to another man affected his reputation with the public . Secondly , Gonne converted to Catholicism before her marriage , and Yeats was Protestant / agnostic . He worried his muse would come under the influence of the priests and do their bidding . 
 Gonne 's marriage to MacBride , as forecast by both their sets of friends and relations , was a disaster early on . This pleased Yeats , as Gonne began to visit him in London . After the birth of her son , Seán MacBride , in 1904 , Gonne and MacBride agreed to end the marriage , although they were unable to agree on the child 's welfare . Despite the use of intermediaries , a divorce case ensued in Paris in 1905 . Gonne made a series of allegations against her husband with Yeats as her main ' second , ' though he did not attend court or travel to France . A divorce was not granted as the only accusation that held up in court was that MacBride had been drunk once during the marriage . A separation was granted with Gonne having custody of the baby and John having visiting rights . 
 Yeats 's friendship with Gonne persisted , and , in Paris , in 1908 , they finally consummated their relationship . " The long years of fidelity rewarded at last " was how another of his lovers described the event . Yeats was less sentimental and later remarked that " the tragedy of sexual intercourse is the perpetual virginity of the soul . " The relationship did not develop into a new phase after their night together , and soon afterwards Gonne wrote to the poet indicating that despite the physical consummation , they could not continue as they had been : " I have prayed so hard to have all earthly desire taken from my love for you and dearest , loving you as I do , I have prayed and I am praying still that the bodily desire for me may be taken from you too . " By January 1909 , Gonne was sending Yeats letters praising the advantage given to artists who abstain from sex . Nearly twenty years later , Yeats recalled the night with Gonne in his poem " A Man Young and Old " : 
 My arms are like the twisted thorn 
 And yet there beauty lay ; 
 The first of all the tribe lay there 
 And did such pleasure take ; 
 She who had brought great Hector down 
 And put all Troy to wreck . 
 In 1896 , Yeats was introduced to Lady Gregory by their mutual friend Edward Martyn . Gregory encouraged Yeats ' nationalism , and convinced him to continue focusing on writing drama . Although he was influenced by French Symbolism , Yeats concentrated on an identifiably Irish content and this inclination was reinforced by his involvement with a new generation of younger and emerging Irish authors . Together with Lady Gregory , Martyn , and other writers including J. M. Synge , Seán O 'Casey , and Padraic Colum , Yeats was one of those responsible for the establishment of the " Irish Literary Revival " movement . Apart from these creative writers , much of the impetus for the Revival came from the work of scholarly translators who were aiding in the discovery of both the ancient sagas and Ossianic poetry and the more recent folk song tradition in Irish . One of the most significant of these was Douglas Hyde , later the first President of Ireland , whose Love Songs of Connacht was widely admired . 
 = = = Abbey Theatre = = = 
 In 1899 , Yeats , Lady Gregory , Edward Martyn and George Moore established the Irish Literary Theatre for the purpose of performing Irish and Celtic plays . The ideals of the Abbey were derived from the avant @-@ garde French theatre , which sought to express the " ascendancy of the playwright rather than the actor @-@ manager à l <unk> . " The group 's manifesto , which Yeats wrote , declared , " We hope to find in Ireland an uncorrupted & imaginative audience trained to listen by its passion for oratory ... & that freedom to experiment which is not found in the theatres of England , & without which no new movement in art or literature can succeed . " 
 The collective survived for about two years but was not successful . Working with two Irish brothers with theatrical experience , William and Frank Fay , Yeats 's unpaid yet independently wealthy secretary Annie Horniman , and the leading West End actress Florence Farr , the group established the Irish National Theatre Society . Along with Synge , they acquired property in Dublin and on 27 December 1904 opened the Abbey Theatre . Yeats 's play Cathleen Ní Houlihan and Lady Gregory 's Spreading the News were featured on the opening night . Yeats remained involved with the Abbey until his death , both as a member of the board and a prolific playwright . In 1902 , he helped set up the Dun Emer Press to publish work by writers associated with the Revival . This became the Cuala Press in 1904 , and inspired by the Arts and Crafts Movement , sought to " find work for Irish hands in the making of beautiful things . " From then until its closure in 1946 , the press — which was run by the poet 's sisters — produced over 70 titles ; 48 of them books by Yeats himself . 
 In 1909 , Yeats met the American poet Ezra Pound . Pound had travelled to London at least partly to meet the older man , whom he considered " the only poet worthy of serious study . " From that year until 1916 , the two men wintered in the Stone Cottage at Ashdown Forest , with Pound nominally acting as Yeats 's secretary . The relationship got off to a rocky start when Pound arranged for the publication in the magazine Poetry of some of Yeats 's verse with Pound 's own unauthorised alterations . These changes reflected Pound 's distaste for Victorian prosody . A more indirect influence was the scholarship on Japanese Noh plays that Pound had obtained from Ernest Fenollosa 's widow , which provided Yeats with a model for the aristocratic drama he intended to write . The first of his plays modelled on Noh was At the Hawk 's Well , the first draft of which he dictated to Pound in January 1916 . 
 The emergence of a nationalist revolutionary movement from the ranks of the mostly Roman Catholic lower @-@ middle and working class made Yeats reassess some of his attitudes . In the refrain of " Easter , 1916 " ( " All changed , changed utterly / A terrible beauty is born " ) , Yeats faces his own failure to recognise the merits of the leaders of the Easter Rising , due to his attitude towards their ordinary backgrounds and lives . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 Yeats was an Irish Nationalist at heart , looking for the kind of traditional lifestyle displayed through poems such as ' The Fisherman ' . However , as his life progressed , he sheltered much of his revolutionary spirit and distanced himself from the intense political landscape until 1922 , when he was appointed Senator for the Irish Free State . 
 In the earlier part of his life , Yeats was a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood . Due to the escalating tension of the political scene , Yeats distanced himself from the core political activism in the midst of the Easter Rising , even holding back his poetry inspired by the events until 1920 . 
 = = = Marriage to Georgie Hyde Lees = = = 
 By 1916 , Yeats was 51 years old and determined to marry and produce an heir . John MacBride had been executed by British forces for his role in the 1916 Easter Rising , and Yeats thought that his widow might remarry . His final proposal to Maud Gonne took place in mid @-@ 1916 . Gonne 's history of revolutionary political activism , as well as a series of personal catastrophes in the previous few years of her life , including chloroform addiction and her troubled marriage to MacBride made her a potentially unsuitable wife and biographer R.F. Foster has observed that Yeats 's last offer was motivated more by a sense of duty than by a genuine desire to marry her . 
 Yeats proposed in an indifferent manner , with conditions attached , and he both expected and hoped she would turn him down . According to Foster " when he duly asked Maud to marry him , and was duly refused , his thoughts shifted with surprising speed to her daughter . " Iseult Gonne was Maud 's second child with Lucien <unk> , and at the time was twenty @-@ one years old . She had lived a sad life to this point ; conceived as an attempt to reincarnate her short @-@ lived brother , for the first few years of her life she was presented as her mother 's adopted niece . When Maud told her that she was going to marry , Iseult cried and told her mother that she hated MacBride . At fifteen , she proposed to Yeats . In 1917 he proposed to Iseult , but was rejected . 
 That September , Yeats proposed to 25 @-@ year @-@ old Georgie Hyde @-@ Lees ( 1892 – 1968 ) , known as George , whom he had met through Olivia Shakespear . Despite warnings from her friends — " George ... you can 't . He must be dead " — Hyde @-@ Lees accepted , and the two were married on 20 October . Their marriage was a success , in spite of the age difference , and in spite of Yeats 's feelings of remorse and regret during their honeymoon . The couple went on to have two children , Anne and Michael . Although in later years he had romantic relationships with other women and possibly affairs , George herself wrote to her husband " When you are dead , people will talk about your love affairs , but I shall say nothing , for I will remember how proud you were . " 
 During the first years of his marriage , he and George experimented with automatic writing , and George contacted a variety of spirits and guides they called " Instructors " while in a trance . The spirits communicated a complex and esoteric system of philosophy and history , which the couple developed into an exposition using geometrical shapes : phases , cones , and gyres . Yeats devoted much time to preparing this material for publication as A Vision ( 1925 ) . In 1924 , he wrote to his publisher T. Werner Laurie admitting : " I dare say I delude myself in thinking this book my book of books " . 
 = = = Nobel Prize = = = 
 In December 1923 , Yeats was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature , " for his always inspired poetry , which in a highly artistic form gives expression to the spirit of a whole nation " . He was aware of the symbolic value of an Irish winner so soon after Ireland had gained independence , and sought to highlight the fact at each available opportunity . His reply to many of the letters of congratulations sent to him contained the words : " I consider that this honour has come to me less as an individual than as a representative of Irish literature , it is part of Europe 's welcome to the Free State . " Yeats used the occasion of his acceptance lecture at the Royal Academy of Sweden to present himself as a standard @-@ bearer of Irish nationalism and Irish cultural independence . As he remarked , " The theatres of Dublin were empty buildings hired by the English travelling companies , and we wanted Irish plays and Irish players . When we thought of these plays we thought of everything that was romantic and poetical , because the nationalism we had called up — the nationalism every generation had called up in moments of discouragement — was romantic and poetical . " The prize led to a significant increase in the sales of his books , as his publishers Macmillan sought to capitalise on the publicity . For the first time he had money , and he was able to repay not only his own debts , but those of his father . 
 = = = Old age and death = = = 
 By early 1925 , Yeats ' health had stabilised , and he had completed most of the writing for " A Vision " ( dated 1925 , it actually appeared in January 1926 , when he almost immediately started rewriting it for a second version ) . He had been appointed to the first Irish Senate in 1922 , and was re @-@ appointed for a second term in 1925 . Early in his tenure , a debate on divorce arose , and Yeats viewed the issue as primarily a confrontation between the emerging Roman Catholic ethos and the Protestant minority . When the Roman Catholic Church weighed in with a blanket refusal to consider their anti position , the Irish Times countered that a measure to outlaw divorce would alienate Protestants and " crystallise " the partition of Ireland . 
 In response , Yeats delivered a series of speeches that attacked the " <unk> impressive " ambitions of the government and clergy , likening their campaign tactics to those of " medieval Spain . " " Marriage is not to us a Sacrament , but , upon the other hand , the love of a man and woman , and the inseparable physical desire , are sacred . This conviction has come to us through ancient philosophy and modern literature , and it seems to us a most sacrilegious thing to persuade two people who hate each other ... to live together , and it is to us no remedy to permit them to part if neither can re @-@ marry . " The resulting debate has been described as one of Yeats 's " supreme public moments " , and began his ideological move away from pluralism towards religious confrontation . 
 His language became more forceful ; the Jesuit Father Peter Finlay was described by Yeats as a man of " monstrous discourtesy " , and he lamented that , " It is one of the glories of the Church in which I was born that we have put our Bishops in their place in discussions requiring legislation " . During his time in the Senate , Yeats further warned his colleagues : " If you show that this country , southern Ireland , is going to be governed by Roman Catholic ideas and by Catholic ideas alone , you will never get the North ... You will put a wedge in the midst of this nation " . He memorably said of his fellow Irish Protestants , " we are no petty people " . 
 In 1924 , he chaired a coinage committee charged with selecting a set of designs for the first currency of the Irish Free State . Aware of the symbolic power latent in the imagery of a young state 's currency , he sought a form that was " elegant , racy of the soil , and utterly unpolitical " . When the house finally decided on the artwork of Percy Metcalfe , Yeats was pleased , though he regretted that compromise had led to " lost muscular tension " in the finally depicted images . He retired from the Senate in 1928 because of ill health . 
 Towards the end of his life — and especially after the Wall Street Crash and Great Depression , which led some to question whether democracy could cope with deep economic difficulty — Yeats seems to have returned to his aristocratic sympathies . During the aftermath of the First World War , he became sceptical about the efficacy of democratic government , and anticipated political reconstruction in Europe through totalitarian rule . His later association with Pound drew him towards Benito Mussolini , for whom he expressed admiration on a number of occasions . He wrote three " marching songs " — never used — for the Irish General Eoin O 'Duffy 's Blueshirts . 
 At the age of 69 he was ' rejuvenated ' by the <unk> operation which was performed on 6 April 1934 by Norman Haire . For the last five years of his life Yeats found a new vigour evident from both his poetry and his intimate relations with younger women . During this time , Yeats was involved in a number of romantic affairs with , among others , the poet and actress Margot Ruddock , and the novelist , journalist and sexual radical Ethel Mannin . As in his earlier life , Yeats found erotic adventure conducive to his creative energy , and , despite age and ill @-@ health , he remained a prolific writer . In a letter of 1935 , Yeats noted : " I find my present weakness made worse by the strange second puberty the operation has given me , the ferment that has come upon my imagination . If I write poetry it will be unlike anything I have done " . In 1936 , he undertook editorship of the Oxford Book of Modern Verse , 1892 – 1935 . 
 He died at the Hôtel Idéal <unk> , in Menton , France , on 28 January 1939 . He was buried after a discreet and private funeral at Roquebrune @-@ Cap @-@ Martin . Attempts had been made at Roquebrune to dissuade the family from proceeding with the removal of the remains to Ireland due to the uncertainty of their identity . His body had earlier been exhumed and transferred to the ossuary . Yeats and George had often discussed his death , and his express wish was that he be buried quickly in France with a minimum of fuss . According to George , " His actual words were ' If I die bury me up there [ at Roquebrune ] and then in a year 's time when the newspapers have forgotten me , dig me up and plant me in Sligo ' . " In September 1948 , Yeats ' body was moved to <unk> , County Sligo , on the Irish Naval Service corvette <unk> Macha . The person in charge of this operation for the Irish Government was Sean MacBride , son of Maud Gonne MacBride , and then Minister of External Affairs . His epitaph is taken from the last lines of " Under Ben <unk> " , one of his final poems : 
 Cast a cold Eye 
 On Life , on Death . 
 Horseman , pass by ! 
 = = Style = = 
 Yeats is generally considered one of the twentieth century 's key English language poets . He was a Symbolist poet , in that he used allusive imagery and symbolic structures throughout his career . Yeats chose words and assembled them so that , in addition to a particular meaning , they suggest other abstract thoughts that may seem more significant and resonant . His use of symbols is usually something physical that is both itself and a suggestion of other , perhaps immaterial , timeless qualities . 
 Unlike other modernists who experimented with free verse , Yeats was a master of the traditional forms . The impact of modernism on his work can be seen in the increasing abandonment of the more conventionally poetic diction of his early work in favour of the more austere language and more direct approach to his themes that increasingly characterises the poetry and plays of his middle period , comprising the volumes In the Seven Woods , Responsibilities and The Green Helmet . His later poetry and plays are written in a more personal vein , and the works written in the last twenty years of his life include mention of his son and daughter , as well as meditations on the experience of growing old . In his poem , " The Circus Animals ' Desertion " , he describes the inspiration for these late works : 
 Now that my ladder 's gone 
 I must lie down where all the ladders start 
 In the foul rag and bone shop of the heart . 
 During 1929 , he stayed at <unk> <unk> near Gort in County Galway ( where Yeats had his summer home since 1919 ) for the last time . Much of the remainder of his life was lived outside Ireland , although he did lease Riversdale house in the Dublin suburb of Rathfarnham in 1932 . He wrote prolifically through his final years , and published poetry , plays , and prose . In 1938 , he attended the Abbey for the final time to see the premier of his play Purgatory . His Autobiographies of William Butler Yeats was published that same year . In 1913 , Yeats wrote the preface for the English translation of Rabindranath Tagore 's <unk> ( Song Offering ) for which Tagore received Nobel Prize in literature . 
 While Yeats 's early poetry drew heavily on Irish myth and folklore , his later work was engaged with more contemporary issues , and his style underwent a dramatic transformation . His work can be divided into three general periods . The early poems are lushly pre @-@ Raphaelite in tone , self @-@ consciously ornate , and , at times , according to unsympathetic critics , stilted . Yeats began by writing epic poems such as The Isle of Statues and The Wanderings of Oisin . His other early poems are lyrics on the themes of love or mystical and esoteric subjects . Yeats 's middle period saw him abandon the pre @-@ Raphaelite character of his early work and attempt to turn himself into a Landor @-@ style social <unk> . 
 Critics who admire his middle work might characterize it as supple and muscular in its rhythms and sometimes harshly modernist , while others find these poems barren and weak in imaginative power . Yeats 's later work found new imaginative inspiration in the mystical system he began to work out for himself under the influence of spiritualism . In many ways , this poetry is a return to the vision of his earlier work . The opposition between the worldly minded man of the sword and the spiritually minded man of God , the theme of The Wanderings of Oisin , is reproduced in A Dialogue Between Self and Soul . 
 Some critics claim that Yeats spanned the transition from the nineteenth century into twentieth @-@ century modernism in poetry much as Pablo Picasso did in painting while others question whether late Yeats has much in common with modernists of the Ezra Pound and T. S. Eliot variety . 
 Modernists read the well @-@ known poem The Second Coming as a dirge for the decline of European civilisation in the mode of Eliot , but later critics have pointed out that this poem is an expression of Yeats 's apocalyptic mystical theories , and thus the expression of a mind shaped by the 1890s . His most important collections of poetry started with The Green Helmet ( 1910 ) and Responsibilities ( 1914 ) . In imagery , Yeats 's poetry became sparer and more powerful as he grew older . The Tower ( 1928 ) , The Winding Stair ( 1933 ) , and New Poems ( 1938 ) contained some of the most potent images in twentieth @-@ century poetry . 
 Yeats 's mystical inclinations , informed by Hindu Theosophical beliefs and the occult , provided much of the basis of his late poetry , which some critics have judged as lacking in intellectual credibility . The metaphysics of Yeats 's late works must be read in relation to his system of esoteric fundamentals in A Vision ( 1925 ) . 
 His 1921 poem , " The Second Coming " contains some of literature 's most potent images of the twentieth century . 
 Turning and turning in the widening gyre 
 The falcon cannot hear the falconer 
 Things fall apart ; the centre cannot hold ; 
 Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world , 
 The blood @-@ dimmed tide is loosed , and everywhere 
 The ceremony of innocence is drowned . 
 The best lack all conviction , while the worst 
