 " Tell Me Why " incorporates elements of " The Last Words of Copernicus " by the Alabama Sacred Harp Singers . 
 " Internet Connection " incorporates a sample from <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the deluxe edition of Maya . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Summertime ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Summertime " is a song by American singer Beyoncé Knowles featuring American rapper P. Diddy . " Summertime " was written by Knowles , Angela Beyincé , P. Diddy , Steven " Steven J. " Jordan , Adonis Shropshire , Varick " Smitty " Smith and Mario Winans , while production was handled by Winans and P. Diddy . The song was later remixed to feature vocals from American rapper Ghostface Killah . " Summertime " was included on the soundtrack album for the film The Fighting Temptations ( 2003 ) , in which Knowles played the lead female role . The original version of the song was released as a B @-@ side to " Crazy in Love " in the UK and Australia , while it was issued as a 12 @-@ inch vinyl single in the United States through Columbia Records . 
 " Summertime " is an R & B song which lyrically refers to falling in love . Music critics generally complimented Knowles ' vocals in the song and noted that it could have been included on her debut studio album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . The song also charted on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart in late 2003 . The original version featuring P. Diddy and the remix version featuring Ghostface Killah peaked at number thirty @-@ five and at number fifty @-@ one respectively on the chart . Both versions charted for forty consecutive weeks . " Summertime " was part of Knowles ' set list during the Dangerously in Love Tour ( 2003 ) , and the Verizon Ladies First Tour ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 The song has two different themes . It primarily talks about the romance and later marriage between the film 's two main characters Darrin ( played by Cuba Gooding Jr . ) and Lilly ( played by Knowles ) , as well as subtly hinting at Knowles ' real @-@ life relationship with rapper Jay @-@ Z. Darrin , a shallow New York advertising executive , traveled to a small town in the deep south upon receiving word that his aunt has died and left him a sizable inheritance . Once in town , Darrin is informed that he will only receive the money if he successfully leads a local gospel group to victory at an upcoming competition . Reluctant but strapped for cash , Darrin takes on the task of finding the best singers in town and shaping the group up . Along the way , he becomes acclimated to the town with the help of his cousin Lucius ( played by Mike Epps ) and meets Lilly , a single mother who not only possesses an incredible voice but also the ability to warm Darrin 's cold heart . Although Gooding 's character , Darrin , was in love with Knowles ' character , Lilly , the latter did not always feel the same until later on in the film . Near the end of the film , he proposes to her and she accepts . They eventually get married ( offscreen ) and within eighteen months they had a baby son together , making Darrin a father and also stepfather to Lilly 's other son . 
 " Summertime " was the only song which appeared on the soundtrack album of The Fighting Temptations but not in the movie itself . As a whole , seven tracks featured the vocals of Knowles . The latter has a starring role in the film , along with a choir made up of gospel , R & B and hip @-@ hop recording artists . Faith Evans , Angie Stone , Melba Moore , Rev. Shirley Caesar , The O 'Jays , Montell Jordan , T @-@ Bone , and Zane are all seen on the film and perform on the soundtrack . " Summertime " was written by Knowles , Angela Beyincé , Sean Combs , Steven " Steven J. " Jordan , Adonis Shropshire , Varick " Smitty " Smith and Mario Winans while production was handled by Winans and P. Diddy . Tim Sendra of Allmusic describes " Summertime " as an R & B " sweet love song " with lush sampled strings and acoustic guitars . The lyrics of the song do not reveal the film 's plot , but they do tell that it has been a year since Darrin and Lilly met and they have gotten closer which could possibly be referring to their marriage . According to Dani Boobyer of the UK @-@ based website The Situation , its lyrics make reference to " failing in love in the summer sun . " 
 = = Release = = 
 During a string of soundtrack releases , Knowles commented on the song in an interview with Billboard and stated : " A lot of music was written especially for the film . At first I was concerned about the timing of the soundtrack , [ because ] my solo album was supposed to come out way before the movie . But then the solo album got delayed . " While later announcing the release of the soundtrack album in a press release , Knowles said : " Once you hear the song [ ' Fighting Temptation ' ] , and all the music in this film , you can 't help but fall in love with it . You 'll definitely get emotional . You might become happy or even sad , but your heart will get full . All the songs are touching and spiritual , and that 's what the movie itself is like . " 
 " Summertime " was issued as a 12 " vinyl single in the United States by Columbia Records on October 28 , 2003 , and was later serviced to radio by the label . The original version of the song also served as the B @-@ side to Knowles ' debut solo lead single " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) in the UK and Australia . " Summertime " was additionally included on Knowles ' 2005 mixtape Speak My Mind . The song was later referenced in Rochelle <unk> 's short story " Summer Madness " , from the anthology Four Degrees of Heat ( 2004 – 07 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a summer issue of Vibe , the song was included on a list of the top songs for a summer playlist . Research director Laura Checkoway reviewed the remix of the track and stated : " Ghost 's game is tight . " In an Amazon.com editorial review , Tom Keogh stated that the song " proves a breezy dance number . " Tim Sendra of Allmusic wrote that " Summertime " features " a wonderful vocal from Beyoncé . " He also considered that it would have made a perfect addition to her debut solo studio album , Dangerously in Love ( 2003 ) . Dani Boobyer of The Situation commented that the song is " infectious " and that it ends the soundtrack album " on a smooth , laid @-@ back high . " Both the original version featuring P. Diddy and remix version featuring Ghostface Killah charted for forty weeks on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . During the week of August 16 , 2003 the remix featuring Ghostface Killah charted and peaked at number fifty @-@ one . During the week of September 20 , 2003 the original version charted at number thirty @-@ five . The remix also charted at number eight on the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart , which acts as a twenty five @-@ song extension to the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Although Knowles did not perform the song in any televised appearances , the song was a part of her set list on her tours . During the Verizon Ladies First Tour , which also featured Alicia Keys , Missy Elliott and Tamia , Knowles performed " Summertime " in New York in front of more than 20 @,@ 000 fans . Shaheem Reid of MTV News commented that Knowles " stepped in the name of love " during the breakdown of the song . Knowles also sung " Summertime " with an interpolation of R. Kelly 's " Step in the Name of Love " on her first solo tour Dangerously in Love Tour ( 2003 ) at the Wembley Arena in London , England . Knowles performed the song in a yellow summer @-@ dress that was bedazzled in rhinestones across the upper breast area and around the bottom of the dress . The song , alongside its live version , was included on a live DVD / CD titled Live at Wembley . " Summertime " serves as the twelfth track of the live DVD . A performance of the remix of the song was included on the Jay @-@ Z documentary Fade to Black ( 2004 ) , which features Knowles performing with Ghostface Killah . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 US 12 " vinyl single 
 " Summertime " ( Album Version featuring P. Diddy ) – 3 : 53 
 " Summertime " ( Album Version Instrumental ) – 3 : 34 
 " Summertime " ( A Capella featuring <unk> ) – 2 : 59 
 " Summertime " ( Remix featuring Ghostface Killah ) – 4 : 04 
 " Summertime " ( Remix Instrumental ) – 3 : 34 
 " Summertime " ( A Capella featuring Ghostface Killah ) – 3 : 08 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Percy Henn = 
 Reverend Canon Percy <unk> Henn ( 21 January 1865 in Manchester , England – 25 February 1955 in Perth , Western Australia ) was a clergyman and teacher in England and later Western Australia . He is best known for his time as Headmaster at Guildford Grammar School and later for the building of the Chapel of SS . Mary and George . 
 Henn gained his BA in 1887 and MA in 1890 from Worcester College at Oxford University . He taught at various schools until 1900 , when he became a missionary in Western Australia in country towns . In Western Australia Henn married Jean Elliott and had four children . After further religious work in regional WA , he moved to Guildford , Western Australia and became a leading force behind Guildford Grammar School 's Guildford Grammar School Chapel and preparatory school . He died in 1955 at age 90 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Henn was the tenth child of Rev. John Henn and his wife Catherine , née Holcroft . Born in Manchester , England in 1865 , he was educated at Christ 's Hospital , London as a Bluecoat Boy and then at Worcester College , Oxford on a scholarship . Henn considered taking holy orders after gaining two qualifications : a BA ( 1887 ) and a MA ( 1890 ) . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Henn decided , before taking on a spiritual career , that he would become a teacher . He began his career as an assistant master at Hurstpierpoint College , West Sussex ( one of the Woodard Schools , a series of eleven schools founded by Nathaniel Woodard ) . There , he became interested in education through religion , and became an ordained priest in 1891 . He then became Chaplain at Hurstpierpoint in 1892 . Henn became recognised as a teacher when he became a founding headmaster at Worksop College in Nottinghamshire ; however he resigned in 1899 amidst differences with a new superior who disagreed with Henn 's philosophy of a school grounds with beautiful buildings dominated by a chapel . 
 = = Looking abroad = = 
 In January 1900 , Henn arrived as a missionary in Perth , Western Australia . After a short spell in Kalgoorlie , he moved to Geraldton as rector ( parish priest ) . On 3 April 1902 , in Geraldton , Henn married Jean Elliott and they eventually had four children together . Henn became a rector in Northam for three years ( 1902 – 1905 ) , signifying the end of his missionary term . He returned to England and became organising secretary in the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in the dioceses of Canterbury and Rochester . 
 = = Return to Western Australia = = 
 = = = A Chapel for Guildford = = = 
 In 1910 , Henn returned to Perth to take up the position of Headmaster of Guildford Grammar School . His task was to oversee the first attempt by the Church of England at secondary education since 1873 . His first thought for the new school was the provision of a chapel . To him , a Church school without a chapel was " like the play of Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark . " Henn immediately sent out a circular entitled " A Church of England Secondary School for Western Australia . " This circular fell into the hands of one Cecil H. Oliverson , whom Henn eventually persuaded to pay the full cost of the Chapel , the Chapel of SS . Mary and George . 
 = = = Relations with Christ Church Grammar School = = = 
 In 1918 , Guildford Grammar School and Christ Church Grammar School were placed under the same ruling council . Henn became a member immediately ; however , Christ Church did not gain representation until 1920 . In 1918 , Henn suggested that Christ Church Grammar School 's oval be widened and made a first @-@ class playing field . 
 = = = Guildford Preparatory School = = = 
 In 1912 , a Cecil Priestley was temporarily employed by Henn as a member of the Guildford Grammar School staff . It seems today that he conceived the idea of a Guildford Preparatory School . Henn was enthusiastic about this , however the Guildford Preparatory School did not integrate with the main Guildford Grammar School until 1921 , when it became Guildford Grammar Preparatory School , and Priestley resigned from his position as the Head of the Prep School around this time . 
 Henn became canon of St George 's Cathedral , Perth in 1921 . He has a Guildford Grammar School house named after him , Henn 's House , founded 1927 . 
 = = 1925 – death = = 
 Henn left his job as Headmaster at Guildford Grammar School in 1925 and returned to England . However , he could not be kept away from Western Australia and returned again to become founding warden of St. Georges College , within the University of Western Australia . Henn retired permanently to Perth in 1933 and died in 1955 , age 90 . Henn 's ashes reside in the Guildford Grammar School Chapel , with a stone slab to commemorate this situated on the north side of the sanctuary . 
 = New Jersey Route 81 = 
 Route 81 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . The route is a freeway connector between exit 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) and U.S. Route 1 / 9 near Newark Liberty International Airport . It runs for 1 @.@ 18 miles ( 1 @.@ 90 km ) , entirely within the city of Elizabeth in Union County . A freeway called Route S100 was initially proposed on the current alignment of Route 81 in 1938 ; it , along with its parent Route 100 , was never built . The current route was conceived in the 1960s as a freeway replacement for Route 164 , which followed Humboldt Avenue , a surface road . It was to be designated Route 76 , but was renumbered to Route 81 when Interstate 76 was created in New Jersey . 
 It was legislated in 1966 to run parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike from exit 13 until North Avenue , where it would turn northwest and intersect U.S. Route 1 / 9 near the airport . The routing was eventually shifted to begin from a new interchange along the New Jersey Turnpike . A total of $ 50 million in funding was allocated for the road and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was responsible for designing the road . The state had wanted the port authority to pay for construction ; however it was ruled that they could not build the road . Construction on Route 81 took place between 1979 and 1982 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 81 is a freeway for its entire length through Elizabeth in Union County . It southern terminus is at the toll plaza for exit 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) , near the Jersey Gardens outlet mall and Elizabeth Center power center . The route heads north from this interchange as a four @-@ lane a 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) freeway maintained by the New Jersey Turnpike Authority . A short distance north of the toll plaza , the route comes to an interchange with County Route 624 ( North Avenue ) , which serves the aforementioned shopping areas as well as the Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth Marine Terminal . 
 Route 81 heads northwest , running in between the travel lanes of North Avenue for a distance , with industrial areas located to the southwest and Newark Liberty International Airport to the northeast . Upon splitting from North Avenue , Route 81 features a northbound ramp to Newark Liberty International Airport and has an interchange with Dowd Avenue . From here , the route continues along the airport property with three northbound lanes and two southbound lanes maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation before reaching its terminus at U.S. Routes 1 and 9 just south of the Elizabeth – Newark city line . South of the terminus , ramps allow Route 81 traffic to access either the local or express lanes of US 1 / 9 as well as Newark Liberty International Airport . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Predecessors to Route 81 = = = 
 Route S100 was originally proposed as a freeway on the rough alignment of present @-@ day Route 81 in 1938 , running between the proposed Route 100 freeway ( now the New Jersey Turnpike ) and U.S. Route 1 / 9 and Route 25 . However , Route S100 was not built . The original plan in the early 1960s for what is now Route 81 was to connect Newark International Airport with Elizabeth Seaport , bypassing Humboldt Avenue , which at the time was designated Route 164 ; Humboldt Avenue is no longer a state highway . The planned route was initially numbered Route 76 , but was renumbered to Route 81 when Interstate 80S in the southern part of the state became Interstate 76 . In 1966 , Route 81 was legislated to run parallel to the New Jersey Turnpike from Exit 13 near the Goethals Bridge north to the vicinity of North Avenue , and head west along the southern edge of the airport to U.S. 1 & 9 . By the 1970s , it was decided by the state of New Jersey to have Route 81 start at a new interchange 13A of the New Jersey Turnpike . In 1975 , Governor Brendan Byrne requested $ 882 million in bonds to construct several roads in New Jersey , including Route 81 . 
 = = = Construction begins and finishes = = = 
 The state allocated a total of $ 50 million for construction of Route 81 in 1976 , with $ 16 @.@ 6 million to be used within the next year , and the design for the proposed road , which was to provide a direct link to Newark Airport , began . The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey was responsible for designing the road and half of the $ 1 @.@ 6 million cost was to be paid for by the port authority while the state and the New Jersey Turnpike Authority were to split the other half . In 1977 , the state wanted the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to pay the $ 50 million to build Route 81 and filed suit . However , the State Court of Appeals ruled in 1978 that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey could not help build the road as it needed permission from both the New Jersey and New York legislatures , who wanted the port authority to focus on mass transit construction to airports . 
 With the construction of the new interchange on the New Jersey Turnpike , a service area along the turnpike named after William Halsey was subsequently closed down . Exit 13A , in turn , revitalized the Port Newark @-@ Elizabeth Marine Terminal area . A retail center has arisen on the east side of the New Jersey Turnpike in an Urban Enterprise Zone , accessible from the North Avenue exit off Route 81 . With the construction of the Jersey Gardens outlet mall , Exit 13A was reconstructed by <unk> DePalma Inc and financed by mall owner Glimcher Realty Trust . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Elizabeth , Union County . 
 = Antoine Huré = 
 General Antoine Jules Joseph Huré ( 11 February 1873 - December 1949 ) was a French army officer and engineer noted for his service in Morocco . Huré joined the army as a volunteer in 1893 and after training at the École Polytechnique and École d <unk> de l 'Artillerie et du <unk> he was commissioned into the 3rd Regiment of Engineers . He spent a number of years with his regiment and on staff appointments in France before transferring to Algeria first with the 19th Army Corps , and then the 15th Army Corps . In 1912 Huré transferred to the general staff in eastern Morocco and earned the Colonial Medal . 
 Huré was recalled to France at the start of the First World War and was shot in the chest whilst serving with the 1st Moroccan Infantry Division , being mentioned in dispatches for continuing with his duties despite his wound . He was posted back to Morocco in 1916 to become military commander of the Fes region . In January 1919 he took over command of French operations against the uprising led by Sidi Mhand n 'Ifrutant in the Tafilalt after General Joseph @-@ François Poeymirau was wounded . Huré suppressed the uprising within a month . In April 1919 he led a column to the relief of a French garrison at Aïn Médiouna which had put up a defence against a Moroccan force twenty times their number for four days during another uprising against French rule . Huré then launched further operations that stabilised the military situation in the area within the month . In July he was appointed commander of French troops in Southern Morocco . 
 Huré eventually reached the rank of général de division and became supreme commander of all French troops in Morocco . Under his supervision the country was finally pacified in 1934 . He returned to France in 1935 to serve on the Supreme Council of War and was later made inspector general of engineers . He wrote two books on military history , including one on the pacification of Morocco that was published after his death . Huré was rewarded for his work by appointment as Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour and as Commander of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Huré was born in Corbie in the Somme department of France on 11 February 1873 , the son of Eugene Edouard Edmund Huré and Céline Clémence Marie <unk> Huré . Huré joined the French Army as a volunteer on 20 October 1893 and became an officer candidate at the École Polytechnique in Paris until 1 October 1895 when he transferred to the École d <unk> de l 'Artillerie et du <unk> ( school of Applied Artillery and Engineering ) as a sous lieutenant . He received his commission as a second lieutenant on 1 October 1897 and was posted to the 3rd Regiment of Engineers . He was promoted to first lieutenant on 20 November 1898 and captain on 16 March 1901 . Huré was married on 11 April 1899 to <unk> Marie <unk> Francine , though the marriage was childless . Between 27 April 1901 and 22 August 1904 he was attached to the staff as an engineer at Valenciennes . He rejoined his regiment for two years before attending the École Supérieur de Guerre from 30 October 1906 . He was promoted to first captain on 23 June 1907 and joined the staff of the 19th Army Corps in Algiers on 24 October 1908 . He transferred to the staff of the 15th Army Corps on 24 December 1910 and on 24 April 1912 to the staff of the military subdivision of Oran . 
 Huré first arrived in Morocco on 9 October 1912 when he was attached to the general staff in the east of the new French protectorate and received the Colonial Medal for Morocco on 28 April 1914 . On 3 August 1914 he became attached to the staff of the 1st Moroccan Infantry Division , being promoted to commandant ( major ) six days later , and served in the defence of France in the First World War . Huré was wounded in the left breast by a bullet on 28 August 1914 in <unk> and received a mention in dispatches for continuing his duties despite his injury . He was appointed a knight of the Legion of Honour on 28 December 1914 , with precedence backdated to the 1 December . Huré became chef de bataillon on 10 January 1916 when he left France to become military commander of the Fes region of Morocco and on 3 January 1918 was appointed an officer of the Legion of Honour , with precedence of 29 December 1917 . He was honoured for his service to the country by appointment as a commander of the Moroccan Order of Ouissam Alaouite and on 19 April 1918 he was promoted to lieutenant @-@ colonel . 
 As a colonel in January 1919 he participated in an operation in the Tafilalt region , under the command of General Joseph @-@ François Poeymirau , to put down an uprising against French rule led by Sidi Mhand n 'Ifrutant as part of the Zaian War . After Poeymirau was wounded by the accidental explosion of an artillery shell Huré assumed command and won victories against bands of Moroccans at <unk> and Erfoud . Huré engaged n 'Ifrutant at <unk> on 25 January , comprehensively defeating his entrenched forces in a six @-@ hour battle and inflicting 600 casualties . Huré received reinforcements from a 10 @,@ 000 strong irregular tribal force sent by <unk> El Glaoui , Pasha of Marrakesh and a French ally , and with their help was able to defeat the n 'Ifrutant uprising by 31 January . 
 = = Battle of Aïn Médiouna = = 
 From 15 February to 5 March 1919 Huré commanded a French column in the area to the north of Boudenib , near the Algerian border , consisting of the 18th battalion of Senegalese Tirailleurs and the 1st battalion Algerian Tirailleurs . Huré 's men demolished some <unk> belonging to the Aït <unk> tribe but were scarcely troubled by attack , only his rear guard being fired upon . On 31 March 1919 a French reconnaissance force fighting <unk> bin <unk> al Din , grandson of the Algerian resistance leader Abdelkader El <unk> , were threatening the town of Beni <unk> when they detached a unit under Captain Macouillard to take a forward position on the peak of the Gueznaïa hill . The next day , in heavy fog with visibility of only a few metres , Macouillard 's force was attacked , in close hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting his artillerymen are killed at their guns and despite repeated bayonet charges the French position became untenable . A grievously wounded Macouillard handed command to his second , Lieutenant Biron , with orders to take the surviving men back to the fortified French camp at Aïn Médiouna , around 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) distant . Just fifty men made the journey , Biron and the other officers being killed in an ambush set by local villagers who then besieged the French post , assisted by other tribesmen attracted by the sound of gunfire . Attacks on the camp were repulsed by artillery fire directed by Lieutenant Solomon but the French were unable to break the siege . Solomon and Lieutenant Andrew held out against twenty times their number for the next four days , being resupplied with food and water by air , with total casualties ( including the fight at Gueznaïa ) reaching 4 officers and 292 killed or missing and 67 injured . 
 Huré led a relief column of 10 infantry companies , seven machine gun sections , 10 cavalry troops , a battery of 75mm artillery and three sections of 65mm mountain guns from Ain <unk> to relieve Solomon and Andrew . His men endured forced marches on routes made almost impassable by heavy rain , with one unit covering 62 kilometres ( 39 mi ) in a single day . On the morning of 5 April Huré pushed back the besieging force and made contact with the garrison by 9 @.@ 00 . However the Moroccans counterattacked at 10 @.@ 00 , inflicting casualties of 24 Frenchmen killed and 59 wounded in a close @-@ quarters fight in which they suffered heavy losses . 
 At 11 @.@ 00 on 6 April Huré sent out patrols to bury the dead at Gueznaïa , whilst he reinforced the defences at Aïn Médiouna and directed 12 aircraft to bomb the tribesmen remaining in the area . Huré left three companies to garrison Aïn Médiouna before withdrawing the remainder of the men . He and his men were commended for their enthusiasm and spirit which enabled the garrison to be relieved earlier than expected . Huré singled out the French Foreign Legion machine gunners for praise , noting that they had held the enemy off for four hours to cover the retreat of other units . He said " despite your small number ... I knew at once that you would save the situation " . 
 Despite Huré 's victory at Aïn Médiouna attacks on loyal villages increased through April 1919 and on the 26th of that month Huré launched another column to defend them . He was attacked at Had <unk> but his hastily fortified camp held and the next morning Huré successfully defeated the tribesmen in battle , at the cost of 12 men killed and 4 officers and 63 men wounded . By the time General Hubert Lyautey and former prime @-@ minister Louis <unk> arrived on an inspection tour on 3 May the military situation had been stabilised thanks to Huré 's actions . On 31 July 1919 Huré was appointed to replace Lieutenant @-@ Colonel <unk> in command of French troops in Southern Morocco fighting an uprising led by self @-@ proclaimed Sultan <unk> . Huré later became a général de brigade ( brigadier ) and commander of the Marrakesh region and was commander of the Legion of Honour on 21 February 1928 . 
 = = Pacification of Morocco = = 
 Huré became supreme commander of all troops in Morocco in 1931 . Upon his appointment the War Minister , André Maginot , warned him that " if you have one unfortunate engagement , I will hide your losses and I will lie against the evidence ; but I can only do that once . If you have a second reverse I will be obliged to tell the truth , and then all those - like me - who wish for the pacification of Morocco will be swept away , like Ferry after Lang Son " . Referring to the fall of Prime Minister Jules Ferry after the disastrous retreat from Lang Son in Vietnam in 1885 . On 16 March 1932 he was promoted to grand @-@ officer of the Legion , having also received promotion to général de division ( major @-@ general ) . 
 The years of 1933 and 1934 were spent in hard mountain warfare in the last bastions of Moroccan resistance in the High Atlas and Anti @-@ Atlas mountain ranges . Huré himself took personal command of the siege of the 6 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) high mountain fortress of Bu <unk> in February and March 1933 , where he fought alongside General Henri Giraud , in a costly battle that caused the deaths of hundreds of French troops and up to 2 @,@ 300 Moroccans . In July Huré led another campaign in the <unk> Gorges , laying a new road as he went and utilising his engineering knowledge to procure dozens of truck @-@ powered pneumatic drills for his sappers . By the end of the month this region too was pacified leaving the last pocket of resistance at Mount <unk> , a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) high peak home to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ 3 @,@ 000 Berber tribesmen . Huré again led directly , commanding a two @-@ week complete siege that successfully forced the tribesmen and their families to surrender , they were treated well and given food and supplies and allowed to return to their homes . There were further minor skirmishes in the Anti @-@ Atlas in the winter of 1933 / 4 but by March 1934 Huré had pacified the remainder of the country and brought to an end almost 30 years of continuous French military involvement in Morocco . 
 = = Return to France = = 
 Huré returned to France to serve on the Supreme Council of War in 1935 and also sat on Louis Franchet d 'Espèrey 's African Friendship Committee , an organisation established to encourage the loyalty of North Africa to France in case of war . By 1936 he was inspector general of French North African troops and in 1938 was appointed inspector general of engineers . He was appointed grand cross of the Legion of Honour on 8 July 1938 and in the same year co @-@ wrote Lyautey du Tonkin au Maroc par Madagascar et le Sud @-@ <unk> ( Lyautey in Tonkin and Morocco by way of Madagascar and South Oran [ Algeria ] ) with British historian Sonia E. Howe . Huré was president of the Islam study group of the Politique <unk> journal for 1939 . After the outbreak of the Second World War Huré became Inspector General of the Military Regions of France on 5 June 1940 , holding that position until 1 July by which point France had surrendered to the Germans . 
 Huré died in December 1949 at Saint @-@ Valéry @-@ sur @-@ Somme in France . In 1952 a book he had written , La Pacification du Maroc . <unk> <unk> : 1931 – 1934 ( The Pacification of Morocco . The Last Step : 1931 – 1934 ) , was published with a preface written by Marshal Alphonse Juin . 
 = Friedrich Joseph , Count of Nauendorf = 
 Friedrich Joseph of Nauendorf , a general in Habsburg service during the French Revolutionary Wars , was noted for his intrepid and daring raids . 
 Like most Austrian generals of the French Revolutionary Wars , he joined the military as a young man , and served in the War of Bavarian Succession , in which he took part in its first action by successfully repelling a Prussian border raid , which earned him the admiration of the Empress Maria Theresa 's son , Joseph . His continued success in the Habsburg border wars with the Ottoman Empire added to his reputation as a commander . 
 In the Wars of the First and Second Coalitions , his forces were vital to the successful relief of Mainz , and his commands captured the French siege train and most of the supplies during the French evacuation . In the campaigns in Swabia ( 1799 ) , he commanded the advanced guard , and later the center of the main column at the Battle of Stockach on 25 March 1799 . At the First Battle of Zürich in 1799 , he commanded the right wing in the Austrian victory of André Masséna 's force . After the Swabian and Swiss campaigns , he retired in poor health , and died in 1801 . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in the village of <unk> , in the Saxon <unk> , 3 August 1749 , Nauendorf came from a family of minor Saxon aristocracy and Prussian state administrators . His grandfather was a states ’ attorney in Jena . His father , Freiherr ( Baron ) Carl Georg Christian Nauendorf , was a cavalry officer in Habsburg military service in the Seven Years ' War , and was present at the Battle of <unk> . He was also part of Baron Ernst Gideon von Laudon 's army on 30 September – 1 October 1761 , when Laudon led the force in the storming of Schweidnitz . 
 Nauendorf joined the 8th Hussar Regiment in 1763 . In 1766 , his father became Colonel and Proprietor ( Inhaber ) of the regiment ; upon his father 's death in 1775 , Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser became Colonel and Inhaber , and the Regiment became known as 8th Hussar Wurmser , or Wurmser 's Hussars . 
 = = = War in Bohemia and Silesia = = = 
 In 1778 , Nauendorf was a Rittmeister ( captain of cavalry ) of the Wurmser Hussar Regiment , and stationed near the border of Bohemia and Prussia , by Pressburg , the regiment 's peace @-@ time garrison . At the end of the year , the Duke of Bavaria , Maximilian III Joseph , Elector of Bavaria , died unexpectedly of smallpox . As the last of the Bavarian Wittelsbach dynasty , descended from 13th century Holy Roman Emperor Louis the Bavarian , Maximilian was related to most of the German houses , and Bavaria was strategically located to entice the Habsburgs , chiefly Archduke and co @-@ Regent Joseph , to covet the duchy . Tensions rose between and among the princes of the German states , principally Elector of Saxony , King of Prussia , and Joseph ; their diplomats shuttled between courts to resolve problems raised by the Bavarian Succession crisis , while Frederick II of Prussia , Frederick August of Saxony and Joseph of Austria moved their extensive armies into position in Bohemia . 
 In early July 1778 , the Prussian General Johann Jakob von Wunsch ( 1717 – 1788 ) crossed into Bohemia near the fortified town of Náchod , in the opening action of the War of the Bavarian Succession . Nauendorf had only 50 Hussars , but they sallied from their garrison to engage the larger Prussian force . Encountering Wunsch , Nauendorf greeted the old Prussian general and his men as friends ; by the time the Prussians realized the allegiance of the Hussars , Nauendorf and his small force had acquired the strategic advantage . Following a brief skirmish , Wunsch withdrew . The next day Nauendorf was promoted to major . ) . In a letter to her son , Joseph , the Empress Maria Theresa wrote : " They say you are so pleased with the rookie Nauendorf , the <unk> or Hungarian who killed seven men , that you gave him 12 ducats . " <unk> with the possibility of acquiring Bavaria , Joseph encouraged successful raids against the Prussian troops . On 7 August 1778 , with two squadrons of his regiment , Nauendorf led a raid against a Prussian convoy at <unk> in the County of <unk> . The surprised convoy surrendered , and Nauendorf captured its officers , 110 men , 476 horses , 240 wagons of flour , and 13 transport wagons . 
 In another raid , on 17 – 18 January 1779 , Nauendorf 's commander , Dagobert von Wurmser advanced into the County of Glatz in five columns , surrounded Habelschwerdt , stormed the village . In a subsequent assault on the so @-@ called Swedish blockhouse in <unk> ( now <unk> <unk> ) , it and the village of Habelschwerdt were set on fire by howitzers . In total , the raid resulted in the capture of Prince Adolf of Hesse @-@ <unk> and over 1 @,@ 000 men , three cannon and ten colors . Wurmser 's forward patrols reached the outskirts of Glatz , and patrolled much of Silesia 's border with Prussia , near Schweidnitz . <unk> and <unk> were both destroyed . 
 On 3 March 1779 , Nauendorf raided the <unk> again , this time with a larger force of infantry and hussars , and took the entire Prussian garrison as prisoner . Following this action , Joseph , now Emperor , awarded him the Knight 's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa ( 19 May 1779 ) . This kind of action characterized the entire war ; there were no major battles . The armies of the opposing sides conducted series of raids and counter @-@ raids from which they lived off the country @-@ side and tried to deny each other access to supplies and fodder . 
 = = = Action in the border war = = = 
 Nauendorf served with the Habsburg forces during the Ottoman wars from 1787 to 1791 . On 19 – 20 October 1788 , near <unk> ( present day Serbia ) , Nauendorf routed 1 @,@ 200 of the elite <unk> with two squadrons of hussars . On 23 October 1788 , with only six squadrons of hussars , he attacked the Turkish rearguard in the village of Pančevo , in the Banat , during which the Turkish commander was mortally wounded . On 16 September 1789 , he led the successful raid on the island of <unk> in the Danube , which garnered greatly needed supplies from the Turkish forces . On 9 November of that year , he led four squadrons of his regiment to capture <unk> , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the so @-@ called Iron Gate of the Danube . Nauendorf was awarded command of 30th Hussar Regiment Wurmser , as the so @-@ called second colonel , who functioned as an executive officer . On 12 March 1779 , Joseph elevated Nauendorf to the rank of Count , or Graf . 
 = = Austrian action on the Rhine = = 
 In 1792 , Nauendorf 's regiment served on the lower ( northern ) Rhine river and at Trier on the Moselle river in the French Revolutionary Wars . In December of that year , his regiment successfully defended <unk> , <unk> and <unk> from the attacks of General of Division La <unk> 's Army of the Moselle . 
 In 1795 , Nauendorf served in Field Marshal Charles Joseph de Croix , Count of Clerfayt ’ s Army of the Lower Rhine , which relieved Mainz . On 13 October , he commanded part of Count Clerfayt 's Corps of Observation , totaling close to 8 @,@ 000 men . On 10 October , a portion of the Corps of Observation had surprised the French at <unk> ; Jourdan was withdrawing his force from the blockade of Mainz . Nauendorf 's cavalry swam across the Main River and the infantry followed in boats ; they surprised and overwhelmed Jourdan 's rear guard at <unk> , capturing five guns , 30 + wagons and 80 ammunition caissons . On 29 October , Nauendorf captured most of the French siege train and supply wagons evacuated from Mainz . Finally , in that year on 6 November , his victory at <unk> prevented the unification of the French armies of the Rhin @-@ et @-@ Moselle and the Sambre @-@ et @-@ Meuse . 
 During the maneuvers leading to the Battle of Amberg on 24 August 1796 , Nauendorf 's cavalry reconnaissance discovered crucial intelligence , after which he sent Archduke Charles the message : " If your Royal Highness will or can advance 12 @,@ 000 men against Jourdan 's rear , he is lost . " After the Austrian victory at Amberg , Nauendorf prevented General Jean @-@ Victor Moreau 's attempted Danube crossing at Neuburg and thwarted Moreau 's next attempt to flank the Austrians by passing through Ulm . 
 = = = Action in Switzerland and Swabia = = = 
 When the War of the Second Coalition began in early 1799 , Nauendorf fought in the Austrian victories at Ostrach ( 21 March ) and then at Stockach ( 25 March ) . In early March he led the Advanced Guard of 17 @,@ 000 across the Lech River by Augsburg , to deploy at Ostrach , a village about 9 kilometres ( 6 mi ) of the Danube River , and less than 2 kilometres ( 1 mi ) from the Free Imperial City of Pfullendorf . Jourdan 's Army of the Danube had crossed the Rhine on 1 March , and moved east to cut communication between the main Austrian force , quartered near Augsburg , and the Austrian troops in northern Italy . At Ostrach , his Advanced Guard sustained the immediate shock of contact , but the main force of the army was less than a day behind him , and Archduke Charles , the commander of the Austrian force , divided his army into three assault columns to make a simultaneous attack at three points on the French line ; after a day of nasty fighting , the Austrians flanked the French at the north and south , and threatened to break through the line in the middle . The French withdrew to <unk> , and then to Engen and Stockach , where , on 25 March , the fighting renewed . At Stockach , Nauendorf again commanded the Austrian advanced guard , which was composed of troops seasoned , as he had been , in the Habsburg border wars . The advanced guard , or <unk> , was redeployed before the battle as the center of the main Austrian line , and took the brunt of the initial fighting . 
 After the French retreat from the Hegau into the Black Forest , Nauendorf took his force across the Rhine between Constance and Stein am Rhein on 22 May , and positioned himself at <unk> . After Friedrich , Freiherr von Hotze 's column successfully pushed the French out of Winterthur on 26 May , Archduke Charles instructed Nauendorf to secure the village of Neftenbach , which effectively closed a semicircle around the French force at Zürich . Once the Austrian main army united with its left wing , under Nauendorf , and its far left , under Hotze , Charles ordered the assault on Zürich . On 4 June , Nauendorf helped to rout the French force at Battle of Zürich , commanding the Coalition 's right wing ; with sustained pressure on Andre Massena 's force , Massena pulled his army across the Limmat river , and dug into positions on the low ring of hills there , biding his time until the propitious moment to retake the city , which he did in September , 1799 , at the Second Battle of Zürich ; Nauendorf was not present for this action , being with Archduke Charles on a march north , toward Mainz . In 1800 , Nauendorf fought in the Austrian losses at Stockach and Engen on 3 May , <unk> on 5 May , and Biberach on 9 May . 
 Nauendorf retired in poor health at the end of the 1800 campaign . He died in Troppau , Austrian Silesia ( today <unk> , in the Czech Republic ) , 30 December 1801 . 
 = Capture of Afulah and Beisan = 
 The Capture of Afulah and Beisan occurred on 20 September 1918 , during the Battle of Sharon which together with the Nablus , formed the set piece Battle of Megiddo fought during the last months of the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of the First World War . During the cavalry phase of the Battle of Sharon , the 4th Cavalry Division of the Desert Mounted Corps attacked and captured the main communications hub at Afulah , located in the centre of the Esdraelon Plain ( also known as the Jezreel Valley and the plain of Armageddon ) , and Beisan on the plain 's eastern edge near the Jordan River , some 40 – 50 miles ( 64 – 80 km ) behind the front line in the Judean Hills . 
 Infantry attacks by the British Empires XXI Corps had begun the Battle of Sharon on 19 September , along an almost continuous trench line from the Mediterranean across the Plain of Sharon and into the foothills of the Judean Hills . These attacks captured the Ottoman front line at Tulkarm , Tabsor , and Arara , in the process outflanking and decimating the Ottoman Eighth Army on the coast . During the attack on Tulkarm , the infantry created a gap in the Ottoman front line defences , through which cavalry from General Edmund Allenby 's Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) rode north . The three cavalry divisions in the Desert Mounted Corps successfully captured the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies ' lines of communication across the Esdraelon Plain from their headquarters in the Judean Hills . 
 The Desert Mounted Corps began the advance riding up the Plain of Sharon to Liktera , on 19 September where they attacked and captured an entrenched line barring their advance . Subsequently , the Corps crossed the Mount Carmel Range by the Musmus Pass and the northern Shushu Pass , during the night of 19 / 20 September . As the 4th Cavalry Division rode out across the Esdraelon Plain on the morning of 20 September , towards their primary objective ; the main communications hub at Afulah , they attacked and captured a force sent from Yildirim Army Group headquarters at Nazareth , to hold and bar the Musmus Pass , which had failed to get into position . Afulah was captured by units from both the 5th and the 4th Cavalry Divisions shortly after . Leaving the 5th Cavalry Division and one regiments at Afulah , the 4th Cavalry Division advanced to capture Beisan and later in the day , the regiment advanced directly from Afulah to occupy the railway bridges at Jisr el Mejamie , across the Jordan and Yarmuk Rivers . The capture of Jenin on the southern edge of the Esdraelon Plain , also blocked the main line of retreat to Damascus from the Judean Hills . The General Headquarters of the Yildirim Army Group commanded by General Otto Liman von Sanders at Nazareth was captured the next day , and Haifa two days later . 
 Several days later while garrisoning Beisan , the 4th Cavalry Division advanced southwards down the Jordan River to close a 20 miles ( 32 km ) long gap , through which the retreating remnants of the Seventh and Eighth Armies had been escaping . They successfully attacked and captured several fords during 23 and 24 September , to completely cut off all remaining Ottoman soldiers in the Judean Hills . By the end of the month , one Ottoman army had been destroyed , while the remnants of two others were in retreat to Damascus after the German rearguard at Samakh was captured by Australian Light Horsemen on 25 September . Damascus was captured on 1 October , and by the time the Armistice of Mudros between the Allies and the Ottoman Empire was signed at the end of October , fighting for Aleppo was underway . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Esdraelon Plain = = = 
 The Esdraelon Plain stretches from Lejjun in the west to Nazareth 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the north , in the foothills of the Galilean Hills , through Afulah in the centre of the plain , to Beisan on its eastern edge and close to the Jordan River , and then to Jenin on the southern edge of the plain , at the foot of the Judean Hills . 
 Near Lejjun , the remains of the ancient fortress of Megiddo on Tell al Mutesellim dominate the entry to the plain from the Musmus Pass . Here a relatively small garrison could control the routes across the Esdraelon Plain where the armies of Egyptians , Romans , Mongols , Arabs , and Crusaders who had fought Saladin near Afulah during the Battle of Al @-@ <unk> , as well as of Napoleon , had marched and fought towards Nazareth , the Galilean Hills , and Damascus . 
 Aerial reconnaissance reported that no defensive works of any kind had been identified on the plain or covering the approaches to it , apart from German troops , garrisoned at the Yildirim Army Group headquarters of Otto Liman von Sanders at Nazareth . At 12 : 30 on 19 September Liman von Sanders ordered the 13th Depot Regiment at Nazareth and the military police , a total of six companies and 12 machine guns , to occupy Lejjun and defend the Musmus Pass . 
 = = = Deployment = = = 
 The Desert Mounted Corps , commanded by the Australian Lieutenant General Sir Harry Chauvel , was made up of the 4th , and the 5th Cavalry Divisions , and the Australian Mounted Division . 
 Each division consisted of three cavalry brigades , with three regiments to each brigade and support troops . The regiments consisted of a headquarters and three squadrons ; 522 men and horses in each regiment . Five of the six brigades in the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions consisted of one British yeomanry regiment and two British Indian Army cavalry regiments one of which was usually lancers , the sixth brigade being the lancers of the 15th Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade . Some of the yeomanry regiments were also armed with the lance in addition to their swords , rifles , and bayonets , while the Australian Mounted Division was armed with swords , .303 rifles and bayonets . 
 The 4th Cavalry Division consisted of the 10th , 11th and 12th Cavalry Brigades , the 5th Cavalry Division was made up of the 13th , 14th and 15th Cavalry Brigades and the Australian Mounted Division was made up of the 3rd , 4th and 5th Light Horse Brigades . The 5th Light Horse Brigade , was temporarily attached to the 60th Division for the Battle of Tulkarm . These mounted units were supported by machine gun squadrons , three artillery batteries from the Royal Horse Artillery or Honourable Artillery Company , and light armoured car units ; two Light Armoured Motor Batteries , and two Light Car Patrols . 
 The Desert Mounted Corps concentrated near Ramleh , Ludd ( Lydda ) , and Jaffa , where they dumped surplus equipment in preparation for their advance before moving up behind the XXI Corps ' infantry divisions , assembled near the Mediterranean coast . By 17 September , the 5th Cavalry Division , which would lead the Desert Mounted Corps ' advance , was deployed north @-@ west of Sarona 8 miles ( 13 km ) from the front line , with the 4th Cavalry Division in orange groves east of Sarona , 10 miles ( 16 km ) from the front , and the Australian Mounted Division in reserve near Ramleh and Ludd 17 miles ( 27 km ) from the front line . 
 All movement had been restricted to night time , culminating in a general move forwards on the eve of battle . On the night of 18 / 19 September , the 4th and 5th Cavalry Divisions moved forward behind the infantry , while the Australian Mounted Division moved up to Sarona . Here the three divisions concentrated , with their supplies carried in massed horse @-@ drawn transport and on long camel trains , clogging the roads . The divisions carried one iron ration and two days ' special emergency rations per man , and 21 pounds ( 9 @.@ 5 kg ) of grain per horse , all carried on the horse , with an additional day 's grain per horse carried on the first line transport limbered wagons . 
 = = = Desert Mounted Corps objectives = = = 
 The three lowlands of the Plain of Sharon , the Esdraelon Plain 40 miles ( 64 km ) behind the Ottoman front line , and the Jordan River Valley formed a semicircle to the north and around the Ottoman positions in the Judean Hills , held by the Seventh and Eighth Armies . After the successful infantry breakthrough , the three cavalry divisions were to ride through the gap northwards up the coastal Plain of Sharon , then eastwards across the Esdraelon Plain to the Jordan River , to cut off the Ottoman forces in the Judean Hills . 
 During the initial cavalry advance up the coastal Plain of Sharon to Litera on the Nahr el Mefjir , the Desert Mounted Corps were to advance while " strictly disregarding any enemy forces that did not directly bar its path . " They were to turn north @-@ east across the Mount Carmel Range through two passes onto the Plain of Esdraelon . The 5th Cavalry Division was to travel by the northern and more difficult track , from Sindiane to Abu Shusheh 18 miles ( 29 km ) south @-@ east of Haifa and on to attack Nazareth . Meanwhile , the 4th Cavalry Division was to take the southern pass to Lejjun via the Musmus Pass and on to capture Afulah . In reserve , the Australian Mounted Division was to follow the 4th Cavalry Division via the Musmus Pass to Lejjun . 
 If they could quickly capture the Esdraelon Plain while the two Ottoman armies were fighting in the Judean Hills against the XXI Corps infantry in the Battle of Sharon , and the XX Corps infantry in the Battle of Nablus , the railways could be cut , the roads controlled , and the lines of retreat across the plain for these two Ottoman armies west of the Jordan would be virtually cut . Success depended on the rapid capture of the communications hub at Afulah and the Yildirim Army Group 's general headquarters at Nazareth which would disrupt communication and simultaneously almost surround the Eighth Army and cut the communications and supply lines to both the Seventh and Eighth Armies in the Judean Hills . ( See Falls Map 21 below which shows these cavalry advances . ) Success required that the cavalry not only capture but hold Afulah , Nazareth , and the Esdraelon Plain for some time . The men and horses of three cavalry divisions would be dependent on rations being quickly and efficiently transported forward many miles from their base . 
 The 5th Cavalry Division 's objectives were to capture Nazareth , Liman von Sanders , and the Yildirim Army Group 's headquarters 70 miles ( 110 km ) from Asurf , before clearing the plain to Afulah . The 4th Cavalry Division 's objectives were to capture the town of Afulah and then advance eastwards across the Esdraelon Plain to capture Beisan and occupy the railway and / or road bridges over the Jordan River . In particular , they were to hold or destroy the Jisr el Mejamie bridge , 12 miles ( 19 km ) north of Beisan , a distance of 97 miles ( 156 km ) from their starting point . The Australian Mounted Division , in reserve , was to enter the Esdraelon Plain and occupy Lejjun while the 3rd Light Horse Brigade advanced to capture Jenin , 68 miles ( 109 km ) from their starting point . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 According to David Woodward , " concentration , surprise , and speed were key elements in the blitzkrieg warfare planned by Allenby . " Victory at Megiddo depended on controlling the skies by destroying or dominating German aircraft activities and reconnaissances , through constant bombing raids by the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , on Afulah to disrupt communications between the Yildirim Army Headquarters at Nazareth and the Seventh and Eighth Armies ' headquarters at Tulkarm and Nablus . Victory also depended on artillery barrages of sufficient intensity and effectiveness , to enable the infantry to quickly outflank the Ottoman defenders on the coast , and drive a gap in the Ottoman front line , for the Desert Mounted Corps to ride through on their way to the Esdraelon Plain , on the first day of battle . 
 = = = 4th Cavalry Division breakthrough = = = 
 With the 11th Light Armoured Motor Battery and 1st Light Car Patrol attached , the 4th Cavalry Division watered at the ' Auja River before moving to the south @-@ east of <unk> , close behind the infantry and the front line . From here , a divisional pioneer party reached the front line at 07 : 00 on 19 September to cut a gap and flag a path through the Ottoman wire . By 08 : 40 permission was given by the 7th ( Meerut ) Division , which had attacked the western sector of the Tabsor defences , for the 4th Cavalry Division , accompanied by three horse artillery batteries which had rejoined the division after taking part in the bombardment and creeping barrage at the beginning of the Battle of Sharon , to pass through the gap in the Ottoman front line defences created by their attacks . ( See Falls Map 20 ) The vanguard 11th Cavalry Brigade was led by the 36th Jacob 's Horse as advance guard . 
 The 4th Cavalry Division advance began at 09 : 00 , riding through the Ramadan and <unk> marches , and northwards towards Liktera and the southern end of the Musmus Pass 25 miles ( 40 km ) away . By 10 : 00 the 11th and 12th Cavalry Brigades had crossed the Nahr el Falik and were moving along both sides of the Tabsor to El <unk> road , followed by the 10th Cavalry Brigade . 
 By 11 : 15 the division had passed the <unk> crossing , and after an hour 's halt on the Burj el ' <unk> to <unk> line , they moved in three brigade columns in echelon . The 12th Cavalry Brigade proceeded straight on to <unk> , while the 10th and 11th Cavalry Brigades crossed the edge of the Iskanderune marches at <unk> . By 13 : 00 the division was approaching El <unk> before crossing the Iskanderune River , where they rested before advancing to Liktera . 
 = = = Capture of Liktera = = = 
 An entrenched Ottoman line of defence garrisoned by the Eighth Army Depot Regiment , stretched through Jelameh , El Mejdel , and Liktera to the sea near the mouth of the Nahr Mefjir . 
 Although the 4th Cavalry Division had started later , riding north on the left and to the rear of 5th Cavalry Division in echelon , both divisions approached Liktera on the Nahr el Mefjir . Faced with the " whole plain alive with cavalry twelve miles behind the Turkish line " , Liktera was quickly captured , along with 50 prisoners . The remainder of the Liktera garrison retreated towards Qaqun , closely followed by the Jacob 's Horse ( 11th Cavalry Brigade , 4th Cavalry Division ) , which took 126 prisoners . This regiment went forward to Tell edh Dhrur , where another 80 prisoners were captured . 
 = = = Musmus Pass = = = 
 At 18 : 30 on 19 September , the 4th Cavalry Division halted for three hours to water , feed , and rest . The 11th Cavalry Brigade concentrated and watered at Tell edh Dhrur ; the 12th Cavalry Brigade reached <unk> on the railway north of Qaqun and also watered , while the 10th Cavalry Brigade rode on to Kerkur at the entrance to the Musmus Pass , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) north of Tell edh Dhrur . After watering , the 2nd Lancers ( Gardner 's Horse ) ( 10th Cavalry Brigade ) pushed forward with the 11th Light Armoured Motor Battery to occupy Kh . ' Ara , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north @-@ east of Kerkur and about one @-@ third of the way through the Musmus Pass , at 23 : 00 . 
 The 14 miles ( 23 km ) long Musmus Pass across the Mount Carmel Range had been in use since before the 15th century BC when the army of the Egyptian Pharaoh Thothmes III travelled through it , and during the 1st century AD by the Roman Emperor Vespasian and his army . The pass rises to 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) above sea level , as it follows the Wadi Ara up the southern side of the Samarian Hills , at the time only about 300 yards ( 270 m ) wide . Beyond Kh . ' Ara and ' Arara ( not to be confused with Arara in the Judean Hills , which was captured during the Battle of Arara on 19 September 1918 ) , both high up on either side of the Musmus Pass , the pass narrows for several miles as it approaches Musmus on the watershed . From here the route becomes very narrow , descending to a steep ridge and a rough section before reaching Lejjun at the mouth of the pass on the Esdraelon Plain with the whole of the Esdraelon Plain stretching out 300 – 400 feet ( 91 – 122 m ) below . 
 Major General George Barrow , commanding the 4th Cavalry Division , ordered the 10th Cavalry Brigade to march on Lejjun by 23 : 00 " at the latest " , whether or not watering was finished . He then motored forward to the 2nd Lancers , the advance guard , and at 11 : 45 ordered them " to push right through the pass to El Lejjun " to avoid being held up beyond Kh . ' Ara . They arrived at Lejjun at 03 : 30 on 20 September without meeting any opposition . Here they captured about 100 Ottoman soldiers , possibly the advance guard of the Ottoman battalion Liman von Sanders had ordered to occupy the pass . 
 Meanwhile , Barrow returned along the Musmus Pass to meet the 10th Cavalry Brigade , which had missed the entrance to the pass and gone 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north on a wrong road , followed by the 11th Cavalry Brigade . Barrow , now on horseback , rode back to the 12th Cavalry Brigade , commanded by Brigadier General Wigan , which was to have been the rearguard , and ordered it forward to support the 2nd Lancers , which regiment came under Wigan 's orders . At 01 : 10 on 20 September , more than two hours after the 10th Cavalry Brigade should have started into the Musmus Pass , the 12th Cavalry Brigade 's advance guard , the 6th King Edward 's Own Cavalry , moved out from Kerkuk . They trotted for 20 minutes , walked for 20 minutes , and halted for five minutes to arrive at Lejjun at 04 : 05 , with the rest of the 12th Cavalry Brigade arriving , without incident , soon after . They moved by half @-@ sections of horse through the pass , without sending out flank guards to piquet " the heights . " As they negotiated the pass , they overtook and stopped a long column of Ottoman transport , capturing about 200 prisoners . Barrow later commented that a " couple of machine guns would have sufficed to hold us up for hours . " 
 Although the entrance to the pass had been secured by a regiment , the remainder of the 10th Cavalry Brigade did not reinforce the regiment . The brigade commander , Brigadier General Richard Howard @-@ Vyse had disobeyed divisional orders to do so and when the brigade finally advanced , twice got lost . In consequence , Barrow , the commander of the 4th Cavalry Division , relieved Howard @-@ Vyse of his command on the spot . Lieutenant Colonel W. G. K. Green of the Jacob 's Horse took command of the brigade . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Lancers charge Musmus defenders = = = 
 After arriving at Lejjun at 03 : 30 , the 2nd Lancers watered , fed , and breakfasted before setting out at 05 : 30 for Afulah on a " three @-@ squadrons front followed by the 11th Light Armoured Car Battery and a subsection of the 17th Machine @-@ Gun Squadron . " Ten minutes later , the centre squadron was fired on by six companies of the 13th Depot Regiment and military police , supported by 12 machine guns , which Liman von Sanders had ordered to occupy the Musmus Pass at Lejjun at 12 : 30 on 19 September . They had had to march from Nazareth to Lejjun , a distance of 15 miles ( 24 km ) . 
 Having failed to reach Lejjun , Liman von Sanders ' force had taken up a position across the Lejjun to Afulah road in the Esdraelon Plain . One squadron of the 2nd Lancers , supported by machine guns and armoured cars , attacked frontally , while the reserve squadron moved to the right along a slight depression to charge from the flank . A second line of Ottoman defences was encountered by the third squadron on the right ; the two squadrons eventually cooperating in a simultaneous charge which " was driven home . " The lancers speared 46 and captured 470 prisoners , suffering one man wounded and 12 horses killed . 
 British Empire reconnaissance aircraft reported three British armoured cars halfway across the Esdraelon Plain , on their way to Afulah . One cavalry brigade was seen at Lejjun , while two were just entering the plain , advancing on a broad front . 
 ... bullets were coming unpleasantly close ... [ as I ] edged towards the right with the intention of locating the enemy 's left flank ... Just then the squadron ran into a wire fence hidden in the <unk> [ millet ] which covered that part of the plain . I went on ahead and left it to my second in command ( <unk> Jang Bahadur Sing ) to reform the squadron ... Bullets were coming thick and fast now , and I imagined that the squadron had had pretty heavy casualties ; added to this I was in a blue funk of striking an <unk> nullah ... the map showing a tributary of the Kishon between me and the enemy ... I galloped back to lead the squadron off more to the right . There seemed to be plenty of the men left , and the formation was still tolerably good . We were moving at a good 15 miles ( 24 km ) an hour by now ... but I was still in mortal terror that the Turks ' determined stand might be fortified by the knowledge that a deep nullah lay between themselves and us ... However , I need not have worried , for we were in for it now ... Before I realized it we were right on top of the enemy , and it was only when I saw a young Turk deliberately aiming at me that I realized that I was still holding my map in my right hand , and had forgotten to draw my sword . 
 = = = Afulah = = = 
 The 2nd Lancers continued their advance to Afulah forty minutes after their successful charge , and were fired on at 07 : 45 on 20 September , when they were 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) from the town . By the time they circled around to gallop in from the north , two regiments of the 14th Cavalry Brigade ( 5th Cavalry Division ) , the 29th Lancers ( Deccan Horse ) and the 34th Prince Albert Victor 's Own Poona Horse , had captured the railway station and the road to Nazareth , respectively . 
 The 5th Cavalry Division 's leading ' D ' Squadron , 34th Poona Horse ( 14th Cavalry Brigade ) , had skirted the town of Birket El <unk> to ride directly towards Afulah . At 06 : 30 they encountered seven lorries carrying German and Ottoman soldiers on the Afulah road , about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of the town . Led by a German officer , the enemy soldiers quickly jumped out of the lorries and opened machine gun fire , killing a British Indian Army cavalry trooper and wounding a non @-@ commissioned officer . ' D ' squadron returned fire with Hotchkiss guns . Shortly afterwards , they were reinforced by the remainder of the 14th Cavalry Brigade ; the brigade 's machine gun squadron winning the engagement . 
 At about 08 : 00 , the 4th Cavalry Division 's 2nd Lancers ( 10th Cavalry Brigade ) and the 5th Cavalry Division 's 29th Lancers ( Deccan Horse ) ( 14th Cavalry Brigade ) entered Afulah . Here about 75 German and 200 Ottoman prisoners were captured at the railway station , along with ten locomotives and 50 railway trucks or wagons in the sidings . A hospital , an aerodrome with three undamaged aircraft , a large quantity of petrol , and large stocks of champagne and hock were also captured . Armoured cars continued the pursuit , capturing 12 German lorries on the road to Beisan , while the railway running south and east from Afulah was cut ; the line to the west had already been cut by the 13th Cavalry Brigade ( 5th Cavalry Division ) . 
 On the morning after the charge outside Afule [ 21 September ] , having settled down to a Boche cigar and a bottle of ditto hock , I would not have changed places with President Wilson himself ! 
 = = = Capture of Beisan = = = 
 The 5th Cavalry Division remained to garrison Afulah , where they were rejoined later that day by the 15th Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade and their divisional artillery , which had been left the night before to move through the Abu Shusheh pass during daylight . 
 Barrow ordered the 4th Cavalry Division , less the 19th Lancers ( Fane 's Horse ) , 12th Cavalry Brigade , to advance to Beisan ; leaving Afulah at 13 : 00 on 20 September , led by the 10th Cavalry Brigade . They advanced quickly along the main road protected by flank guards ; the 36th Jacob 's Horse , 11th Cavalry Brigade , capturing some German soldiers along the way . About 100 enemy soldiers retreating from the direction of Mount Ephraim were captured during this advance , and while moving down the railway through <unk> into Beisan another 100 or more soldiers with three 150 @-@ mm howitzers facing eastwards were captured . A line of piquets was established from Afulah to Beisan and another 700 prisoners were captured during the night . 
 Beisan was captured without a fight between 16 : 30 and 18 : 00 on 20 September . Here the 4th Cavalry Division rested , having covered 70 miles ( 110 km ) , the first 20 miles ( 32 km ) over sandy soil , and fought two actions all in 34 hours with the loss of only 26 horses . This was the first opportunity for the division to take saddles off the horses since the cavalry advance began . 
 At Beisan , the 4th Cavalry Division was well in advance of their rations transport , which did not catch up until the next day , when lorries delivered rations . Until then , the division had the remains of their two days ' special emergency ration , which had been carried in sandbags on their saddles . Ration transport had been 50 miles ( 80 km ) behind the division ; ' A ' , ' B ' <unk> , the Divisional Transport Train , and Ammunition Column bivouacking for the night at <unk> on 19 September . The special camel convoy had been unable to keep up , and its provisions were distributed elsewhere . By the evening of 20 September rations had also been delivered to the 5th Cavalry Division at Aujah by motor lorry via the Musmus Pass , while ' A ' Echelon and the Divisional Transport Train were bivouacked at Qaqun . 
 The 10th Cavalry Brigade had had only two full night 's rest since leaving the Jordan Valley on 11 September , nine nights before and about 150 miles ( 240 km ) away . " They had had no rest during the last three nights . " The brigade had participated in long advances as part of divisional formations , during which such things as watering and off @-@ saddling were complicated by the large numbers involved . Despite this , the brigade only lost 15 horses ; 36th Jacob 's Horse lost four , and the 19th Lancers , one . 
 By the evening of 20 September , Chauvel 's communications with his cavalry divisions , were limited to wireless and aircraft . The last aerial reconnaissance on 20 September reported three large fires burning at Nablus railway station , fires burning at the Balata dumps , and the whole Ottoman front line from El Lubban to the Jordan alarmed . They also reported a brigade of British cavalry entering Beisan . 
 = = = Capture of the Jisr el Mejamie bridge = = = 
 The 19th Lancers ( 12th Cavalry Brigade , 4th Cavalry Division ) remained at Afulah , with orders to ride during the evening directly to Jisr el Mejamie , 9 miles ( 14 km ) north @-@ north @-@ east of Beisan , to capture the railway bridges and prepare them for demolition . 
 Accompanied by a section of the 18th Machine Gun Company and a party of the 4th Field Squadron Royal Engineers , the regiment left Afulah at 19 : 30 after handing over to the 5th Cavalry Division . They rode 20 miles ( 32 km ) during the night over very rough stony country to reach Jisr el Mejamie at 05 : 00 on 21 September . The rail tracks on the left bank of the Jordan River and on the right bank of the Yarmuk River were picked up , thus blocking the connection between the Hedjaz Railway and the Palestine Railway systems . Explosive charges were attached to the bridge over the Jordan River and over the Yarmuk River to the north , but were not exploded . The second bridge was not captured , but it was later blown up by retreating Yildirim forces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Allenby described the successful advance : 
 ... my infantry ... have driven the enemy into the arms of the Desert Mounted Corps operating from Beisan and Jenin . Cavalry have occupied Nazareth . I cannot estimate total number of prisoners , but 18 @,@ 000 have been counted . I motored to Lejjun , today ; 65 miles N. of here , overlooking the plain of Esdraelon . A beautiful view across the flat vale . Nazareth , high in hills , to the N. ; Mount Tabor opposite ; Mount Gilboa to the E. , overlooking Jezreel . Some of the Indian cavalry got into Turks with the lance , in the plain yesterday , and killed many . I ... passed through thousands of prisoners today ... 
 During the first 36 hours of battle , from 04 : 30 on 19 September until 17 : 00 on 20 September , the German and Ottoman front line had been cut by infantry , and the cavalry had passed through the gap to reach their objectives at Afulah , Nazareth , and Beisan . The continuing British Empire infantry attack in the Judean Hills had forced the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies to withdraw northwards towards the waiting Desert Mounted Corps . 
 By dusk on 19 September , 4 @,@ 000 prisoners had been captured and brigade transport following the cavalry divisions was 20 miles ( 32 km ) behind enemy lines in what had been Ottoman Empire territory . 
 On 22 September the 4th Cavalry Division 's motor ambulances , which had been working in the Judean Hills transporting wounded infantry , rejoined their division at Beisan . 
 = = = Liman von Sanders ' withdrawal = = = 
 Liman von Sanders had no combat formations available to stop the cavalry advance up the coast and across the Esdraelon Plain ; Allenby 's attack forced the Yildirim Army Group and its commander to retire . Liman von Sanders ' retreat from Nazareth , began in the early hours of 20 September , taking him to Tiberias and Samakh late in the afternoon , and then on to Deraa , where he arrived on the morning of 21 September on his way to Damascus . 
 = = = Retreat of the Asia Corps = = = 
 With about 700 German and 1 @,@ 300 Ottoman soldiers of the 16th and 19th Divisions , von Oppen was moving northwards from Tubas towards Beisan when he learned it had already been captured . He decided to advance during the night of 22 September to Samakh , where he correctly guessed Liman von Sanders would order a strong rearguard action . However , Jevad , the commander of the Eighth Army , ordered him to cross the Jordan instead ; he successfully got all the Germans and some of the Ottoman soldiers across during 23 September , before the 11th Cavalry Brigade attack , which closed the last Jordan River gap . Those who had not crossed were captured . 
 = = = Jordan River gap closed = = = 
 The Jisr ed Damieh bridge , which carried the Wadi Fara road from Nablus across the Jordan River , was captured on 22 September by Meldrum 's Force , comprising the New Zealand Mounted Rifles Brigade and 1st and 2nd Battalions , British West Indies Regiment , supported by artillery . All fords south of this bridge were also denied to the enemy . 
 Between 21 and 23 September the Ottoman III Corps ( Ottoman Seventh Army ) fought a rearguard action from Tubas to the Jordan River , which delayed the British cavalry encirclement and enable what remained of the Ottoman Eighth Army and the Ottoman Seventh Army to retreat to the eastern side of the Jordan River . 
 Late in the evening of 22 September , Chauvel ordered Barrow 's 4th Cavalry Division to advance south from Beisan along the Jordan River to close a 20 miles ( 32 km ) gap north from the Jisr ed Damieh bridge , which Chaytor 's Force had captured . 
 = = = = 23 September = = = = 
 During the day , strong patrols by the 4th Cavalry Division had moved southwards down the Beisan to Nablus road , on the west bank of the Jordan , and down the <unk> to Jisr ed Damieh road , on the east bank . 
 The 11th Cavalry Brigade advance southwards ; the 36th Jacob 's Horse on the east bank was fired on , 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) south of Beisan to the south @-@ east of Kh. es <unk> . A long column of retiring Ottoman soldiers was attempting to cross the Jordan River at Makhadet Abu Naji under cover of a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong rearguard with 30 machine guns . As the 29th Lancers , advanced down on the west bank , they were fired on from the rearguard at <unk> abu Naji which was attacked in the rear and the flank by the 36th Jacob 's Horse ; they broke the rearguard into a " hopeless rout " . The commander of the 16th Division , Rushdi Bey , and 18 machine guns were captured , along with 800 prisoners , which were later identified to have been the rearguard of von Oppen 's Asia Corps . 
 Meanwhile , another stronger rearguard on the east bank protecting the retreating columns was attacked by the 1 / 1st County of London ( Middlesex ) Yeomanry , 11th Cavalry Brigade 4th Cavalry Division . Further attacks by the 36th Jacob 's Horse were repulsed by a second much larger body of Ottoman soldiers moving towards the Jordan River 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the south . The support of the Hampshire Battery RHA and the cooperation of the 36th Jacob 's Horse from the east bank was requested in a third attack . 
 At 11 : 00 the Hampshire Battery RHA came into action , but they drew accurate fire from two batteries of field guns south @-@ east of the ford , which hit all their guns . About 5 @,@ 000 yards ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) south , a squadron of 1 / 1st County of London ( Middlesex ) Yeomanry found a ford across the Jordan River . They quickly deployed and put the enemy guns " out of action . " The 1 / 1st County of London ( Middlesex ) Yeomanry began their attack from both sides of the river and eventually captured the ford , along with 4 @,@ 000 prisoners , leaving many dead . At 15 : 00 the defenders withdrew from the <unk> Abu Naji ford , " suffering very heavily indeed from machine @-@ gun and automatic @-@ rifle fire , and abandoning an enormous amount of material . " 
 = = = = 24 – 25 September = = = = 
 Units of the 4th Cavalry Division continued the advance southwards from Beisan on 24 September , after rations had been distributed . At 10 : 35 an observation post sighted a column of Ottoman soldiers making for a ford across the Jordan River at Makhadet el Mas 'udi , where the Ottoman advanced guard arrived and deployed its machine guns to cover the escape of a larger body of Ottoman troops across another ford 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) further south . ( See Falls Sketch Map 36 Detail ' A ' Situation at 11 : 00 ) The 1 / 1st County of London ( Middlesex ) Yeomanry attack at Makhadet el Mas 'udi ford succeeded at 12 : 30 , while the 29th Lancers reinforced the Yeomanry attack on the main column , capturing a total of 5 @,@ 000 prisoners , including an Ottoman divisional commander , with many dead . 
 Troops captured by the 11th Cavalry Brigade on 24 September were the rear of the Seventh Ottoman Army , the majority of which had crossed during the previous night and early morning , continuing their retreat towards Irbid , while von Oppen 's Asia Corps and the Fourth Ottoman Army were retreating towards Deraa . 
 The 11th Cavalry Brigade continued their advance 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) south to Ras Umm <unk> without encountering any further Ottoman columns , while the XX Corps Cavalry Regiment , which made contact with the 29th Lancers , reached ' Ain Male 7 miles ( 11 km ) east of Tubas , capturing several thousand prisoners . The 11th Cavalry Brigade subsequently returned to Beisan on 25 September . 
 = Spice ( Perfume song ) = 
 " Spice " ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a song recorded by Japanese girl group Perfume for their third studio album , JPN ( 2011 ) . It premiered on November 2 , 2011 as the fifth and final single from the album in Japan . It was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . The single also included the B @-@ side track " Glitter " , which appeared on the parent album . It was also released on June 19 , 2013 through European and Oceanic regions , and June 25 in North America . Musically , " Spice " is a house song . 
 Upon its release , the track garnered mixed reviews from music critics . Some critics highlighted the song as one of Perfume 's best singles from their album , whilst some felt the composition was uninteresting . It was also successful in Japan , peaking at number two both on the Oricon Singles Chart and Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . An accompanying music video was shot by Shimada Daisuke ; it features the girls performing the song in a dining room . It was performed on the groups 2011 JPN concert tour . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Spice " was written , composed , arranged , and produced by Japanese musician and Capsule member Yasutaka Nakata . It was recorded , mixed , and mastered by him . The song was recorded in 2010 at Contemode Studios , Shibuya , Tokyo by Nakata . Together with the album ’ s remaining material , " Spice " has partial rights by Nakata through <unk> Music Communications . The single also included the B @-@ side track " Glitter " ; another version , re @-@ composed by Nakata , appeared on JPN instead . It premiered on November 2 , 2011 as the fifth and final single from the album . It was also released digitally on June 19 , 2013 through European and Oceanic regions , and June 25 in North America . 
 The maxi CD of the single contains both " Spice " and " Glitter " , plus their instrumental versions . The cover artwork was photographed by Japanese photographer Hiroshi Nomura and features the girls sitting on a circle window . Musically , " Spice " was described as an house song with elements of pop music and synthpop . Paul Browne from J @-@ Pop Go noted that the song " sees Perfume step down gear a bit for a more mid @-@ tempo effort . " A staff editor from Selective Hearing noted that the song incorporated elements of 80s synthpop music . Ian Martin from The Japan Times said the song incorporated elements of Westernised pop music . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Upon its release , " Spice " received mixed reviews from most music critics . Asian Junkie editor Random J reviewed the song on his personal blog , and highlighted it as one of the best tracks on the album . Similarly , Paul Browne from J @-@ Pop Go also selected it as one of the album 's best tracks . A staff editor from CD Journal was positive in his / her review , complimenting Nakata 's composition . A staff editor from Selective Hearing was mixed in his / her review of the song ; the reviewer said that it , " isn ’ t the greatest thing the group has done for an a @-@ side but there ’ s enough to make it worth listening to . The layered vocals will probably hook most before they realize that they ’ ve heard all this before . " As a result , the reviewer concluded that they would recommended the B @-@ side " Glitter " over " Spice " . Ian Martin from The Japan Times was particularly negative in his review , labelling the song an " otherwise unremarkable closing number ... " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In Japan , " Spice " was successful on several record charts . It debuted at number two on the Oricon Singles Chart ; it sold 75 @,@ 688 units in its first week of sales . It was the group 's fifth consecutive charting single to reach number two on that chart . The following week , the single fell outside the top ten to number 13 , selling 7 @,@ 136 units . It lasted for 10 weeks on the chart , totaling 90 @,@ 471 units by the end of 2011 . The song peaked at number two on Billboard 's Japan Hot 100 chart . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video was directed by Shimada Daisuke . The group 's outfits from the single cover sleeve was used again for the video shoot . The music video was released on October 27 , 2011 , through Tokuma Japan 's official YouTube channel . The music video appeared on the DVD single . The music video also appeared on Perfume 's DVD compilation sets for JPN and Perfume Clips ( 2014 ) . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The music video opens with several shots of a dining table ; it includes uneaten sweets , foods , and small pink bird ornaments . The first verse features close @-@ ups of the girls singing and dancing to the song , in front of a beige backdrop . The chorus section has three scenes of each member ; Kashiyuka is seen laying down with an electronics cable in her hand ; Nocchi is seen at the dining table ; and A @-@ Chan is seen under a table with a cable telephone . During the instrumental break , close @-@ up shots ( yet very blurry ) features a fish bowl that have small fishing swimming around . The second verse repeats the first verses video shoots . 
 The second chorus has the girls dancing on the table , knocking several pieces of food and <unk> onto the ground . A @-@ Chan is seen lying down on a pillow , whilst Kashiyuka balances a book and an apple on her head . Both of these scenes have them throwing several pieces of food onto the table . Nocchi is seen at the dining table , holding a fork and listen to music through her headphones . She witnesses a small door underneath a stool , opens it , and sees a small green room . In the room , a blurred image of a cup starts to become clear , and holds small candy . As the girls eat the pieces of candy , their cream @-@ coloured dresses turn into the outfits from the cover sleeve from the single . The girls start dancing in the fish bowl , surrounded by glittery lights . The final scene has the girls looking through the small door again , only to witness the dining room table empty ; the small cup with candy appears in beige colouring rather than full @-@ on vibrancy . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 The song and its B @-@ side track has been used in commercials and television series within Japan . " Spice " was used as the theme song for the Japanese Tokyo Broadcasting System television series , <unk> Tantei . The B @-@ side song , " Glitter " , was first used in the commercial for Japanese company Kirin . The group 's producer , Yasutaka Nakata , was heavily influenced by the image of the drama when he wrote " Spice " ; it ’ s also the first time that he produced a soundtrack for them . The single was performed on their 2011 JPN concert tour , where it was included during the second segment . It was included on the live DVD , released in mid 2012 . The song was included on the group 's 180 Gram vinyl compilation box set , Perfume : Complete LP Box ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the parent album . 
 Ayano Ōmoto ( Nocchi ) – vocals 
 Yuka Kashino ( Kashiyuka ) – vocals 
 Ayaka Nishiwaki ( A @-@ Chan ) – vocals 
 Yasutaka Nakata – producer , composer , arranger , mixing , mastering . 
 Shimada Daisuke – video director 
 Tokuma Japan Communications – record label 
 = = Chart and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = 10 Story Fantasy = 
 10 Story Fantasy ( occasionally referred to as Ten Story Fantasy ) was a science fiction and fantasy pulp magazine which was launched in 1951 . The market for pulp magazines was already declining by that time , and the magazine only lasted a single issue . The stories were of generally good quality , and included work by many well @-@ known writers , such as John Wyndham , A.E. van Vogt and Fritz Leiber . The most famous story it published was Arthur C. Clarke 's " Sentinel from Eternity " , which later became part of the basis of the movie 2001 : A Space Odyssey . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The early 1950s saw dramatic changes in the world of U.S. science fiction ( sf ) publishing . At the start of 1949 , all but one of the major magazines in the field were in pulp format ; by the end of 1955 , almost all had either ceased publication or switched to digest format . Despite the rapid decline of the pulp market , several new science fiction magazines were launched in pulp format during these years . In 1950 , Avon Publications experimented with a format that included several pages of comics , trying new pulp magazines in three genres : romance , westerns , and science fiction . The sf pulp , titled Out of This World Adventures , lasted for two issues ; the others for only one . 
 Despite these failures , Joseph Meyers , Avon 's owner , decided to try another pulp magazine the following year when his printer , J.W. Clements offered Meyers a low price for printing a pulp magazine . Donald A. Wollheim , Avon 's executive editor , titled the new magazine 10 Story Fantasy , although it actually contained thirteen stories . The layout bore a strong resemblance to that of Out of This World Adventures : both magazines had unusually elaborate artwork for the table of contents , and in both magazines the first letter of each story was decorated with black and white art . As in Out of This World Adventures , the interior art was mostly supplied by William McWilliam and " Martin " , both of whom worked in Avon 's comics department . 
 The cover art , selected by Meyers , not Wollheim , illustrates John Wyndham 's story " Tyrant & Slave @-@ Girl on Planet Venus " ( published under the pseudonym " John Beynon " ) . This story had been sold first to the British magazine New Worlds , under the title " No Place Like Earth " ; Wyndham subsequently sold the American rights to Wollheim , and it appeared on both sides of the Atlantic at the same time . Myers picked the new , more lurid title ; all subsequent reprint appearances used the title " No Place Like Earth " . 
 10 Story Fantasy 's most famous story is Arthur C. Clarke 's " Sentinel from Eternity " , which Clarke submitted to a BBC writing competition in 1948 ; it did not receive a prize or honorable mention . The story later became part of the basis of the movie 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The stories were generally of good quality , with several well @-@ known contributors such as A.E. van Vogt , L. Sprague de Camp , August Derleth , and Lester del Rey . Among the better @-@ received stories were " Friend to Man " , by C.M. Kornbluth ; " Private Worlds " , by Wollheim , under the pseudonym " Martin Pearson " ; " Cry Witch " , by Fritz Leiber ; and " Seeds of Futurity " , by Kris Neville . 
 Although the quality of the stories was high , the publisher was unwilling to commit to future issues , and the Spring 1951 issue was the only one that appeared . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The magazine was announced as a quarterly but only one issue was published . Donald Wollheim was editor for the only issue , which was numbered volume 1 number 1 . It was published in pulp format , priced at 25 cents and was 128 pages . The publisher was Avon Periodicals of New York . 
 = Washington State Route 3 = 
 State Route 3 ( SR 3 ) is a 59 @.@ 81 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 96 @.@ 25 km ) state highway in the U.S. state of Washington , serving the Kitsap Peninsula in Mason and Kitsap counties . The highway begins at U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) south of Shelton and travels northeast onto the Kitsap Peninsula through Belfair to Gorst , where it intersects SR 16 and begins its freeway . SR 3 travels west of Bremerton , Silverdale and Poulsbo before it terminates at the eastern end of the Hood Canal Bridge , signed as SR 104 . The highway is designated as a Strategic Highway Network ( STRAHNET ) corridor under the National Highway System as the main thoroughfare connecting both parts of Naval Base Kitsap and is also part of the Highways of Statewide Significance program . 
 SR 3 was established during the 1964 highway renumbering and codified in 1970 as the successor to Secondary State Highway 14 ( SSH 14 ) from Shelton to Belfair , Primary State Highway 14 ( PSH 14 ) from Belfair to Gorst , and PSH 21 from Gorst to the Hood Canal Bridge . PSH 21 was previously part of State Road 21 from 1915 to 1937 , while PSH 14 was part of State Road 14 and the Navy Yard Highway from 1919 to 1937 . The present SR 3 freeway was opened in 1968 in the Bremerton area and was extended north to Poulsbo in 1973 and to Bangor in 1977 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 3 begins at a diamond interchange with US 101 south of Shelton in unincorporated Mason County on the Olympic Peninsula . The highway travels north into Shelton at the end of Oakland Bay on 1st Street and crosses over a Puget Sound and Pacific Railroad line and Goldsborough Creek . SR 3 turns east on Pine Street and leaves Shelton , traveling northeast along Oakland Bay and a US Navy rail line . The highway continues north along Oakland Bay and Case Inlet past heavily forested areas to Allyn @-@ Grapeview , where it serves as the western terminus of SR 302 at North Mason High School . SR 3 travels towards the southern end of the Hood Canal and intersects the eastern termini of SR 106 and SR 300 in Belfair . The highway continues northeast past Bremerton National Airport towards the community of Gorst in Kitsap County , where it forms the western terminus of SR 16 . 
 SR 3 becomes a four @-@ lane divided freeway and travels northeast along the Sinclair Inlet to an interchange with SR 304 in Navy Yard City , serving the city of Bremerton and Naval Station Bremerton . The freeway continues through western Bremerton past the diamond interchange with SR 310 and the community of Chico along Dyes Inlet . SR 3 travels west of Silverdale past the western terminus of SR 303 at the Kitsap Mall and east of Naval Submarine Base Bangor in Bangor . The freeway continues north towards Poulsbo past the termini of SR 308 and SR 305 , which serve Keyport and Bainbridge Island respectively . SR 3 travels north from Poulsbo as a two @-@ lane road towards Port Gamble and ends at the eastern approach of the Hood Canal Bridge at an intersection with SR 104 . 
 Every year , the Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) conducts a series of surveys on its highways in the state to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , which is a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . In 2011 , WSDOT calculated that the busiest section of SR 3 was between SR 16 in Gorst and SR 304 in Navy Yard City , serving 69 @,@ 000 vehicles , while the least busiest section was southwest of Allyn @-@ Grapeview at an intersection with Grapeview Loop Road , serving 6 @,@ 600 vehicles . SR 3 is designated as a STRAHNET corridor within National Highway System , connecting Naval Base Kitsap to the state highway system between Gorst and Bangor , while the rest of the highway is part of the system , which includes roadways important to the national economy , defense , and mobility . WSDOT designates the entire route of SR 3 as a Highway of Statewide Significance , which includes highways that connect major communities in the state of Washington . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 3 follows the route of a paved section of State Road 21 between Belfair and Port Gamble on the Kitsap Peninsula that was added to the state highway system in 1915 . The highway was later split between the Navy Yard Highway from Belfair to Bremerton and State Road 21 from Bremerton to Port Gamble in 1919 . In 1923 , the state highway system was restructured and the Navy Yard Highway was numbered as State Road 14 , while State Road 21 kept its designation . The Navy Yard Highway was paved on a 48 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 77 km ) section connecting Union to Charleston and was dedicated by Naval Station Bremerton on June 13 , 1923 , while the rest of the highway remained a gravel road into the 1930s . 
 During the creation of the primary and secondary state highway system in 1937 , the paved State Roads 14 and 21 kept their numerical designations and became PSH 14 and PSH 21 , respectively . PSH 21 was extended southwest from Bremerton on the former Navy Yard Highway to Gorst , while PSH 14 turned south at Gorst and headed towards Tacoma . A branch of PSH 14 , named SSH 14A , was designated on a gravel road that connected the main highway at Belfair to US 101 in Shelton . In 1955 , PSH 21 was extended southwest along PSH 14 from Gorst to Union , shortening PSH 14 to its current route as SR 16 . 
 During the 1964 highway renumbering , a new state route system replaced the existing primary and secondary state highways and SR 3 was designated along SSH 14A , PSH 14 , and PSH 21 on its present route when it was codified in 1970 . Construction of the freeway section of SR 3 began in 1963 between SR 304 in Navy Yard City and Silverdale west of Bremerton and was opened in February 1968 . The freeway was extended north to Poulsbo in late 1973 , and further north to Naval Submarine Base Bangor in 1977 after the arrival of Ohio @-@ class submarines at Bangor . WSDOT re @-@ built the interchange between SR 3 and SR 303 in Silverdale at a cost of $ 26 million , paid for by a 2003 gas tax . The new interchange , opened in November 2007 , split the western terminus of SR 303 between two exits , signed as 45A and 45B , and removed a loop ramp that created turning conflicts . WSDOT began study of a Belfair bypass in 1966 and completed a provisional report in 2010 that did not recommend constructing a bypass of the community , instead opting for a project to widen the highway and add safety improvements that began work in fall 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Michael Phelps = 
 Michael Fred Phelps II ( born June 30 , 1985 ) is an American competition swimmer and the most decorated Olympian of all time , with a total of 22 medals in three Olympiads . Phelps also holds the all @-@ time records for Olympic gold medals ( 18 , double the second highest record holders ) , Olympic gold medals in individual events ( 11 ) , and Olympic medals in individual events for a male ( 13 ) . In winning eight gold medals at the 2008 Beijing Games , Phelps took the record away from fellow American swimmer Mark Spitz ( 7 ) for the most first @-@ place finishes at any single Olympic Games . Five of those victories were in individual events , tying the single Games record . In the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Phelps won four golds and two silver medals , making him the most successful athlete of the Games for the third Olympics in a row . 
 Phelps is the long course world record holder in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , 200 @-@ meter butterfly and 400 @-@ meter individual medley as well as the former long course world record holder in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle and 200 @-@ meter individual medley . He has won a total of 77 medals in major international long @-@ course competition , totalling 61 gold , 13 silver , and 3 bronze spanning the Olympics , the World , and the Pan Pacific Championships . Phelps 's international titles and record @-@ breaking performances have earned him the World Swimmer of the Year Award seven times and American Swimmer of the Year Award nine times as well as the FINA Swimmer of the Year Award in 2012 . His unprecedented Olympic success in 2008 earned Phelps Sports Illustrated magazine 's Sportsman of the Year award . 
 After the 2008 Summer Olympics , Phelps started the Michael Phelps Foundation , which focuses on growing the sport of swimming and promoting healthier lifestyles . He continues to work with his foundation after the 2012 Olympics , which he had said would be his last . In April 2014 , Phelps came out of retirement , and he qualified for the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro , Brazil . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Phelps was born in Baltimore , Maryland , and raised in the Rodgers Forge neighborhood of nearby Towson , Maryland . He attended Rodgers Forge Elementary , Dumbarton Middle School , and Towson High School . Michael is the youngest of three children . His mother , Deborah Sue " Debbie " ( née Davisson ) , is a middle school principal . His father , Michael Fred Phelps , is a retired Maryland state trooper who played football in high school and college and tried out for the Washington Redskins in the 1970s . Phelps 's parents divorced in 1994 , when he was nine years old , and his father remarried in 2000 . His ancestry includes English , Irish , Scottish , Welsh , and German . Phelps graduated from Towson High School in 2003 . 
 Phelps began swimming at the age of seven , partly because of the influence of his sisters and partly to provide him with an outlet for his energy . When Phelps was in the sixth grade , he was diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) . By the age of 10 , he held a national record for his age group , and Phelps began to train at the North Baltimore Aquatic Club under coach Bob Bowman . More age group records followed , and as of 2016 Phelps still holds 12 age group records ( nine in long course and three in short course ) . 
 = = 2000 Summer Olympics = = 
 Phelps 's rapid improvement culminated in his qualifying for the 2000 Summer Olympics at the age of 15 and becoming the youngest male to make a U.S. Olympic swim team in 68 years . While he did not win a medal , he did make the finals and finished fifth in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly . 
 = = 2001 World championships = = 
 At the World Championship Trials for the 2001 World Aquatics Championships , on March 30 , Phelps broke the world record in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly to become , at 15 years and 9 months , the youngest male ever to set a swimming world record . Previously this was Ian Thorpe , who lowered the 400 @-@ meter freestyle world record at 16 years , 10 months . At the World Championships in Fukuoka , Japan , Phelps broke his own world record in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly en route to becoming a world champion for the first time . 
 = = 2002 Pan Pacific championships = = 
 At Nationals , the selection meet for the 2002 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships , in Fort Lauderdale , Florida , Phelps set an American record in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley and was just off the world record in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly . In the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps bettered the world record held by Tom Dolan with a time of 4 : 11 @.@ 09 , just ahead of Erik Vendt , who finished second with a time of 4 : 11 @.@ 27 , also below the old world record . In the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps was barely beaten by Klete Keller and in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps beat Ian Crocker . 
 At the 2002 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Yokohama , Japan , Phelps won three gold medals and two silvers . In his first event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won gold ahead of Erik Vendt with a time of 4 : 12 @.@ 48 . In the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps lost to Tom Malchow , finishing behind him 1 : 55 @.@ 41 to 1 : 55 @.@ 21 . Phelps said he lost because he did not take butterfly training seriously after he broke the world record . In the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 59 @.@ 70 . In the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , along with Nate <unk> , Klete Keller , and Chad Carvin , won the silver medal with a time 7 : 11 @.@ 81 finishing behind Australia . The U.S. 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay team consisted of Aaron Peirsol , Brendan Hansen , Phelps , and Ian Crocker . In the final for the medley relay , Phelps swam a 51 @.@ 1 split , at the time the fastest split in history . The final time of 3 : 33 @.@ 48 was a world record . 
 = = 2003 World championships = = 
 At Nationals , Phelps won the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , 200 @-@ meter backstroke , and the 100 @-@ meter butterfly . He became the first American swimmer to win three different races in three different strokes at a national championship . At the 2003 Duel in the Pool , a meet that pits swimming stars from Australia and the United States , Phelps broke the world record in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley with a time of 4 : 10 @.@ 73 and almost broke the world record in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , just missing the record by 0 @.@ 03 seconds . At a meet in Santa Clara County , California , Phelps broke the world record in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley with a time of 1 : 57 @.@ 94 . Phelps said he broke the 200 @-@ meter individual medley world record after Don Talbot said Phelps was unproven , using his words as motivation . 
 At the 2003 World Aquatics Championships , Phelps won four gold medals , two silver medals , and broke five world records . Phelps broke his first world record on July 22 in the semi @-@ finals for the 200 @-@ meter butterfly . Phelps swam a 1 : 53 @.@ 93 to break his own world record of 1 : 54 @.@ 58 set in 2001 and became the first man to swim under 1 : 54 @.@ 00 . In the final of the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , on July 23 , Phelps easily won the gold medal , but did not come close to his world record with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 35 . Less than an hour later , Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg for the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . Phelps put up a solid time of 1 : 46 @.@ 60 ( an American record ) but the Americans could not match the depth of the Australians and ultimately finished second 7 : 10 @.@ 26 to 7 : 08 @.@ 58 . In the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps dominated . On July 24 , in the semifinals of the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , he broke his own world record with a time of 1 : 57 @.@ 52 . On July 25 , in the final of the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps smashed his own record with a time of 1 : 56 @.@ 04 to win the gold medal and finished almost 3 seconds ahead of Ian Thorpe . About an hour before the final of the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps swam in the semifinals of the 100 @-@ meter butterfly . Phelps dominated again , finishing in the top seed position with a world record time of 51 @.@ 47 . However , in the final of the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , on July 26 , Ian Crocker erased Phelps 's world record with a time of 50 @.@ 98 , to become the first man under 51 seconds . Phelps swam a 51 @.@ 10 ( also under his former world record ) , but had to settle for silver . In the final of the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , on July 27 , Phelps broke his own world record with a time of 4 : 09 @.@ 09 to easily claim the gold medal . About half an hour later , Phelps earned his final gold medal when the United States team won the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . Phelps did not swim in the finals , but still earned a medal because he swam in the heats . 
 = = 2004 Summer Olympics = = 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 At the 2004 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Phelps competed in six events ; the 200- and 400 @-@ meter individual medley , the 100- and 200 @-@ meter butterfly , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , and the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In his first event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps easily won with a world record time of 4 : 08 @.@ 41 . Two days later , in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 46 @.@ 27 , finishing sixth @-@ tenths of a second ahead of Klete Keller . Phelps , however , was not pleased with the result and wanted to be in the 1 : 45s and was uncertain if he would swim the event in Athens . The following day , Phelps won in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 31 , three seconds ahead of second @-@ place finisher Tom Malchow . After two days off , Phelps was back in the pool and finished second to Aaron Peirsol in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . Less than half an hour later , Phelps won the 200 @-@ meter individual medley title ahead of Ryan Lochte by 2 @.@ 70 seconds . The following day , Phelps finished second to Ian Crocker in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly . Crocker won in a time of 50 @.@ 76 , a world record and 0 @.@ 39 seconds ahead of Phelps . When the Trials were over , Phelps became the first person to qualify in six individual events for a U.S. Olympic team . However , Phelps dropped the 200 @-@ meter backstroke to focus on the 200 @-@ meter freestyle because he wanted to race Ian Thorpe . Even though Phelps didn 't compete in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle at the Trials , he was still selected for the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . Gary Hall , Jr. thought this was unfair and said Phelps did not deserve a spot on the relay . Phelps argued his program was too crowded to compete in 100 @-@ meter freestyle and was at least among the top four swimmers because he had beaten the top @-@ seeded Jason Lezak the last time he had swum against him . 
 = = = Athens = = = 
 In his first event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won with a world record time of 4 : 08 @.@ 26 to win his first Olympic gold medal . The following day , in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , along with Ian Crocker , Neil Walker , and Jason Lezak , finished in third place with a time of 3 : 14 @.@ 62 . Crocker 's lead @-@ off time of 50 @.@ 05 was the worst among the field and was blamed on sickness . In the event many were calling The Race of the Century , held the following day , Phelps finished in third place behind Ian Thorpe and Pieter van den Hoogenband in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle . Although this race ended the chance to match Spitz 's record , Phelps had savored the challenge even though it was not his strongest event , saying " How can I be disappointed ? I swam in a field with the two fastest <unk> of all time " . In his fourth event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , held the following day , Phelps finished first with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 04 , breaking Tom Malchow 's Olympic record . About an hour later , in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , along with Ryan Lochte , Peter Vanderkaay , and Klete Keller , finished in first place with a time of 7 : 07 @.@ 33 . Two days later , in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps finished first with a time of 1 : 57 @.@ 14 , an Olympic record . In the 100 @-@ meter butterfly final , held the following day , Phelps defeated American teammate Ian Crocker ( who held the world record in the event at the time ) by just 0 @.@ 04 seconds with a time of 51 @.@ 25 . Traditionally , the American who places highest in an individual event will be automatically given the corresponding leg in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay final . This gave Phelps an automatic entry into the medley relay , but he deferred and Crocker swam instead . Phelps 's gesture gave Crocker a chance to make amends as well getting his final shot at a gold medal . The American medley team went on to win the event in world @-@ record time , and , since Phelps had raced in a preliminary heat of the medley relay , he was also awarded a gold medal along with the team members who competed in the final . In winning six gold and two bronze medals , Phelps , still a teenager , had the second @-@ best performance ever at a single Olympics , behind Mark Spitz 's seven gold medals at the 1972 Summer Olympics . Also , he became the second male swimmer ever to win more than two individual titles at a single Games with four , tying Spitz 's four from 1972 . 
 = = 2005 World championships = = 
 At the 2005 World Championship Trials , Phelps decided to drop his specialty events , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley and the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , and experiment with the 400 @-@ meter freestyle and the 100 @-@ meter freestyle . Phelps went on to win the 400 @-@ meter freestyle , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , the 100 @-@ meter freestyle , and the 200 @-@ meter individual medley at the Trials . 
 At the 2005 World Aquatics Championships , Phelps won a total of six medals , 5 golds and one silver . In the 400 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps did not make it past the preliminary heats and finished 18th overall with a time of 3 : 50 @.@ 53 . Later that day , in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps won his first gold in the Championships . Two days later , on July 26 , Phelps won his second gold in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle with a new American record time of 1 : 45 @.@ 20 , finishing ahead of Grant Hackett . Two days later , on July 28 , Phelps finished seventh in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle final . Later that day , Phelps won his third gold in the 200 @-@ meter individual medley . On July 29 , Phelps , along with Ryan Lochte , Peter Vanderkaay and Klete Keller , won the gold in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with a time of 7 : 06 @.@ 58 . This was the fourth gold medal for Phelps . On July 30 , Phelps swam in his last individual event , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly . In the final , Phelps could not match the speed of Ian Crocker and had to settle for silver , finishing 51 @.@ 65 to 50 @.@ 40 . On July 31 , Phelps earned his final gold medal when the United States team won the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . Phelps did not swim in the finals but still earned a medal because he swam in the heats . 
 = = 2006 Pan Pacific championships = = 
 At the 2006 National Championships , Phelps won a total of three events . In his first event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 32 . In his second event , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps just edged out Ian Crocker 51 @.@ 51 to 51 @.@ 73 . In his third event , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 56 @.@ 50 , just ahead of Ryan Lochte 's time of 1 : 56 @.@ 78 . 
 At the 2006 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Victoria , British Columbia , Phelps won five gold medals and one silver . In his first event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won in a world record time of 1 : 53 @.@ 80 , his first world record in two years . In his second event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps easily won with a time of 4 : 10 @.@ 47 , 3 @.@ 38 seconds ahead of second @-@ place finisher Robert <unk> . In his third event , the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , along with Ryan Lochte , Peter Vanderkaay , and Klete Keller , won the gold medal with a time of 7 : 05 @.@ 28 . In his fourth event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Phelps won the silver medal , finishing behind Aaron Peirsol 1 : 56 @.@ 81 to 1 : 54 @.@ 44 . In his fifth event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , along with Neil Walker , Cullen Jones , and Jason Lezak , won the gold medal with a world @-@ record time 3 : 12 @.@ 46 . In his sixth event , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won with a world record time of 1 : 55 @.@ 84 , breaking his record of 1 : 55 @.@ 94 set in 2003 . 
 = = 2007 World championships = = 
 At the 2007 World Aquatics Championships , Phelps won seven gold medals , tying the record , and broke five world records . Phelps first gold medal came in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle . Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 48 @.@ 42 seconds and Neil Walker , Cullen Jones and Jason Lezak each expanded the lead to win in a Championship record of 3 : 12 @.@ 72 , just missing the world record of 3 : 12 @.@ 46 set the previous year . His lead @-@ off time was faster than the winning time in the individual 100 @-@ meter freestyle final later in the meet . Phelps set his first world record in the Championships in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , his second race . Phelps won the gold ahead of Pieter van den Hoogenband and broke Ian Thorpe 's six @-@ year @-@ old world record with a time of 1 : 43 @.@ 86 . For his third race , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won the gold and bettered his own world record of 1 : 53 @.@ 71 with a time of 1 : 52 @.@ 09 . For his fourth race , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps set his third world record with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 98 , bettering his own world @-@ record time of 1 : 55 @.@ 84 For his fifth race , the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 1 : 45 @.@ 36 as the American team of Ryan Lochte , Klete Keller , and Peter Vanderkaay went on to win the gold medal and beat the previous world record set by Australia in 2001 with a time 7 : 03 @.@ 24 . For his sixth race , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps edged out Ian Crocker 50 @.@ 77 to 50 @.@ 82 to win his sixth gold medal . For his seventh event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps won the gold medal in a world @-@ record time of 4 : 06 @.@ 22 , more than 3 @.@ 5 seconds ahead of Ryan Lochte . By winning seven gold medals , Phelps broke the record of six set by Ian Thorpe at the 2001 World Championships . The 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay team would have competed in the final , but received a disqualification for a false start during a changeover in the heats , ending Phelps 's chance of eight gold medals . 
 Even though Phelps competed in the backstroke in international competition only once ( at the 2006 Pan Pacific Championships ) , he was among the best backstroke swimmers in the world . This is illustrated by his personal best times set in 2007 , four months after the World Championships . At the US Nationals in Indianapolis on August 1 , 2007 , Phelps swam a 1 : 54 @.@ 65 in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , which was the third fastest of all time in the event , 0 @.@ 33 of a second off the world record of 1 : 54 @.@ 32 held by Ryan Lochte . Two days later Phelps swam a time of 53 @.@ 01 sec in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , 0 @.@ 03 of a second short of the world record of 52 @.@ 98 held by Aaron Peirsol and the second @-@ fastest performance of all time . In 2007 Phelps swam into the all @-@ time top 3 performances in seven individual events , four of these being world records . 
 = = 2008 Summer Olympics = = 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 At the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Phelps competed in six individual events . In his first event , the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps broke his own world record of 4 : 06 @.@ 22 with a time of 4 : 05 @.@ 25 . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 10 , ahead of Peter Vanderkaay 's time 1 : 45 @.@ 85 . In his third event , the 100 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps placed second in his heat with a time of 47 @.@ 92 , ensuring him a spot on the relay . In his fourth event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 52 @.@ 20 . In his fifth event , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps broke his own world record of 1 : 54 @.@ 98 with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 80 . In his sixth and final event , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won with a time of 50 @.@ 89 . When asked about his chances of winning eight gold medals in Beijing , Phelps said , " I am going to prepare for that meet just like I do every other meet ... There is only so much I can do in a month and then I am going to prepare myself the best that I can . " 
 = = = Beijing = = = 
 Phelps set an Olympic record in the preliminary heats of the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . He followed that up in the final by winning the gold medal , as well as breaking his previous world record by nearly two seconds . 
 Phelps swam the first leg of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay in a time of 47 @.@ 51 seconds ( an American record for the 100 @-@ meter freestyle ) , and won his second gold medal of the 2008 Olympics , as well as setting his second world record of the Olympics ( 3 : 08 @.@ 24 ) . Teammate Jason Lezak , after beginning the anchor leg more than half a body length behind Alain Bernard , managed to finish ahead of the favored French swimmer by eight hundredths of a second . The top five teams in the final finished ahead of the world record of 3 : 12 @.@ 23 set the previous day by the American B team in a preliminary heat . 
 For his third race , Phelps broke his previous world record in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle by nearly a second and won his third gold medal . He also set his third world record at the Olympics , 1 : 42 @.@ 96 , winning by nearly two seconds over silver medalist Park Tae @-@ hwan . In this race , Phelps became the fifth Olympic athlete in modern history to win nine gold medals , joining Mark Spitz , Larisa Latynina , Paavo Nurmi , and Carl Lewis . 
 The next day , Phelps participated in two finals . In his first event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps made it four gold medals and world records in four events by swimming the final in 1 : 52 @.@ 03 , defeating silver medalist László Cseh by almost seven @-@ tenths of a second despite his goggles ' having filled up with water and being unable to " see anything for the last 100 meters . This fourth gold medal was his tenth , and made him the all @-@ time leader for most Olympic gold medals won by an individual in the modern Olympic era . Moreover , Phelps became the first swimmer , male or female , to win three Olympic butterfly titles , after his two titles in the Athens 2004 Olympics . He also became the first swimmer to successfully defend an Olympic butterfly title . 
 Less than one hour after his gold medal victory in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg of the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . With Lochte , Ricky Berens , and Peter Vanderkaay , he won his fifth gold and set his fifth world record as the American team finished first with a time of 6 : 58 @.@ 56 . The Americans were the first team to break the seven @-@ minute mark in the relay , and broke the previous record , set in Melbourne , Australia , by more than four and a half seconds . 
 After taking a day off from finals ( Phelps did swim in qualifying heats ) , Phelps won his sixth gold of the Beijing Games on August 15 by winning the 200 @-@ meter individual medley with a world record time of 1 : 54 @.@ 23 , finishing ahead of Cseh by over two seconds . 
 = = = = Seventh gold medal = = = = 
 Before the final of the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , US born Serbian swimmer Milorad Čavić caused a minor stir when he said it would be " good " if Phelps lost . " It 'd be good for him if he loses . It would be nice if historians talk about Michael Phelps winning seven gold medals and losing the eighth to ' some guy . ' I 'd like to be that guy " , Čavić said . Phelps responded , " When people say things like that , it fires me up more than anything . " On August 16 , Phelps won his seventh gold medal of the Games in the men 's 100 @-@ meter butterfly , setting an Olympic record for the event with a time of 50 @.@ 58 seconds and edging out his nearest competitor Čavić , by one hundredth ( 0 @.@ 01 ) of a second . 
 Unlike all six of his previous events in the 2008 Games , Phelps did not set a new world record , leaving intact Ian Crocker 's world @-@ record time of 50 @.@ 40 seconds , set in 2005 . 
 Phelps 's 0 @.@ 01 @-@ second finish ahead of Čavić prompted the Serbian delegation to file a protest . Subsequent analysis of the video by the FINA panel , which required analyzing frames shot 1 / 10,000th of a second apart , was used to officially confirm Phelps 's victory , but the images were not immediately released to the press . The initial refusal by official timekeeper Omega to release underwater photos of the finish also raised questions due to Phelps 's sponsorship relationship with Omega . Čavić later wrote in his blog , " People , this is the greatest moment of my life . If you ask me , it should be accepted and we should move on . I 've accepted defeat , and there 's nothing wrong with losing to the greatest swimmer there has ever been . " 
 Phelps 's seventh gold medal of the Games tied Mark Spitz 's record for gold medals won in a single Olympic Games , set in the 1972 Olympics . It was also his fifth individual gold medal in Beijing , tying the record for individual gold medals at a single Games originally set by Eric Heiden in the 1980 Winter Olympics and equaled by Vitaly <unk> at the 1992 Summer Games . Said Phelps upon setting his seventh @-@ straight Olympic record of the Games in as many events , " Dream as big as you can dream , and anything is possible ... I am sort of in a dream world . Sometimes I have to pinch myself to make sure it is real . " 
 = = = = All @-@ time record = = = = 
 On August 17 , Phelps won his eighth gold medal in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , breaking Mark Spitz 's record of seven gold medals won in a single Olympic Games , which had stood since 1972 . Phelps , along with teammates Brendan Hansen , Aaron Peirsol , and Jason Lezak , set a new world record in the event with a time of 3 minutes and 29 @.@ 34 seconds , 0 @.@ 7 seconds ahead of second @-@ place Australia and 1 @.@ 34 seconds faster than the previous record set by the United States at the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens . When Phelps dived in to swim the 100 @-@ meter butterfly leg , the third leg of the 400 @-@ meter medley , the United States had been trailing Australia and Japan . Phelps completed his split in 50 @.@ 1 seconds , the fastest butterfly split ever for the event , giving teammate Jason Lezak a more than half @-@ second lead for the final leg , which he held onto to clinch the event in world record time . Said Phelps , upon completing the event that awarded him his eighth gold medal and eighth Olympic record in as many events , " Records are always made to be broken no matter what they are ... Anybody can do anything that they set their mind to . " 
 = = 2009 World championships = = 
 At the 2009 National Championships , Phelps drastically shortened his program , swimming in only three individual events . In his first event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps won with a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 23 . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps easily won with a time of 1 : 52 @.@ 76 , 0 @.@ 88 seconds ahead of the second @-@ place finisher . In his third event , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won with a world @-@ record time of 50 @.@ 22 . 
 At the 2009 World Aquatics Championships , Phelps won a total of 6 medals , 5 golds and 1 silver . In his first event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 47 @.@ 78 , well off his 47 @.@ 51 performance in Beijing , but the American team was able to edge out Russia and France for the gold . For his second race , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps lost his first race in four years to Germany 's Paul Biedermann . Phelps touched second in 1 : 43 @.@ 22 , but Biedermann smashed Phelps 's record of 1 : 42 @.@ 96 set in Beijing a year ago with a time of 1 : 42 @.@ 00 . Phelps took the silver graciously , but coach Bob Bowman threatened to withdraw Phelps from international competition because Bowman claimed Biedermann had an unfair advantage because he was wearing a full polyurethane swimsuit , specifically an Arena X @-@ Glide . Bowman said , " It took me five years to get Michael from 1 : 46 to 1 : 42 and this guy has done it in 11 months . That 's an amazing training performance . I 'd like to know how to do that . " Phelps rebounded from this loss and for his third race , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won the gold and broke his own world record of 1 : 52 @.@ 03 with a time of 1 : 51 @.@ 51 . For his fourth race , the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 1 : 44 @.@ 49 as the team went on to win the gold medal and break the world record set the previous year . After his loss in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , many thought Phelps was vulnerable coming into the final for the 100 @-@ meter butterfly . His closest competitor , Milorad Čavić , who wore an Arena X @-@ Glide ( the same suit Biedermann beat Phelps with ) , thought people were making excuses for Phelps because he was wearing an LZR Racer . Čavić even offered to buy Phelps a new suit . For his fifth race , the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won the gold and became the first man to complete it in under 50 seconds , beating Čavić 49 @.@ 82 to 49 @.@ 95 . The victory prompted a fierce celebration from Phelps , who sat on the lane rope and pumped his chest and swimsuit . For his final event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Phelps won his fifth gold medal . Phelps , along with teammates Aaron Peirsol , Eric Shanteau , and David Walters , set a new world record in the event with a time of 3 minutes and 27 @.@ 28 seconds . 
 = = 2010 Pan Pacific championships = = 
 At the 2010 National Championships , Phelps competed in five individual events . In the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps won ahead of Ryan Lochte in a time of 1 : 45 @.@ 61 . About an hour later , Phelps returned to the pool to win the 200 @-@ meter butterfly . But Phelps was not happy with his performance and called it the " worst " 200 @-@ meter butterfly of his life . In the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won his 50th national title in 50 @.@ 65 . After the race , Phelps said he was " fairly pleased " with the result . In the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps finished second to Lochte 1 : 55 @.@ 94 to 1 : 54 @.@ 84 . It was the first time Lochte had beat Phelps in a major national meet . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Phelps finished in 4th place in 1 : 56 @.@ 98 . 
 On the first day of competition at the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships , Phelps opted out swimming in the final of the 200 @-@ meter freestyle to focus on the 200 @-@ meter butterfly . In the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps led from start to finish , coming in first with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 11 . Although it was much slower than his 1 : 51 @.@ 51 time from the previous year , Phelps had not lost a 200 @-@ meter butterfly final since 2002 . On day two of the competition , Phelps swam in the heats of the 400 @-@ meter individual medley and contributed in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In the heats of the 400 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps failed to make the A final , with Lochte and Tyler Clary taking the top two American positions . Phelps did not swim in the B final of the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . In the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , with Peter Vanderkaay , Ricky Berens , and Lochte , finished first ahead of Japan and Australia . On day three of the competition , Phelps competed in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly and contributed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps finished first in a time of 50 @.@ 86 , a championship record . In the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps , with Lochte , Jason Lezak , and Nathan Adrian , finished first ahead of Australia and South Africa . As the lead @-@ off leg in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay , Phelps set the championship record in the 100 @-@ meter freestyle with a time of 48 @.@ 13 . In his final event , Phelps swam in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Aaron Peirsol , Mark Gangloff , and Adrian and finished first ahead of Japan and Australia . 
 = = 2011 World championships = = 
 In his first event at the 2011 World Aquatics Championships in Shanghai , Phelps won bronze in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Garrett Weber @-@ Gale , Jason Lezak , and Nathan Adrian . This was Phelps 's first bronze in a World Aquatics Championships . Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 48 @.@ 08 , the second @-@ best lead @-@ off in the field behind James Magnussen 's 47 @.@ 49 . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , Phelps won silver for the second consecutive time at a World Aquatics Championships . This time he finished second to Ryan Lochte in the event with a time of 1 : 44 @.@ 79 , compared to Lochte 's time of 1 : 44 @.@ 44 . In his third final , the 200 @-@ meter butterfly , he won his first gold medal with a time of 1 : 53 @.@ 34 to become the first swimmer to win five gold medals in one discipline at the World Aquatics Championships . In his fourth event , the 200 @-@ meter individual medley , Phelps again finished second to Lochte in a personal best of 1 : 54 @.@ 16 , which was 0 @.@ 16 behind Lochte who swam a new world record . It was Phelps 's 30th medal in the World Aquatics Championships . Shortly after completing the semifinals of the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps competed in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Peter Vanderkaay , Ricky Berens , and Ryan Lochte . Phelps 's team won the gold medal in a time of 7 : 02 @.@ 67 . Phelps swam the lead @-@ off leg in 1 : 45 @.@ 53 , the third @-@ best leg in the field . In the 100 @-@ meter butterfly , Phelps won his third consecutive title ( also winning in 2007 and 2009 ) and second individual title of the meet with a time of 50 @.@ 71 . In his last event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Phelps teamed with Nick Thoman , Mark Gangloff , and Nathan Adrian to win gold in a time of 3 : 32 @.@ 06 . Phelps 's butterfly leg of 50 @.@ 57 was by far the fastest butterfly leg in the field . 
 = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 For the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Phelps originally stated he would never do eight events again , and would instead try new events . Phelps said , " I keep saying I want to go down and start sprinting , but Bob [ Bowman , Phelps 's coach ] really isn 't so keen on that ... I don 't think that 's going to happen ... Over the next four years , I 'd like to try some different events , maybe not do some of the events I did here . " However , at the 2012 United States Olympic Trials , the qualifying meet for the 2012 Summer Olympics , Phelps qualified in the same eight events that he swam in Beijing in 2008 . He later dropped the 200 @-@ meter freestyle from his program , as he stated he wanted to focus on the 4 × 100 @-@ meter freestyle relay . During the trials , Phelps finished first in the 200 @-@ meter freestyle , 100 @-@ meter butterfly , 200 @-@ meter butterfly , 200 @-@ meter individual medley , and second in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . In making his fourth Olympic team , Phelps holds the record for men for the most Olympic appearances in swimming representing the United States . 
 = = = London = = = 
 On July 28 , 2012 , Phelps placed eighth in the morning <unk> for the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . Phelps , the two @-@ time defending Olympic champion , won his heat in 4 minutes , 13 @.@ 33 seconds with a time that was well off his world record of 4 : 03 @.@ 84 set four years ago in Beijing , when Phelps won a record eight gold medals . He out @-@ touched László Cseh by 0 @.@ 07 seconds in his heat to qualify last for the final , locking out Cseh . In his first finals of the Summer Olympics , Phelps placed fourth behind fellow American Ryan Lochte , Thiago Pereira of Brazil , and Kosuke <unk> of Japan in the 400 @-@ meter individual medley . It was the first time Phelps failed to medal in an Olympic event since 2000 . The next night , in his second event of the Games , he got a silver as a member of the 4 × 100 @-@ meter free relay . Phelps swam the fastest leg of the US relay team and the second @-@ fastest of anyone in the race . 
 On July 31 , 2012 , Phelps won a silver medal in the 200 @-@ meter butterfly behind South African Chad le Clos by 5 / <unk> of a second , and a gold medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay , thereby equaling and then surpassing Larisa Latynina to become the all @-@ time record holder for most Olympic medals won . Latynina was present at the race and asked to be the presenter of Phelps 's medal , but was told that Olympic rules would not allow it . She called Phelps deserving of the record . 
 On August 2 , 2012 , Phelps won his 16th Olympic gold medal when he edged out Ryan Lochte to win the 200 @-@ meter individual medley with a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 27 , and by that victory also became the first male swimmer to win the same event in three consecutive Olympics . Rebecca Soni and Phelps ( twice ) are the only swimmers to successfully defend an individual title from the 2008 Games . This win also marked Phelps 's fifth Olympic title in the individual medley , breaking the record of four shared by Hungarian <unk> <unk> and Ukrainian Yana <unk> . 
 He repeated the achievement of winning the same event at three Olympics the following evening , winning the Olympic gold medal in the 100 m butterfly , his last individual event . After two very close victories in the 100 m butterfly at the 2004 and 2008 Olympics ( by 0 @.@ 04 and 0 @.@ 01 sec , respectively ) , in this race Phelps beat Le Clos and Yevgeny <unk> , who tied for silver , by 0 @.@ 23 sec . 
 Phelps 's final event was the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay in which he went on to win his 18th career gold medal and his 22nd overall . By winning 4 gold and 2 silver medals , Phelps concluded the 2012 Olympics as the most successful swimmer of the meet for the third Olympics in a row . After his last event , the international swimming federation FINA honored Phelps with an award commemorating his standing as the most decorated Olympian ever . 
 = = 2014 Coming back from retirement = = 
 In April 2014 , Phelps announced he would come out of retirement , and would enter an event later that month . In May 2014 , he won the 100 @-@ meter butterfly event at the Arena Grand Prix in Charlotte , North Carolina . 
 = = 2015 US Nationals = = 
 After having been dropped from the team for the 2015 World Aquatics Championships for his DUI , Phelps competed in the US National Championships ( long course ) in San Antonio instead as his target meet of the summer . He won gold medals in the 100 meter butterfly ( 50 @.@ 45 s ) , 200 meter butterfly ( 1 : 52 @.@ 94 ) , and the 200 meter individual medley ( 1 : 54 @.@ 75 ) . In each of these events he swam the fastest time in the world for 2015 . 
 In December 2015 at the Winter Nationals in Federal Way , Phelps won titles in the 200 m individual medley , and the 100 m and 200 m butterfly ( long course ) , bringing his career total to 62 national titles . 
 = = 2016 Summer Olympics = = 
 = = = Trials = = = 
 At the US trials for the 2016 Summer Olympics , Phelps won the 200 m butterfly ( 1 : 54 @.@ 84 ) , the 200 m individual medley ( 1 : 55 @.@ 91 ) , and the 100 m butterfly ( 51 @.@ 00 s ) events . This made him the first American male swimmer , and the second American swimmer overall after Dara Torres , to qualify for a fifth Olympics . 
 = = Testing for performance @-@ enhancing drugs = = 
 During the 2008 Olympics , Phelps was questioned by the press as to whether perhaps his feats were " too good to be true " , a reference to unsupported rumors that Phelps might be taking performance @-@ enhancing drugs . In response , Phelps noted that he had signed up for Project Believe , a project by the United States Anti @-@ Doping Agency in which U.S. Olympians can volunteer to be tested in excess of the World Anti @-@ Doping Agency guidelines . During the Games , Phelps passed all nine tests that were administered to him . 
 = = Bob Bowman = = 
 Phelps has trained under Bob Bowman since he was 11 years old . Bowman swam for Florida State University from 1983 to 1985 . Phelps has said Bowman reminded him of a drill sergeant because of his disciplined and regimented ways . However , Phelps has said , " Training with Bob is the smartest thing I 've ever done ... I 'm not going to swim for anyone else . " After the 2004 Summer Olympics , Bowman was hired as the head coach for the University of Michigan after Jon Urbanchek retired . Phelps joined Bowman at Michigan to train and attended classes , but did not pursue a degree . Phelps served as a volunteer assistant coach at Michigan . After the 2008 Summer Olympics , Bowman returned to Baltimore as CEO at the North Baltimore Aquatic Club . Phelps also returned to Baltimore with Bowman . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bob Bowman described Phelps as " a solitary man " with a " rigid focus " at the pool prior to a race , but afterward " a man incredibly invested in the success of the people he cares about " . " He 's unbelievably kind @-@ hearted " , recounting Phelps 's interaction with young children after practices . In February 2015 , Phelps announced he was engaged to model Nicole Johnson . They had met in 2009 and temporarily broke up in 2012 . Their son , Boomer Robert Phelps was born on May 5 , 2016 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 In November 2004 , at the age of 19 , Phelps was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol in Salisbury , Maryland . He pleaded guilty to driving while impaired , and was sentenced to serve 18 months ' probation , fined $ 250 , ordered to speak to high school students about drinking and driving and to attend a Mothers Against Drunk Driving ( MADD ) meeting . Asked about the incident later by Matt Lauer on the Today Show , Phelps said that he had " let a lot of people in the country down . " 
 In February 2009 , publication of a photograph of Phelps using a water pipe , a device used for smoking , resulted in the loss of the Kellogg Company as a sponsor , as well as a three @-@ month suspension by USA Swimming . Phelps admitted that the photo , taken at a party at the University of South Carolina , was authentic . He publicly apologized , saying his behavior was " inappropriate " . 
 In September 2014 , he was arrested again , on driving under the influence of alcohol and speeding charges in Baltimore , Maryland . As a result , USA Swimming suspended him from all competitions for six months , and stated he would not be chosen to represent the United States at the 2015 World Aquatics Championships in August . 
 = = = Ian Thorpe = = = 
 Phelps idolized Australian swimmer Ian Thorpe as a teenager , modelling his public image after him . Thorpe initially said it was highly unlikely for Phelps to win eight gold medals at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . Phelps used the remarks as motivation , taping them to his locker during the Games . Thorpe was in the stands for the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , where Phelps was swimming for his eighth Olympic title . When Phelps and his teammates captured the gold , Thorpe gave a congratulatory kiss to Phelps 's mother , then gave a handshake and a hug to congratulate Phelps . Thorpe afterwards said " I 'm really proud of him not just because he won eight golds . Rather , it 's how much he has grown up and matured into a great human being . Never in my life have I been so happy to have been proved wrong . " 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 After the 2008 Olympics , Phelps used his $ 1 million Speedo bonus to set up the Michael Phelps Foundation . His foundation focuses on growing the sport of swimming and promoting healthier lifestyles . 
 In 2010 , the Michael Phelps Foundation , the Michael Phelps Swim School and <unk> developed and nationally piloted the " im " program for Boys & Girls Club members . The im program teaches children the importance of being active and healthy , with a focus on the sport of swimming . It also promotes the value of planning and goal @-@ <unk> im is offered through the Boys & Girls Clubs of America and through Special Olympics International . The Foundation has since developed two other programs , Level Field Fund @-@ Swimming and Caps @-@ for @-@ a @-@ Cause . 
 The Foundation 's largest event is its annual fundraiser , the Michael Phelps Foundation Golf Classic . Phelps stated he hopes to work with his Foundation more after he retires from competition following the 2012 Summer Olympics in London . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Phelps was a USA Olympic team member in 2000 , 2004 , 2008 , 2012 and 2016 , and holds the records for most Olympic gold medals ( 18 ) , most such medals in individual events ( 11 ) , and most such medals at a single games ( 8 , in Beijing 2008 ) . A street in his hometown of Baltimore was renamed The Michael Phelps Way in 2004 . On April 9 , 2009 , Phelps was invited to appear before the Maryland House of Delegates and the Maryland Senate , to be honored for his Olympic accomplishments . 
 Phelps has also received the following awards : 
 Swimming World Magazine World Swimmer of the Year Award : 2003 , 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2012 
 Swimming World Magazine American Swimmer of the Year Award : 2001 , 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 , 2012 
 FINA swimmer of the year ( since 2010 ) : 2012 
 Golden Goggle Male Performance of the Year ( since 2004 ) : 2004 , 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 
 Golden Goggle Relay Performance of the Year ( since 2004 ) : 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2009 
 Golden Goggle Male Athlete of the Year ( since 2004 ) : 2004 , 2007 , 2008 , 2012 , 2014 , 2015 
 USOC <unk> of the Year Award : 2004 , 2008 , 2011 – 12 
 James E. Sullivan Award : 2003 
 Gazzetta dello Sport Sportsman of the Year : 2003 , 2004 
 Laureus World Sports Sportsman of the Year Award ( nominated ) : 2004 , 2005 , 2008 , 2009 , 2013 
 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year : 2008 
 Associated Press Athlete of the Year : 2008 , 2012 
 Marca Leyenda ( 2008 ) 
 = = Career best times = = 
 = = = Long course ( 50 @-@ meter pool ) = = = 
 r = relay lead @-@ off 
 = = = Short course meters ( 25 @-@ meter pool ) = = = 
 = = World records = = 
 With 39 world records ( 29 individual , 10 relay ) , Phelps set more records than any other swimmer , surpassing Mark Spitz 's previous record of 33 world records ( 26 individual , 7 relay ) . 
 All but two of the records were set in a long @-@ course ( 50 @-@ meter ) pool ; records that currently stand are indicated in bold . Currently , he holds seven world records , not including his records for most Olympic medals and most Olympic gold medals ever won by one person . 
 a with Aaron Peirsol , Brendan Hansen , and Jason Lezak 
 b with Neil Walker , Cullen Jones , and Jason Lezak 
 c with Ryan Lochte , Klete Keller , and Peter Vanderkaay 
 d with Garrett Weber @-@ Gale , Cullen Jones , and Jason Lezak 
 e with Ryan Lochte , Ricky Berens , and Peter Vanderkaay 
 f with Ryan Lochte , Ricky Berens , and David Walters 
 g with Aaron Peirsol , Eric Shanteau and David Walters 
 h short course record with Nick Thoman , Mark Gangloff and Nathan Adrian 
 i short course record with Nathan Adrian , Matt Grevers and Garrett Weber @-@ Gale 
 = Psychedelic rock = 
 Psychedelic rock is a style of rock music that is inspired or influenced by psychedelic culture and attempts to replicate and enhance the mind @-@ altering experiences of psychedelic drugs , most notably LSD . It often uses new recording techniques and effects and sometimes draws on sources such as the ragas and drones of Indian music . 
 It was pioneered by musicians including the Beatles , the Beach Boys , and the Byrds , emerging as a genre during the mid @-@ 1960s among folk rock and blues rock bands in the United Kingdom and United States , such as the 13th Floor Elevators , Grateful Dead , Jefferson Airplane , the Jimi Hendrix Experience , Cream , The Doors and Pink Floyd . It reached a peak in between 1967 and 1969 with the Summer of Love and Woodstock Rock Festival , respectively , becoming an international musical movement and associated with a widespread counterculture , before beginning a decline as changing attitudes , the loss of some key individuals and a back @-@ to @-@ basics movement , led surviving performers to move into new musical areas . 
 The terms " psychedelic rock " and " acid rock " are often deployed interchangeably , but " acid rock " sometimes refers to the more extreme ends of the genre . Psychedelic rock influenced the creation of psychedelic soul and bridged the transition from early <unk> and folk music @-@ based rock to progressive rock , glam rock , hard rock and as a result influenced the development of subgenres such as heavy metal . Since the late 1970s it has been revived in various forms of neo @-@ psychedelia . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 As a musical style , psychedelic rock attempted to replicate the effects of and enhance the mind @-@ altering experiences of hallucinogenic drugs , incorporating new electronic sound effects and recording effects , extended solos , and improvisation , and it was particularly influenced by Eastern mysticism , reflected in use of exotic instrumentation , particularly from Indian music or the incorporation of elements of Eastern music . Major features include : 
 electric guitars , often used with feedback , wah wah and fuzzbox effects units ; 
 elaborate studio effects , such as backwards tapes , panning , phasing , long delay loops , and extreme reverb ; 
 non @-@ Western instruments , specifically those originally used in Indian classical music such as the sitar and tabla ; 
 a strong keyboard presence , especially electric organs , harpsichords , or the Mellotron ( an early tape @-@ driven ' sampler ' ) ; 
 extended instrumental solos , especially guitar solos , or jams ; 
 complex song structures , key and time signature changes , modal melodies and drones ; 
 electronic instruments such as synthesizers and the theremin ; 
 lyrics that made direct or indirect reference to hallucinogenic drugs , as in Jefferson Airplane 's " White Rabbit " or Jimi Hendrix 's " Purple Haze " ; 
 surreal , whimsical , <unk> or literary @-@ inspired , lyrics . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The term " psychedelic " was first coined in 1956 by psychiatrist Humphry Osmond as an alternative descriptor for hallucinogenic drugs in the context of psychedelic psychotherapy . As the countercultural scene developed in San Francisco , the terms acid rock and psychedelic rock were used in 1966 to describe the new drug @-@ influenced music and were being widely used by 1967 . The terms psychedelic rock and acid rock are often used interchangeably , but some commentators have distinguished the former , which generally evoked the effects of psychedelic drugs , and acid rock , which can be seen as a more extreme variation that was heavier , louder , relied on long jams , focused more directly on LSD , and made greater use of distortion . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 From the second half of the 1950s , Beat Generation writers like William Burroughs , Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg wrote about and took drugs , including cannabis and Benzedrine , raising awareness and helping to popularise their use . In the same period Lysergic acid diethylamide , better known as LSD , or " acid " ( at the time a legal drug ) , began to be used in the US and UK as an experimental treatment , initially promoted as a potential cure for mental illness . 
 In the early 1960s the use of LSD and other hallucinogens was advocated by proponents of the new " consciousness expansion " , such as Timothy Leary , Alan Watts , Aldous Huxley and Arthur Koestler , their writings profoundly influenced the thinking of the new generation of youth . The sensory effects of LSD may include hallucinations of colored patterns , crawling geometric patterns , after image @-@ like trails of moving objects ( " tracers " ) , <unk> and auditory effects such as an echo @-@ like distortion of sounds and a general intensification of the experience of music . 
 By the mid @-@ 1960s , the psychedelic life @-@ style had already developed in California , and an entire subculture developed . This was particularly true in San Francisco , due in part to the first major underground LSD factory , established there by Owsley Stanley . There was also an emerging music scene of folk clubs , coffee houses and independent radio stations catering to a population of students at nearby Berkeley , and to free thinkers that had gravitated to the city . From 1964 , the Merry Pranksters , a loose group that developed around novelist Ken Kesey , sponsored the Acid Tests , a series of events based around the taking of LSD ( supplied by Stanley ) , accompanied by light shows , film projection and discordant , improvised music known as the psychedelic symphony . The Pranksters helped popularize LSD use through their road trips across America in a psychedelically @-@ decorated school bus , which involved distributing the drug and meeting with major figures of the beat movement , and through publications about their activities such as Tom Wolfe 's The Electric Kool @-@ Aid Acid Test ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = = Precursors = = = = 
 Music critic Richie Unterberger states : " Trying to pin down the first psychedelic record is nearly as elusive as trying to name the first rock & roll record . Far @-@ fetched claims have been advanced for songs running from the Tornados ' futuristic 1962 number one instrumental ' Telstar ' to the Dave Clark Five 's massively reverb @-@ laden ' Any Way You Want It ' . " There had long been a culture of drug use among jazz and blues musicians , and , in the early 1960s , use of drugs ( including cannabis , peyote , mescaline and LSD ) had begun to grow among folk and rock musicians , who also began to include drug references in their songs . The first mention of LSD on a rock record was the Gamblers ' 1960 surf instrumental " LSD 25 " . New York folk musician Peter <unk> claimed to be the first to use the word " psychedelic " in a song lyric ( The Holy Modal Rounders ' version of " Hesitation Blues " , 1963 ) . 
 In terms of bridging the relationship between music and hallucinogens , the Beatles and the Beach Boys were the most pivotal . In 1965 , the Beach Boys ' leader Brian Wilson started experimenting with song composition while under the influence of psychedelic drugs , and after being introduced to cannabis by Bob Dylan , members of the Beatles also began using LSD . The phenomenal success of these two bands allowed them the means to experiment with new technology over entire albums . The Beatles introduced guitar feedback with " I Feel Fine " ( 1964 ) and incorporated drug @-@ inspired drone on " Ticket to Ride " ( 1965 ) . The Kinks and the Yardbirds also incorporated droning guitars to mimic the qualities of the sitar , but the Beatles ' " Norwegian Wood " ( 1965 ) marked the first released recording on which a member of a Western rock group played an Indian instrument . The song is generally credited for sparking a musical craze for the sound of the sitar in the mid @-@ 1960s – a trend which would later be associated with the growth of the essence of psychedelic rock . The Beatles ' May 1966 B @-@ side " Rain " was the first pop recording to include reversed sounds . Drug references began to appear in the Beatles ' songs with " Day Tripper " ( 1965 ) and the Beach Boys ' " Sloop John B " ( March 1966 ) . 
 In Unterberger 's opinion , the Byrds , emerging from the Californian folk scene , were more responsible than the Beatles for " sounding the psychedelic siren " . Drug use and attempts at psychedelic music moved out of acoustic folk @-@ based music towards rock soon after the Byrds " plugged in " to produce a chart topping version of Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " in the summer of 1965 , which became a folk rock standard . In the song 's lyric , the narrator requests : " Take me on a trip upon your magic swirling ship " . A number of Californian @-@ based folk acts followed the Byrds into folk @-@ rock , bringing their psychedelic influences with them , to produce the " San Francisco Sound " . 
 = = = = Local scenes = = = = 
 = = = = = United States = = = = = 
 The San Francisco music scene continued to develop as The Fillmore , the Avalon Ballroom , and The Matrix began booking local rock bands on a nightly basis . The first Trips Festival , sponsored by the Merry Pranksters and held at the <unk> 's Hall in January 1966 , saw The Grateful Dead , and Big Brother and the Holding Company play to an audience of 10 @,@ 000 , giving many their first encounter with both acid rock , with its long instrumentals and unstructured jams , and LSD . 
 A major figure in the expansion of the genre was promoter Bill Graham , whose first rock concert in 1965 was a benefit that included Allen Ginsberg and the then unknown Jefferson Airplane on the bill . He produced shows attracting most of the major psychedelic rock bands and operated The Fillmore . When this proved too small he took over Winterland and then the Fillmore West ( in San Francisco ) and the Fillmore East ( in New York City ) , where the major rock artists , from both the US and the UK , came to play . 
 Although San Francisco was the centre of American psychedelic music scene , many other American cities contributed significantly to the new genre . Los Angeles boasted dozens of important psychedelic bands . New York City produced their share of psychedelic bands , as did the Detroit area , and Chicago ( H. P. Lovecraft ) . Texas ( particularly Austin ) is often cited for its contributions to psychedelic music . 
 = = = = = United Kingdom = = = = = 
 Before 1967 , British media outlets for psychedelic culture were limited to stations like Radio Luxembourg and pirate radio like Radio London , particularly the programmes hosted by DJ John Peel . The growth of underground culture was facilitated by the emergence of alternative weekly publications like IT ( International Times ) and OZ magazine which featured psychedelic and progressive music together with the counterculture lifestyle , which involved long hair , and the wearing of wild shirts from shops like Mr Fish , Granny Takes a Trip and old military uniforms from Carnaby Street ( Soho ) and Kings Road ( Chelsea ) boutiques . 
 Soon psychedelic rock clubs like the UFO Club in Tottenham Court Road , Middle Earth Club in Covent Garden , The Roundhouse in Chalk Farm , the Country Club ( Swiss Cottage ) and the Art Lab ( also in Covent Garden ) were drawing capacity audiences with psychedelic rock and ground @-@ breaking liquid light shows . A major figure in the development of British psychedelia was the American promoter and record producer Joe Boyd , who moved to London in 1966 . He co @-@ founded venues including the UFO Club , produced Pink Floyd 's first single , " Arnold Layne " ( 1967 ) , and went on to manage folk and folk rock acts including Nick Drake , the Incredible String Band and Fairport Convention . 
 British psychedelic rock , like its American counterpart , had roots in the folk scene . Blues , drugs , jazz and eastern influences had featured since 1964 in the work of Davy Graham and Bert Jansch . However , the largest strand was a series of bands that emerged from 1966 from the British blues scene , but influenced by folk , jazz and psychedelia , including Pink Floyd , Traffic , Soft Machine , Cream , and the Jimi Hendrix Experience ( led by an American , but initially produced and managed in Britain by Chas Chandler of the Animals ) . 
 = = = 1966 : Beginnings = = = 
 Author Jim DeRogatis says the birth date of psychedelic ( or acid ) rock is " best listed at 1966 " . In March 1966 , the Byrds moved rapidly away from folk rock with their single " Eight Miles High " , which made use of free jazz and Indian ragas , and the lyrics of which were widely taken to refer to drug use . The result of this directness was limited airplay , and there was a similar reaction when Dylan , who had also electrified to produce his own brand of folk rock , released " Rainy Day Women ♯ 12 & 35 " ( April 1966 ) , with its repeating chorus of " Everybody must get stoned ! " . 
 The Beach Boys ' album Pet Sounds ( May 1966 ) is often considered one of the earliest in the canon of psychedelic rock . It contained many elements that would be incorporated into psychedelia , with its artful experiments , psychedelic lyrics based on emotional longings and self @-@ doubts , elaborate sound effects and new sounds on both conventional and unconventional instruments . Scholar Philip Auslander explains that even though psychedelic music is not normally associated with the Beach Boys , the " odd directions " and experiments in Pet Sounds " put it all on the map . ... basically that sort of opened the door — not for groups to be formed or to start to make music , but certainly to become as visible as say Jefferson Airplane or somebody like that . " According to The <unk> 's Mike <unk> , the album " ignited a psychedelic pop revolution " , inspiring mainstream pop acts to take part in the psychedelic culture . 
 Like Pet Sounds , the Beatles ' album Revolver ( August 1966 ) explored musical soundscapes that could not be replicated on stage , even with the help of an orchestra , and it helped precipitate the psychedelic pop style . That same month , the Texas band 13th Floor Elevators debuted with The Psychedelic Sounds of the 13th Floor Elevators . They were the first group to advertise themselves as psychedelic rock , having done so since the end of 1965 . Psychedelic Sounds was the first album to use " psychedelic " as part of its title . Wondering Sound contributor Rachael Maddux writes that even though Pet Sounds and Psychedelic Sounds are considered early psychedelic rock albums , there are " obvious differences " in their music : " Even the album covers are a study in contrasts . " 
 The first acid ( or psychedelic ) rock single to break into the top 10 in popular music charts was Count Five 's " Psychotic Reaction " ( June 1966 ) . As in most early acid rock music , the song 's most characteristic element was its replacement of the melodic electric guitar with howling feedback and distortion . By the end of the year , the Beatles and the Beach Boys were the only acts to have high @-@ charting psychedelic rock songs . The Beach Boys ' October 1966 single " Good Vibrations " was one of the first pop songs to incorporate psychedelic lyrics and sounds . As psychedelia gained prominence , Beach Boys @-@ style harmonies would be ingrained into the newer psychedelic pop . 
 = = = 1967 – 69 : Peak years = = = 
 Psychedelic rock reached its apogee in the last years of the decade . Key recordings included Jefferson Airplane 's Surrealistic Pillow ( February 1967 ) , the first album to come out of San Francisco during this era , which sold well enough to bring the city 's music scene to the attention of the record industry : from it they took two of the earliest psychedelic hit singles : " White Rabbit " and " Somebody to Love " . The Doors ' first hit single " Light My Fire " ( May 1967 ) , running for over seven minutes , became one of the defining records of the genre , although their follow up album Strange Days ( September 1967 ) only enjoyed moderate success . 
 February 1967 saw the Beatles release the double A @-@ side " Strawberry Fields Forever " and " Penny Lane " , opening a strain of British " pastoral " or " nostalgic " psychedelia , followed by the release of what is often seen as their definitive psychedelic statement in Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( June 1967 ) , including the controversial track " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " . The Small Faces managed to get drug references past the censors with their first single " Here Come the Nice " ( June 1967 ) . Existing " British Invasion " acts now joined the psychedelic revolution , including Eric Burdon ( previously of The Animals ) and The Who , whose The Who Sell Out ( December 1967 ) included psychedelic influenced tracks " I Can See for Miles " and " Armenia City in the Sky " . The Incredible String Band 's The 5000 Spirits or the Layers of the Onion ( July 1967 ) developed their folk music into full blown psychedelia , which would be a major influence on psychedelic rock . 
 In America the Summer of Love of 1967 saw a huge number of young people from across America and the world travel to the Haight @-@ Ashbury district of San Francisco , boosting the population from 15 @,@ 000 to around 100 @,@ 000 . It was prefaced by the Human Be @-@ In event in March and reached its peak at the Monterey Pop Festival in June , the latter helping to make major American stars of Janis Joplin , lead singer of Big Brother and the Holding Company , Jimi Hendrix , and the Who . Santana , led by guitarist Carlos Santana , used Latin rhythms as the basis for their psychedelic music . 
 These trends climaxed in the 1969 Woodstock festival , which saw performances by most of the major psychedelic acts , including Jimi Hendrix , Jefferson Airplane , and the Grateful Dead . Psychedelic rock was glamorized on screen in Easy Rider ( 1969 ) , which used songs including Steppenwolf 's " Born to be Wild " as part of its soundtrack . 
 = = = International expansion = = = 
 The US and UK were the major centres of psychedelic music , but in the late 1960s scenes began to develop across the world , including continental Europe , Australasia , Asia and south and Central America . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 In the later 1960s psychedelic scenes developed in a large number of countries in continental Europe , including the Netherlands with bands like The Outsiders , Denmark where it was pioneered by <unk> , and Germany , where musicians began to fuse music of psychedelia and the electronic avant @-@ garde . 1968 saw the first major German rock festival in Essen , and the foundation of the <unk> Free Arts Lab in Berlin by Hans @-@ Joachim <unk> , and Conrad Schnitzler , which helped bands like Tangerine Dream and Amon <unk> achieve cult status . 
 = = = = Australia and New Zealand = = = = 
 Although only a few singles gained recognition outside the region , the thriving Australian and New Zealand rock scenes that formed in wake of Beatlemania produced a wealth of inventive and original psychedelic pop and rock music . Much of this was strongly influenced by British psychedelia , since many bands included first @-@ generation British ( and European ) immigrants , and bands such as The Twilights , whose members were British immigrants , were able to keep up to date on current musical developments , thanks to regular " care packages " of the latest singles and albums , tapes and cassettes of radio broadcasts , and even the latest Mod fashions , sent to them by family and friends back in the UK . After gaining local success , a number of these groups returned to the UK further their musical careers . The most internationally successful Australian pop @-@ rock band of this period were The Easybeats , formed in Sydney in 1964 by a group of English , Scottish and Dutch immigrants , who scored a string of local hits in Australia and became hugely popular there before travelling to the UK . They recorded their international hit " Friday on My Mind " ( 1966 ) in London and remained there for their forays into psychedelic @-@ tinged pop until they disbanded in 1970 . A similar path was pursued by the Bee Gees , formed in Brisbane , but whose first album Bee Gees ' 1st ( 1967 ) , was recorded in London , and gave them three major hit singles and contained folk , rock and psychedelic elements , heavily influenced by the Beatles . 
 Two bands that formed in Adelaide in the mid @-@ 1960s also figured prominently in Australian psychedelic pop / rock . The Masters Apprentices started out as a gritty R & B band in the style of the early Rolling Stones and the Pretty Things , but they rapidly absorbed the changes in music spearheaded by The Beatles , and during 1967 they released several accomplished psychedelic singles - " Wars or Hands of Time " ( the B @-@ side of their 1966 debut single " <unk> " ) is generally regarded as the first Australian pop single to address the Vietnam War ; their second single " Buried and Dead " ( 1967 ) , showed the unmistakable influence of the nascent " Raga rock " genre , and their third single , the psych @-@ pop classic " Living In A Child 's Dream " , became a major national hit and was voted " Single of the Year " by the readers of the Australian pop magazine Go @-@ Set . The group also performed at one of the first psychedelic " happenings " in Australia , the " Living In A Child 's Dream Ball " , staged on 14 October 1967 at the University of New South Wales in Sydney , which featured a full psychedelic light @-@ show , with liquid slide projections , smoke machines and mirror balls , with the band wheeled to the stage inside a specially @-@ constructed giant die . All the groups ' early singles tracks were penned by rhythm guitarist Mick Bower , who was sadly forced to quit the music scene for health reasons soon after " Living In A Child 's Dream " was released , but after a period of upheaval , the band was able to continue with new members , scoring another Australian psych @-@ pop hit in late 1967 with the classic Brian <unk> song " Elevator Driver " . The Twilights , also formed in Adelaide and likewise became nationwide pop stars in the mid @-@ 1960s before making the trip to London . Here they recorded a series of minor hits , and absorbing the psychedelic scene , before returning home in mid @-@ 1967 , where they performed the entire Sgt Pepper 's album live on stage some weeks before its official release in Australia . This was followed by the release of their psychedelic 1968 concept album Once upon a Twilight . 
 Although The Easybeats were the only Australian band working in the psychedelic style to score a major international hit , many other Australian bands scored local or national hits with singles that were strongly influenced by psychedelic trends . This included the cult Brisbane @-@ based group The Wild Cherries , led by guitarist Lobby <unk> , whose 1967 single " Krome Plated <unk> " / That 's Life " combined influences from R & B , soul and psychedelia , and the single 's driving B @-@ side , " That 's Life " is believed to be the first Australian pop single to employ phasing in its production . The most successful New Zealand band of the period , The La De Das , produced the psychedelic pop concept album The Happy Prince ( 1968 ) , based on the Oscar Wilde children 's classic , but failed to break through in Britain and the wider world . 
 Although British influences were predominant , a number of progressive Sydney @-@ based groups such as Tamam <unk> and Tully produced music that combined influences from Eastern mystical philosophy , avant @-@ garde jazz and American psychedelic groups like The Grateful Dead and Jefferson Airplane . Both bands also regularly collaborated with the experimental Sydney film and light @-@ show collective Ubu , and Tully were also notable for being the first Australian group to buy and use a Moog synthesiser , as well as performing as the house band in the original Australian stage production of Hair , which premiered in Sydney in 1969 . Australian psychedelic music in the late 1960s peaked with the two singles by Melbourne singer Russell Morris . His 1969 solo debut " The Real Thing " ( penned by mid @-@ Sixties pop star Johnny Young ) broke new ground in Australian popular music , both for its lavish production by Ian Meldrum and John L. Sayers - it was reputedly the most expensive Australian single ever produced up to that time - and for its running time of almost seven minutes , unprecedented for an Australian pop single . It became a national number one hit in Australia , where it charted for 23 weeks , and also went to number one on local charts in New York , Houston and Chicago . It was followed by " Part Three Into Paper Walls " ( co @-@ written by Young and Morris ) , which was deliberately crafted as a virtual " sequel " to " The Real Thing " , featured similarly dazzling production , was just over seven minutes long , and gave Morris his second consecutive number one hit in Australia . 
 = = = = Asia = = = = 
 A thriving psychedelic music scene in Cambodia , influenced by psychedelic rock and soul broadcast by US forces radio in Vietnam , was pioneered by artists such as Sinn Sisamouth and Ros Sereysothea . In South Korea , Shin Jung @-@ <unk> , often considered the godfather of Korean rock , played psychedelic @-@ influenced music for the American soldiers stationed in the country . Following Shin Jung @-@ <unk> , the band San Ul Lim ( Mountain Echo ) often combined psychedelic rock with a more folk sound . In Turkey , Anatolian rock artist <unk> <unk> blended classic Turkish music and Middle Eastern themes into his psychedelic @-@ driven rock , helping to found the Turkish rock scene with artists such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> and Baris Manco . 
 = = = = Latin America = = = = 
 Latin America proved a particularly fertile ground for psychedelic rock . The Brazilian psychedelic rock group Os Mutantes formed in 1966 , although little known outside Brazil at the time ( due to the fact that they recorded in Portuguese ) , they have since accrued a substantial international cult following . Os Mutantes also played a central role in the short @-@ lived but revolutionary Brazilian aesthetic movement Tropicália , also known as ' Tropicalismo ' ( <unk> ) , an anti @-@ authoritarian artistic reaction to the repressive military junta that seized power in Brazil in 1964 . Encompassing visual art , theatre , poetry and music , Tropicália combined the popular and the avant @-@ garde , and fused traditional Brazilian culture with foreign influences , including contemporary developments in British and American psychedelic music , and above all the music of The Beatles . As well as recording their own material , Os Mutantes collaborated with other key figures in the burgeoning Tropicalist movement , including singer @-@ songwriter Gilberto Gil , whom they backed on Gil 's second LP . 
 The musical manifesto of the Tropicalist movement was the landmark 1968 collaborative LP Tropicália : ou Panis et <unk> ( " <unk> : or Bread and Circuses " ) which brought together the talents of Os Mutantes , Gilberto Gil , Caetano Veloso , Tom Zé and Gal Costa , with arrangements by avant @-@ garde composer @-@ arranger Rogerio Duprat ( who had studied with Pierre Boulez ) and lyrical contributions from poet Torquato Neto . The album 's group cover photograph depicted the collective holding a variety of objects and images , in a deliberate reference to the cover of The Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . The collective also performed a number of concert " happenings " which were intended to both involve and provoke audiences , and these reportedly had a similar effect on Brazilian audiences to that experienced by folk purists who witnessed Bob Dylan 's early " electric " concerts - the performers sported long hair , wore outlandish psychedelic costumes , used electric guitars and amplification , and played at full volume . Brazil 's military junta was becoming increasingly suspicious of the anarchic anti @-@ establishment attitudes of the <unk> , who also found themselves at odds with the nationalistic student left @-@ wing , who favoured traditional Brazilian musical forms , and rejected what they saw as the corrupting influence of Western pop music . 
 In September 1968 Caetano Veloso gave two tumultuous performances at the third annual International Popular Song Festival in Rio , where the audience included a large contingent of left @-@ wing students who were vehemently opposed to the <unk> . When Veloso ( backed by Os Mutantes ) performed in the first round of the Festival 's song competition on 12 September , he was initially greeted with enthusiastic applause , but the situation soon turned ugly . Dressed in a shiny green plastic suit , festooned with wires and necklaces strung with teeth , Veloso provoked the students with his sensual movements and startling new psychedelic music . He was bombarded by insults , jeers and boos from the students , who became even more incensed when American pop singer John Dandurand made a surprise appearance during the song . The ideological conflict climaxed three days later when Veloso returned for the second round of the competition on 15 September , at which he performed a new song entitled " Prohibido a <unk> " ( " It is Forbidden to Forbid " ) , which was recorded live and later released as single . 
 The students began hissing and booing as soon as Veloso 's name was announced , and when he began his performance , his overtly sexual stage moves and the experimental music of Os Mutantes provoked an outpouring of anger - the audience began booing so loudly stood that Veloso could barely be heard , and a large number then stood and turned their backs on the performers , prompting Os Mutantes to turn their backs on the audience . As the song continued , the students pelted the stage with fruit , vegetables , eggs , paper balls and anything else that came hand . Veloso stopped playing and launched into a furious monologue , in which he excoriated the students for their conservatism . After being joined by Gilberto Gil , who came on stage to show his support , Veloso finished his diatribe by telling the students " ... if you are the same in politics as you are in aesthetics , we ’ re done for ! " and declaring he was withdrawing from the competition . He then deliberately finished the song out of tune , angrily shouted " Enough ! " and walked off arm @-@ in @-@ arm with Gil and Os Mutantes . 
 Tropicália had a major effect on the Brazilian music scene during its brief heyday ( 1967 – 68 ) , and the main performers made regular appearances on Brazilian stage , television and radio , but the movement was abruptly shut down in early 1969 , following a provocative December 1968 TV performance which parodied the Brazilian national anthem . Gil and Veloso were both arrested in February 1969 on the orders of the military junta - they were held in prison for three months without charge or trial , and after a further four months under house arrest , they were released on condition that they leave the country , and they spent the next few years in exile in the UK . Others in the Tropicalist movement were treated even more harshly - several were arrested and tortured , or forced to undergo psychiatric ' treatment ' . 
 In the late 1960s , a wave of Mexican rock , heavily influenced by psychedelia and funk emerged , especially in northern border Mexican states , in particular , Tijuana , Baja California . Among the most recognized bands from this " Chicano Wave " ( Onda Chicana in Spanish ) were Three Souls in my Mind , Love Army , El Ritual and Los Dug Dug 's . In Chile from 1967 to 1973 , between the ending of the government of President Frei Montalva and the government of President Allende , a cultural movement was born from a few Chilean bands that emerged playing a unique fusion of folkloric music with heavy psychedelic influences . The 1967 release of Los Mac 's album Kaleidoscope Men ( 1967 ) inspired bands such as Los <unk> and Los <unk> , the latter going on to collaborate with the iconic Chilean singer @-@ songwriter Victor Jara on his 1971 album El derecho de vivir en <unk> . Meanwhile , in the Argentinian capital Buenos Aires , a burgeoning psychedelic scene gave birth to three of the most important bands in Argentine rock : Los Gatos , Manal and <unk> . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 By the end of the 1960s , psychedelic rock was in retreat . LSD had been made illegal in the US and UK in 1966 . In 1969 , the murders of Sharon Tate and Leno and Rosemary LaBianca by Charles Manson and his " family " of followers , claiming to have been inspired by Beatles ' songs such as " Helter Skelter " , has been seen as contributing to an anti @-@ hippie backlash . At the end of the same year , the Altamont Free Concert in California , headlined by the Rolling Stones , became notorious for the fatal stabbing of black teenager Meredith Hunter by Hells Angel security guards . Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys ( whose much anticipated Smile project would not emerge until 2004 ) , Brian Jones of the Rolling Stones , Peter Green of Fleetwood Mac and Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd were early " acid casualties " , helping to shift the focus of the respective bands of which they had been leading figures . Some groups , such as the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Cream , broke up . Jimi Hendrix died in London in September 1970 , shortly after recording Band of Gypsys ( 1970 ) , Janis Joplin died of a heroin overdose in October 1970 and they were closely followed by Jim Morrison of the Doors , who died in Paris in July 1971 . Many surviving acts moved away from psychedelia into either more back @-@ to @-@ basics " roots rock " , traditional @-@ based , pastoral or whimsical folk , the wider experimentation of progressive rock , or riff @-@ based heavy rock . 
 In 1966 , even while psychedelic rock was becoming dominant , Bob Dylan spearheaded the back @-@ to @-@ basics roots revival when he went to Nashville to record the album Blonde on Blonde . This , and the subsequent more clearly country @-@ influenced albums , John Wesley Harding ( 1967 ) and Nashville Skyline ( 1969 ) , have been seen as creating the genre of country folk . Dylan 's lead was also followed by The Byrds , joined by Gram Parsons to record Sweetheart of the Rodeo ( 1968 ) , helping to define the genre of country rock , which became a particularly popular style in the California music scene of the late 1960s , and was adopted by former folk rock artists including Hearts and Flowers , Poco and New Riders of the Purple Sage . Other acts that followed the back to basics trend in different ways were the Canadian group The Band and the Californian @-@ based Creedence Clearwater Revival . The Grateful Dead also had major successes with the more reflective and stripped back Workingman 's Dead and American Beauty in 1970 . The super @-@ group Crosby , Stills and Nash , formed in 1968 from members of The Byrds , Buffalo Springfield , and The Hollies , were joined by Neil Young for Deja Vu in 1970 , which moved away from many of what had become the " clichés " of psychedelic rock and placed an emphasis on political commentary and vocal harmonies . 
 After the death of their manager Brian Epstein and the unpopular surreal television film , Magical Mystery Tour , the Beatles returned to a raw style with The Beatles ( 1968 ) , Abbey Road ( 1969 ) and Let It Be ( 1970 ) , before their eventual break up . The back to basics trend was also evident in The Rolling Stones ' albums starting from Beggar 's Banquet ( 1968 ) to Exile on Main St. ( 1972 ) . Fairport Convention released Liege and Lief in 1969 , turning away from American @-@ influenced folk rock toward a sound based on traditional British music and founding the subgenre of electric folk , to be followed by bands like Steeleye Span and <unk> . The psychedelic @-@ influenced and whimsical strand of British folk continued into the 1970s with acts including Comus , Mellow Candle , Nick Drake , The Incredible String Band , Forest and Trees and with Syd Barrett 's two solo albums . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Other genres = = = 
 As psychedelia emerged as a mainstream and commercial force , particularly through the Beatles ' Revolver , it began to influence pop music , which incorporated hippie fashions , as well as the sounds of sitars , fuzz guitars , and tape effects . Scottish folk singer Donovan 's transformation to ' electric ' music gave him a series of pop hits , beginning with " Sunshine Superman " , which reached number one in both Britain and the US , to be followed by " Mellow Yellow " ( 1966 ) and " Atlantis " ( 1968 ) . American pop @-@ oriented bands that followed in this vein included the Electric Prunes , the Blues Magoos and the Strawberry Alarm Clock . International acts such as the Bee Gees and the Easybeats were also prominent in the development of psychedelic pop . Psychedelic sounds were also incorporated into the output of early bubblegum pop acts like The Monkees and The Lemon Pipers . 
 Following the lead of Hendrix in rock , psychedelia began to influence African American musicians , particularly the stars of the Motown label . This psychedelic soul was influenced by the civil rights movement , giving it a darker and more political edge than much acid rock . Building on the funk sound of James Brown , it was pioneered from about 1968 by Sly and the Family Stone and The Temptations . Acts that followed them into this territory included the Supremes , The Chambers Brothers , The 5th Dimension , Edwin Starr and the Undisputed Truth . George Clinton 's interdependent Funkadelic and Parliament ensembles and their various spin @-@ offs took the genre to its most extreme lengths making funk almost a religion in the 1970s , producing over forty singles , including three in the US top ten , and three platinum albums . While psychedelic rock began to waver at the end of the 1960s , psychedelic soul continued into the 1970s , peaking in popularity in the early years of the decade , and only disappearing in the late 1970s as tastes began to change . Acts like Earth , Wind and Fire , Kool and the Gang and Ohio Players , who began as psychedelic soul artists , incorporated its sounds into funk music and eventually the disco which partly replaced it . 
 = = = Rock music = = = 
 Many of the British musicians and bands that had embraced psychedelia went on to create progressive rock in the 1970s , including Pink Floyd , Soft Machine and members of Yes . King Crimson 's album In the Court of the Crimson King ( 1969 ) has been seen as an important link between psychedelia and progressive rock . While bands such as Hawkwind maintained an explicitly psychedelic course into the 1970s , most dropped the psychedelic elements in favour of wider experimentation . The incorporation of jazz into the music of bands like Soft Machine and Can also contributed to the development of the jazz rock of bands like Colosseum . As they moved away from their psychedelic roots and placed increasing emphasis on electronic experimentation , German bands like Kraftwerk , Tangerine Dream , Can and Faust developed a distinctive brand of electronic rock , known as kosmische musik , or in the British press as " Kraut rock " . The adoption of electronic synthesisers , pioneered by Popol Vuh from 1970 , together with the work of figures like Brian Eno ( for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music ) , would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock . In Japan , Osamu <unk> 's 1974 psychedelic rock album <unk> utilized electronic equipment such as a synthesizer and drum machine , and one of the record 's contributors was <unk> <unk> , who later started the electronic music band Yellow Magic Orchestra ( as " Yellow Magic Band " ) in 1977 . 
 Psychedelic rock , with its distorted guitar sound , extended solos and adventurous compositions , has been seen as an important bridge between blues @-@ oriented rock and later heavy metal . American bands whose loud , repetitive psychedelic rock emerged as early heavy metal included the Amboy Dukes and Steppenwolf . From England , two former guitarists with the Yardbirds , Jeff Beck and Jimmy Page , moved on to form key acts in the genre , The Jeff Beck Group and Led Zeppelin respectively . Other major pioneers of the genre had begun as blues @-@ based psychedelic bands , including Black Sabbath , Deep Purple , Judas Priest and UFO . Psychedelic music also contributed to the origins of glam rock , with Marc Bolan changing his psychedelic folk duo into rock band T. Rex and becoming the first glam rock star from 1970 . From 1971 David Bowie moved on from his early psychedelic work to develop his Ziggy Stardust persona , incorporating elements of professional make up , mime and performance into his act . 
 = = Neo @-@ psychedelia = = 
 Neo @-@ psychedelia ( or acid punk ) is a diverse subgenre of alternative / indie rock that originated in the 1970s as an outgrowth of the British post @-@ punk scene . Its practitioners drew from the unusual sounds of 1960s psychedelic music , either updating or copying the approaches from that era . Neo @-@ psychedelia may include forays into psychedelic pop , jangly guitar rock , heavily distorted free @-@ form jams , or recording experiments . 
 = King Charles 's Castle = 
 King Charles 's Castle is a ruined artillery fort overlooking New Grimsby harbour on the island of Tresco in the Isles of Scilly . Built between 1548 and 1551 to protect the islands from French attack , it would have held a battery of guns and an accompanying garrison , designed to prevent enemy vessels from entering the harbour . The castle is polygonal in design , constructed from granite stone , with the gun battery at the front , and a dining room , kitchen and living accommodation at the rear . An additional defensive earthwork was constructed around it during the 17th century . The design of the castle is unusual for the period , and is only seen elsewhere in blockhouses along the River Thames . 
 The castle 's design was unsatisfactory , as its guns could not be angled so to fire down into the harbour , and its defences were considered vulnerable to attack . To mitigate this , an additional blockhouse was probably constructed below , closer to the water , but eventually a new fortification , the Star Castle , was built instead on the neighbouring island of St Mary 's , which became the main fort in the Scilly Isles . In the aftermath of the English Civil War , the Scilly Isles were held by the Royalist sympathisers of King Charles I , who gave the castle its current name . The islands were then attacked by a Parliamentary force led by Sir Robert Blake in 1651 , who landed on Tresco but bypassed the fort as he took the island . Its Royalist defenders blew up parts of the castle as they left , and some of its stone appears to have been used to build the newer Cromwell 's Castle by the harbour . 
 Although King Charles 's Castle was being used to house soldiers in 1660 , by the 18th century it was described as ruinous . After 1922 , the castle passed into the guardianship of the Ministry of Works , and archaeological excavations were carried out in 1954 . In the 21st century the site is controlled by English Heritage and is open to visitors . It is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument and a Grade II * listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 King Charles 's Castle was built between 1548 and 1551 to protect the Scilly Isles against French attack . Tensions with France had grown during the reign of Henry VIII and spilled over into war in 1538 . Henry initially responded by fortifying the coasts of England , constructing new artillery forts designed to defend against the longer @-@ range cannons that were becoming common in the 16th century . Henry 's son , the nine @-@ year @-@ old Edward VI , inherited the throne in 1547 , facing renewed war with France . Edward Seymour was made the Lord Protector to the King , and he appointed his brother , Thomas , as England 's Lord Admiral . Thomas inspected the Scilly Isles personally and concluded that they were vulnerable to a French invasion . 
 As a result of the inspection , Sir Francis Flemming , the Lieutenant @-@ General of the Ordnance , was tasked in February 1558 with improving the defences on the islands . Flemming was supported in this effort with a shipment of lead to aid in construction , and money raised from the dissolution of the monasteries in England . The building work initially focused on the island of Tresco and was carried out under the direction of John Killigrew , the captain of Pendennis Castle in Falmouth . Tresco was in need of modern defences , but Killigrew also wanted to use the work programme to increase his political influence on the island . 
 The castle was built as part of this programme of work . It was positioned on the high ground of Castle Down to protect New Grimsby harbour , overlooking the narrow , northern entrance to the harbour . It would have held a battery of guns and an accompanying garrison , designed to prevent enemy vessels from entering the harbour . 
 Edward Seymour fell from power in 1549 , and after his removal a new survey was carried out by Captain William Tyrell , in part to confirm that the new fortifications were suitably located across the islands . Building work across the Scilly Isles continued , expanding to include the neighbouring island of St Mary 's . At least 540 oak trees from South Wales were dispatched to the islands in early 1550 , as the islands lacked suitable sources of timber of their own . Orders were given in 1551 to send bows , arrows and the ingredients required to make gunpowder to the islands , where construction teams were kept at work throughout 1552 . 
 The Old Blockhouse appears to have been completed , but the Crown 's resources had become badly stretched and it was decided at the end of 1552 to curtail further expenditure on the Scilly Isles . Between 1548 and 1552 , a total of £ 3 @,@ 123 had been spent on improving the fortifications on the islands ; a 1579 survey suggested that , with the cost of the garrisons , the project had come to a total of £ 6 @,@ 000 . Edward 's successor , Queen Mary I , intended to establish a garrison of 150 soldiers on the islands , but it is uncertain if these numbers were ever achieved . By 1558 , Killigrew held the title of the " captain in the Castell of Tresco " , referring to King Charles 's Castle . 
 = = = = Weaknesses = = = = 
 It soon became evident that King Charles 's Castle had been built in a poor location . It was 40 metres ( 130 ft ) above sea level and its guns could only fire at enemy ships in the harbour by being angled downwards . Artillery pieces in the 16th century could not fire in this position as the cannonballs would fall out of their muzzles , making the castle much less effective in defending Tresco . By 1554 , a small blockhouse had been built beneath the castle on the future site of Cromwell 's Castle , overlooking the harbour just above the sea level to compensate for this weakness . 
 The concerns over the castle were significant . Francis Godolphin , who at the time was renting Tresco from the Crown , commented at the end of the century that the castle could not defend the island as " it neither <unk> the whole harbour so through the <unk> height thereof can make no good shot so steep downwards " , and also complained about its fortification , " which is worst , is of so weak form as it cannot be defended " . Partially in response to these problems , the new Star Castle was constructed on St Mary 's island between 1593 to 1594 ; a more modern , well @-@ positioned design , Star Castle rapidly became the key defensive site in the Scilly Isles . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The Scilly Isles supported Charles I during the English Civil War , and after a short period in Parliamentary control rebelled in favour of Charles in 1648 . The Royalists on Tresco appeared to have believed that King Charles 's Castle was a critical defensive point on the island and probably built new earthwork defences around the castle to defend it against an attack from the land . It is possible , however , that these defences instead date from around 1627 , and were built by the King 's engineer , Bernard Johnson . During this period the castle was given its current name . 
 Tresco formed a base for Royalist privateers , and Parliament became concerned that the Dutch , then hostile to England , might counter the piracy by occupying the islands , gaining a foothold they could then use against England . In 1651 Parliament sent Sir Robert Blake in charge of a naval task force to retake the islands . 
 Blake arrived at St Helen 's Pool in April 1651 , and set about invading the island of Tresco . Taking the harbour of Old Grimsby in an amphibious assault on 18 April , he then simply bypassed King Charles ' Castle and marched south , using Tresco as a basis for then taking the neighbouring island of St Mary 's . 
 The Royalist commander of the castle , William <unk> , retreated from the castle on 19 April and the defenders blew up part of the site as they left , leaving the remains to the Parliamentary commander Colonel George Fleetwood . Some of the castle 's stonework appears to have been reused in the construction of the new Cromwell 's Castle by the Parliamentarians , just beneath King Charles 's Castle , the new fortification being sited in a much better position to defend the harbour . 
 In 1660 , Charles II was restored to the throne and Edward Sherburne was sent to the Scilly Isles to inspect the defences . He recommended that repairs be carried out to King Charles 's Castle , which was then being used to house soldiers . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The Crown , in the form of the Duchy of Cornwall , leased the islands in 1687 to the Godolphin family , followed by Augustus Smith in 1834 . The antiquary William Borlase was critical of the castle — by then in ruins — during his 1752 visit , describing it as a " work of labour and expense , rather than of skill " , and attributing its abandonment to its poor military utility . The writer John Troutbeck , commenting at the end of the century , took a similar perspective , praising the thickness of the walls , but noting that it was ill @-@ positioned to fire into the harbour , unlike its replacement below . 
 In 1922 , the lease passed to Arthur Dorrien @-@ Smith , who agreed to pass several properties on Tresco , including the castle , into the guardianship of the Ministry of Works . The castle was partially excavated in 1954 , uncovering coins , pottery and a buckle . Parts of the first floor of the battery were reconstructed from the fallen stonework uncovered during the dig . 
 In the 21st century , the blockhouse is controlled by English Heritage , the successor to the Ministry , and open to tourists . It is protected as a scheduled monument and a Grade II * listed building under UK law . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Buildings = = = 
 King Charles 's Castle is a polygonal stone building , composed of a gun battery on one side and living quarters on the other . On the west side , overlooking the sea , is a large room which originally contained the battery , with embrasures for five guns . At some point after its initial construction , the north @-@ east gun embrasure was blocked by the construction of an internal chamber within the gun battery , 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 15 ft ) by 2 @.@ 3 metres ( 7 ft 7 in ) , with the embrasure being opened up to form a window . 
 Behind the battery is a large room , 8 @.@ 8 metres ( 29 ft ) by 6 metres ( 20 ft ) , forming a hall and kitchen , originally for the use of the garrison and containing a fireplace and oven . The room has two bedrooms leading off it , each 2 @.@ 9 metres ( 9 ft 6 in ) square . The north bedroom may have been heated by a small brazier . A guardroom , 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) square , forms the entrance to the building , leading into the hall . 
 The castle is made from dressed and rubble granite , incorporating an underling rocky outcrop into the design in the north @-@ west and south @-@ west corners . In places the walls survive up to 3 @.@ 4 metres ( 11 ft ) high and 1 @.@ 65 metres ( 5 ft 5 in ) thick , but are on average only 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) tall and 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 ft 7 in ) thick . Opinions vary as to how tall the castle was when first built ; it may have been two storeys high throughout , or may only have been that height in the gun battery , with the living accommodation being a single storey construction . The upper storey of the gun battery would have held additional guns . 
 Architecturally , the castle is unusual for this period . Its design appears somewhat backward , particularly in comparison to the nearby fortification of Harry 's Walls , built at the same time as the castle , but which adopted a more contemporary design that employed bastions . Its closest equivalents are the blockhouses built by Henry VIII on the River Thames . 
 = = = Earthworks = = = 
 The castle is surrounded by a rectangular earthwork , probably built in 1627 , and similar to that at Sandsfoot and Pendennis Castles . It stretches away north @-@ east from the castle , with an earth and rubble bank up to 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) high and 8 metres ( 26 ft ) wide , with a bastion and demi @-@ bastion at its corners and a ditch , up to 0 @.@ 4 metres ( 1 ft 4 in ) deep and 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide along the north and east sides . 
 Another line of earthworks survives around 40 metres ( 130 ft ) south @-@ east of these earthworks ; its bank is 0 @.@ 3 metres ( 1 ft 0 in ) high , with a ditch up to 0 @.@ 2 metres ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) deep . It lies just behind the crest of the hill , possibly for concealment , and is defended with bastions and <unk> although it appears not to have been finished . It probably dates from the mid @-@ 16th century , possibly having been built at around the same time as the castle . 
 = Anton Meyer = 
 Anton Meyer is a fictional character from the BBC medical drama Holby City , played by actor George Irving . He appeared in the series from its first episode , broadcast on 12 January 1999 , until series four , episode 46 , broadcast on 20 August 2002 . His role in the show is that of consultant cardiothoracic surgeon and head of the cardiothoracic surgery department at Holby General . Irving had considerable input in creating the character , who was initially envisioned by the series producers as an Iranian surgeon named Hussein . At Irving 's suggestion , Meyer became Hungarian , an emigrant to Britain following the 1956 Hungarian Revolution . Little of the backstory created for Meyer was ever revealed on @-@ screen , as part of a deliberate bid to present the character as enigmatic , allowing viewers to project their own imagination onto him . 
 Meyer is a driven , arrogant surgeon , with high expectations of his colleagues . His major storylines see him operate on his own sister , fear that he may have Motor Neurone Disease , lose his spleen after being shot in a road rage incident , and ultimately depart from Holby for Michigan when the hospital Board make impositions on his autonomy . Irving made the decision to leave the series as he struggled to set the character aside outside of work , which had a negative impact on his personal life . He ruled out the possibility of returning to Holby City in future , preferring his memory of Meyer to remain untarnished . 
 Meyer proved popular with viewers and critics . Following the series launch , he was described by Jaci Steph of the Daily Mail as the series ' " only distinctive character " . Peter Paterson , also of the Daily Mail , deemed Meyer an asset to the show , which he finds " feeble " in Meyer 's absence . Jim Shelley of The Mirror described Meyer as " one of the best characters on television in recent years " . Meyer was particularly well received by female fans , attaining sex @-@ symbol status , described by journalist Lynda Lee @-@ Potter as " the kind of domineering , unsmiling hero who made Mills & Boon heroines swoon . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Meyer 's major storylines include operating on his own sister when she falls ill , despite a long @-@ term enmity with his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Greg . He seeks help from his friend , neurologist Professor Charles Merrick ( Simon Williams ) , when he fears he may have Motor Neurone Disease , but Merrick deduces he has an easily treatable thyroid problem instead . Merrick 's daughter Victoria ( Lisa Faulkner ) works on Meyer 's firm for a period as a Senior house officer ( SHO ) . When she is murdered by the irate father of one of her patients , Meyer becomes involved when he is trapped in a lift with her killer , James Campbell . Campbell overdoses on pills and dies in the lift before Meyer can revive him to face justice . 
 At the beginning of series four , Meyer is shot in a road @-@ rage incident on his way to work . The culprit is later admitted to the hospital as a patient , when he crashes his car after trying to flee following the shooting . He tries to escape from the hospital in fear that the police will discover him , and after three attempts at leaving the hospital , he finally achieves his goal but collapses in the hospital car park and dies . 
 When the parents of Rufus Wooding , a young patient of Meyer 's , suddenly withdraw their consent for a complicated operation , total <unk> @-@ pulmonary connection ( <unk> ) , Meyer discovers that his SHO , Sam Kennedy ( Collette Brown ) , has intervened and persuaded the parents not to go ahead with surgery . Believing that his authority has been undermined , Meyer promptly fires her . Kennedy threatens to go to the press if Meyer is not investigated , so the hospital Board begin an enquiry , during which Meyer is suspended . The investigation is headed by Meyer 's old friend and rival , Tom Campbell @-@ Gore ( Denis Lawson ) . It concluded that Meyer 's clinical skills were exemplary and unquestionable , although the Board , aware that Meyer 's penchant for taking extremely difficult cases has made hospital death rates appear bad , remove Meyer 's discretion to decide when to operate in such cases . This decision angers Meyer , who argues that he performs operations that are in the interests of the patients not league tables . The Board also relieve Meyer of his registrar Alex Adams ( Jeremy Sheffield ) . Meyer resigns to work in Michigan to develop an artificial heart , while Campbell @-@ Gore takes his post at Holby . 
 = = Creation = = 
 Irving was heavily involved in the creation of his character , writing Meyer 's biography before assuming the role . He felt that it was important for him to understand Meyer 's motivation and the reason he is so driven , as the character is presented as a " peacock ogre " who throws scalpels at one of his colleagues in an early episode , and unless Irving could fathom why , his portrayal would be " one step removed " . Meyer was loosely based on the cardiothoracic surgeon Sir <unk> Yacoub . He was originally intended to be of Iranian descent and had the surname Hussein , before the series producers changed their minds and made him central European instead . Irving had developed a Hungarian accent for a film role prior to his involvement with Holby City , and decided that " Meyer was temperamentally Hungarian – gloomy with a bit of Mediterranean liveliness . " It was decided that Meyer had left Hungary following the 1956 uprising , with his parents , who were intellectuals . 
 Although it was decided he has a sister , a wife and a daughter , Meyer 's personal life is rarely mentioned on screen , enabling viewers to perceive him as a strong man onto whom they can " project whatever they want from their own imagination . " Irving believes that modern television drama is populated by characters prone to disclosing everything about themselves , and so feels that having an enigmatic character like Meyer , who behaves in the reserved vein of Humphrey Bogart and Spencer Tracy , makes for a " refreshing change " . He commented that revealing more of Meyer 's personal life would be anticlimatic compared to viewers ' expectations . As preparation for the role , Irving observed coronary artery bypass surgery performed at Papworth and Middlesex Hospital , deeming the experience an " enormous privilege " . He had a " real fascination " with medicine and the human body prior to assuming the role , and considered studying biology at university . Upon receiving the script for the first episode of Holby City , Irving felt immediately connected to Meyer , commenting : " I knew instinctively how he moved , how he spoke , what he felt . I could feel his heartbeat . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Irving concentrated on his own ideas of Meyer 's characterisation when playing him , believing it was important to ignore outside input , as Meyer in turn is unperturbed by others ' opinions of him . Irving describes Meyer as a driven man , determined to only work with colleagues who meet his exacting standards . He feels that Meyer 's " dry sense of humour " and bullying manner are both tools he uses to ensure colleagues meet his standards . Irving believes that Meyer 's manipulative nature actually serves the greater good of the hospital , and despite his perfectionist and purist tendencies , Meyer is actually a great humanist , who holds his staff in the highest regard . 
 Graham Keal of the Birmingham Post observed that Meyer begins the series as a " hate figure " – ferocious , unbending and unsmiling , but is actually more complex a character than that , with " much to admire too . " Peter Paterson of the Daily Mail described Meyer as " an arrogant , sarcastic , demanding tyrant " , a surgeon who " insults his subordinates , terrifies the nurses , and unashamedly puts his social life at least on a level with his hospital duties . " Paterson called Meyer " saturnine and sinister in appearance " , likening him to James Robertson Justice 's Doctor in the House consultant Lancelot Spratt . Shane Donaghey of The People compared Meyer to Hannibal Lecter , describing him as " Part panto villain , part grim reaper , with a bedside manner of a cruel vet " and commenting that he manages his department " with an iron fist veiled in a concrete glove . " The Daily Mail 's Christopher Matthew called Meyer " wonderfully supercilious " , and " one of the great television monsters of our age " , likening Irving 's portrayal to that of a foreign spy in a 1950s British war film . 
 Meyer has a penchant for listening to classical music whilst in theatre , and has a " right @-@ hand @-@ man " in his registrar , Nick Jordan ( Michael French ) , who is presented as Meyer 's " more humane " counterpart . Meyer 's catchphrase is " Walk with me " , an instruction he issues to his staff while , according to The Mirror 's Jim Shelley , " sneer [ ing ] imperiously " and " <unk> [ ing ] around the wards like a Roman emperor , suavely saving lives and damning other doctors with their own inadequacies . " 
 Irving was dismayed by the storyline which saw Meyer shot in a road rage incident , describing filming the scenes as an " unpleasant experiences " , the worst aspect being that Meyer loses his spleen as a result of his injuries . Of the later storyline which sees Meyer investigated by Tom Campbell @-@ Gore on behalf of the hospital Board , Denis Lawson explained : " [ Campbell @-@ Gore ] actually rather fancies Meyer 's job but if he finds against him in the investigation he cannot get the job because it 's a conflict of interest . So he has to play a rather clever game , which he does . " On taking over as head of the cardiothoracic surgery department , he commented : " George is fantastic in the show , but obviously I 'm going to do something very , very different , so I don 't feel that I 'm stepping into his shoes . " 
 After four years in the role , Irving decided to leave Holby City and return to performing in theatre . He stated : " I 've had four great years but I felt the time had come to leave . The show has gone from strength to strength so now seems a good time to go . " Of his decision to leave , Irving explained that , while he enjoyed Meyer 's sureness and confidence , he found it difficult to " switch off " the character outside of work , and had been forced to " put the rest of his life on hold " whilst part of the series , deeming it to be an " intense experience . " He felt that , had he stayed in the series , Meyer could not have remained enigmatic much longer , and believed : " you have to stop when a character 's time is through . " Following Irving 's departure from Holby City , Benji Wilson of the Radio Times questioned whether he would ever consider returning . Irving responded : " I don 't know – my feeling is that Meyer was of his time . He 's the kind of character that belongs at the launch of series like Holby and I think that 's where he should remain . The memory of Meyer is important to me and I want it to stay as it is . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The broadcast of the first episode brought positive comments for Irving and Meyer from television critics . Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail described Meyer as the series ' " only distinctive character " , while Peter Paterson , also of the Daily Mail , deemed Meyer a welcome change to the caring , politically correct and compassionate characters seen in Casualty . In the Birmingham Post , Graham Keal called Irving 's portrayal " a charismatic combination of autocratic arrogance and dry wit " , and noted that the character 's interactions with Nick Jordan " form the programme 's primary double act " . Andrew Billen in the New Statesman called Meyer the most compelling character of the series , while Kathleen Morgan of the Daily Record similarly deemed Meyer the star of the show , writing that Irving : " gave a chilling performance as a man who saves lives simply to boost his ego . " Following the broadcast of the second episode , Daily Mirror critic Charlie Catchpole wrote that Irving gave the best performance in a hospital drama as " a rude , eccentric , conceited , arrogant bully " since Tom Baker in Medics . 
 John Russell of The People disliked the storyline which saw Meyer operate on his own sister , describing it as " something between a carve up and a cock up " , and commenting that he was " so disturbed " he " switched the tripe off " , however fellow People critic Shane Donaghey lauded Meyer as the only reason to watch Holby City . Tony Purnell of The Mirror gave a poor review when Meyer did not appear for several episodes , commenting that the show was in " very poor health " in his absence , and " the sooner he returns , the better . " Purnell praised Meyer 's return two episodes later , however was concerned by his Motor Neurone Disease scare , deeming Meyer " the lifeblood of the series " and writing that Holby City could " ill afford to lose him " . 
 In April 2001 , Paterson again reviewed the character positively , writing that the series is " feeble " in his absence , and that : " when surgeon Meyer is not strutting arrogantly around the hospital , Holby City loses much of its zing and bite . " He deemed Meyer one of the series ' two major assets , alongside Siobhan Redmond as paediatrician Janice Taylor , and criticised the opening episode of series four , in which Meyer is shot in a road rage incident , believing that Meyer was " wasted " in spending " most of a wearisome hour @-@ long show under the knife " . Jim Shelley of The Mirror similarly hoped for Meyer to " get well soon and resuscitate the series . " Shelley selected the character as a runner @-@ up for his 2001 " Man of the Year " award , and upon the character 's exit from Holby City , described him as " a study in arrogance and laconic authority [ ... ] one of the best characters on television in recent years . " 
 Meyer has been particularly well received by female Holby City fans , elevating Irving to sex @-@ symbol status . The Dail Mail 's Lynda Lee @-@ Potter described him as " devastatingly attractive , brusque and autocratic " and " the kind of domineering , unsmiling hero who made Mills & Boon heroines swoon . " Irving felt that this was " fairly predictable in terms of the nature of Meyer – tough and masterful – combined with the aphrodisiac of power , and the life and death aspects of his job . " He commented that he was surprised by the positive reaction to his character , explaining : " He seems to have captured people 's imaginations , but it 's difficult to put your finger on what he has . I think it 's got something to do with being a character who says exactly what he means all the time . He 's got integrity , which I admire anyway , and I expect the audience responds to that . Surgeons seem to like him too . I find that particularly gratifying . He 's got the courage to do what 's right for his work and his patients and not worry about popularity or being liked . " Conversely , Irving noted that after assuming the role , members of the public would sometimes " give a kind of shudder " upon encountering him , associating him with his character . 
 = George Armstrong ( ice hockey ) = 
 George Edward " Chief " Armstrong ( born July 6 , 1930 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey centre who played 21 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Toronto Maple Leafs . He played 1 @,@ 188 NHL games between 1950 and 1971 , all with Toronto and a franchise record , and was the team 's captain for 13 seasons . Armstrong was a member of four Stanley Cup championship teams and played in seven NHL All @-@ Star Games . He scored the final goal of the NHL 's " Original Six " era as Toronto won the 1967 Stanley Cup . 
 Armstrong played both junior and senior hockey in the Toronto Marlboros organization and was a member of the 1950 Allan Cup winning team as senior champions of Canada . He returned to the Marlboros following his playing career and coached the junior team to two Memorial Cup championships . He served as a scout for the Quebec Nordiques , as an assistant general manager of the Maple Leafs and for part of the 1988 – 89 NHL season as Toronto 's head coach . Armstrong was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1975 and the Maple Leafs honoured his uniform number 10 in 1998 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Armstrong was born in 1930 in <unk> , Ontario , to a Scottish Canadian father and part Ojibway mother . He grew up in <unk> , Ontario where his father was a nickel miner . Sport was an important part of Armstrong 's family as his father played soccer and his mother was a canoeist . The younger Armstrong developed a passion for hockey but was a poor skater , which his father believed was a consequence of a case of spinal meningitis George suffered at the age of six . 
 While attending Sudbury High School , Armstrong played on the hockey team with Red McCarthy and Tim Horton . Inspired by a newspaper advertisement offering tryouts with the Copper Cliff Redmen of the Northern Ontario Junior Hockey Association ( <unk> ) , Armstrong convinced Horton and McCarthy to join him in trying out . They made the team and Armstrong began his junior hockey career at age 16 in the 1946 – 47 season . He recorded six goals and five assists in nine games and caught the attention of scouts for the National Hockey League ( NHL ) ' s Toronto Maple Leafs who added him to their protected list . He also played with the Prince Albert Blackhawks for part of that season . Armstrong quit school in grade 11 to focus on his hockey career . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and senior = = = 
 The Maple Leafs placed Armstrong on the Stratford <unk> in the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) junior division for the 1947 – 48 season . He led the league in both assists ( 43 ) and points ( 73 ) , and was named recipient of the Red Tilson Trophy as the OHA 's most valuable player . Promoted to the Toronto Marlboros for the 1948 – 49 season , Armstrong recorded 62 points in 39 games with the junior squad and played in three regular season and ten post @-@ season matches for the senior team . Armstrong remained with the senior Marlboros in 1949 – 50 where he served as captain . He led the OHA senior division with 64 goals , at the time an OHA record , and recorded 115 points in 39 games . He was again named the winner of the Red Tilson Trophy . 
 The Maple Leafs briefly recalled Armstrong during the 1949 – 50 season and he made his NHL debut on December 3 , 1949 . He appeared in two games before returning to the Marlboros . In the 1950 Allan Cup playdowns , he recorded 19 goals and 19 assists in 14 games as the Marlboros won the national senior championship . It was also during the season that he earned his nickname . While visiting the Stoney Reserve in Alberta with the Marlboros , the locals presented Armstrong with a ceremonial headdress and called him " Big Chief Shoot the Puck " owing to his own Native heritage . The nickname was often shortened to " Chief " . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 Upon turning professional in 1950 – 51 , Armstrong was assigned to Toronto 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Pittsburgh Hornets . In 71 games for Pittsburgh , he recorded 15 goals and 48 points . Despite being hampered by hand and wrist injuries suffered in fights , Armstrong was the AHL 's leading goal scorer and stood second in points by mid @-@ season in 1951 – 52 . He was recalled to Toronto during the season and scored his first NHL goal , against goaltender Gerry McNeil of the Montreal Canadiens . It was the first goal ever scored by a player with Native heritage . He finished the season with three goals and three assists in 20 games with Toronto . 
 Though he missed the start of the 1952 – 53 season due to a separated shoulder , Armstrong earned a permanent spot on the Maple Leafs ' roster . He quietly established himself as an important contributor for Toronto by recording 25 points that season , then scoring 32 points the following season and 28 in 1954 – 55 . A 48 @-@ point season in 1955 – 56 was second on the team to Tod Sloan 's 66 . Armstrong then led the Maple Leafs in scoring with 44 points in 1956 – 57 despite missing 14 of his team 's games . He was named to play in the NHL All @-@ Star Game in both seasons . They were the first two of seven he would ultimately play . 
 The Maple Leafs named Armstrong the team 's captain in 1957 – 58 as he succeeded Ted Kennedy and Jim Thomson who served as co @-@ captains the season before . He finished fourth in team scoring with 42 points , then played his third All @-@ Star Game during the 1958 – 59 season . He recorded four assists in the playoffs as the Maple Leafs reached the 1959 Stanley Cup Final , but lost to the Montreal Canadiens . With 51 points in 1959 – 60 , Armstrong finished one behind Bob Pulford for the team lead . Toronto again reached the Stanley Cup Final where they were again eliminated by Montreal . 
 The Maple Leafs finally reached the NHL 's peak two seasons later . Armstrong set a career high with 53 points in the 1961 – 62 regular season , then added 12 points in 12 playoff games for Toronto . He started the play that resulted in the Stanley Cup clinching goal , rushing the puck up ice before passing to Tim Horton , who then passed to goal @-@ scorer Dick Duff that capped off a 2 – 1 victory in the sixth and deciding game of the series against the Chicago Black Hawks . As Maple Leafs captain , Armstrong was presented the trophy by league president Clarence Campbell . It was the first of three consecutive championships for Toronto as the Maple Leafs of 1962 – 1964 became the fourth dynasty in NHL history . Individually , Armstrong scored 21 , 19 and 20 goals over the three seasons and by virtue of the NHL 's All @-@ Star Game format of the time that had the defending champion play the all @-@ stars of the remaining teams , appeared in his fourth , fifth and sixth All @-@ Star Games . Early in the 1963 – 64 season , on December 1 , 1963 , Armstrong scored his 200th career NHL goal . 
 A 37 @-@ point season followed in 1964 – 65 , then 51 points the 1965 – 66 season . By 1966 – 67 , Armstrong led an aging Maple Leafs team that entered the playoffs as an underdog against a dominant Chicago team . The Maple leafs nonetheless eliminated the Black Hawks in six games to set up the 1967 Stanley Cup Final against Montreal . The Canadiens were so confident of victory that a display area for the Stanley Cup had been set up at the Quebec pavilion at Expo 67 prior to the series ' start . The Maple Leafs dashed Montreal 's hopes by winning the championship in six games . Armstrong scored the final goal of the series in a 3 – 1 victory in the deciding contest . It was also the last goal scored in the NHL 's " Original Six " era as the league was set to double in size to 12 teams for the 1967 – 68 season . 
 Armstrong announced his intention to retire as a player following the championship but changed his mind and returned for another season . The Maple Leafs placed him on their protected list for the 1967 Expansion Draft , and he remained with Toronto . He played in his seventh All @-@ Star Game in 1968 and finished the season with 34 points . Retiring following the season before changing his mind became an annual event for Armstrong as he announced his intention to leave the game in five straight years . He remained a consistent scorer for Toronto , recording 27 , 28 and 25 points in his following three seasons . He finally ended his playing career after the 1970 – 71 season to take an office position in the Maple Leafs . 
 = = Coaching and scouting career = = 
 Armstrong was announced as the head coach of his former junior team , the Toronto Marlboros , in July 1972 . Though he had preferred his previous role as a scout to coaching , Armstrong led the Marlboros to Memorial Cup victories on two occasions : in 1973 and 1975 . In 1977 , Armstrong 's name circulated as a possible successor to Maple Leafs coach Red Kelly when the latter was fired by the team . When approached by the organization with the prospect of assuming head coaching duties however , Armstrong rejected the possibility . His decision resulted in animosity from within the organization and subsequently led to his resignation as coach of the Marlboros that season to accept a scouting post with the Quebec Nordiques . 
 Some 10 years later , Armstrong returned to the Maple Leafs organization in the dual capacities of assistant general manager and scout . During the 1988 – 89 season , and after management had fired head coach John Brophy , team owner Harold Ballard was adamant that Armstrong be named Brophy 's replacement . Armstrong agreed to take the position , but increasingly delegated majority of his duties to assistant coach Garry <unk> . The Maple Leafs finished with 17 wins in 47 Armstrong 's games coached . He was replaced by Doug Carpenter the following season and returned to his scouting capacities with the team . Armstrong remains a scout with the Maple Leafs to this day . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 The Toronto Maple Leafs described Armstrong as being a " consistent , durable and hardworking " player throughout his 21 @-@ season career that spanned parts of four decades . A consummate leader , Armstrong was lauded by owner Conn Smythe as " the best captain , as a captain , the Leafs have ever had " . His 713 career points were the second most all @-@ time in Toronto franchise history at the time of his retirement , and As of 2014 remains fifth @-@ best . His 1 @,@ 187 NHL games are the most by any player in Toronto history , and he remains the franchise leader with 417 career assists and 713 points by a right wing . The Maple Leafs named him the co @-@ recipient , with Bob Pulford , of the J. P. Bickell Memorial Award in 1959 . The award is presented to members of the organization who perform with a high standard of excellence . In 1998 , the franchise honoured his uniform number 10 . In 2013 , he ranked was number 14 on Sportsnet 's list of the greatest Maple Leafs . Armstrong was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1975 and the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 2010 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Armstrong resides in Toronto with his wife Betty . The couple have four children : Fred , Betty @-@ Ann , Brian and Lorne . He is the uncle of Dale McCourt , a former first overall draft pick by the Detroit Red Wings in the 1977 NHL Amateur Draft . When given a day with the Stanley Cup in 2005 , Armstrong elected to have a family gathering with it at his son 's home in Vaughan , Ontario . Armstrong was recognized by the NHL for his charitable efforts in 1969 when he was named the inaugural recipient of the Charlie Conacher Humanitarian Award . Proud of his Native heritage , Armstrong often supported programs organized by both Indian and Northern Affairs and non @-@ governmental agencies that aimed to promote positive role models for Native children . 
 Armstrong had a brief film career , appearing as himself in the 1971 film Face @-@ Off , a.k.a. " Winter Comes Early " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Playing career = = = 
 * Stanley Cup champion 
 = = = Coaching career = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Punch @-@ up in Piestany = 
 The Punch @-@ up in Piestany was a bench @-@ clearing brawl between Canada and the Soviet Union , during the final game of the 1987 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Piešťany , Czechoslovakia ( now Slovakia ) , on January 4 , 1987 . The incident resulted in the ejection of both nations , and while the Soviets had already been eliminated from medal contention , the disqualification cost Canada a certain medal – potentially the gold . The brawl is famous for officials having turned off the arena lights in a desperate attempt at ending the 20 @-@ minute melee . Much of the blame was placed on Norwegian referee Hans Rønning , who had been selected for the game based on his perceived neutrality rather than experience . 
 Following the brawl , the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) suspended the players involved for 18 months and the coaches for three years . The players ' suspensions were later reduced to six months on appeal , allowing several players from both teams to return for the 1988 tournament in Moscow . Both nations won medals in 1988 ; Canada won the gold medal while the Soviets won silver . 
 The brawl dramatically raised the profile of the World Junior Hockey Championships in Canada , where it is now one of the top events on the annual sports calendar . The fervent patriotism displayed by Canadian Broadcasting Corporation analyst Don Cherry in the aftermath led to a sharp rise in his own popularity with Canadian fans . Several players in that game went on to play in the National Hockey League , including Brendan Shanahan , Theoren Fleury , Sergei Fedorov , Alexander Mogilny and Vladimir Konstantinov . 
 = = Hockey 's " Cold War " = = 
 Canada and the Soviet Union had engaged in an increasingly intense rivalry since the Soviets first emerged on the international scene by winning the 1954 World Ice Hockey Championships . From 1963 until 1983 , the Soviets captured 17 World Championship titles amidst repeated accusations from Canada that their teams were made up of professionals masquerading as amateurs . The accusations eventually led to Canada boycotting all World Championships and Olympic hockey tournaments between 1970 and 1976 . Finally , the 1972 Summit Series was organized , pitting the Soviet all @-@ stars against Canada 's NHL all @-@ stars . The eight @-@ game series was won by Canada 4 – 3 – 1 as Paul Henderson scored the winning goal late in the deciding contest . The Soviets handily won a second Summit Series against World Hockey Association all @-@ stars in 1974 . The series led to the creation of the Canada Cup , a tournament held five times between 1976 and 1991 . Canada won four titles , losing to the Soviet Union in 1981 . Also from 1976 until 1991 , top Soviet club teams toured the NHL in what became known as the Super Series . 
 The World Junior Championships were formally created in 1977 , and to that point had been dominated by the Soviet Union with seven championships . Until 1982 , Canada sent either their Memorial Cup champion or an all @-@ star team . 1982 was the first time Canada sent a national junior team , under the auspices of Hockey Canada 's Program of Excellence . The Canadians won that tournament , and again in 1985 . 
 The " Cold War " culminated in 1987 with Rendez @-@ vous ' 87 , as the Soviet national team played a two @-@ game series against the NHL all @-@ stars in place of the NHL All @-@ Star Game . The series was split , with the NHL winning the first game 4 – 3 , and the Soviets the second , 5 – 3 . The 1987 Canada Cup followed , and was won by Canada two games to one , with the third game being described as the greatest in hockey history . The winning goal was scored by Mario Lemieux on a pass from Wayne Gretzky . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 In 1987 , the World Junior Hockey Championship was a round robin tournament . The teams with the top three records won the gold , silver and bronze medals . Finland had finished their schedule with a 5 – 1 – 1 record to lead the tournament . Canada entered the game with a 4 – 1 – 1 record , and had already been assured the bronze medal . A victory against the Soviets would have guaranteed Canada the silver , and a victory by more than four goals would have won the gold medal . The Soviet Union , entering the game with a 2 – 3 – 1 record , had already been eliminated from medal contention . The match @-@ up between the two squads was deliberately scheduled to be the final game of the tournament as organizers expected at least one of the teams would be playing for the gold medal . 
 The IIHF assigned Norway 's Hans Rønning as the referee for this game . The assignment was made based on his neutrality despite his inexperience officiating at the international level . Upon hearing of Rønning 's assignment , Canadian representative Dennis McDonald sought out IIHF supervisor of officials , René Fasel , hoping to convince him to select a different referee . Aside from the question of his competence to call a game of this magnitude , the Canadians were concerned about Rønning following an earlier game in the tournament he officiated between Canada and the United States . A wild brawl had broken out during the pre @-@ game warm @-@ ups against the Americans three days earlier . The officials were not on the ice when the melee occurred ; however , Rønning ejected one player from each team at random for starting the brawl . Canadian captain Steve Chiasson was thus barred from the game against the Americans , as well as the following game after being assessed a match penalty . Unable to convince IIHF officials to change the assignment , McDonald was concerned about how the game would be played . Rønning 's inexperience at that level was later identified as a significant cause of the brawl , as several stick infractions by both sides had gone uncalled , causing anger to rise between both teams . 
 Off the opening faceoff , Sergei <unk> elbowed Canadian Dave <unk> , who responded by cross @-@ checking the Soviet player . Neither player was assessed a penalty . Five minutes in , Theoren Fleury scored the opening goal for Canada . In celebrating the goal , Fleury slid across centre ice on his knees acting as if his stick was a machine gun and pretended to " open fire " on the Soviet bench . Canadian Amateur Hockey Association president Murray Costello later called it an " inflammatory act , completely unnecessary , lacking any sort of respect . " The first period continued in similar fashion with both teams repeatedly slashing their opponents and Canada emerging with a 3 – 1 lead . Interviewed by the CBC during the intermission , Fleury described the atmosphere on the ice : " The boys are up for the gold medal . Everybody is so tense . Tempers are flying . It 's really tough out there ... I can 't believe it . It 's so tense . It 's so tense . " 
 Early in the second period , the game was paused for a moment of silence in memory of four Swift Current Broncos players who were killed when their team bus crashed in Saskatchewan five days previous . There was a drop in intensity in the five minutes of play that followed . However , just after the six @-@ minute mark , following a minor scuffle that sent two players from each team to the penalty box , the teams resumed shoving and slashing at each other . Each team also scored a goal , giving Canada a 4 – 2 lead halfway through the game . 
 = = = The brawl = = = 
 The brawl began after a face @-@ off as <unk> collided with Everett <unk> with 6 : 07 left in the second period , resulting in a fight between the two . Soviet player Pavel <unk> also leveled a two @-@ handed slash at Fleury , leading to another fight . The battle quickly escalated into a line brawl involving all skaters on the ice for both teams . Returning from a commercial break , Canadian commentator Don Wittman understated the severity of the fighting by saying " well , we had a real skirmish just moments ago following a face @-@ off . " Evgeny Davydov was the first player from either team to leave his bench to join the melee , prompting all players from both teams to leave their benches . 
 Mike Keane paired off against Valeri <unk> , with the Canadian " fighting like it was for the world title " according to Fleury . In another fight , Vladimir Konstantinov leveled a head @-@ butt that broke Greg Hawgood 's nose ; Brendan Shanahan later described it as " the greatest head @-@ butt I 've ever seen " . Stéphane Roy was pummeled by two Soviet players . The remaining players paired off as the officials attempted to break up the fighting . There were at least a dozen separate fights over the entire ice surface . Unable to control the situation , Rønning and his linesmen eventually left the ice under the orders of Czechoslovakian officials . In a desperate attempt at ending the brawl , tournament officials had the arena lights turned off , leaving the players to fight in the dark as the fans whistled loudly in disapproval of the entire situation . The whole stadium shouted " My <unk> <unk> , my <unk> <unk> " , which translates to " We want hockey , we want hockey " . By the time the fights had finally broken up , the IIHF declared the game null and void . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The IIHF held an emergency meeting in an arena office to decide how to handle the incident . Each team was represented by a delegate , and the meeting was chaired by IIHF President Günther Sabetzki . The delegates voted 7 – 1 in favour of ejecting both teams from the tournament , the lone dissenting vote being that of Canada 's Dennis McDonald . McDonald was incensed by the voting : Finland , Czechoslovakia and Sweden all stood to gain medal position by voting the two teams out , the Americans only promised support if other nations supported Canada , and Sabetzki could barely control his disdain for the Canadians . 
 After voting to eject the two teams , officials banned the Soviet team from the tournament banquet and medal ceremony , but they still invited Canada . McDonald stated the Canadians were not interested , which Sabetzki and Czechoslovak officials responded to by ordering the Canadian team out of the arena within half an hour . They were met by armed soldiers who escorted them across the border and out of Czechoslovakia . The IIHF voided the standing of both teams , including individual statistics . In the words of McDonald , " it was like we were never here . " However , the other teams kept the points they gained in the matches against both teams . 
 Both teams attempted to blame the other for allowing the violence to get out of hand . Soviet official Anatoly <unk> blamed a Canadian trainer for igniting hostilities by running over to the Soviet bench and punching one of their assistant coaches in the stomach . The Canadians , meanwhile , pointed to Davydov being the first off the bench as being the spark that led to the brawl . CBC commentator Don Cherry was one of the first to float a conspiracy theory that the Soviets had done so as a deliberate attempt to have Canada ejected , and therefore lose a medal . Alan Eagleson suggested that the IIHF 's decision would have been different had it been the Soviets in contention for a medal , and not the Canadians . 
 The IIHF voted to suspend all players involved from competing in international events for 18 months , and all coaches for three years . The player suspensions were later cut to six months , which allowed eligible players to participate in the 1988 tournament , and Alexander Mogilny to play in the 1988 Winter Olympics . The IIHF also considered either demoting both teams to the B pool or banning them from the 1988 tournament as further punishment , but backed off as the next year 's tournament was set to be held in the Soviet Union , while Canada represented the only media revenue the tournament generated at the time . 
 Among the Canadians , only two players were not suspended : goalie Jimmy Waite and forward Pierre Turgeon . Waite felt he could not risk being ejected for fighting under the belief that the game would resume , and that the Canadian backup goaltender , Shawn Simpson , was injured . Steve Nemeth would later apply for early reinstatement arguing that he was not fighting , but trying to help break the players apart . Many of their teammates never forgave Turgeon for failing to defend his teammates . In the words of Everett <unk> : " I 'm looking for someone to help ( Stéphane ) Roy out and I look over at the bench . There 's this dog Turgeon , just sitting there , with his head down . He wouldn 't get his ass off the bench ... just sitting there when everyone 's off the Soviet bench and at least one of our guys is in real trouble getting double @-@ teamed . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the 1988 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships in Moscow , Canada and the Soviet Union won the gold and silver medals , respectively , as both teams ' rosters featured several players from the 1987 tournament . Since the 1987 tournament , the two nations have maintained their dominance of the tournament . Canada has won 14 gold medals between 1988 and 2015 , while the Soviet Union , and its successor , Russia , has won six . 
 Hans Rønning 's assignment to officiate the game was viewed by other on @-@ ice officials as a nod to organizers from Lillehammer , Norway , who had just won the right to host the 1994 Winter Olympics and were observing the game . At age 38 , Rønning expected the 1987 tournament to be among his last international assignments . Rønning never officiated another international game , though he did referee two more seasons in Norway before retiring . 
 In Canada , public sentiment widely supported the players . Opinion polls taken in the aftermath of the brawl saw 87 – 92 % of respondents supporting their actions . Don Cherry 's passionate defence of the Canadian team led to a sharp increase in his popularity . Toronto Maple Leafs owner Harold Ballard had special gold medals made up for the Canadian team . Ballard stated that " I believe the Canadian boys deserve the gold medal and I 'm going to see to it that they get them . Imagine how these Russians engineered this whole thing over there just because they 've got a lousy team and were scared to go home finishing in sixth place . " 
 Canadian hockey officials criticized the players for the brawl . In 2005 , the suggestion of a reunion for the 1987 team was met with uncomfortable silence and " I don 't think so " from Hockey Canada officials . Immediately following the tournament , Canadian officials were seen as trying to distance themselves from the team : " The CAHA ( Canadian Amateur Hockey Association ) didn 't do anything for these kids " , reporter Jim <unk> said . " These kids were good enough to make this team . They gave up their holidays , did their best , risked getting hurt and ended up on the wrong end of a bad decision - and the CAHA basically handed them their tickets . " Winnipeg Jets assistant general manager Mike Smith was in the Vienna airport while the Canadian juniors were waiting for their flight , and took the opportunity to criticize them for their play at the tournament as well as the brawl . 
 Before Piešťany , the junior tournament had a small following in Canada . Only one Canadian reporter flew overseas to cover the 1987 tournament . That changed in 1988 , as the major Canadian media outlets all sent reporters to Moscow . The tournament 's prestige in Canada continued to grow . By the 2005 tournament , over 100 Canadian reporters covered the tournament in Grand Forks , North Dakota . 
 The brawl was seen as an embarrassment by Soviet officials who prided themselves on the discipline of their teams . A senior official , Anatoly <unk> , said that the " ice hockey department and the Ice Hockey Federation of the USSR will soon analyze the Soviet team 's performance at the championship , and those guilty of the incident will be strictly punished " . The Soviet media agency , Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union , was highly critical of the coaching staff 's inability to control the players . Head coach Vladimir Vasiliev was fired as the coach of the Soviet national junior team as a result of Piešťany . 
 = = Players = = 
 Of the 20 players who dressed for Canada in that game , 19 went on to play in the National Hockey League . ( Shawn Simpson was drafted by the Capitals , and dressed for two games for them , but ultimately only played for their associate team . ) In 1987 , only one Soviet had ever played in the NHL , Victor <unk> . The players for this Soviet team would be among the first wave of Eastern Bloc players to arrive in the NHL with the fall of the Iron Curtain . Five of them would ultimately win the Stanley Cup . 
 = Humphrey Stafford , 1st Earl of Devon = 
 Humphrey Stafford , 1st Earl of Devon ( ca . 1439 – 17 August 1469 ) was a dominant magnate in south @-@ western England in the mid @-@ 15th century , and a participant in the Wars of the Roses . A distant relative of the earls of Stafford , Humphrey Stafford became the greatest landowner in the county of Dorset through fortunes of inheritance . Later , Stafford was one of several men promoted rapidly through the nobility by King Edward IV , to fill the power vacuum left by dead or forfeit Lancastrians . In the West Country it was particularly the forfeitures of the Lancastrian Courtenay family that benefited Stafford . In 1469 he received the Courtenay title of earl of Devon . 
 Stafford held the comital title for only three months . In July he was sent north to quell a rebellion instigated by the discontented Earl of Warwick . Even though he escaped the disastrous Battle of Edgecote , he was executed by a mob at Bridgwater on 17 August 1469 . Considered an overambitious man by many , Stafford was nevertheless a capable administrator , who enjoyed the absolute confidence of the king . 
 = = Family background = = 
 The Staffords of Hooke in Dorset and Southwick in Wiltshire were a cadet branch of the earls of Stafford and later dukes of Buckingham . Humphrey 's grandfather was another Humphrey Stafford , called Sir Humphrey " of the silver hand " ( d . 1442 ) . His heir was a grandson – yet another Humphrey Stafford – who died childless in 1461 . This left Humphrey Stafford , the future Earl of Devon , heir to the family lands , the greatest part of which was in Dorset and the rest mostly in Somerset and Wiltshire . Humphrey 's father , William , was already dead by this time , having fallen victim to Cade 's rebellion on 18 June 1450 . William 's uncle , and Humphrey 's great uncle , was John Stafford , Archbishop of Canterbury ( 1443 – 1452 ) . 
 The inheritance of these family lands made Stafford the greatest landowner in the county of Dorset . Through his mother Katherine , he was also heir to the possessions of her father John <unk> , another major south @-@ western landowner . At some point – definitely after 21 June 1450 – he married Isabel , daughter of Sir John Barre of Herefordshire . 
 = = Service to the House of York = = 
 In the late 1450s , Stafford might have been in the service of his distant relative John Stafford , Earl of Wiltshire , son of Humphrey Stafford , Duke of Buckingham . His association with James Touchet , Baron Audley – one of Wiltshire 's men – implies so . If so , this represent a short episode of loyalty to the House of Lancaster over the House of York in the ongoing civil war . In 1460 the two were sent to Guînes to relieve the English garrison there . Bad weather forced them into the harbour of Calais , which was held by the Yorkist leader Richard Neville , Earl of Warwick . Here they were both recruited for the Yorkist cause . 
 Stafford took part in the Battle of Mortimer 's Cross , where the Yorkist forces under Edward , Earl of March , won a major victory on 2 February 1461 . After the Battle of Towton on 29 March that year , Stafford was knighted by Edward , who had by now been pronounced King Edward IV after the deposition of Henry VI . Later that same year , on 26 July , he received a summons to Parliament for the first time , as Lord Stafford of Southwick . Over the course of the following years , the king granted him numerous lands and offices . In 1461 he was appointed steward of the Duchy of Cornwall and constable of Bristol , and in 1462 he received the greater part of the Devon estates of Thomas Courtenay , Earl of Devon , who had been captured at Towton and executed . In 1464 he was made keeper of Dartmoor , and in 1467 he was granted more of the Courtenay manors . 
 Stafford repaid the king 's generosity by serving him faithfully as a local commissioner , in a part of the country that had up until that point been fiercely Lancastrian . Throughout the 1460s he presided at Quarter Sessions and other courts all over the West Country . His activities were not limited to legal commissions ; in 1461 – 2 he performed military service against the Scots , and in 1468 he conducted diplomacy with Brittany . In 1469 he was admitted to the Royal Council , and served on the commission that convicted Henry Courtenay , Thomas Courtenay 's brother , for treason . According to the chronicler John Warkworth , Henry 's downfall was due to the machinations of Stafford , who was rewarded with further land and the earldom of Devon on 17 May 1469 . However , the king himself took great interest in the trial against Courtenay , and it is more reasonable to see the decision as a result of Edward 's need for a loyal agent in the region . 
 = = Death and aftermath = = 
 Stafford 's quick rise did not go unnoticed among the established aristocracy . In 1468 , the discontented Warwick named the Earl of Devon as a courtier with undue influence on King Edward . Warwick and Devon were later reconciled , but the next year Warwick repeated his accusations once more . In an act of rebellion by proxy , Warwick instigated an insurrection in Yorkshire led by a " Robin of Redesdale " . At the same time Warwick – together with George , Duke of Clarence , King Edward 's brother – staged an invasion of the country from Warwick 's stronghold of Calais . Devon , together with William Herbert , Earl of Pembroke , was ordered to gather troops to quell the rebellion . 
 The royal army under Devon and Pembroke intercepted the northern rebels – on their way south to meet up with Warwick and Clarence – by Banbury in Oxfordshire . It is not clear what happened after this . According to Warkworth , Devon and Pembroke quarrelled over billeting arrangements , and Devon took off with the majority of the archers . The next day , on 26 July 1469 , Pembroke met the rebels at the Battle of Edgecote , but without artillery support he was thoroughly defeated . When Devon finally arrived , he was either unable to engage his troops , or too late to make a difference . The French chronicler Jean de Waurin , however , gives a different account . According to Waurin , Devon left the field of battle once he heard news that Clarence was arriving with reinforcements . In either case , Pembroke was captured and executed on Warwick 's order . Devon managed to escape , but was later captured by a mob at Bridgwater in Somerset , and executed on 17 August . 
 Humphrey Stafford had been Earl of Devon for exactly three months at the time of his death . He and Isabel had no children , so when he died his title became extinct . It was restored the next year for John Courtenay , the brother of Thomas , the last Courtenay earl of Devon . Stafford was buried in Glastonbury Abbey , and a dispute over his lands followed between his cousins . 
 Stafford was considered over @-@ ambitious and unscrupulous by many contemporaries . This can be seen both by Warkworth implicating him in the downfall of Henry Courtenay , and Warwick targeting him as one of King Edward 's evil councillors . This thread has also been picked up by modern historians ; Charles Ross calls him a " greedy and ambitious man " . At the same time , his skills as an administrator can hardly be doubted , as evidenced by King Edward 's heavy reliance on him . He could also show a more human and sympathetic side . Michael Hicks describes his activity , from 1467 onwards , in adding codicils to his will " to right the wrongs that he was conscious of committing " – the last of these he added as he faced his own execution . 
 = The C Word = 
 " The C Word " is the fourteenth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by series creator Tina Fey and directed by Adam Bernstein . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on February 15 , 2007 . Guest stars in this episode include Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Rachel Dratch , John Lutz , Keith Powell , Lonny Ross , Rip Torn , and Charlyne Yi . 
 In the episode , after being criticized for her working habits by her co @-@ workers , head writer Liz Lemon ( Fey ) decides to be more lenient with her writing staff . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) brings Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to a major golf event to get closer to Don Geiss ( Torn ) , the CEO of General Electric ( GE ) , but his plan backfires when Tracy decides to drop " truth bombs " . 
 " The C Word " has received generally positive reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 0 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 6 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming for General Electric ( GE ) , invites Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) to a GE diabetes charity golf event . Jack hopes that bringing Tracy along can help him get close to GE CEO Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) . At the event , Tracy becomes the hit of the party , but quickly begins to feel that the reason he was brought along was to be " the funny black man " . Tracy insults Geiss by accusing him of not hiring more black people , which results in Tracy and Jack not being invited to golf along with Geiss . Jack blames Tracy for this , but Tracy doesn 't care , as he tells Jack that he cannot help but drop " truth bombs " . Later , to make amends with both Jack and Geiss , Tracy gives a heartfelt speech about his daughter battling diabetes , which moves Geiss . This results in Geiss inviting Jack , Tracy , and Tracy 's daughter to the Vineyard . Tracy admits to Jack that he does not have a daughter , which prompts Jack to say , " Let 's have a casting session on Monday . " 
 Meanwhile , at the 30 Rock studios , TGS with Tracy Jordan head writer Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) and her writing staff are discussing potential topics to use in the show . J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) suggests one of his sketches , " Dancing with the <unk> " , which Liz criticizes , thus embarrassing him in front of everyone . Later , Liz talks to Greta Johansen ( Rachel Dratch ) , the show 's cat wrangler . At the same time , she overhears Lutz calling her the C word . Outraged by this , Liz tells Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) and Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) about what Lutz called her and wants to fire him . Frank reveals that Lutz 's poor behavior is due to the passing of his grandmother . After it 's pointed out that she has been a terrible boss to the staff , Liz begins acting nice , but this backfires when they take advantage of her . Angered by this , Liz confronts the writers about their actions , and tells Lutz she knows what he called her . Liz warns all of them that if they call her that " horrible word " she will fire them . 
 At the same time , Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) struggles with his feelings for another page , Grace Park ( Charlyne Yi ) who demonstrates affection for him . Kenneth explains to Pete that he is afraid of " disgracing the peacock " by becoming romantically involved with her . Throughout the episode , it is shown to be sexually awkward for the two of them during their job , though towards the end , Kenneth confronts her with his feelings about her . Their kiss is interrupted by Kenneth 's work , which allows him to abruptly forget about her . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The C Word " was written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , making it her seventh writing credit after the pilot episode , " The Aftermath " , " Tracy Does Conan " , " The Head and the Hair " , " Black Tie " , and " Up All Night " . The episode was directed by supervising producer Adam Bernstein , making it his fifth for the series . " The C Word " originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 15 , 2007 , as the fourteenth episode of the show 's first season . 
 In an April 2007 interview with Entertainment Weekly , Fey revealed that she was once called " the c word " by one of her writers . In discussion of this , she said , " That C @-@ word thing actually did happen . I was furious , and I had this weird reaction where I kept saying , ' You can 't say that ! My parents love me ! ' " In another interview , she was asked whether the c @-@ word was based on experience , to which she said , " It was a little bit . It was a little bit based on the experience of having someone call you that and not knowing how to deal with it . " . In December 2015 Fey revealed that the writer who called her " the c word " was Colin Quinn . 
 Comedian actress Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) alumna of Fey , the latter who was the head writer on SNL from 1999 until 2006 , was originally cast to portray the character Jenna Maroney . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , actress Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In the pilot , " The Baby Show " , and in this episode , she played Greta Johansen , The Girlie Show 's cat wrangler . " The C Word " was actor Rip Torn 's debut as GE CEO Don Geiss . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The C Word " was watched by 5 @.@ 0 million households , according to the Nielsen ratings system . It earned a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 6 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Up All Night " , which was watched by 5 @.@ 2 million American viewers . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning , wrote , " Even in an episode like ' The ' C ' Word , ' where some of the ideas fall a bit short , there were still plenty of laugh @-@ out @-@ loud moments to talk about . [ ... ] In the end , the great writing outweighed the slightly bothersome contrivances to make this yet another laugh @-@ filled episode of 30 Rock . " He said that the pairing of Jack and Tracy " gave us another opportunity to enjoy the pairing of the polar opposite personalities " . Canning reported that the Liz plot had " its funny moments " , but opined that it was hard to " get past the fact this wasn 't exactly the Liz we knew " , in regards to her being a " domineering boss that cares little about her employees . " Canning gave the episode a 7 @.@ 8 out of 10 rating . Julia Ward of AOL 's TV Squad wrote that putting Alec Baldwin and Rip Torn together " was a genius move . " She was complimentary towards Tina Fey , citing that it was " another great week " in her " continuing portrayal of what being a hard @-@ working gal is actually like . " Ward enjoyed Tracy 's speech , noting that it was " priceless " , and was glad to see him having " ample screen time ... which was a nice change of pace . " TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich wrote he enjoyed all of the episode 's storyline pairings , but much enjoyed Jack and Tracy . Further in his recap , Mitovich reported that Liz 's plot could have been better had the comedy show How I Met Your Mother " not gone there with the C @-@ word " in an episode . Though , he said that Liz 's story " had a fitting message – that she is held to a different standard , yet shouldn 't be , as a female head writer . Plus , her story gave us that winning flurry of flashbacks to times when she was a ... not very nice lady . " 
 = Michael Grabner = 
 Michael @-@ René Grabner ( born 5 October 1987 ) is an Austrian professional ice hockey player for the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Grabner grew up playing for the local team in Villach , EC VSV . He moved to North America at the age of 17 and joined the Spokane Chiefs of the major junior Western Hockey League ( WHL ) to further his hockey career . After his second season with the Chiefs , he was selected 14th overall by the Vancouver Canucks in the 2006 NHL Entry Draft . Grabner played one more season in the WHL before moving to the American Hockey League ( AHL ) , where he played two seasons in the Canucks ' farm system . He was traded during the 2010 NHL Entry Draft to the Florida Panthers , but was claimed by the New York Islanders after Florida placed him on waivers with the intention of assigning him to their AHL affiliate . Grabner spent five seasons with the Islanders before being traded to the Maple Leafs in 2015 . Internationally Grabner has appeared for Austria in both junior and senior tournaments , and played in the 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Villach , Grabner began playing hockey at the age of five . He joined his EC VSV 's junior team , scoring 10 points over 13 games in 2002 – 03 . The following year , he improved to 32 goals and five assists over 23 games , while also debuting with EC VSV 's men 's team in the Austrian Hockey League . In the subsequent off @-@ season , he was selected 22nd overall by the Spokane Chiefs in the Canadian Hockey League ( CHL ) Import Draft . Grabner believed that playing major junior in North America would help his goal of making it to the NHL . He had been exposed to Chiefs general manager Tim <unk> through a connection with his head coach in EC VSV , Greg Holst . 
 Grabner left Austria to join Spokane for the 2004 – 05 WHL season , but suffered a broken collarbone in his first exhibition game . He missed approximately a month with the injury and scored his first WHL goal on 29 October 2004 , in a 4 – 2 loss against the Seattle Thunderbirds . He went on to record 13 goals and 24 points in his rookie season . 
 The following season , he improved to 36 goals and 50 points . Playing in his NHL draft year , he competed in the CHL Top Prospects Game and scored a goals and two assists . Shortly thereafter , he notched his first WHL career hat trick on 4 February 2007 , in a 7 – 5 win against the Tri @-@ City Americans . Grabner 's draft stock went up significantly in the second half of the season , as he scored 22 goals in the final 23 games of 2005 – 06 . 
 He entered the 2006 NHL Entry Draft having been ranked 23rd overall among prospects playing in North America by the NHL Central Scouting Bureau . He was chosen 14th overall by the Vancouver Canucks . Grabner was admittedly surprised to be chosen in that position of the draft , as he was projected to be a late first @-@ round to early second @-@ round pick . He had been scouted as highly skilled offensively with his speed and his shot his strengths . 
 He participated in his first NHL training camp in 2006 , before being returned to the Chiefs for the 2006 – 07 season . Early in his third WHL season , he suffered a hip pointer after receiving a slash . Due to lingering pain from the injury he was in and out of the lineup for several games before being sidelined for a month in November and early @-@ December . In mid @-@ February , he recorded six goals in a span of three games to be named WHL and CHL Player of the Week ( 12 – 18 February 2007 ) . Grabner with 39 goals and 16 assists in 55 games for a point @-@ per @-@ game pace over the course of the season . However , he was criticized by his coach for his lack of physical play . 
 = = = Manitoba Moose and Vancouver Canucks = = = 
 After the Chiefs were eliminated from the 2007 WHL playoffs , Grabner joined the Canucks ' American Hockey League affiliate , the Manitoba Moose for their final two games of the regular season and the playoffs . Grabner joined the Moose for his first full professional season in 2007 – 08 , recording 44 points in 74 games as a rookie . 
 The following season , on 26 February 2009 , Grabner was recalled by the Canucks to replace Pavol Demitra who suffered a fractured finger the night before . However , later that day , Grabner was reassigned to Manitoba after Demitra was deemed fit to play . He finished his second season with the Moose improving to 30 goals , tied for the team lead with Jason Krog , and 48 points in 66 games , helping the Moose to the league 's best regular season record . After eliminating the Toronto Marlies and Grand Rapids Griffins in the first two rounds of the 2009 playoffs , Grabner scored the series @-@ clinching goal in the sixth game of the semifinals , a 3 – 1 win over the Houston Aeros . Grabner finished with 17 points in 20 games as the Moose finished as Calder Cup runners @-@ up . 
 Coming off a successful second AHL season , Grabner was expected to challenge for a roster spot at the Canucks ' 2009 – 10 training camp , but was sent back down to the Moose before the start of the regular season . After a quick start with the Moose , however , scoring four goals in five games , he was called up by the Canucks on 14 October 2009 , to replace injured star winger Daniel Sedin . Grabner then scored his first NHL goal on 21 October on the powerplay against Antti Niemi in a 3 – 2 win against the Chicago Blackhawks . Nine games into his initial stint with the Canucks , however , he injured himself during a pre @-@ game warmup on 1 November . Grabner was kicking a soccer ball around with teammates before a game against the Colorado Avalanche when he rolled over his ankle . 
 Upon recovering , he returned to the Moose on 27 December 2009 , until being recalled on 17 March 2010 , following an injury to Canucks forward Mikael Samuelsson . On 2 April , Grabner scored his first NHL career hat trick in a 5 – 4 shootout win against the Anaheim Ducks . Remaining with the club for the 2010 playoffs , Grabner notched his first career NHL post @-@ season goal against Antti Niemi ( the same goaltender he scored his first regular season goal against ) on 1 May 2010 , in the opening game of the second round against the Chicago Blackhawks . 
 = = = New York Islanders = = = 
 On 25 June 2010 , during the 2010 NHL Entry Draft , Grabner was traded , along with Steve Bernier and the Canucks first round choice in the draft , the twenty @-@ fifth selection ( used to select Quinton Howden ) to the Florida Panthers for Keith Ballard and Victor <unk> . Grabner attended the Panthers training camp , where it was expected he would compete for a position on the team , but failed to do so . On 3 October 2010 , it was announced Grabner was placed on waivers by the Panthers , who intended to assign him to their AHL affiliate , the Rochester Americans . However he was claimed by the New York Islanders two days later . 
 He played his first game with the Islanders on 11 October 2010 , against the New York Rangers . His first point with the Islanders came on 13 October . Grabner 's first goal with the Islanders came against Craig Anderson of the Colorado Avalanche on 16 October . In January 2011 Grabner was selected to participate in the 2011 SuperSkills as one of twelve rookies in the competition , winning the fastest skater competition with times of 14 @.@ 061 and 14 @.@ 238 . In February Grabner led all rookies in scoring with 10 goals and 16 points . He also had a six @-@ game goal scoring streak which was the longest rookie streak since the 2006 – 07 season when Evgeni Malkin also scored in six straight . For his efforts Grabner was named rookie of the month . He finished his rookie year with 34 goals and 52 points , his goal total led all rookies , as well as the Islanders . Ranking third in points by a rookie Grabner earned a Calder Memorial Trophy nomination for NHL rookie of the year . Following his successful rookie year the Islanders signed Grabner to a five @-@ year , $ 15 million contract extension on 13 May 2011 , <unk> to start at $ 1M and then increase by another $ 1M each year . 
 On 21 October 2013 , Grabner was suspended for two games for an illegal check to the head of Carolina Hurricanes forward Nathan <unk> . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 On 17 September 2015 , after five seasons with the Islanders , he was traded to Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Taylor Beck , Carter <unk> , Matt Finn , Tom Nilsson , and goaltender Christopher Gibson and made assistant captain of the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 = = = New York Rangers = = = 
 With his freedom from the Maple Leafs obtained , on July 1 , 2016 , Grabner signed as a free agent to a two @-@ year deal with the New York Rangers . 
 = = International play = = 
 Grabner made his international debut with Austria in Division I play of the 2004 IIHF World U18 Championships in Minsk , Belarus . <unk> for the tournament at sixteen @-@ years @-@ old , he scored three goals and an assist in five games . The following year , he competed for Austria in Division I of the 2005 World Junior Championships , held in Great Britain . He recorded three points in four games as Austria finished third in Group A. Several months later , he was named to his second under @-@ 18 team for the 2005 IIHF World U18 Championships , where Austria again competed in Division I play . Grabner tied for second in team @-@ scoring with four goals and an assists over five games . Austria finished in fifth place out of six teams in Group A , coming within a loss of being relegated to Division II for the next year . He joined Austria in their qualifying tournament for the 2010 Winter Olympics in early 2009 and led the four team tournament in scoring with five goals ; Austria finished second to Germany and failed to qualify for the Olympics . 
 It was during the 2012 World Championships that Grabner first played for the Austrian national team . Austria participated in Division IA , the second tier of the World Championships , and earned a promotion to the elite level for 2013 . 
 He also represented Austria in the 2014 Olympic Games in Sochi , where he scored five goals and made one assist . He scored a hat @-@ trick against Finland . He finished tied for first in goal @-@ scoring and tied for fifth in points . He led Austria in scoring . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 On 31 March 2011 , Grabner and wife Heather , whom he met while playing in Spokane , welcomed a son . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
