 = = Plot = = 
 Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) celebrates his winning of the Vice President position on a golf outing with Jim ( John Krasinski ) , Robert California ( James Spader ) , and Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) . After playing , Robert tells Jim that he dislikes the business plan for the Sabre store , citing the poor quality of the products ; he only approved it because Jo Bennett wanted it , but he plans to sandbag it at a high @-@ level meeting , and Jim is stunned when Robert strongly hints he 's going to fire Dwight over it . Jim makes several attempts to stop Dwight from attending the meeting with Robert , but Dwight is heedless and continually insults Jim , who finally decides to leave Dwight to his fate . However , a guilt @-@ inducing phone call to Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) makes Jim decide he has to keep parsing Dwight 's insults until he directly tells him that he 's going to lose his job . Dwight ignores the news , thinking Jim is jealous of him , so Jim resorts to wrestling with Dwight outside the conference room . In the meantime , Nellie has Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) stand in as VP in Dwight 's absence . When Dwight makes it into the conference room , he hears Robert planning to fire the VP , so he sneaks out of the conference room and lets Packer take the fall in front of those present . Dwight then silently extends a hand to Jim , and they head back to Scranton with Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) , who has reverted to his old grumpy self over the thought of leaving Florida . 
 Back in Scranton , Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) and Toby ( Paul Lieberstein ) are both trying to sell girl scout cookies for their daughters . When Toby 's requests clash with Darryl 's , Darryl tells him they need their own sections of the office to sell to in order to not interfere with each other . Darryl takes accounting while Toby gets every other section . Darryl asks for accounting because Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) buys more cookies than everyone else put together . Toby eventually realizes Darryl 's plan and the two end up fighting over who sells Kevin cookies , with Kevin coming up with absurd competition ideas . After doing a song and dance for Kevin , Kevin still can 't make up his mind , so Darryl and Toby contemplate giving up until Kevin mentions he plans to buy hundreds of boxes of cookies , at which point continue the competition . They finally give up for good when Kevin wants to ride them like a pony , citing they still want to maintain their dignity and will not go beyond the limit to what they 'd do for their daughters . When they walk away , Kevin says he 'll doing any absurd thing for them to continue , kissing Meredith ( Kate Flannery ) to prove it , but they still refuse . 
 Meanwhile , Andy ( Ed Helms ) learns that Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) isn 't coming back to Scranton after she takes a job helping an elderly lady she met at the Sabre store opening , leaving Andy very distraught , especially when he learns that everyone else already knew through Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) , who is revealed to have returned to Scranton after freaking out during the previous episode . When Dwight , Jim , and Stanley return to Scranton and Andy sees Jim happily reunite with Pam , Andy decides to travel to Florida to try and bring Erin back . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Last Day in Florida " was written by Robert Padnick , his second writing credit for the season after " Gettysburg " . The episode was directed by Matt Sohn , his third director 's credit for the season after " Pam 's Replacement " and " Tallahassee " . The episode marks the fifth appearance of Catherine Tate as Nellie Bertram and her fourth consecutive appearance . Her character , Nellie , worked with several of the office workers on a special project for Sabre in a six episode arc . The episode also features a guest appearance from David Koechner , who appears as Todd Packer in the series . He recently made a deal with NBC to do more episodes for the series and also possibly join the cast of series developer Greg Daniels 's next series , Friday Night Dinner , an adaption of the British series of the same name . Lindsey Broad , who portrays Cathy Simms , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave , makes her twelfth and final appearance on the series . The episode also marks the second appearance of Georgia Engel as Irene , Erin 's elderly new friend . Showrunner Paul Lieberstein said in an interview that he was excited for her appearance calling her performance " fantastic " . She will appeared three episodes in the season . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Irene introducing Erin to her grandson who asks Erin to go on a date with him , which she says yes to , and Packer attempting to have a conversation with California over the HBO medieval fantasy series Game of Thrones , but learns Robert has not seen the series . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode , Ryan mentions that he told everybody through his Tumblr account that Erin was not coming back from Florida . Kevin forces Toby and Darryl to sing " Hello ! Ma Baby " in the style of Michigan J. Frog . Sabre 's Pyramid tablet makes a reappearance in the episode . The device serves as a parody of several tablet computers , specifically the Apple iPad . B. J. Novak described the device as " really the worst piece of technology that you 've ever seen . " The device was created by Paul Lieberstein , who originally envisioned that the device only had the rights to the 1993 film Coneheads . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Last Day in Florida " aired on March 8 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 89 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 6 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Test the Store " . The episode finished second in its time slot , beating Fox drama series The Finder and reruns of the ABC medical drama Grey 's Anatomy and The CW drama series Supernatural . Despite this , the episode was defeated by the CBS drama Person of Interest . In addition , " Last Day in Florida " was the highest @-@ rated NBC television episode of the night . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Last Day in Florida " received mixed reviews from critics , with many of them praising Rainn Wilson and John Krasinski 's performance in the episode and their characters ' interaction . Writing for New York , Michael Tedder called the scene featuring Dwight helping Jim up " eloquent " and wrote that it summarized their relationship over the years . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt called the episode the " most satisfying episode in the Florida arc " , mainly praising the Jim @-@ Dwight relationship , and said that since Steve Carell left the series they have become the " emotional core " of the show . He also complimented the writers for adding " business logic " to Sabre , specifically with Robert criticizing the Sabre Pyramid . Despite mainly praising the Florida plotline , he went on to criticize the Andy @-@ Erin plotline for Erin 's incompetence and also the fact he stopped caring about Andy and Erin 's relationship , although he did call their video chat " charming " . He ultimately gave the episode a B + . Brian Marder of Hollywood.com had a mixed response to the episode and wrote that it ruined the positive momentum the previous two episodes had . He also wrote that the episode wasn 't a good episode until the final scene of Andy telling the camera he 's going to Florida to get Erin back , calling the development " half intriguing , half mildly uninteresting " . 
 IGN writer Cindy White considered the Jim and Dwight scenes to be one of the only highlights of the episode , especially due to them being the core element to the series . She criticized Robert 's role in the episode and series , calling his character " a tool [ ... ] I mean that in both senses " , and also wrote that he was too much of an inconsistent character . She concluded that while the episode wasn 't " terrible " , it was a mediocre conclusion to the Florida storyline and wrote that " I 've got a suspicion that the best part of Season 8 is behind us " . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 @.@ 0 / 10 . Jeffrey Hyatt of Screen Crave gave the episode a review of seven out of ten , writing that the only drawback for the episode was the Scranton subplot , because it " turned really old , really fast " , although he did compliment Lieberstein 's performance in the episode . 
 Like the previous episodes , the Scranton subplot received mixed reviews . Tedder called the subplot " typical , but likable " . VanDerWerff wrote that while it had good moments , the storyline ultimately felt like " rejected storylines from an old sitcom " while White wrote that she enjoyed the storyline . 
 = Srigala Item = 
 Srigala Item ( Indonesian for Black Wolf , also advertised with the Dutch title De Zwarte Wolf ) is a 1941 film from the Dutch East Indies that was directed by Tan <unk> Hock and produced by The Teng Chun for Action Film . Starring Hadidjah , Mohamad Mochtar , and Tan Tjeng Bok , the film 's plot – inspired by Zorro – follows a young man who became a masked vigilante to take revenge against his conniving uncle . Srigala Item was a commercial success , which Misbach Yusa Biran credits to the plot 's use for escapism . A copy of the black @-@ and @-@ white film , which featured kroncong music , is stored at Sinematek Indonesia . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Through violence , Djoekri ( Tan Tjeng Bok ) is able to gain control of his brother <unk> 's ( Bissoe ) wealth and plantation , <unk> . The latter disappears , leaving behind his adult son Mochtar ( Mohamad Mochtar ) . At the plantation , the young man is treated as a servant and often beaten by Djoekri and his right @-@ hand man , Hasan . Djoekri 's son Joesoef ( Mohamad Sani ) , however , leads a life of plenty . 
 Soon Djoekri 's activities are targeted by a masked man known as the " Black Wolf " ( " Srigala Item " ) , who also foils Joesoef 's attempts to woo <unk> ( Hadidjah ) , whom Mochtar loves . Djoekri tires of the Black Wolf 's interference and takes him on in a battle . Though Djoekri almost wins , ultimately the Black Wolf emerges victorious . It is later revealed that <unk> remains alive and Mochtar was the Black Wolf . 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was written and directed by Tan <unk> Hock for Action Film , a subsidiary of producer The Teng Chun 's Java Industrial Film ( JIF ) . Tan , who had made his directorial debut in 1940 , based Srigala Item on the stories surrounding Johnston McCulley 's fictional bandit Zorro ; as with the American bandit , the Black Wolf used a whip and wore all black . The black @-@ and @-@ white film was shot by The Teng Chun 's brother Teng Gan , with <unk> Bajo Angin as artistic designer . 
 The film starred Hadidjah and Mohamad Mochtar , who had first acted together in JIF 's Alang @-@ Alang ( Grass ; 1939 ) and were promoted as a celebrity couple in competition with Raden Mochtar and Roekiah of Tan 's Film . It also featured Bissoe , Tan Tjeng Bok , and Mohamad Sani . Bissoe had made his feature film debut with JIF 's Oh Iboe in 1938 , while Sani had made his debut for JIF in 1940 . Tan Tjeng Bok , a former stage star with Dardanella , made his feature film debut through Srigala Item . 
 Music for Srigala Item was done in the kroncong ( traditional music with Portuguese influences ) style , popular at the time , by Mas Sardi . Hadidjah is credited as singing two songs , " Ja . Ja . Ja . Ja . " ( " Yeah . Yeah . Yeah . Yeah . " ) and " <unk> @-@ <unk> " ( " <unk> " ) ; Tan Tjeng Bok is also recorded as performing a song . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Srigala Item premiered in the first half of 1941 , one of nine films released by JIF and its subsidiaries that year . It was advertised , sometimes under the Dutch name of De Zwarte Wolf , as sensational , full of action , and mysterious " and marketed for all ages . The film was released in Batavia ( modern day Jakarta ) , the capital of the Indies , and by July 1941 it had reached Surabaya , in Eastern Java , and Singapore , then part of British Malaya . 
 An anonymous review of Srigala Item in the Surabaya @-@ based daily Soerabaijasch Handelsblad was positive , predicting the film would be a commercial success . This prediction was fulfilled , as Srigala Item reached extensive audiences – mostly lower @-@ class natives . The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran credits this success to escapism . He writes that the film 's theme of an oppressed , financially destitute youth who is able to control his destiny by becoming a masked vigilante , allowed viewers to be able to see themselves as the Black Wolf , and thus take revenge against those who had wronged them . 
 Action Film and JIF continued producing films until the beginning of the Japanese occupation of the Indies began in early 1942 , leading to the closing of all but one film studio . The cast of Srigala Item remained with JIF until the company closed , as did Tan . According to JB Kristanto 's Katalog Film Indonesia ( Catalogue of Indonesian Films ) , a copy of Srigala Item is stored at Sinematek Indonesia in Jakarta . The reels have been damaged by acid , leading to part of the film being excised . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = University of Bristol = 
 The University of Bristol ( abbreviated as <unk> in post @-@ nominal letters , sometimes referred to as Bristol University ) is a red brick research university located in Bristol , United Kingdom . It received its royal charter in 1909 , and its predecessor institution , University College , Bristol , had been in existence since 1876 . 
 Bristol is organised into six academic faculties composed of multiple schools and departments running over 200 undergraduate courses situated in the Clifton area along with three of its nine halls of residence . The other six halls are located in Stoke Bishop , an outer city suburb located 1 @.@ 8 miles away . The university had a total income of £ 530 @.@ 9 million in 2014 / 15 , of which £ 148 @.@ 4 million was from research grants and contracts . It is the largest independent employer in Bristol . 
 The University of Bristol is ranked 11th in the UK for its research , according to the Research Excellence Framework ( REF ) 2014 by GPA . The University of Bristol is ranked 37th by the QS World University Rankings 2015 @-@ 16 , and is ranked amongst the top ten of UK universities by QS , THE , and ARWU . A highly selective institution , it has an average of 6 @.@ 4 ( Sciences faculty ) to 13 @.@ 1 ( Medicine & Dentistry Faculty ) applicants for each undergraduate place . The University of Bristol is the youngest British university to be ranked among the top 40 institutions in the world according to the QS World University Rankings , and has also been ranked at 15th in the world in terms of reputation with employers , placing higher than several American Ivy League universities , including Princeton University , Cornell and <unk> . 
 Current academics include 21 fellows of the Academy of Medical Sciences , 13 fellows of the British Academy , 13 fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering and 44 fellows of the Royal Society . The university has been associated with 12 Nobel laureates throughout its history , including Paul Dirac , Sir William Ramsay , Cecil Frank Powell , Sir Winston Churchill , Dorothy Hodgkin , Hans Albrecht Bethe , Max Delbrück , Gerhard Herzberg , Sir Nevill Francis Mott , Harold Pinter , Jean @-@ Marie Gustave Le <unk> and most recently , 2015 Economics Nobel Prize winner Angus <unk> . 
 Bristol is a member of the Russell Group of research @-@ intensive British universities , the European @-@ wide Coimbra Group and the Worldwide Universities Network , of which the university 's previous vice @-@ chancellor , Eric Thomas , was chairman from 2005 to 2007 . In addition , the university holds an Erasmus Charter , sending more than 500 students per year to partner institutions in Europe . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Foundation = = = 
 The earliest antecedent of the university was the engineering department of the Merchant Venturers ' Technical College ( founded as a school as early as 1595 ) which became the engineering faculty of Bristol University . The university was also preceded by Bristol Medical School ( 1833 ) and University College , Bristol , founded in 1876 , where its first lecture was attended by only 99 students . The university was able to apply for a royal charter due to the financial support of the Wills and Fry families , who made their fortunes in tobacco plantations and chocolate , respectively . The Wills Family made a vast fortune from the tobacco industry and gave generously to the city and university . The royal charter was gained in May 1909 , with 288 undergraduates and 400 other students entering the university in October 1909 . Henry Overton Wills III became its first chancellor . The University College was the first such institution in the country to admit women on the same basis as men . However , women were forbidden to take examinations in medicine until 1906 . 
 = = = Historical development = = = 
 Since the founding of the university itself in 1909 , it has grown considerably and is now one of the largest employers in the local area , although it is smaller by student numbers than the nearby University of the West of England . Bristol does not have a campus but is spread over a considerable geographic area . Most of its activities , however , are concentrated in the area of the city centre , referred to as the " University Precinct " . It is a member of the Russell Group of research @-@ led UK universities , the Coimbra Group of leading European universities and the Worldwide Universities Network ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Early years = = = = 
 After the founding of the University College in 1876 , Government support began in 1889 . After mergers with the Bristol Medical School in 1893 and the Merchant Venturers ' Technical College in 1909 , this funding allowed the opening of a new medical school and an engineering school — two subjects that remain among the university 's greatest strengths . In 1908 , gifts from the Fry and Wills families , particularly £ 100 @,@ 000 from Henry Overton Wills III ( £ 6m in today 's money ) , were provided to endow a University for Bristol and the West of England , provided that a royal charter could be obtained within two years . In December 1909 , the King granted such a charter and erected the University of Bristol . Henry Wills became its first chancellor and Conwy Lloyd Morgan the first vice @-@ chancellor . Wills died in 1911 and in tribute his sons George and Harry built the Wills Memorial Building , starting in 1913 and finally finishing in 1925 . Today , it houses parts of the academic provision for earth sciences and law , and graduation ceremonies are held in its Great Hall . The Wills Memorial Building is a Grade II * listed building . 
 In 1920 , George Wills bought the Victoria Rooms and endowed them to the university as a Students ' Union . The building now houses the Department of Music and is a Grade II * listed building . 
 At the point of foundation , the university was required to provide for the local community . This mission was behind the creation of the Department of Extra @-@ Mural Adult Education in 1924 to provide courses to the local community . This mission continues today ; a new admissions policy specifically caters to the ' BS ' postcode area of Bristol . 
 Among the famous names associated with Bristol in this early period is Paul Dirac , who graduated in 1921 with a degree in engineering , before obtaining a second degree in mathematics in 1923 from Cambridge . For his subsequent pioneering work on quantum mechanics , he was awarded the 1933 Nobel Prize for Physics . Later in the 1920s , the H.H. Wills Physics Laboratory was opened by Ernest Rutherford . It has since housed several Nobel Prize winners : Cecil Frank Powell ( 1950 ) ; Hans Albrecht Bethe ( 1967 ) ; and Sir Nevill Francis Mott ( 1977 ) . The Laboratory stands on the same site today , close to the Bristol Grammar School and the city museum . 
 Sir Winston Churchill became the university 's third chancellor in 1929 , serving the university in that capacity until 1965 . He succeeded Richard Haldane who had held the office from 1912 following the death of Henry Wills . 
 During World War II , the Wills Memorial was bombed , destroying the Great Hall and the organ it housed , along with 7 @,@ 000 books removed from King 's College London for safe keeping . It has since been restored to its former glory , complete with oak panelled walls and a new organ . 
 = = = = Post @-@ war development = = = = 
 In 1946 , the university established the first drama department in the country . In the same year , Bristol began offering special entrance exams and grants to aid the resettlement of servicemen returning home . Student numbers continued to increase , and the Faculty of Engineering eventually needed the new premises that were to become Queen 's Building in 1955 . This substantial building housed all of the university 's engineers until 1996 , when the department of Electrical Engineering and Department of Computer Science moved over the road into the new Merchant Venturers ' Building to make space for these rapidly expanding fields . Today , Queen 's Building caters for most of the teaching needs of the Faculty and provides academic space for the " heavy " engineering subjects ( civil , mechanical , and aeronautical ) . 
 With unprecedented growth in the 1960s , particularly in undergraduate numbers , the Student 's Union eventually acquired larger premises in a new building in the Clifton area of the city , in 1965 . This building was more spacious than the Victoria Rooms , which were now given over to the Department of Music . The new Union provides many practice and performance rooms , some specialist rooms , as well as three bars : Bar 100 ; the Mandela ( also known as <unk> ) and the Avon Gorge . Whilst spacious , the Union building is thought by many to be ugly and out of character compared to the architecture of the rest of the Clifton area , having been mentioned in a BBC poll to find the worst architectural <unk> in Britain . The university has proposed relocating the Union to a more central location as part of its development ' masterplan ' . More recently , plans for redevelopment of the current building have been proposed . 
 The 1960s were a time of considerable student activism in the United Kingdom , and Bristol was no exception . In 1968 , many students marched in support of the Anderson Report , which called for higher student grants . This discontent culminated in an 11 @-@ day sit @-@ in at the Senate House ( the administrative headquarters of the university ) . A series of chancellors and vice @-@ chancellors led the university through these decades , with Henry Somerset , 10th Duke of Beaufort taking over from Churchill as chancellor in 1965 before being succeeded by Dorothy Hodgkin in 1970 who spent the next 18 years in the office . 
 As the age of mass higher education dawned , Bristol continued to build its student numbers . The various undergraduate residences were repeatedly expanded and , more recently , some postgraduate residences have been constructed . These more recent ventures have been funded ( and are run ) by external companies in agreement with the university . 
 Since 1988 , there have been only two further chancellors ; Sir Jeremy Morse , then chairman of Lloyds Bank who handed over in 2003 to Brenda Hale , the first female Law Lord . 
 One of the few Centres for Deaf Studies in the United Kingdom was established in Bristol in 1981 , followed in 1988 by the Norah Fry Centre for research into learning difficulties . Also in 1988 , and again in 2004 , the Students ' Union AGM voted to disaffiliate from the National Union of Students ( NUS ) . On both occasions , however , the subsequent referendum of all students reversed that decision and Bristol remains affiliated to the NUS . 
 In 2002 , the university was involved in argument over press intrusion after details of the son of then @-@ prime minister , Tony Blair 's , application to university were published in national newspapers . 
 As the number of postgraduate students has grown ( particularly the numbers pursuing taught master 's degrees ) , there eventually became a need for separate representation on university bodies and the Postgraduate Union ( <unk> ) was established in 2000 . Universities are increasingly expected to exploit the intellectual property generated by their research activities and , in 2000 , Bristol established the Research and Enterprise Division ( RED ) to further this cause ( particularly for technology @-@ based businesses ) . In 2001 , the university signed a 25 @-@ year research funding deal with <unk> , an intellectual property commercialisation company . In 2007 , research activities were expanded further with the opening of the Advanced Composites Centre for Innovation and Science ( <unk> ) and The Bristol Institute for Public Affairs ( <unk> ) . 
 In 2002 , the university opened the new Centre for Sports , Exercise and Health in the heart of the university precinct . At a cost , local residents are also able to use the facilities . 
 Expansion of teaching and research activities continues . In 2004 , the Faculty of Engineering completed work on the Bristol Laboratory for Advanced Dynamics Engineering ( <unk> ) . This £ <unk> project provides cutting @-@ edge technology to further the study of dynamics and is the most advanced such facility in Europe . It was built as an extension to the Queen 's Building and was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II in March 2005 . 
 In January 2005 , the School of Chemistry was awarded £ 4.5m by the Higher Education Funding Council for England to create Bristol <unk> : a Centre for Excellence in Teaching & Learning ( CETL ) , with an additional £ <unk> announced for the capital part of the project in February 2006 . Bristol <unk> stands for Bristol Chemical Laboratory Sciences ; it is the only chemistry CETL in the UK . 
 September 2009 saw the opening of the university 's Centre for Nanoscience and Quantum Information . This £ 11 million state of the art building is dubbed as the quietest building in the world and has other technologically sophisticated features such as self @-@ cleaning glass . Advanced research into quantum computing , nanotechnology , materials and other disciplines are being undertaken in the building . 
 There is also a plan to significantly redevelop the centre of the University Precinct in the coming years . The first step began in September 2011 , with the start of construction of a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art Life Sciences building . In a time of heavy financial pressures on all Universities , this £ 50 million project is a clear statement that Bristol is committed to world class research and teaching facilities . 
 = = = = 2003 admissions controversy = = = = 
 The university has been regarded as being elitist by some commentators , taking 41 % of its undergraduate students from non @-@ state schools , according to the most recent 2009 / 2010 figures , despite the fact that such pupils make up just 7 % of the population and 18 % of 16 + year old pupils across the UK . The intake of state school pupils at Bristol is lower than many Oxbridge colleges . The high ratio of undergraduates from non @-@ state school has led to some tension at the university . In late February and early March 2003 , Bristol became embroiled in a row about admissions policies , with some private schools threatening a boycott based on their claims that , in an effort to improve equality of access , the university was discriminating against their students . These claims were hotly denied by the university . In August 2005 , following a large @-@ scale survey , the Independent Schools Council publicly acknowledged that there was no evidence of bias against applicants from the schools it represented . The university has a new admissions policy , which lays out in considerable detail the basis on which any greater or lesser weight may be given to particular parts of an applicant 's backgrounds – in particular , what account may be taken of which school the applicant hails from . This new policy also encourages greater participation from locally resident applicants . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Some of the University of Bristol 's buildings date to its pre @-@ charter days when it was University College Bristol . These buildings were designed by Charles Hansom , the younger brother of Joseph Hansom , Joseph being the inventor of the Hansom Cab . These buildings suffered being built in stages due to financial pressure . George Oatley added to them a tower in memory of Albert Fry which can still be seen on University Road . The first large scale building project the University of Bristol undertook on gaining a charter was the Wills Memorial Building which it was hoped would be a symbol of academic permanence for the university and a memorial to the chief benefactor of the university , Henry Overton Wills . It was requested to the architect George Oatley that the building be built to last at least 400 years but the site purchased , at the top of Park Street suffered from an awkward slope and a desirability to link the building with the Museum and Art Gallery situated adjacent to the plot . The architecture critic Roger Gill has stated that the building is " remarkable in size " but noted that the " ambience of a medieval University was strangely lacking " . He goes on to criticise the building as a " sham " and a " folly " . The armorials on the Founder 's Window represent all of the interests present at the founding of the University of Bristol including the Wills and Fry families . The <unk> Park Estate and Royal Fort House were also purchased from the trustees of the Tyndall family allowing the university to expand . Many Departments in the Faculty of Arts are housed in large Victorian houses which have been converted for teaching . 
 Goldney gardens entered the property of the University of Bristol through George Wills who had hoped to build an all male hall of residence there . This was prevented due to the moral objection of the then warden of Clifton Hall House who objected to the idea of male and female residences being in such close proximity . University records show that Miss <unk> was prepared to resign over the issue and that she had the support of the then Chancellor Conwy Lloyd Morgan . Eventually land was purchased in Stoke Bishop allowing Wills Hall to be bought , allowing the building of what has been described as a " quasi @-@ Oxbridge " hall , to which was added the Dame Monica Wills Chapel added by George Wills ' widow after his death . 
 <unk> , a mansion house on the other side of the Avon Gorge , was used as a halls of residence in the past and was a home of Sir George Oatley . The building is now used to house the Centre for Continuing Education . 
 Many of the more modern buildings , including Senate House and the newer parts of the HH Wills Physics Laboratory , were designed by <unk> Brentnall after funds from the University Grants Committee . He is also responsible for the extension to the Wills Memorial Building library which was completed to such standard that few now realise that is an extension to the original building . Brentnall oversaw the rebuilding of the Great Hall of the Wills Memorial Building after it was partly destroyed during the Bristol Blitz of World War II . The buildings of St Michael 's Hill were rebuilt using hundreds of old photographs to recreate the original houses . The flats at Goldney Hall were designed by Michael Grice and received an award from the Civic Trust for their design . Bristol University owns some of the best examples of Georgian architecture in the city , the best examples being Royal Fort House , Clifton Hill House and Goldney Hall despite some additions . The Victoria Rooms which house the Music Department were designed by Charles Dyer and is seen as a good example of a Greek revival movement in British architecture . The tympanum of the building depicts a scene from The Advent of Morning designed by Jabez Tyley . Its major feature was a large organ which has since been destroyed by fire . 
 = = Academic reputation = = 
 League tables usually place Bristol within the top ten universities in the United Kingdom and it attracts many academically gifted students . For example , edition of 21 July 2011 of Times Higher Education reported that Bristol was fifth in a UK league table for the highest proportion of students with A @-@ level grades AAB or better . Bristol was ranked 10th overall in the The Sunday Times 10 @-@ year ( 1998 – 2007 ) average ranking of British universities based on consistent league table performance , and is a member of the ' Sutton 13 ' of top ranked Universities in the UK . Internationally , the 2012 / 2013 QS World University Rankings placed Bristol at 28th overall in the world . The rankings also placed Bristol at 15th in the world in terms of reputation with employers , placing higher than several American Ivy League universities , including Princeton University , Cornell and <unk> . Bristol was chosen as the ninth best university in the UK for the quality of graduates according to recruiters from the UK 's major companies . Another international ranking , the Shanghai Jiao Tong University Academic Ranking of World Universities , placed Bristol 64th globally in 2013 The Times Higher Education World University Ranking placed Bristol at 66th in 2011 . Competition for places is high with an average 7 @.@ 7 applications per place according to the 2014 Sunday Times League Tables , making it the joint 11th most competitive university in the UK . 
 According to data published in The Sunday Times , Bristol has the sixth @-@ highest percentage of " good honours " of any UK university . In the 2010 Centre for Higher Education 's Development 's Excellence Rankings , Bristol is one of only four UK universities ( Oxford , UCL and Manchester ) to be rated Excellent in all seven departments . 
 The following courses offered by the University of Bristol managed to reach top 5 in The ' Times ranking ( 2008 ) : Computer Science ( 3rd ) ; Electrical and Electronic Engineering ( 3rd ) ; Civil Engineering ( 5th ) ; Biological Sciences ( 3rd ) ; Mathematics ( 3rd ) ; and Psychology ( 4th ) . Furthermore , the QS World University Rankings place Bristol in the world 's top 100 universities for all subject areas in 2011 : Arts and Humanities ( 57th ) , Natural Sciences ( 40th ) , Engineering & IT ( 83rd ) , Social Sciences ( 65th ) and Life Sciences ( 70th ) . A further breakdown of the QS World University Natural Sciences Ranking shows the following : Earth Sciences ( 25th ) , Mathematics ( 35th ) , Environmental Sciences ( 39th ) , Physics ( 41st ) , and Chemistry ( 48th ) . 
 In addition , Bristol is particularly strong in the field of social sciences , particularly in economics , finance and management , and was rated fourth in the 2008 Guardian University Guide for Business and Management Studies . 
 In 2011 , The Guardian also ranked Bristol as third in the UK for geography , just behind second place Oxford and ranked Bristol as 1st in the UK for Music . 
 In The Complete University Guide 2013 , Bristol ranked fifth for German , fourth for Russian , third for mechanical and civil engineering , third for music and second for drama . 
 Bristol is also known for its research strength , having 15 departments gaining the top grade of 5 * in the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise . Overall , 36 out of 46 departments rated gained the top two ratings of 5 or 5 * , and 76 % of all the academic staff working in departments scored these top two levels . In terms of teaching strength , Bristol had an average Teaching Quality Assessment score of 22 @.@ 05 / 24 before the <unk> was abolished . For admission in October 2010 , Bristol reported an average of 10 @.@ 2 applications per place with the average A @-@ level score on admission being 478 @.@ 5 . Bristol 's drop @-@ out rate is also lower than the benchmark set by <unk> of no more than 3 @.@ 1 % . 
 = = Academic structure = = 
 The university is made up of a number of schools and departments organised into six faculties : 
 = = = Faculty of Arts = = = 
 School of Arts 
 Archaeology and Anthropology 
 Film and Television 
 Music 
 Philosophy 
 Theatre 
 School of Humanities 
 Classics & Ancient History 
 English 
 History ( Historical Studies ) 
 History of Art ( Historical Studies ) 
 Religion and Theology 
 School of Modern Languages 
 French 
 German 
 Hispanic , Portuguese and Latin American Studies 
 Italian 
 Russian 
 Bristol Institute for Research in the Humanities and Arts 
 Centre for English Language and Foundation Studies 
 Graduate School of Arts and Humanities 
 = = = Faculty of Engineering = = = 
 Graduate School of Engineering 
 Merchant Venturers ' School of Engineering 
 Computer Science 
 Electrical & Electronic Engineering 
 Engineering Mathematics 
 Queen 's School of Engineering 
 Aerospace Engineering 
 Civil Engineering 
 Mechanical Engineering 
 = = = Faculty of Biomedical Sciences = = = 
 School of Biochemistry 
 School of Cellular and Molecular Medicine 
 School of Physiology and Pharmacology 
 = = = Faculty of Science = = = 
 School of Biological Sciences 
 School of Chemistry 
 School of Earth Sciences 
 School of Experimental Psychology 
 School of Geographical Sciences 
 School of Mathematics 
 School of Physics 
 Interface Analysis Centre 
 The Bristol Centre for Nanoscience and Quantum Information 
 = = = Faculty of Health Sciences = = = 
 Centre for Health Sciences Education 
 Centre for Comparative and Clinical Anatomy 
 Teaching and Learning for Health Professionals 
 School of Clinical Sciences 
 School of Oral & Dental Sciences 
 School of Social and Community Medicine 
 School of Veterinary Sciences 
 = = = Faculty of Social Sciences and Law = = = 
 Graduate School of Education 
 School for Policy Studies 
 Centre for Exercise , Nutrition and Health Sciences 
 Norah Fry Research Centre 
 School of Economics , Finance and Management 
 Accounting and Finance 
 Centre for Market and Public Organisation 
 Economics 
 Management 
 School of Sociology , Politics and International Studies 
 University of Bristol Law School 
 = = = Degrees = = = 
 Bristol awards a range of academic degrees spanning bachelor 's and master 's degrees as well as junior doctorates and higher doctorates . The <unk> awarded are the degree abbreviations used commonly among British universities . The university is part of the Engineering Doctorate scheme , and awards the Eng . D. in systems engineering , engineering management , aerospace engineering and non @-@ destructive evaluation . 
 Bristol notably does not award by title any bachelor 's degrees in music , which is available for study but awarded B.A. ( although it does award <unk> and DMus ) , nor any degree in divinity , since divinity is not available for study ( students of theology are awarded a B.A. ) . Similarly , the university does not award <unk> ( Bachelor of Letters ) , although it does award both <unk> and DLitt . In regulations , the university does not name MD or DDS as higher doctorates , although they are in many universities as these degrees are normally accredited professional doctorates . 
 The degrees of DLitt . , DSc , <unk> , LLD and DMus , whilst having regulations specifying the grounds for award , are most often conferred as honorary degrees ( in honoris causa ) . Those used most commonly are the DLitt , DSc and LLD , with the MA ( and occasionally the <unk> ) also sometimes conferred <unk> for distinction in the local area or within the University . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In common with most UK universities , Bristol is headed formally by the chancellor , currently Baroness Hale of Richmond , and led on a day @-@ to @-@ day basis by the vice @-@ chancellor , currently Hugh Brady , who is the academic leader and chief executive . There are four pro vice @-@ chancellors and three ceremonial pro @-@ chancellors . The chancellor may hold office for up to ten years and the pro @-@ chancellors for up to three , unless the University Court determines otherwise , but the vice @-@ chancellor and pro @-@ vice @-@ chancellors have no term limits . The vice @-@ chancellor is supported by a deputy vice @-@ chancellor . 
 Responsibility for running the university is held at an executive level by the vice @-@ chancellor , but the council is the only body that can recommend changes to the university 's statutes and charter , with the exception of academic ordinances . These can only be made with the consent of the senate , the chief academic body in the university which also holds responsibility for teaching and learning , examinations and research and enterprise . The chancellor and pro chancellors are nominated by council and appointed formally by court , whose additional powers are now limited to these appointments and a few others , including some lay members of council . Finally , Convocation , the body of all staff , ceremonial officers and graduates of the university , returns 100 members to court and one member to council , but is otherwise principally a forum for discussion and to ensure graduates stay in touch with the university . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Students ' union = = = 
 The University of Bristol Union ( Bristol SU or BSU ) located on Queen 's Road is a founding member of the National Union of Students and is amongst the oldest students ' unions in England . The union oversees the two media outlets of the university , the Bristol University Radio Station ( <unk> ) and the student newspaper Epigram . In terms of student life , the union is responsible for the organisation of the annual freshers ' fair , the co @-@ ordination of Bristol Student Community Action , which organises volunteering projects in the local community , and the organisation of entertainment events and very large number of student societies . Previous presidents have included Sue Lawley and former Liberal Democrat MP Lembit Öpik . There is a separate union for postgraduate students , as well as an athletic union , which is a member of the British Universities & Colleges Sport . In distinction to the " blues " awarded for sporting excellence at Oxford and Cambridge , Bristol 's most successful athletes are awarded " reds " . 
 = = = Halls of residence = = = 
 Accommodation for students is primarily in the central precinct of the university and two areas of Bristol : Clifton and Stoke Bishop . In Stoke Bishop , Wills Hall on the edge of the Clifton Downs was the first to be opened , in 1929 , by the then chancellor , Winston Churchill . Its original quadrangle layout has been expanded twice , in 1962 and 1990 . Churchill Hall , named for the chancellor , followed in 1956 , then Badock Hall in 1964 . At the time of Badock Hall 's establishment , some of the buildings were called Hiatt Baker Hall , but two years later , Hiatt Baker moved to its own site and is now the largest hall in the university . The first self @-@ catering hall in Stoke Bishop was University Hall , established in 1971 with expansion in 1992 . The University 's newest undergraduate residence , 33 Colston Street , was opened in the city centre in October 2011 after acquiring the property in 2009 . The university established a partnership with Unite PLC in order provide accommodation due to increase in number of students accepted for entry for academic year 2012 / 2013 . A £ 20 million project of expanding facilities of Hiatt Baker is to provide additional 327 places for undergraduate students in 2014 . All of the main halls elect groups of students to the Junior Common Room to organise the halls social calendar for the next year . Residents of student houses , private accommodation and students living at home become members of Orbital – a society organising social events for students throughout the year . 
 In Clifton , Goldney Hall was built first in the early 18th century by the wealthy merchant Goldney family and eventually became part of the university in 1956 . It is a popular location for filming , with The Chronicles of Narnia , The House of Eliott and Truly , Madly , Deeply , as well as episodes of Only Fools and Horses and Casualty , being filmed there . The Grotto in the grounds is a Grade I listed building . Clifton Hill House is another Grade I listed building now used as student accommodation in Clifton . The original building was constructed between 1745 and 1750 by Isaac Ware , and has been used by the university since its earliest days in 1909 . Manor Hall comprises five separate buildings , the principal of which was erected from 1927 – 1932 to the design of George Oatley following a donation from Henry Herbert Wills . 
 One of its annexes , Manor House , has recently been refurbished and officially ' reopened ' in 1999 . Goldney Hall has beautiful gardens and modern accommodation complexes . Clifton Hill House has more dated facilities , but as with all the Clifton residences also possesses attractive gardens . Manor Hall houses the largest and most dated rooms , some dating back to the early 20th century . 
 On the central precinct sits The Hawthorns , a student house accommodating 115 undergraduate students . The house started life as a collection of villas built somewhere between 1888 and 1924 that were later converted , bit by bit , into a hotel by John Dingle . The Hawthorns also houses conferencing facilities , the staff refectory and bar , the Accommodation Office and the Student Houses Office . Several of the residences in the central precinct are more recent and have been built and are managed by third @-@ party organisations under exclusivity arrangements with the University . These include Unite House and Chantry Court , opened in 2000 and 2003 respectively by the UNITE Group , as well as Dean 's Court ( 2001 , postgraduates only ) and Woodland Court ( 2005 ) , both run by the Dominion Housing Group . 
 = = Symbols = = 
 In common with other universities in the United Kingdom , Bristol uses its particular pattern of academic dress as well its logo and coat of arms to represent itself . 
 = = = Academic dress = = = 
 The university specifies a mix of Cambridge and Oxford academic dress . For the most part , it uses Oxford @-@ style gowns and Cambridge @-@ style hoods , which are required to be " university red " ( see the logo at the top of the page ) 
 = = = Logo and arms = = = 
 In 2004 , the university unveiled its new logo . The icons in the logo are the sun for the Wills family , the dolphin for Colston , the horse for Fry and the ship @-@ and @-@ castle from the mediaeval seal of the City of Bristol , as also used in the coat of arms . The shape of the whole logo represents the open book of learning . This logo has replaced the university arms shown , but the arms continue to be used where there is a specific historical or ceremonial requirement . The arms comprise : 
 argent on a cross quadrate gules the arms of the City of Bristol between in pale and a sun in splendour ( for Wills ) and an open book proper , leaved and clasped or , and inscribed with the words Nisi <unk> Dominus , and in <unk> to the sinister a dolphin <unk> ( for Colston ) , and to the dexter a horse courant ( for Fry ) , both of the third . 
 The inscription on the book is the Latin opening of the 124th Psalm , " If the Lord Himself had not ( been on our side ... ) " . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Academics = = = 
 Current academics at the University of Bristol include 18 fellows of the Academy of Medical Sciences , 10 fellows of the British Academy , 13 fellows of the Royal Academy of Engineering and 31 fellows of the Royal Society . These include , Sir Michael Berry , one of the discoverers of quantum mechanics ' " geometric phase " , John Rarity international expert on quantum optics , quantum cryptography and quantum communication , David May , computer scientist and lead architect for the <unk> , Mark Horton , a British maritime and historical archaeologist . 
 Past academics of the university include , Patricia Broadfoot , Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University of Gloucestershire , and Nigel Thrift , Vice @-@ Chancellor of the University of Warwick . Anthony Epstein , co @-@ discoverer of the Epstein @-@ Barr virus , was Professor of Pathology at the university from 1968 – 1982 . , Sir John Lennard @-@ Jones , discoverer of the Lennard @-@ Jones potential in physics and Alfred Marshall , one of the University College 's principals and influential economist in the latter part of the 19th century . Mathematicians and philosophers Rohit <unk> and Brian Rotman lectured in the mathematics department . 
 The University of Bristol is associated with two Ig Nobel Prizes , an award for unusual or trivial achievements in scientific research . Sir Michael Berry shared the award ( with Andre <unk> , a Nobel Laureate ) for using magnets to levitate a frog . Gareth Jones also shared an Ig Nobel prize for scientifically documenting fellatio in fruit bats . 
 = = = Alumni = = = 
 Notable alumni include writers Dick King @-@ Smith , Sarah Kane , Angela Carter , David Gibbins and David Nicholls , author of the novel Starter for Ten , turned into a screenplay set in the University of Bristol . Mark Simmons , author of business books , Will Hutton , economist , author , commentator . 
 In entertainment and current affairs former students include , James <unk> , BBC News Chief Political Correspondent who founded the university independent newspaper Epigram , William Lewis , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the Telegraph Media Group , Derren Brown , illusionist , Sue Lawley , Radio 4 presenter , Alastair Stewart , newsreader and Dominic Waghorn , Sky News US Correspondent . Susanna Reid , ITV Breakfast anchor studied Politics , Philosophy and Law at the university between 1989 and 1992 and was also editor of the student newspaper , Epigram . 
 In comedy , Matt Lucas and David Walliams , Simon Pegg ( of Hot Fuzz fame ) , Chris Morris , creator of the controversial Brass Eye and Jon Richardson . Other comedy stars include Chris Langham , of The Thick of It fame , standup comic Marcus Brigstocke . 
 Other alumni include , Mike Bennett , digital media entrepreneur , Albert II , Prince of Monaco , musician James Blunt , former Liberal Democrat MP Lembit Öpik was President of Bristol University Students ' Union during his time . Paul Dirac , Lucasian Professor at Cambridge and Nobel Laureate , Sir Jonathan Evans former head of MI5 and Anne McClain , member of the 2013 NASA Astronaut Class 
 Notable alumni from the Film and Television Production department include film directors Mick Jackson , Michael Winterbottom , Marc Evans , Christopher Smith , Alex Cox and Peter Webber amongst many others . 
 = Songs by George Harrison = 
 Songs by George Harrison is a book of song lyrics and commentary by English musician George Harrison , with illustrations by New Zealand artist Keith West . It was published in February 1988 , in a limited run of 2500 copies , by Genesis Publications , and included an EP of rare or previously unreleased Harrison recordings . Intended as a luxury item , each copy was hand @-@ bound and boxed , and available only by direct order through Genesis in England . The book contains the lyrics to 60 Harrison compositions , the themes of which West represents visually with watercolour paintings . Starting in 1985 , Harrison and West worked on the project for two years , during which Harrison returned to music @-@ making with his album Cloud Nine , after focusing on film production for much of the early 1980s . The book includes a foreword by his Cloud Nine co @-@ producer , Jeff Lynne , and a written contribution from Elton John . 
 The musical disc contains three songs that Warner Bros. Records had rejected in 1980 for inclusion on Harrison 's album Somewhere in England , together with a live version of his Beatles track " For You Blue " . This last song was recorded during Harrison 's controversial 1974 North American tour , when his singing was marred by the effects of laryngitis ; it remains the only vocal performance from that tour to have been made available outside of concert bootlegs . While " Lay His Head " was issued as the B @-@ side to his 1987 single " Got My Mind Set on You " , the Songs by George Harrison EP remains the sole official release for this live version of " For You Blue " and for the studio tracks " Sat Singing " and " Flying Hour " . 
 Genesis undertook a single print run for the book , after which Songs by George Harrison became a highly priced collector 's item . It was followed by a second volume , published in 1992 . AllMusic describes the EP as " remarkable " and " classic Harrison " . 
 = = Background = = 
 George Harrison first worked with Genesis Publications on his 1980 autobiography , I Me Mine , for which his friend Derek Taylor served as editor and narrator . Harrison subsequently edited Taylor 's memoir , Fifty Years Adrift , which Genesis published in its customary , limited @-@ edition , deluxe format in 1984 . That year , Brian Roylance , the owner of Genesis Publications , met a New Zealand @-@ born botanical artist named Keith West , whose work Roylance considered might be suitable for a proposed illustrated book of Harrison 's songs . 
 Since 1982 , when he released the little @-@ promoted Gone Troppo album , Harrison had minimised his musical activities in favour of a role as a film producer , with the success of his company HandMade Films . The content of his previous album , Somewhere in England , had been the subject of scrutiny by Warner Bros. Records , the distributor of Harrison 's Dark Horse record label ; as a result , Harrison was obliged to replace four of the songs intended for that album with more commercial @-@ sounding recordings for its eventual release , in mid 1981 . On the musical disc accompanying the Songs by George Harrison book , Harrison decided to include three of the tracks that Warner Bros. had rejected . The fourth of those 1980 recordings , " Tears of the World " , would appear on the EP accompanying Harrison and West 's 1992 illustrated book , Songs by George Harrison 2 . 
 = = Production = = 
 Having relocated to north Wales by 1985 , West met with Harrison regularly over a period of two years at the latter 's Oxfordshire estate , Friar Park . The pair discussed the images required for all of Harrison 's songs , in order to ensure empathy between the illustrations and the message behind the lyrics . West worked up pencil sketches , which he would submit to Harrison , before completing the final watercolour illustrations . 
 Songs by George Harrison contains the lyrics to 60 of Harrison 's compositions , for each of which West hand @-@ lettered the words . Harrison provided text commenting on the story behind some of the songs , along with facsimiles of his original lyric sheets . The book was bound inside a black leather cover , and ran to 176 pages , measuring 175 by 250 millimetres . 
 During the two @-@ year period of production , Harrison resumed a more active musical career , which included working with producer Jeff Lynne on the soundtrack to HandMade Films ' Shanghai Surprise in 1986 before recording his first album in five years , Cloud Nine . The book includes a foreword by Lynne , a " <unk> " by Elton John , and a " <unk> " by Harrison . The accompanying EP was offered in either vinyl or CD format , with the disc housed beside the book in a handmade Solander box . 
 = = Musical content = = 
 = = = " Sat Singing " = = = 
 The opening track on the EP , the 1979 @-@ copyright " Sat Singing " , was recorded at Harrison 's Friar Park studio , FPSHOT , in March 1980 . Among Harrison biographers , Simon Leng views the song as a " pivotal composition " in the artist 's career , while Dale Allison considers it to be " a crucial song for interpreting George 's religiosity " . The lyrics document an afternoon spent immersed in meditation , during which the singer surrenders the distractions of the physical world for a communion with his deity . The title references the Sanskrit term sat @-@ sang , which means time spent in the company of " the highest truth " , such as with one 's guru . Leng describes the song as " a companion piece " to the Beatles ' " Tomorrow Never Knows " , in that " Sat Singing " represents the " attainment " of John Lennon 's earlier exhortation to " Turn off your mind , relax and float downstream " . 
 = = = " Lay His Head " = = = 
 Like " Sat Singing " , " Lay His Head " was recorded during the sessions for Somewhere in England , in April 1980 . The title refers to a phrase from the gospels of St Matthew and St Luke that Harrison had taken to quoting when referring to the lack of privacy afforded him and his Beatles bandmates during the 1960s . In his adaptation , the phrase became : " Foxes have holes and birds have nests , but Beatles have nowhere to lay their heads . " Leng views the song as a reflection on " what a man loses when he becomes a media entity : a connection with other people that everyone else takes for granted " . 
 Harrison carried out further work on the recording in August 1987 . In October that year , " Lay His Head " was released as the B @-@ side to " Got My Mind Set on You " , the lead single from Cloud Nine . The version on Songs by George Harrison used the same mix as that issued on the single , which differed from the 1980 recording through the increased presence of percussion and drums . Percussionist Ray Cooper was credited as co @-@ producer with Harrison . 
 = = = " For You Blue " = = = 
 Originally recorded by the Beatles and released on their 1970 album Let It Be , " For You Blue " was one of the relatively few Beatles songs that Harrison chose to perform on his 1974 North American tour with Ravi Shankar . The live version issued on Songs by George Harrison was the first recording from these 1974 concerts to receive an official release , despite Harrison 's statements post @-@ tour that a full live album would be made available . 
 Although the EP credits read " Live in Washington DC " , the song was recorded in nearby Largo , Maryland , on 13 December 1974 . The performance features solos from Robben Ford ( on electric guitar ) , Emil Richards ( marimba ) and Willie Weeks ( bass ) . During the tour , many reviewers had criticised Harrison for , variously , giving over stage @-@ time to his fellow musicians , being scornful of his audience 's nostalgia for the Beatles , and performing with a voice ravaged by the effects of laryngitis . In response , Leng writes that this live version of " For You Blue " contradicts the " ' given ' view " espoused by Rolling Stone magazine that Harrison 's 1974 concerts were a " calamity " . In 2001 , Record Collector editor Peter Doggett similarly commented on the track , with regard to the singer 's vocal issues : " Thankfully , the solitary official evidence of the tour ... showed little evidence of the strain . " 
 = = = " Flying Hour " = = = 
 Although Harrison had intended the song for inclusion on Somewhere in England , " Flying Hour " dated from the sessions for his previous album , George Harrison ( 1979 ) , and was recorded in March 1978 . He wrote the song with Bad Company guitarist Mick Ralphs , who was among a coterie of local rock musicians , known informally as " the Henley Music Mafia " , with whom Harrison played and socialised from the late 1970s onwards . Among the changes carried out when he revisited " Flying Hour " in 1987 , the track has a longer running time than the 1980 version , partly through the reinstating of a 20 @-@ second guitar solo late in the song , and Harrison 's slide guitar features less prominently in the mix . The track is driven by Weeks ' bassline and includes <unk> synthesizer soloing from Steve Winwood . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Songs by George Harrison was published on 15 February 1988 , with the Genesis Publications catalogue number <unk> 777 . The print run was limited to 2500 , with each copy signed by Harrison and West . The book was priced at £ 235 and available via mail order only . Genesis also offered the book as a limited @-@ edition series of enlarged prints . 
 The release coincided with Harrison 's uncharacteristically high @-@ profile publicity for Cloud Nine , which was a critical and commercial success when issued in November 1987 . In an interview published in Musician magazine that same month , Harrison spoke of a planned second volume with West , and he defended the exclusivity of Songs by George Harrison by saying , " in a world of crass , disposable junk , it 's meant to be a lovely thing . " 
 Harrison and his wife Olivia returned to England from California for the book 's publication . He subsequently promoted Songs by George Harrison during his Cloud Nine publicity activities in Europe . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Despite its high price , Songs by George Harrison sold well . Typically for a Genesis title , however , the publication 's availability was confined to its initial print run . 
 In a four @-@ star rating for the EP , J.T. Griffith of AllMusic describes it as " one of the essential additions to any serious Beatles or George Harrison collection " and he concludes : " Songs By George Harrison is remarkable ... the songs are classic Harrison . " Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Greg Kot highlighted " Sat Singing " and " Lay His Head " among the " gems " offered on the disc . That same year , Dave Thompson of Goldmine similarly admired the 1980 @-@ recorded tracks ; he said that their rejection had been " a criminal decision on the label 's part " since otherwise Somewhere in England " could easily have taken its place among the elite of solo <unk> " . 
 While lamenting that Songs by George Harrison was " an heirloom @-@ quality item ( with a price to match ) " , and so prohibitive to the majority of Harrison 's audience , author Robert Rodriguez considers that Warner Bros. " displayed appalling judgment " in overlooking " Sat Singing " and particularly " Flying Hour " , which he describes as " a breezy tune filled to the brim with hooks " . Simon Leng admires the reinterpretation of " For You Blue " as a rhythm and blues " jam track " and praises " Sat Singing " for its " melody of some beauty , colored by warm , golden slide guitar " . Leng adds that " As a musical essay on serenity and joy , [ ' Sat Singing ' ] is one of Harrison 's best " , yet he also identifies an isolationist perspective on the three 1980 recordings that reflected the singer 's failure to appreciate the market forces with which Warner 's had to contend . 
 The 1988 Genesis publication remains the only formal release for " Sat Singing " , " Flying Hour " and the live " For You Blue " , although all four tracks from the EP became available in 1995 on the bootleg compilation Pirate Songs . While a live version of the instrumental " Hari 's on Tour ( Express ) " from Harrison 's 1974 tour appeared on the Songs by George Harrison 2 EP , " For You Blue " remains the only vocal track from that tour to receive an official release . 
 In December 2006 , Record Collector magazine ranked Songs by George Harrison 122nd in its list of " The 250 Most Valuable Records of Our Time " , with an estimated value of £ 800 for the book and disc set . Dale Allison describes it as " obscure , hard @-@ to @-@ get , and very expensive " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by George Harrison , except where noted . All track @-@ list information per CD label . 
 " Sat Singing " – 4 : 30 
 " Lay His Head " – 3 : 50 
 " For You Blue " [ live ] – 4 : 08 
 " Flying Hour " ( Harrison , Mick Ralphs ) – 4 : 32 
 = Paul Tibbets = 
 Paul Warfield Tibbets Jr . ( 23 February 1915 – 1 November 2007 ) was a brigadier general in the United States Air Force . He is best known as the pilot who flew the Enola Gay ( named after his mother ) when it dropped Little Boy , the first of two atomic bombs used in warfare , on the Japanese city of Hiroshima . 
 Tibbets enlisted in the United States Army in 1937 and qualified as a pilot in 1938 . After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , he flew anti @-@ submarine patrols over the Atlantic . In February 1942 , he became the commanding officer of the 340th Bombardment Squadron of the 97th Bombardment Group , which was equipped with the Boeing B @-@ 17 . In July 1942 the 97th became the first heavy bombardment group to be deployed as part of the Eighth Air Force , and Tibbets became deputy group commander . He flew the lead plane in the first American daylight heavy bomber mission against Occupied Europe on 17 August 1942 , and the first American raid of more than 100 bombers in Europe on 9 October 1942 . Tibbets was chosen to fly Major General Mark W. Clark and Lieutenant General Dwight D. Eisenhower to Gibraltar . After flying 43 combat missions , he became the assistant for bomber operations on the staff of the Twelfth Air Force . 
 Tibbets returned to the United States in February 1943 to help with the development of the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress . In September 1944 , he was appointed the commander of the 509th Composite Group , which would conduct the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . After the war , he participated in the Operation Crossroads nuclear weapon tests at Bikini Atoll in mid @-@ 1946 , and was involved in the development of the Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet in the early 1950s . He commanded the 308th Bombardment Wing and 6th Air Division in the late 1950s , and was military attaché in India from 1964 to 1966 . After leaving the Air Force in 1966 , he worked for Executive Jet Aviation , serving as its president from 1976 until his retirement in 1987 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paul Warfield Tibbets Jr. was born in Quincy , Illinois , on 23 February 1915 , the son of Paul Warfield Tibbets Sr. and his wife , Enola Gay Tibbets . When he was five years old the family moved to Davenport , Iowa , and then to Iowa 's capital , Des Moines , where he was raised , and where his father became a confections wholesaler . When he was eight , his family moved to Miami , Florida , to escape from harsh midwestern winters . As a boy he was very interested in flying . One day his mother agreed to pay one dollar to get him into an airplane at the local carnival . In 1927 , when he was 12 years old , he flew in a plane piloted by barnstormer Doug Davis , dropping candy bars with tiny parachutes to the crowd of people attending the races at the Hialeah Park Race Track . 
 In the late 1920s , business issues forced Tibbets 's family to return to Alton , Illinois , where he graduated from Western Military Academy in 1933 . He then attended the University of Florida in Gainesville , and became an initiated member of the Epsilon Zeta Chapter of Sigma Nu fraternity in 1934 . During that time , Tibbets took private flying lessons at Miami 's Opa @-@ locka Airport with Rusty Heard , who later became a captain at Eastern Airlines . After his undergraduate work , Tibbets had planned on becoming an abdominal surgeon . He transferred to the University of Cincinnati after his second year to complete his pre @-@ med studies there , because the University of Florida had no medical school at the time . However , he only attended for a year and a half as he changed his mind about wanting to become a doctor . Instead , he decided to enlist in the United States Army and become a pilot in the United States Army Air Corps . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 Because he went to a military school , attended some college , and had some flight experience , Tibbets qualified for the Aviation Cadet Training Program . On 25 February 1937 , he enlisted in the army at Fort Thomas , Kentucky , and was sent to Randolph Field in San Antonio , Texas , for primary and basic flight instruction . During his training , he showed himself to be an above @-@ average pilot . He was commissioned as a second lieutenant and received his pilot rating in 1938 at Kelly Field , Texas . 
 After graduation , Tibbets was assigned to the 16th Observation Squadron , which was based at Lawson Field , Georgia , with a flight supporting the Infantry School at nearby Fort Benning . It was here that he met Lucy Wingate , a clerk at a department store in Columbus , Georgia . The two quietly married in a Catholic seminary in Holy Trinity , Alabama , on 19 June 1938 . Tibbets did not inform his family or his commanding officer , and the couple arranged for the notice to be kept out of the local paper . They had two sons , Paul III and Gene . While stationed at Fort Benning , Tibbets was promoted to first lieutenant , and served as a personal pilot for Brigadier General George S. Patton Jr. in 1940 and 1941 . 
 In June 1941 , Tibbets transferred to the 9th Bombardment Squadron of the 3d Bombardment Group at Hunter Field , Savannah , Georgia , as the engineering officer , and flew the A @-@ 20 Havoc . While there he was promoted to captain . In December 1941 , he received orders to join the 29th Bombardment Group at MacDill Field , Florida , for training on the Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress . On 7 December 1941 , Tibbets heard about the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor while listening to the radio during a routine flight . Due to fears that German U @-@ Boats might enter Tampa Bay and bombard MacDill Field , the 29th Bombardment Group moved to Savannah . Tibbets remained on temporary duty with the 3d Bombardment Group , forming an anti @-@ submarine patrol at Pope Army Airfield , North Carolina , with 21 B @-@ 18 Bolo medium bombers . The B @-@ 18s were used as an intermediate trainer , which pilots flew after basic flight training in a Cessna UC @-@ 78 and before qualifying in the B @-@ 17 . Listen to Paul Tibbets own story of the development of the bomb 
 = = War against Germany = = 
 In February 1942 , Tibbets reported for duty with the 29th Bombardment Group as its engineering officer . Three weeks later he was named the commanding officer of the 340th Bombardment Squadron of the 97th Bombardment Group , equipped with the B @-@ 17D . It was initially based at MacDill , and then Sarasota Army Airfield , Florida , before moving to Godfrey Army Airfield in Bangor , Maine . 
 In July 1942 the 97th became the first heavy bombardment group of the Eighth Air Force to be deployed to England , where it was based at RAF <unk> . It had been hastily assembled to meet demands for an early deployment , and arrived without any training in the basics of high altitude daylight bombing . In the first weeks of August 1942 , under the tutelage of Royal Air Force veterans , the group received intensive training for its first mission . The group commander , Lieutenant Colonel Cornelius W. Cousland , was replaced by Colonel Frank A. Armstrong Jr . , who appointed Tibbets as his deputy . 
 Tibbets flew the lead bomber Butcher Shop for the first American daylight heavy bomber mission on 17 August 1942 , a shallow penetration raid against a marshalling yard in Rouen in Occupied France , with Armstrong as his co @-@ pilot . This was not Tibbets 's regular aircraft , Red Gremlin , nor his regular crew , which included bombardier Thomas Ferebee and navigator Theodore Van Kirk , who later flew with him in Enola Gay . On October 9 , Tibbets led the first American raid of more than 100 bombers in Europe , attacking industrial targets in the French city of Lille . Poor bombing accuracy resulted in numerous civilian casualties and less damage to the rail installations than hoped , but the mission was hailed an overall success because it reached its target against heavy and constant fighter attack . Of the 108 aircraft in the raid , 33 were shot down or had to turn back due to mechanical problems . 
 In the leadup to Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa , the commander of the Eighth Air Force , Major General Carl Spaatz was ordered to provide his best two pilots for a secret mission . He chose Tibbets and Major Wayne Connors . Tibbets flew Major General Mark W. Clark from <unk> to Gibraltar while Connors flew Clark 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Lyman Lemnitzer . A few weeks later Tibbets flew the Supreme Allied Commander , Lieutenant General Dwight D. Eisenhower , there . " By reputation " , historian Stephen Ambrose wrote , Tibbets was " the best flier in the Army Air Force [ sic ] . " 
 After Tibbets had flown 25 combat missions against targets in France , the 97th Bomb Group was transferred to North Africa as part of Major General Jimmy Doolittle 's Twelfth Air Force . For Tibbets , the war in North Africa introduced him to the realities of aerial warfare . He claimed that he saw the real effects of bombing civilians and the trauma of losing his brothers in arms . In January 1943 , Tibbets , who had now flown 43 combat missions , was assigned as the assistant for bomber operations to Colonel Lauris Norstad , Assistant Chief of Staff of Operations ( A @-@ 3 ) of the Twelfth Air Force . Tibbets had recently been given a battlefield promotion to colonel , but did not receive it , as such promotions had to be confirmed by a panel of officers . He was told that Norstad had vetoed the promotion , saying " there 's only going to be one colonel in operations . " 
 Tibbets did not get along well with Norstad , or with Doolittle 's chief of staff , Brigadier General Hoyt Vandenberg . In one planning meeting , Norstad wanted an all @-@ out raid on Bizerte to be flown at 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) . Tibbets protested that flak would be most effective at that altitude . When challenged by Norstad , Tibbets said he would lead the mission himself at 6 @,@ 000 feet if Norstad would fly as his co @-@ pilot . Norstad backed down , and the mission was successfully flown at 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 = = War against Japan = = 
 When General Henry H. Arnold , the Chief of United States Army Air Forces , requested an experienced bombardment pilot to help with the development of the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress bomber , Doolittle recommended Tibbets . Tibbets returned to the United States in February 1943 . At the time , the B @-@ 29 program was beset by a host of technical problems , and the chief test pilot , Edmund T. Allen , had been killed in a crash of the prototype aircraft . 
 Working with the Boeing plant in Wichita , Kansas , Tibbets test flew the B @-@ 29 , and soon accumulated more flight time in it than any other pilot . He found that without defensive armament and armor plating , the aircraft was 7 @,@ 000 pounds ( 3 @,@ 200 kg ) lighter , and its performance was much improved . In simulated combat engagements against a P @-@ 47 fighter at the B @-@ 29 's cruising altitude of 30 @,@ 000 feet ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) , he discovered that the B @-@ 29 had a smaller turning radius than the P @-@ 47 , and could avoid it by turning away . 
 After a year of developmental testing of the B @-@ 29 , Tibbets was assigned in March 1944 as director of operations of the 17th Bombardment Operational Training Wing ( Very Heavy ) , a B @-@ 29 training unit based at Grand Island Army Air Field , Nebraska , and commanded by Armstrong . Its role was to transition pilots to the B @-@ 29 . Tibbets taught two Women Airforce Service Pilots , Dora Dougherty and Dorothea ( Didi ) Moorman , to fly the B @-@ 29 as demonstration pilots . 
 On 1 September 1944 , Tibbets reported to Colorado Springs Army Airfield , the headquarters of the Second Air Force , where he met with its commander , Major General Uzal Ent , and three representatives of the Manhattan Project , Lieutenant Colonel John Lansdale Jr . , Captain William S. Parsons , and Norman F. Ramsey Jr . , who briefed him on the project . Tibbets was told that he would be in charge of the 509th Composite Group , a fully self @-@ contained organization of about 1 @,@ 800 men , which would have 15 B @-@ 29s and a high priority for all kinds of military stores . Ent gave Tibbets a choice of three possible bases : Great Bend Army Airfield , Kansas ; Mountain Home Army Airfield , Idaho ; or Wendover Army Air Field , Utah . Tibbets selected Wendover for its remoteness . 
 When the operation was still in the development stage the leading candidates to command the group designated to drop the atomic bomb had been Armstrong and Colonel Roscoe C. Wilson , the Army Air Force project officer providing liaison support to the Manhattan Project . Although an experienced combat veteran against German targets , Armstrong was in his forties and had been severely injured in a fire in the summer of 1943 , while Wilson had no combat experience and was qualified primarily by his engineering background and association with the project . Tibbets was considerably younger than both and had experience in both staff and command duties in heavy bomber combat operations , and was already an experienced B @-@ 29 pilot , thus making him an ideal candidate . 
 Tibbets , who received promotion to colonel in January 1945 , brought his wife and family along with him to Wendover . He felt that allowing married men in the group to bring their families would improve morale , although it put a strain on his own marriage . To explain all the civilian engineers on base who were working on the Manhattan Project , he had to lie to his wife , telling her that the engineers were " sanitary workers . " At one point Tibbets found that Lucy had co @-@ opted a scientist to <unk> a drain . 
 On 6 March 1945 , concurrent with the activation of Project Alberta , the 1st Ordnance Squadron , Special ( Aviation ) was activated at Wendover , again using Army Air Forces personnel on hand or already at Los Alamos . Its purpose was to provide " skilled machinists , welders and munitions workers " and special equipment to the group to enable it to assemble atomic weapons at its operating base , thereby allowing the weapons to be transported more safely in their component parts . A rigorous candidate selection process was used to recruit personnel , reportedly with an 80 % rejection rate . The 509th Composite Group reached full strength in May 1945 . 
 With the addition of the 1st Ordnance Squadron to its roster in March 1945 , the 509th Composite Group had an authorized strength of 225 officers and 1 @,@ 542 enlisted men , almost all of whom deployed to Tinian , an island in the northern Marianas within striking distance of Japan , in May and June 1945 . The 320th Troop Carrier Squadron kept its base of operations at Wendover . In addition to its authorized strength , the 509th had attached to it on Tinian all 51 civilian and military personnel of Project Alberta . Furthermore , two representatives from Washington , D.C. were present on the island : the deputy director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Thomas Farrell , and Rear Admiral William R. Purnell of the Military Policy Committee . 
 The ground support echelon of the 509th Composite Group received movement orders and moved by rail on 26 April 1945 , to its port of embarkation at Seattle , Washington . On May 6 the support elements sailed on the SS Cape Victory for the Marianas , while the group 's materiel was shipped on the SS Emile Berliner . An advance party of the air echelon flew by C @-@ 54 to North Field , Tinian , between May 15 and 22 , where it was joined by the ground echelon on 29 May 1945 . Project Alberta 's " Destination Team " also sent most of its members to Tinian to supervise the assembly , loading , and dropping of the bombs under the administrative title of 1st Technical Services Detachment , Miscellaneous War Department Group . 
 On 5 August 1945 , Tibbets formally named his B @-@ 29 Enola Gay after his mother . Enola Gay had been personally selected by him while it was still on the assembly line at the Glenn L. Martin Company plant in Bellevue , Nebraska . The regularly assigned aircraft commander , Robert A. Lewis , was unhappy to be displaced by Tibbets for this important mission , and became furious when he arrived at the aircraft on the morning of August 6 to see the aircraft he considered his painted with the now @-@ famous nose art . Lewis would fly the mission as Tibbets 's co @-@ pilot . 
 At 02 : 45 the next day — in accordance with the terms of Operations Order No. 35 — the Enola Gay departed North Field for Hiroshima , Japan , with Tibbets at the controls . Tinian was approximately 2 @,@ 000 miles ( 3 @,@ 200 km ) away from Japan , so it took six hours to reach Hiroshima . The atomic bomb , code @-@ named " Little Boy " , was dropped over Hiroshima at 08 : 15 local time . Tibbets recalled that the city was covered with a tall mushroom cloud after the bomb was dropped . 
 Tibbets was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross by Spaatz immediately after landing on Tinian . He became a celebrity , with pictures and interviews of his wife and children in the major American newspapers . He was seen as a national hero who had ended the war with Japan . Tibbets later received an invitation from President Harry S. Truman to visit the White House . The 509th Composite Group was awarded an Air Force Outstanding Unit Award in 1999 . 
 Tibbets was interviewed extensively by Mike Harden of the Columbus Dispatch , and profiles appeared in the newspaper on anniversaries of the first dropping of an atomic bomb . In a 1975 interview he said : " I 'm proud that I was able to start with nothing , plan it and have it work as perfectly as it did ... I sleep clearly every night . " " I knew when I got the assignment , " he told a reporter in 2005 , " it was going to be an emotional thing . We had feelings , but we had to put them in the background . We knew it was going to kill people right and left . But my one driving interest was to do the best job I could so that we could end the killing as quickly as possible . " 
 = = Post @-@ war military career = = 
 The 509th Composite Group returned to the United States on 6 November 1945 , and was stationed at Roswell Army Airfield , New Mexico . Colonel William H. Blanchard replaced Tibbets as group commander on 22 January 1946 , and also became the first commander of the 509th Bombardment Wing , the successor to the 509th Composite Group . Tibbets was a technical advisor to the 1946 Operation Crossroads nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific , but he and his Enola Gay crew were not chosen to drop another atomic bomb . 
 Tibbets then attended the Air Command and Staff School at Maxwell Air Force Base , Alabama . On graduating in 1947 he was posted to the Directorate of Requirements at Air Force Headquarters at the Pentagon . When the head of the directorate , Brigadier General Thomas S. Power , was posted to London as air attaché , he was replaced by Brigadier General Carl Brandt . Brandt appointed Tibbets as director of Directorate of Requirements 's Strategic Air Division , which was responsible for drawing up requirements for future bombers . Tibbets was convinced that the bombers of the future would be jet aircraft and thus became involved in the Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojet program . He subsequently served as B @-@ 47 project officer at Boeing in Wichita from July 1950 until February 1952 . He then became commander of the Proof Test Division at Eglin Air Force Base in Valparaiso , Florida , where flight testing of the B @-@ 47 was conducted . 
 Tibbets returned to Maxwell Air Force Base , where he attended the Air War College . After he graduated in June 1955 , he became Director of War Plans at the Allied Air Forces in Central Europe Headquarters at Fontainebleau , France . He left Lucy and his sons behind in Alabama , and he and Lucy divorced that year . During his posting to France , he met a French divorcee named Andrea <unk> , who became his second wife . He returned to the United States in February 1956 to command the 308th Bombardment Wing at Hunter Air Force Base , Georgia , and married her in the base chapel on 4 May 1956 . They had a son , James Tibbets . 
 In January 1958 , Tibbets became commander of the 6th Air Division at MacDill Air Force Base , <unk> and was promoted to brigadier general in 1959 . This was followed by another tour of duty at the Pentagon as director of Management Analysis . In July 1962 , he was assigned to the Joint Chiefs of Staff as deputy director for operations , and then , in June 1963 , as deputy director for the National Military Command System . In 1964 , Tibbets was named military attaché in India . He spent 22 months there on this posting , which ended in June 1966 . He retired from the United States Air Force ( USAF ) on 31 August 1966 . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 After his retirement from the Air Force , Tibbets worked for Executive Jet Aviation ( EJA ) , an air taxi company based in Columbus , Ohio , and now called NetJets . He attempted to extend the company 's operations to Europe , but was unsuccessful . He retired from the company in 1968 , and returned to Miami , Florida , where he had spent part of his childhood . The banks foreclosed on EJA in 1970 , and Bruce Sundlun became president . Sundlun lured Tibbets back to EJA that year . Tibbets succeeded Sundlun as president on 21 April 1976 , and remained in the role until 1986 . He served for a year as a consultant before his second and final retirement from EJA in 1987 . 
 Barry Nelson played Tibbets in the film The Beginning or the End ( 1947 ) . Above and Beyond ( 1952 ) depicted the World War II events involving Tibbets , with Robert Taylor starring as Tibbets and Eleanor Parker as his first wife Lucy . Tibbets was also the model for screenwriter Sy Bartlett 's fictional character " Major Joe Cobb " in the film Twelve O 'Clock High , and for a brief period in February 1949 was slated to be the film 's technical advisor until his replacement at the last minute by Colonel John H. <unk> . Enola Gay : The Men , the Mission , the Atomic Bomb , a 1980 made @-@ for @-@ television movie , somewhat fictionalized , told the story of Tibbets crew . Patrick Duffy played Tibbets and Kim Darby played Lucy . 
 In other fictional portrayals , Nicholas <unk> was Tibbets in the film Day One , David Gow played him in the 1995 TV movie Hiroshima , and Ian Shaw played the part in the BBC 's 2005 TV docudrama Hiroshima , for which Tibbets was also interviewed on camera . An interview with Tibbets also appeared in the 1982 movie Atomic Cafe , as well as was in the 1970s British documentary series The World at War , and the " Men Who Brought the Dawn " episode of the Smithsonian Networks ' War Stories ( 1995 ) . Tibbets figured largely in the 2000 book Duty : A Father , His Son and the Man Who Won the War by Bob Greene of the Chicago Tribune . 
 The United States government apologized to Japan in 1976 after Tibbets re @-@ enacted the bombing in a restored B @-@ 29 at an air show in Texas , complete with a mushroom cloud . He said that he had not meant for the re @-@ enactment to have been an insult to the Japanese . In 1995 , he denounced the 50th anniversary exhibition of the Enola Gay at the Smithsonian Institution , which attempted to present the bombing in context with the destruction it caused , as a " damn big insult " , due to its focus on the Japanese casualties rather than the brutality of the Japanese government . He was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1996 . 
 Tibbets 's grandson Paul W. Tibbets IV graduated from the United States Air Force Academy in 1989 , and in April 2006 became commander of the 393d Bomb Squadron , flying the B @-@ 2 Spirit at Whiteman AFB , Missouri . The squadron was one of the two operational squadrons that had formed part of the 509th Composite Group when Tibbets commanded it . Paul Tibbets IV was promoted to brigadier general in 2014 , and became Deputy Director for Nuclear Operations at the Global Operations Directorate of the United States Strategic Command at Offutt Air Force Base in Nebraska . As such , he was responsible for America 's strategic nuclear forces . On 5 June 2015 , he assumed command of the 509th Bomb Wing . 
 Tibbets died in his Columbus , Ohio , home on 1 November 2007 , at the age of 92 . He had suffered small strokes and heart failure during his final years and had been in hospice care . He was survived by his French @-@ born wife , Andrea , and two sons from his first marriage , Paul III and Gene as well as his son , James , from his second marriage . Tibbets had asked for no funeral nor headstone as he feared opponents of the bombing might use it as a place of protest . In accordance with his wishes , his body was cremated , and his ashes were scattered over the English Channel , which he had flown over many times during the war . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Command pilot 
 Source : Ohio History Central . 
 = Barrington Court = 
 Barrington Court is a Tudor manor house begun around 1538 and completed in the late 1550s , with a vernacular stable court ( 1675 ) , situated in Barrington , near Ilminster , Somerset , England . 
 The house was owned by several families by 1745 after which it fell into disrepair and was used as a tenant farm . After repair by architect Alfred Hoare Powell ( 1865 – 1960 ) , it was the first house acquired by the National Trust , in 1907 , on the recommendation of the antiquarian Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley ( 1851 – 1920 ) . In the 1920s the house was renovated , the stable block turned into a residence and several outbuildings , gardens and gateways constructed . 
 The house was originally surrounded by a medieval deer park and in the 17th century a formal garden was constructed . This had largely disappeared until a new garden was laid out by garden designer Gertrude Jekyll ( 1843 — 1932 ) in an Arts and Crafts @-@ style . It now contains walled kitchen gardens , fruit orchards and ornamental gardens . 
 = = History = = 
 The estate had been occupied since the 11th century and by the 14th century included a substantial house to the north east of the present building , where traces of a moat can still be seen . In 1446 the owner , Giles Daubeney , 6th Baron Daubeney , died at Barrington and left it to his son , another Giles Daubeney , who was a courtier , diplomat and military commander under Edward IV and Henry VII . 
 The manor was inherited in 1514 by Henry Daubeney , created Earl of Bridgewater for his services to Henry VIII . He spent much of his time in France and little time in Somerset . He may have begun the new house , but he went bankrupt and was involved in the disgrace of Catherine Howard , Henry VIII 's fifth wife . It is unlikely that much , if any , of the current building was his work . The house was forfeit to the crown and then had various owners including Henry Grey , 1st Duke of Suffolk , who in 1552 sold it to William Clifton , a London merchant who had been assembling a Somerset estate . Clifton or his son John Clifton are thought to be responsible for most of the building at Barrington , possibly modeled on earlier work at Kirby Hall or East Anglian manors close to their roots at <unk> Hall , <unk> Hall or <unk> Hall at <unk> . 
 It passed down in the Clifton family including Gervase Clifton , who in 1605 sold it to his brother @-@ in @-@ law Sir Thomas Phelips of Montacute House . The house was then mortgaged and , in 1625 , sold to Colonel William Strode , Jr . The house and estate were owned by the Strode family from 1625 until 1745 after which it was bought by several different owners but poorly maintained , becoming known as Court Farm . 
 The interior of the house suffered from its demotion to a tenant farm and from a fire in the early 19th century ; after being almost derelict it was repaired under the supervision of Alfred Hoare Powell . Barrington Court was acquired by the Trust in 1907 and was leased to Col. A. A. Lyle of Tate & Lyle in the 1920s . He and his wife turned the house around and refurbished the court house and renovated Strode House ( built by Colonel Strode 's son , William III , in 1674 ) which was originally a stable and coach block . It was at this time that the Lyles contracted Gertrude Jekyll to design the three formal gardens on the property that are maintained by the head gardener . 
 The house was one of the first large properties acquired by the National Trust ; it was not anticipated just how expensive repairs and maintenance would be , and even thirty years later it was still used as an example of why the Trust should be wary of taking on other country houses . 
 Barrington Court was occupied by a tenant , Stuart Interiors , that took the lease in 1986 from Andrew Lyle , grandson of Col. Lyle . The company sold reproduction furniture . Stuart Interiors left Barrington Court in December 2008 , and although the building has no furniture , it is open to visitors . 
 In 2014 it was the site of filming for the BBC 's Tudor @-@ era historical TV serial Wolf Hall . In May 2015 the house was the venue for the BBC programme Antiques Roadshow . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Like many Elizabethan mansions , Barrington is built in an ' E ' shape with large projecting wings with square projections that contain staircases . The house is not truly symmetrical as the hall has two lights and the buttery one . The south front has seven gables supported by octagonal buttresses and decorated with twisted finials with ogee scale @-@ work caps and English <unk> . 
 Its central entry porch leads into a screens passage with the hall on the left and , an innovation , a service passage leading to the kitchen wing that occupies the right wing . A long gallery stretches the entire length of the house on the upper floor . 
 = = = Strode House = = = 
 The stables — built in 1674 by William Strode III — were converted into a separate house around 1920 , under plans drawn up by the architect J.E. Forbes , when the building was given a new west front . The two @-@ storey brick building has Hamstone dressings and a hipped tile roof . Immediately in front of the building is the " fountain court " . 
 = = = Outbuildings = = = 
 In the 1920s a " <unk> " was constructed in a Tudor style to match the other buildings . It is a single @-@ storey building with an attic . The front of the building is decorate with heraldic lions . 
 The two @-@ storey agent 's house , known as <unk> , was also built in the 1920s . There are also row of six thatched cottages in Tudor style , a farmhouse and a barn dating from the same period . 
 = = = Gateways and walls = = = 
 There are multiple gateways around the estate and entrances to the house . The gateway to the west of the forecourt was rebuilt in the 1920s with tall piers and moulded stepped caps , permitting a full view of the symmetrical facade of the house . The gateways to the east of the forecourt and to the east of the south lawn have wrought iron gates . The wall around the forecourt is of the same vintage and has rectangular lily ponds at the base . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 In the 16th century the house was surrounded by a deer park . In the 1550s William Clifton took action , in the Star Chamber court , against local poachers who hunted deer in the park while he was away . 
 The remains of the original gardens include a rectangular raised area or parterre 70 metres ( 230 ft ) by 50 metres ( 160 ft ) near a liner pond or canal which is 12 metres ( 39 ft ) by 110 metres ( 360 ft ) . There is also geophysical evidence of a further 17th @-@ century formal garden . 
 Barrington Court is noted for its Arts and Crafts @-@ style gardens for which garden designer Gertrude Jekyll provided planting plans . The gardens were laid out in 1917 by J. E. Forbes , of the partnership Forbes & Tate , for Lieut @-@ Col. A. Arthur Lyle . There are a series of walled areas that include a white garden , a rose and iris garden and a lily garden . The original plans are being used to restore the gardens ; however , the planting scheme has been changed from that designed by Jekyll to that designed by Mrs Lyle in the 1960s . 
 The walls of the kitchen garden were built in the 1920s and include two gateways with neoclassical architraves . The gravel paths are laid out in a square with a cross at the centre enhanced by a fountain surrounded by fruit trees , vegetable plots and soft fruits . There are carriage openings with wrought @-@ iron gates . 
 The kitchen garden provides produce for the property 's restaurant located in the adjacent Strode House ; this includes many types of fruit and vegetables . The local St Mary & St Peter 's CE VC Primary School , which has bases at Barrington and <unk> , has a vegetable plot where the children plant , tend and cook the produce ; the walls are also strewn with apple , pear and plum trees . Attached to the garden is a squash court . 
 About 20 metres ( 66 ft ) south west of the house is an unusual multi @-@ faced sundial . It was built of stone and bronze , on a stone column . It is a dodecahedron surmounted by a heraldic lion . It was imported from California by Colonel Lyle in 1920 . 
 The gardens are Grade II * listed on the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens . 
 = Joshua King ( footballer ) = 
 Joshua Christian Kojo " Josh " King ( born 15 January 1992 ) is a Norwegian professional footballer who plays as a striker or a winger for Premier League club Bournemouth and the Norway national team . 
 King was signed by Manchester United from Vålerenga in 2008 . After loan spells with Preston North End , Borussia Mönchengladbach , Hull City and Blackburn Rovers , he signed permanently with Blackburn in January 2013 . He switched to Bournemouth in May 2015 . 
 After representing Norway at under @-@ 15 , under @-@ 16 , under @-@ 18 , under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 21 levels , King made his senior international debut against Iceland in 2012 , and scored his first international goal against Cyprus later that year . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Born in Oslo , to a Gambian father and a Norwegian mother , King grew up in the suburb of <unk> . He began his career with the local club , <unk> IL , before switching to Vålerenga when he was 15 . While at Vålerenga , King trained with English side Manchester United on multiple occasions , but UEFA rules prevented him from signing a contract with the club until he was 16 . He also had trial offers from Chelsea , Sunderland and Ipswich Town , but rejected those in favour of Manchester United . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 = = = = Youth teams = = = = 
 King signed for Manchester United when he turned 16 in January 2008 , and made his debut for the under @-@ 18 side in a 5 – 1 home defeat to Sunderland on 29 March 2008 . He played just once more in the league that season , as well as making five substitute appearances in the Blue Stars Youth Cup in May 2008 . He began the following season by scoring four goals in four matches as the Manchester United Under @-@ 17s won the 2008 Milk Cup . He then played in two matches at the start of the 2008 – 09 Premier Academy League season before an injury in October 2008 kept him out until January 2009 . 
 Two games after his comeback , King scored twice in a 5 – 0 win over Bolton Wanderers on 31 January 2009 . The following week , he was named as an unused substitute for the reserves in a Manchester Senior Cup match against Stockport County , before making his reserve debut as a substitute for Robbie Brady in a Premier Reserve League match against Bolton Wanderers three days later . He then made his first start of the season for the Under @-@ 18s against Manchester City on 14 February , only to miss the next two months of the season . He returned at the start of April 2009 , just in time to play in the run @-@ in to the end of the Under @-@ 18 league season , as United finished in second place , 19 points behind winners Manchester City . 
 At the start of the 2009 – 10 season , King came on as a substitute for Zoran <unk> in the final of the Lancashire Senior Cup , a 1 – 0 win over Bolton Wanderers . He then started the reserves ' first three league games of the season , and was rewarded for his performances by being given a place on the bench for the first team 's League Cup third round match against Wolverhampton Wanderers on 23 September 2009 . He was given the number 41 jersey and came on as an 81st @-@ minute substitute for goalscorer Danny Welbeck . Although King had two opportunities to add to United 's lead , the match finished 1 – 0 and United progressed to the fourth round of the competition . He was again named as a substitute for the fourth round match against Barnsley , but he did not take to the field . King was an integral part of the under @-@ 18s side for the remainder of the season , scoring six goals in 14 appearances as the team won Group C of the 2009 – 10 Premier Academy League ; they were drawn against Arsenal in the play @-@ off semi @-@ finals , and although King scored his penalty in the shoot @-@ out after the match finished in a 1 – 1 draw , Arsenal ultimately won 5 – 3 . 
 = = = = Preston North End loan = = = = 
 After impressing for Manchester United in the 2010 – 11 pre @-@ season , King joined Football League Championship side Preston North End – managed by Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson 's son , Darren – on a three @-@ month loan deal on 7 August 2010 , becoming Preston 's 1,000th player and linking up with fellow United loanee Matty James . He made his debut the next day , coming on as a 70th @-@ minute substitute for Paul Hayes in Preston 's 2 – 0 defeat by Doncaster Rovers on the opening day of the 2010 – 11 season . 
 King 's first goal for Preston came in his second match , a League Cup first round tie against Stockport County on 10 August ; after coming on as a 72nd @-@ minute substitute for Chris Brown , he intercepted a goal kick from Andy Lonergan and curled the ball past the Stockport goalkeeper , making the final score 5 – 0 . He had earlier added an assist after running 60 yards down the right wing and crossing for Paul Hayes ' second goal – the fourth of the match . King made his first start for Preston on 21 August , playing the full 90 minutes of the team 's 1 – 0 home win over Portsmouth ; King was named man of the match for his performance , in which he repeatedly threatened the Portsmouth goal . 
 King played in seven of Preston 's first 12 league games , but suffered an ankle injury at the end of October 2010 that ruled him out for the rest of the loan , and he returned to Manchester United . After his recovery towards the end of November , King returned to Preston on another loan until 4 January 2011 ; however , he made just one more appearance for the club before being recalled by Manchester United a few days early . Some sources suggested that Alex Ferguson recalled King and fellow loanees Matty James and Ritchie De Laet in retaliation for Preston sacking his son , Darren , but Ferguson later indicated that King and De Laet had not enjoyed their time at Preston and did not want to return to the club . 
 = = = = Return to Manchester United = = = = 
 After his return to Manchester United , King was a regular in the reserve team , playing in 17 of the last 18 games of the season ; his only absence came against Arsenal on 28 April 2011 . He was also regularly on the scoresheet , particularly in the Manchester Senior Cup , in which he scored twice in an 8 – 0 win over Bury and three times in a 6 – 1 win over Rochdale . He also hit two against Oldham Athletic in the quarter @-@ finals of the Lancashire Senior Cup and against Chelsea in the Premier Reserve League to finish the season with 11 goals as the team won the Manchester Senior Cup and the Premier Reserve League North . 
 In among these performances , King was also named on the bench for three first @-@ team matches , including Manchester United 's 4 – 0 away league win over Wigan Athletic and their FA Cup wins over Crawley Town and Arsenal , as well as travelling with the team for the first leg of their Champions League round of 16 tie with Marseille . In recognition of his performances in the second half of the season , King was rewarded with a new two @-@ year contract with Manchester United , keeping him at the club until the summer of 2013 . 
 = = = = Borussia Mönchengladbach loan = = = = 
 In August 2011 , King joined German club Borussia Mönchengladbach on loan for the duration of the 2011 – 12 season . The loan agreement between Borussia and Manchester United was first announced by Borussia 's director of sport , Max Eberl , at the club 's general meeting on 29 May 2011 , but the move was held up when King suffered a groin injury requiring surgery while on international duty with the Norway Under @-@ 21 side . Borussia confirmed the loan transfer on 22 July 2011 , the terms of which were undisclosed by either club , although it was still subject to King passing a medical examination on 1 August . He began individual training with Borussia on 2 August , before linking up with the rest of the squad shortly afterwards . King made his first appearance for Borussia Mönchengladbach as a substitute on 19 August 2011 , in Borussia 's 4 – 1 win against VfL Wolfsburg . After just one more substitute appearance and a total of 19 minutes on the field , a recurrence of King 's groin injury resulted in his loan spell being terminated early . 
 = = = = Hull City loan = = = = 
 Having returned to England , King joined Hull City on loan for the rest of the 2011 – 12 season on 16 January 2012 . He made his debut as an 86th @-@ minute substitute for Liam Rosenior in a 1 – 0 away win at Reading on 21 January . King played in four consecutive matches at the start of his spell at Hull , but on 9 February 2012 , he appeared for the Manchester United reserves in their 4 – 2 Manchester Senior Cup defeat at home to Manchester City ; he played for 61 minutes of the match before being replaced by Reece Brown . It took until 9 April for King to score his first goal for Hull , scoring the equaliser as Hull came from behind to beat Middlesbrough 2 – 1 ; King also provided the assist for Matty Fryatt 's winning goal . 
 King returned to Manchester United on 1 May and went straight back into the reserve team for their Lancashire Senior Cup semi @-@ final against Blackpool ; Manchester United won 5 – 4 on penalties after neither side could produce a goal in normal time , with King scoring United 's first penalty . Another penalty shoot @-@ out followed in King 's next match for the reserves , the Premier Reserve League play @-@ off match against the winners of the south section , Aston Villa ; after coming on as a substitute for captain Davide Petrucci , King was one of three scorers for Manchester United in the shoot @-@ out as they won 3 – 1 to take the title . 
 = = = Blackburn Rovers = = = 
 At the start of the 2012 – 13 season , King found himself a regular in the Manchester United reserve team , and scored the team 's last goal in the 90th minute of their 4 – 0 win over Accrington Stanley in the final of the Lancashire Senior Cup on 8 August 2012 . However , despite playing in seven of the reserves ' first nine games of the season , he was unable to make the step up to the first team – he was an unused substitute in the League Cup third round match against Newcastle United on 26 September , and came on as a substitute for Danny Welbeck in the 85th minute of the dead rubber Champions League group match against Galatasaray on 20 November . 
 In search of first @-@ team football , King was allowed to join Blackburn Rovers on loan until 31 December 2012 , with a view to eventually making the move permanent . Despite competition up front from Jordan Rhodes , Colin Kazim @-@ Richards , Ruben <unk> and Nuno Gomes , he made his debut two days later , coming on as a 55th @-@ minute substitute for Marcus Olsson in a 2 – 0 defeat at home to Millwall . He scored his first goal for the club at home to Cardiff City on 7 December , an equaliser after Mark Hudson had put Cardiff in front ; however , Cardiff scored a further three goals and won 4 – 1 . After scoring two goals in eight appearances , King 's transfer to Blackburn was made permanent as he signed a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract on 2 January 2013 , with the option of extending the deal by a further year . In an FA Cup match against Derby County on 26 January , he was forced to come off with a hamstring injury ; he had also missed the three games prior to that with the same injury . He went on to make a total of 20 appearances for Blackburn that season . 
 His first goal of the 2013 – 14 season came on 24 August in Blackburn 's 5 – 2 victory over Barnsley , where he converted a Todd Kane pass into a goal from six yards out . On 14 February 2015 , King scored his first Rovers hat trick in a 4 – 1 win against Stoke City in the FA Cup 5th round . He did not net any other goals that season . 
 = = = Bournemouth = = = 
 On 28 May 2015 , after turning down a new contract at Blackburn , King switched to Bournemouth ahead of their first @-@ ever season in the Premier League . He credited the ethos of manager Eddie Howe and the opportunity to be a top @-@ flight regular as his reasons to sign . He made his debut for Bournemouth on 8 August as they began the season with a 0 – 1 home defeat against Aston Villa . King 's first goal for the Cherries came on 21 November , when he opened a 2 – 2 draw at Swansea City ; on 12 December he scored the winning goal from a corner kick routine as Bournemouth beat his former club United 2 – 1 at Dean Court . Contrary to the common courtesy , he enthusiastically celebrated his goal against his former employers , and later told the Daily Mail that manager Alex Ferguson refused to speak to him or any of the other young players at the time . 
 = = International career = = 
 After representing Norway at youth international level , Egil Olsen called up King to Norway 's squad for two World Cup qualifiers in September 2012 . He made his debut against Iceland on 7 September 2012 , when he replaced Mohammed Abdellaoue after 65 minutes . King had the ball in the back of the net eight minutes later , but the goal was disallowed . Four days later in Norway 's next match , he replaced Abdellaoue at half time against Slovenia . King replaced Alexander <unk> as a substitute at half time against Cyprus in Larnaca on 16 October 2012 , then won a penalty and scored the last goal in Norway 's 3 – 1 victory . 
 He was included in the Norwegian squad for the 2013 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship , but as he was a regular member of the senior squad he had to play the World Cup qualifying match against Albania , along with his under @-@ 21 teammates <unk> Berisha , Håvard <unk> and Markus Henriksen before they traveled to the championship in Israel . King appeared in the under @-@ 21 team 's matches against Italy U @-@ 21 and Spain U @-@ 21 during the championship . 
 He scored his second full international goal in his next appearance , scoring the second goal in a 2 – 0 victory over Cyprus on 6 September 2013 . On 10 October 2014 , he scored two goals against Malta in a 3 – 0 away win in UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying , but was dropped by manager Per @-@ Mathias <unk> from their play @-@ off against Hungary in place of <unk> Berisha , Marcus Pedersen and Alexander <unk> . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 16 May 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played on 5 June 2016 
 = Friends with Benefits ( film ) = 
 Friends with Benefits is a 2011 American romantic comedy film directed by Will Gluck , and starring Justin Timberlake and Mila Kunis in the lead roles . The film features Patricia Clarkson , Jenna Elfman , Bryan Greenberg , Nolan Gould , Richard Jenkins , and Woody Harrelson in supporting roles . The plot revolves around Dylan Harper ( Timberlake ) and Jamie <unk> ( Kunis ) , who meet in New York City , and naively believe adding sex to their friendship will not lead to complications . Over time , they begin to develop deep mutual feelings for each other , only to deny it each time they are together . 
 Principal casting for Friends with Benefits took place over a three @-@ month period from April to July 2010 . Gluck reworked the original script and plot shortly after casting Timberlake and Kunis . Filming began in New York City on July 20 , 2010 , and concluded in Los Angeles in September 2010 . The film was distributed by Screen Gems and was released in North America on July 22 , 2011 . Friends with Benefits was generally well received by film critics , most of whom praised the chemistry between the lead actors . The film became a commercial success at the box office , grossing over $ 149 @.@ 5 million worldwide , against a budget of $ 35 million . It was nominated for two People 's Choice Awards — Favorite Comedy Movie , and Favorite Comedic Movie Actress ( Kunis ) — and two Teen Choice Awards for Timberlake and Kunis . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jamie <unk> ( Mila Kunis ) is an executive recruiter for a leading job agency in New York City , and Dylan Harper ( Justin Timberlake ) works as an art director for a small internet company in Los Angeles . Jamie has the task of trying to recruit Dylan to interview for a job with GQ and begin working in New York City . Dylan comes to New York and after interviewing for the position learns from Jamie that he has been given an offer to work for GQ . At first Dylan is hesitant to accept the job and move from Los Angeles to New York . But after a fun night exploring the city with Jamie , Dylan agrees to accept the position . 
 The following day , Jamie presents Dylan with the contract to sign so she can land her commission for recruiting him . Not knowing anyone else in the city , he and Jamie quickly develop a strong platonic friendship . One night , they get on the topic of sex and relationships . They come to the conclusion that sex should not come with so many emotional attachments . As they both feel the need for a physical connection , they agree to have sex without emotion or commitment . After several trysts together , Jamie comes to the realization that this is not really what she wants and she would like to start dating again . She tells Dylan that they need to stop . 
 Jamie meets Parker ( Bryan Greenberg ) , an oncologist , and they begin dating . After five dates , they consummate their relationship , only to break up the next morning . Trying to be sympathetic and to console her , Dylan suggests she travels with him to California over the Fourth of July weekend , while he visits his family . Initially hesitant , Jamie agrees after much persistence from Dylan . They fly to Los Angeles , where Jamie meets his sister Annie ( Jenna Elfman ) , nephew Sammy ( Nolan Gould ) , and father ( Richard Jenkins ) , who suffers from the early stages of Alzheimer 's disease . While in California , they begin to develop strong emotional romantic feelings for each other , and share a passionate kiss , which leads to a night of close intimacy unlike any other they had shared before . However , the next day , Jamie overhears a conversation between Annie and Dylan , where Dylan admits to having no real feelings for Jamie . Hurt , she flies back to New York . A few days later , Dylan returns to New York , trying to reconcile his friendship with Jamie and find out why she has been ignoring him . He finally finds Jamie , and she informs him she overheard everything he said and has no interest in maintaining any kind of a friendship with him . 
 Soon after this , Jamie discovers that Dylan may be leaving the GQ position for another job before the year elapses on his contract , which would affect her commission . She confronts Dylan about this , which leads to another argument . Both begin to do some soul searching trying to come to terms with their feelings about their relationship . Jamie spends time with her mother , Lorna ( Patricia Clarkson ) , while Dylan discusses it with Annie over the phone . His sister informs him that their father will be flying to Newark and he needs to be picked up at the airport . While at the airport , his father , in a moment of Alzheimer 's @-@ induced confusion , incorrectly recognizes a passer @-@ by as a woman from his past . Dylan asks him about the woman , and his father , upon regaining his lucidity , says that she was a woman he met in the Navy , that she was the love of his life , and he regrets decisions he made in his youth to let her go . He tells Dylan not to do the same thing , and to go after the woman he loves , if there is any chance of saving the relationship . 
 Dylan realizes how he really feels about Jamie after talking with his father , and decides to go after her . He calls Jamie ’ s mother to set up an excuse to get Jamie to go to Grand Central Station thinking she will be picking up her mother . He arranges to have a flash mob dance to " Closing Time " set up to surprise Jamie at the station . When the moment comes , he catches up with Jamie and tells her how he really feels . Surprised and happy by this turn of events , Jamie tells him to kiss her . After sharing a passionate kiss , Dylan suggests it is time they go on their first real date . They go across the street to the Pershing Square café and although they attempt to keep the date casual and relaxed , the film ends with them in a sensual embrace and passionate kiss . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMovie and The Guardian . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In April 2010 , Justin Timberlake became the first to sign on to the project . He was soon followed by Mila Kunis when she landed the female lead opposite him . Approximately two months later , Variety magazine announced that an ensemble cast consisting of Emma Stone , Patricia Clarkson , Richard Jenkins , Woody Harrelson , Andy Samberg and Jenna Elfman were set to join them in the film . Three days after principal filming began , Bryan Greenberg completed the cast . The film features cameo appearances from Shaun White , Jason Segel , and Rashida Jones . Production locations were set up as early as July 13 , and principal filmography commenced on July 20 , 2010 in the Midtown Manhattan section of New York City . Filming continued in Central Park and other sections of New York City from July to early August before the production relocated to Los Angeles , California . 
 Paramount Pictures dropped its original protest against the film after their director Ivan Reitman , re @-@ titled his film No Strings Attached . Screen Gems then moved forward with the title Friends with Benefits . At the same time , NBC was developing a sitcom with the same title , but the movie production company stated that due to its production schedule , they didn ’ t expect an issue to arise . Screen Gems chose to accelerate production fearing that they would lose their title to the competing Paramount project . Director Will Gluck spoke about the frustration of comparing the two films , stating : " I wish there was more space between them . The thing that 's <unk> me now is people are saying we 're remaking No Strings Attached . We 're not remaking it . The two movies were being made at the same time . " Gluck , in an interview with The New Zealand Herald , said that both films are different . Similar sentiments were expressed by Kunis , stating , " It 's just two different movies . There 's only [ ... ] so many stories you can tell in the world . This is just one of the many . " 
 The first theatrical trailer was released on March 16 , 2011 . The trailer had a subsequent release on YouTube and attracted over a million views in 48 hours , becoming the second most watched video of the day and the most viewed video in the film category . Promotion for Friends with Benefits subsequently grew , including promotional videos from Facebook and Twitter . Timberlake and Kunis also landed on the cover of Elle in support of the film . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Will Gluck stated that the concept of the story began with the idea that he wanted to work with Kunis and Timberlake , explaining that he rewrote the script for the two actors . Following those changes , Gluck expressed that he wanted to attract a more adult audience and that he " wanted to do more of an adult movie about sex , too , and about relationships " . He went on to compare the storyline of Friends with Benefits to the relationship in films between Katharine Hepburn and Spencer Tracy . 
 In an interview with Movieline , Gluck further discussed the film 's plot saying that Friends with Benefits would relate largely with a younger generation . He added : " They comment about these romantic comedies throughout the movie , and as they go through their storyline , they realize that they ’ re in a romantic comedy story — as two regular people who aren ’ t in a movie would comment on . They ’ re very cognizant that they ’ re in this story [ ... ] but they end up embracing the fact that they ’ re going through a romantic comedy moment . " In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Timberlake explained that he and Gluck held authorship of humor and tone in regards to Friends with Benefits . Timberlake and Kunis workshopped the script for more than a month before the movie went into production . Gluck would meet with the actors with 20 pages of script in front of him and the three would beat it up , changing lines , and defending each character 's perspective . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 In June 2011 , it was announced that Madison Gate Records would be distributing the album which featured fifteen songs . The album for Friends with Benefits was released on July 19 , 2011 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc in the United States on December 2 , 2011 and in the United Kingdom on February 6 , 2012 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Friends with Benefits received generally positive reviews from critics . On Rotten Tomatoes the film has a rating of 70 % , based on 168 reviews , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 2 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads , " Friends with Benefits adds nothing new to its well @-@ worn rom @-@ com formula , but the chemistry between Justin Timberlake and Mila Kunis is almost enough to carry the movie by itself . " Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average score , gave the film a 63 out of 100 , based on 37 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Manohla Dargis of The New York Times praised Friends with Benefits for its " breezy , speedy and funny comedy " and complimented the chemistry between the lead actors . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three stars , and remarked about the film , " What not every rom @-@ com has , however , is good dialogue , well @-@ delivered at a fast clip . " He added , " Kunis fast @-@ talks her way through the opening scenes as if she 's channeling Juno , and Timberlake easily keeps up . At some fundamental level , I simply enjoyed watching them . " Peter Debruge of Variety found the plot to be predictable and benign ; however , he complimented the cast , calling Kunis " a natural with comedy " , while Timberlake " exudes the kind of star wattage that put Will Smith on top . " Likewise , Salon 's Andrew O 'Hehir asserted that despite a disappointing conclusion to the film , it was nonetheless a " rewarding summer diversion . " The Guardian writer Peter Bradshaw reacted negatively to the film , expressing that there " was no benefit to watching it . " Bradshaw gave the film a one @-@ out @-@ of @-@ five @-@ star rating . 
 The Daily Telegraph 's Sukhdev Sandhu felt that Timberlake held his own when working with Mila Kunis . Concluding his review , Sandhu presented Friends with Benefits a three out of five stars . Betsey Sharkey of the Los Angeles Times praised the acting in the film , opining that " it [ brought ] a lot of natural life to the party . " Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review , stating that there was " palpable chemistry " between Timberlake and Kunis . Entertainment Weekly writer Owen Gleiberman gave Friends with Benefits a ' B- ' grade , exclaiming that while he enjoyed much of the film , he felt that it was inconsistent . 
 Mary Pols of Time applauded the film , and wrote that despite the plot being predictable , the film was " elevated by energetic dialogue , the sexual chemistry between the leads and the fact that the miscommunication that keeps bliss at bay [ ... ] is plausible . " Giving Friends with Benefits a three @-@ star rating , The Boston Globe journalist Ty Burr opined that the film " works like a charm . " He added that it mostly keeps its manic energy in check , and that it plays to chick @-@ flick formulas without ever groveling – which is due almost entirely to the leads . " Similar sentiments were expressed by Peter Paras of E ! . Giving it a ' B ' grade , Paras asserted that the film was the best romantic comedy film in a long time . Melissa Leong of the National Post wrote , " While the film takes jabs at the Hollywood fairy tale , [ ... ] Gluck adheres to the formula . " 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 According to The New York Times , Friends with Benefits , a film " about love and sex in the age of social networking , gets some of its juice and tang partly by trash @-@ talking its own genre . The setup is familiar , as are the essential elements : a single man and a single woman , two battered hearts yet a pair of resilient , eager , pretty bodies [ ... ] Friends with Benefits starts from the premise that its characters , and you , are sick of the romantic comedy clichés they may secretly , or not so secretly , adore . " Drew Pinsky , an addiction medicine specialist felt that the film 's central characters , both of whom were raised by a single parent in the film , " start looking for ways to solve that problem because they were never given the opportunity to grow an emotional landscape from a nurturing , available parent . They were just quickly <unk> and became a caretaker . And the caretaking is all part of the ' going for a broken person ' and trying to fix them . " He further added that " love addiction ending in ' happily ever after ' is not a great message . " 
 Timberlake added that Friends with Benefits is a film for " our generation ; people that are between 25 and 30 years of age that are moving into a different part of their life . They are not sure what type of commitment they are comfortable with or what they 're gonna do for the rest of their life " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Friends with Benefits was released in North America on July 22 , 2011 , in 2 @,@ 926 theaters . It collected $ 6 @,@ 801 @,@ 594 on its opening day and then grossed a total of $ 18 @,@ 622 @,@ 150 in its opening weekend , finishing third at the box office , behind Captain America : The First Avenger and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . The film grossed $ 55 @.@ 8 million in the United States and Canada . 
 The film had similar success internationally . In Australia , it premiered on August 18 , 2011 and earned $ 2 @.@ 4 million during its opening weekend , charting above Green Lantern to finish first at the box office . The film expanded into Europe in September 2011 . It grossed $ 10 @.@ 6 million from over 20 territories in its first weekend . Friends with Benefits topped first place in France , where it opened with $ 1 @.@ 8 million . The film performed highest in the United Kingdom and Germany , where it grossed $ 3 @.@ 1 million and $ 2 @.@ 6 million in its first weekend upon release , respectively . By mid @-@ September , the film had grossed over $ 29 @.@ 6 million overseas . It went on to gross over $ 149 @.@ 5 million worldwide , with international grosses standing at $ 93 @.@ 7 million . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = Seymour H. Knox I = 
 Seymour Horace Knox I ( April 1861 – May 17 , 1915 ) , was a Buffalo , New York businessman who made his fortune in five @-@ and @-@ dime stores . He merged his more than 100 stores with those of his first cousins , Frank Winfield Woolworth and Charles Woolworth , to form the F. W. Woolworth Company . He went on to hold prominent positions in the merged company as well as Marine Trust Co . He was the father of Seymour H. Knox II and grandfather of Seymour H. Knox III and Northrup Knox , the co @-@ founders of the Buffalo Sabres in the National Hockey League . 
 = = Biography = = 
 He was born in April 1861 in Russell , Saint Lawrence County , New York . His father was James Horace Knox , a farmer married to Jane E. <unk> . James ' grandfather had fought in the American Revolution . William Knox , was the first of this line of <unk> to come to Massachusetts from Belfast , Ireland , in 1737 . 
 Seymour attended the Russell district school and at fifteen , though he had never gone to high school , began to teach in school himself . 
 = = Career = = 
 At seventeen he moved to Hart , Michigan , where for a few years he worked as a <unk> . Then he left for Reading , Pennsylvania , where he entered into a partnership with his first cousins . He later donated the Knox Memorial Central School Building ( dedicated on July 30 , 1913 ) that served the town until the Knox Memorial School and Edwards Central School merged . He initially became a partner with the Woolworths by jointly opening a Reading , Pennsylvania , Woolworth & Knox store with them on September 20 , 1884 , using his entire life savings . The Reading store 's first several hours had no sales . However , after the partners took a lunchtime walk , they returned at 1 : 30 to find the local factory workers had been let out at 1 : 00 — with their paychecks . Sales were brisk , and the partners never looked back . His second store , in Newark , New Jersey , was short lived , but his partnership thrived nonetheless . The third venture , in Erie , Pennsylvania , enabled them to buy out the Newark lease . He partnered with Frank to open the first Buffalo store , at 409 Main Street , on October 13 , 1888 . 
 By 1889 , he was able to buy out his cousins . He maintained a collegial business relationship with his cousins after the buyout . In fact , he bought Woolworth merchandise at wholesale and sometimes traded in competition . He formed another brief partnership with another friendly rival , Earle Perry Charlton , from 1889 – 1895 , opening his Buffalo " S.H. Knox Co . " 5 and 10 Cent Store in 1890 . In 1890 , he made established headquarters in the Buffalo store . Sources disagree on the chronology of later stores . One source says that the second Buffalo store was opened at 549 William Street on June 20 , 1891 . Another says Knox opened his second store on December 18 , 1893 , at 519 Main Street four days after the first store at 409 Main Street was destroyed in the Wonderland Building Fire . The 519 Main Street store replaced the 409 Main Street after the December 14 , 1893 fire and moved to 395 Main Street in 1895 . He continued to build his S.H. Knox Co . 5 and 10 Cent Store empire . By the time of the 1911 incorporation of F. W. Woolworth Company , Knox was the second largest of six store operators with 98 U.S. and 13 Canadian locations . In 1912 , he received $ 12 million of the $ 65 million merger proceeds and was appointed Director and Senior Vice @-@ Principal of the Corporation . Knox is remembered as the pioneering city center store operator . His Detroit , Michigan store was the first outside of the agricultural and small @-@ market towns . Many of the Woolworth friendly rivals emulated his plan . 
 In 1913 , he purchased Stephen Clement 's interests in Marine National . At his death , Seymour was Vice President of the Woolworth Co. and Chairman of the Board of the Marine Trust Co . He was the first of three generations of the family to serve as Chairman . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Seymour married Grace Millard Knox ( 1862 – 1936 ) , in 1890 , and they raised three children : 
 Seymour H. Knox II ( Seymour , Jr . ) 
 Marjorie Knox 
 Dorothy Knox 
 Among his grandchildren were Seymour H. Knox III and Northrup R. Knox , the original principal owners of the Buffalo Sabres . Grace established The University at Buffalo 's first endowment fund in 1916 when she donated $ 250 @,@ 000 . Knox bred champion trotters and pacers and was a polo enthusiast . 
 Knox died on May 17 , 1915 in Buffalo , New York . 
 = Oregon Theatre = 
 The Oregon Theatre , or Oregon Theater , is an adult movie theater in the Richmond neighborhood of southeast Portland , Oregon . The theater was completed in 1925 and originally housed a Wurlitzer pipe organ and vaudeville stage . It would later screen Hollywood , art @-@ house , and Spanish @-@ language films . The building was acquired by the Maizels family in 1967 and became an adult cinema in the 1970s . It continues to operate as the city 's longest running pornographic cinema and remains owned by a member of the Maizels family . 
 The cinema has been described as " less creepy than most of its kind " and " out of place " along the newly developed Southeast Division Street . It has also been called " the last holdout of an era " , referring to both the prominence of adult film screenings in the city during the 1970s and its status as the last property owned by the Maizels family . In 2004 , the building was identified as an " Investment and Identity Site " and commended for having attributes valued by the community , such as quality architecture , local ownership , and orientation to the street . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The two @-@ story , roughly 8 @,@ 700 square foot ( 810 m2 ) Oregon Theatre was designed by Hubert A. Williams . It exhibits Italianate and " Streetcar Era Commercial " architecture , with plans drafted by Universal Plan Service . The brick exterior includes a glass @-@ filled retail base , <unk> , double @-@ hung windows on the second story , ornamental brickwork on its parapet , and a flat roof . Upon its completion , the interior featured a $ 16 @,@ 000 Wurlitzer pipe organ , ornate lighting fixtures attached to a high @-@ domed ceiling , 750 high @-@ backed chairs , a vaudeville stage , and a screen which measured 16 by 20 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m × 6 @.@ 1 m ) . The theater cost $ 35 @,@ 000 to construct and began operating on September 4 , 1925 , possibly for a showing of Steele of the Royal Mounted . 
 J. W. McFadden Inc. was the building 's original owner . Subsequent owners have included C. C. and Leedy Maude , J. S. Middleton , Oregon Theatre Co . , Mary Watt , and Ernest Bass . The theater 's front doors and ticket office were altered by J. W. McFadden Inc. in 1930 , along with the construction of a new ticket booth . In 1949 , when the Waverly Heights Congregational United Church of Christ was reconstructing a new church building on its property at Southeast 33rd and Woodward , church services were held at the Oregon Theatre . According to the Puget Sound Theatre Organ Society , the organ was repossessed by the William Wood Organ Co. and re @-@ installed at radio station <unk> 's studios in Portland . The theater 's front entrance , including its doors and 1930s ticket booth , were remodeled by Ferguson Cassady Co. in 1954 . 
 In 1967 , an immigrant family acquired ownership of the theater . The Maizels family also owned other cinemas , including Aladdin Theater , the defunct and demolished Walnut Park , and the Encore , now known as Clinton Street Theater . In addition to Hollywood films , the cinemas screened art @-@ house and Spanish @-@ language movies . Multi @-@ light Broadway Sign Co. installed corrugated aluminum on the bottom of the marquee in 1975 . 
 = = = Adult cinema = = = 
 The venue became an adult cinema in the 1970s . The success of Deep Throat in 1972 was a turning point , leading to an increase in the number of adult film screenings at more than a dozen cinemas in Portland . However , the rise of video cassettes and cable television led to a decline in cinema attendance , and by the 2000s , the Maizels family had sold all of their properties except for the Oregon Theatre . <unk> Maizels still owns the theater , which continues to operate as the city 's longest running pornographic cinema . 
 Since becoming an adult cinema , the theater has featured a single movie screen and sofas . In 2005 , The Portland Mercury said the theater showed heterosexual pornographic films daily except for Wednesdays and Saturdays , when it featured bisexual content . In 2013 , Portland Monthly described the venue 's green entryway , leading to a ramp lined with adult DVDs and an " indifferent doorman who demands $ 8 . Inside , a few dozen men , mostly seniors , occupy a hodgepodge of old couches in near @-@ total darkness . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to local film archivist and author Gary Lacher , the Oregon Theatre 's record as the longest continuously operating adult cinema in Portland is " not often acknowledged publicly " and represents " the last holdout of an era " , referring to the prominence of adult film screenings in Portland . In an interview , Lacher expressed his wish that the theater would return to a more traditional cinema , but was thankful that the venue has been spared from closure and demolition to date . 
 In 2004 , <unk> Planning included the theater as an " Investment and Identity Site " in their report , which was commissioned by the Division Vision Coalition ( <unk> ) , a coalition of community members from the nearby business and neighborhood associations . <unk> is invested in the " economy of locally @-@ owned businesses , an attractive streetscape that invites neighbors to linger , and sustainable features that are ecologically sensitive " . The building was identified as having attributes valued by the community , including quality architecture , local ownership , and orientation to the street . 
 In its 2005 review of the theater , The Portland Mercury said the " glut of cozy sofas make an outing comfortable " , but criticized the venue for having only one screen and for showing predominantly heterosexual films . The publication said that the venue was " [ m ] ore like an actual cinema than a circle jerk ( though chicken @-@ choking is not unheard of ) .... The [ theater ] is much less creepy than most of its kind — there 's even bicycle parking indoors . " In its 2012 Portlandia @-@ related list of " Portland 's Most Ill @-@ Advised Valentine 's Date Spots " , IFC quipped , " Of course , considering the dwindling number of adult theaters across the country , you could make an argument that it 's a piece of Portland history , and that visiting wouldn 't be much different than going to a museum ... on second thought , play it safe and stay away . " In 2013 , Portland Monthly said the venue " seems out of place " , a " dingy brick building " surrounded by the newly developed Southeast Division Street . 
 After multiple restaurants on Southeast Division were featured in Willamette Week 's annual restaurant guide in 2013 , the newspaper made humorous " predictions " about what might become of some of the street 's existing spaces . It predicted that the Oregon Theatre could become " McMenamins <unk> & Brewery " , referring to the McMenamins regional chain of breweries , historic hotels , music venues and pubs . Willamette Week wrote , " When one of the nation 's last adult theaters finally succumbs to market pressure , McMenamins <unk> the space while keeping its historic character alive with ' voyeur ' dining booths , a sticky dance floor and VIP dining in the bored projectionist 's perch . " In 2014 , Willamette Week called the theater " seedy " . 
 = Triton ( moon ) = 
 Triton is the largest natural satellite of the planet Neptune . It was discovered on October 10 , 1846 , by English astronomer William Lassell . It is the only large moon in the Solar System with a retrograde orbit , an orbit in the opposite direction to its planet 's rotation . At 2 @,@ 700 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 700 mi ) in diameter , it is the seventh @-@ largest moon in the Solar System . Because of its retrograde orbit and composition similar to Pluto 's , Triton is thought to have been a dwarf planet captured from the Kuiper belt . Triton has a surface of mostly frozen nitrogen , a mostly water @-@ ice crust , an icy mantle and a substantial core of rock and metal . The core makes up two @-@ thirds of its total mass . Triton has a mean density of 2 @.@ 061 grams per cubic centimetre ( 0 @.@ <unk> lb / cu in ) and is composed of approximately 15 – 35 % water ice . 
 Triton is one of the few moons in the Solar System known to be geologically active . As a consequence , its surface is relatively young with sparse impact craters , with a complex geological history revealed in intricate cryovolcanic and tectonic terrains . Part of its surface has geysers erupting sublimated nitrogen gas , contributing to a tenuous nitrogen atmosphere less than 1 / 70 @,@ 000 the pressure of Earth 's atmosphere at sea level . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Triton was discovered by British astronomer William Lassell on October 10 , 1846 , just 17 days after the discovery of Neptune . 
 A brewer by trade , Lassell began making mirrors for his amateur telescope in 1820 . When John Herschel received news of Neptune 's discovery , he wrote to Lassell suggesting he search for possible moons . Lassell did so and discovered Triton eight days later . Lassell also claimed to have discovered rings . Although Neptune was later confirmed to have rings , they are so faint and dark that it is doubtful that he actually saw them . 
 Triton is named after the Greek sea god Triton ( <unk> ) , the son of Poseidon ( the Greek god comparable to the Roman Neptune ) . The name was first proposed by Camille Flammarion in his 1880 book Astronomie Populaire , and was officially adopted many decades later . Until the discovery of the second moon Nereid in 1949 , Triton was commonly referred to as " the satellite of Neptune " . Lassell did not name his own discovery ; he later successfully suggested the name Hyperion , previously chosen by John Herschel , for the eighth moon of Saturn when he discovered it . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Triton is unique among all large moons in the Solar System for its retrograde orbit around its planet ( i.e. it orbits in a direction opposite to the planet 's rotation ) . Most of the outer irregular moons of Jupiter and Saturn also have retrograde orbits , as do some of Uranus 's outer moons . However , these moons are all much more distant from their primaries , and are small in comparison ; the largest of them ( Phoebe ) has only 8 % of the diameter ( and 0 @.@ 03 % of the mass ) of Triton . 
 Triton 's orbit is associated with two tilts , the inclination of Neptune 's spin to Neptune 's orbit , 30 ° , and the inclination of Triton 's orbit to Neptune 's spin , 157 ° ( an inclination over 90 ° indicates retrograde motion ) . Triton 's orbit precesses forward relative to Neptune 's spin with a period of about 678 Earth years ( 4 @.@ 1 Neptunian years ) , making its Neptune @-@ orbit @-@ relative inclination vary between 127 ° and 180 ° and in the past , to 173 ° . That inclination is currently 130 ° ; Triton 's orbit is now near its maximum departure from <unk> with Neptune 's . 
 Triton 's rotation is tidally locked to be synchronous with its orbit around Neptune : it keeps one face oriented toward the planet at all times . Its equator is almost exactly aligned with its orbital plane . At the present time , Triton 's rotational axis is about 40 ° from Neptune 's orbital plane , and hence at some point during Neptune 's year each pole points fairly close to the Sun , almost like the poles of Uranus . As Neptune orbits the Sun , Triton 's polar regions take turns facing the Sun , resulting in seasonal changes as one pole , then the other , moves into the sunlight . Such changes have recently been observed . 
 Triton 's revolution around Neptune has become a nearly perfect circle with an eccentricity of almost zero . <unk> damping from tides alone is not thought to be capable of circularizing Triton 's orbit in the time since the origin of the system , and gas drag from a prograde debris disc is likely to have played a substantial role . Tidal interactions also cause Triton 's orbit , which is already closer to Neptune than the Moon 's is to Earth , to gradually decay further ; predictions are that 3 @.@ 6 billion years from now , Triton will pass within Neptune 's Roche limit . This will result in either a collision with Neptune 's atmosphere or the breakup of Triton , forming a ring system similar to that found around Saturn . 
 = = Capture = = 
 Moons in retrograde orbits cannot form in the same region of the solar nebula as the planets they orbit , so Triton must have been captured from elsewhere . It might therefore have originated in the Kuiper belt , a ring of small icy objects extending outwards from just inside the orbit of Neptune to about 50 AU from the Sun . Thought to be the point of origin for the majority of short @-@ period comets observed from Earth , the belt is also home to several large , planet @-@ like bodies including Pluto , which is now recognized as the largest in a population of Kuiper belt objects ( the plutinos ) locked in orbital step with Neptune . Triton is only slightly larger than Pluto and nearly identical in composition , which has led to the hypothesis that the two share a common origin . 
 The proposed capture of Triton may explain several features of the Neptunian system , including the extremely eccentric orbit of Neptune 's moon Nereid and the scarcity of moons as compared to the other giant planets . Triton 's initially eccentric orbit would have intersected orbits of irregular moons and disrupted those of smaller regular moons , dispersing them through gravitational interactions . 
 Triton 's eccentric post @-@ capture orbit would have also resulted in tidal heating of its interior , which could have kept Triton fluid for a billion years ; this inference is supported by evidence of differentiation in Triton 's interior . This source of internal heat disappeared following tidal locking and circularization of the orbit . 
 Two types of mechanisms have been proposed for Triton 's capture . To be gravitationally captured by a planet , a passing body must lose sufficient energy to be slowed down to a speed less than that required to escape . An early theory of how Triton may have been slowed was by collision with another object , either one that happened to be passing by Neptune ( which is unlikely ) , or a moon or proto @-@ moon in orbit around Neptune ( which is more likely ) . A more recent hypothesis suggests that , before its capture , Triton was part of a binary system . When this binary encountered Neptune , it interacted in such a way that the binary dissociated , with one portion of the binary expelled , and the other , Triton , becoming bound to Neptune . This event is more likely for more massive companions . Similar mechanisms have been proposed for the capture of Mars 's moons . This hypothesis is supported by several lines of evidence , including binaries being very common among the large Kuiper belt objects . The event was brief but gentle , saving Triton from collisional disruption . Events like this may have been common during the formation of Neptune , or later when it migrated outward . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Triton is the seventh @-@ largest moon and sixteenth @-@ largest object in the Solar System , and is modestly larger than the dwarf planets Pluto and Eris . It comprises more than 99 @.@ 5 % of all the mass known to orbit Neptune , including the planet 's rings and thirteen other known moons , and is also more massive than all known moons in the Solar System smaller than itself combined . It has a radius , density ( 2 @.@ 061 g / cm3 ) , temperature and chemical composition similar to those of Pluto . 
 Triton 's surface is covered with a transparent layer of annealed frozen nitrogen . Only 40 % of Triton 's surface has been observed and studied , but it is possible that it is entirely covered in such a thin sheet of nitrogen ice . Like Pluto 's , Triton 's crust consists of 55 % nitrogen ice with other ices mixed in . Water ice comprises 15 – 35 % and frozen carbon dioxide ( dry ice ) the remaining 10 – 20 % . Trace ices include 0 @.@ 1 % methane and 0 @.@ 05 % carbon monoxide . There could also be ammonia ice on the surface , as there are indications of ammonia dihydrate in the lithosphere . Triton 's mean density implies that it probably consists of about 30 – 45 % water ice ( including relatively small amounts of volatile ices ) , with the remainder being rocky material . Triton 's surface area is 23 million km2 , which is 4 @.@ 5 % of Earth , or 15 @.@ 5 % of Earth 's land area . Triton has a considerably and unusually high albedo , reflecting 60 – 95 % of the sunlight that reaches it , and it has changed slightly since the first observations . By comparison , the Moon reflects only 11 % . Triton 's reddish colour is thought to be the result of methane ice , which is converted to tholins under bombardment from ultraviolet radiation . 
 Because Triton 's surface indicates a long history of melting , models of its interior posit that Triton is differentiated , like Earth , into a solid core , a mantle and a crust . Water , the most abundant volatile in the Solar System , comprises Triton 's mantle , enveloping a core of rock and metal . There is enough rock in Triton 's interior for radioactive decay to power convection in the mantle to this day . The heat may even be sufficient to maintain a global subsurface ocean similar to what is hypothesized to exist beneath the surface of Europa . If liquid water is present in Triton , it has been speculated that this could make it habitable for some form of life . 
 = = Atmosphere = = 
 Triton has a tenuous nitrogen atmosphere , with trace amounts of carbon monoxide and small amounts of methane near its surface . Like Pluto 's atmosphere , the atmosphere of Triton is thought to have resulted from evaporation of nitrogen from its surface . Its surface temperature is at least 35 @.@ 6 K ( − 237 @.@ 6 ° C ) because Triton 's nitrogen ice is in the warmer , hexagonal crystalline state , and the phase transition between hexagonal and cubic nitrogen ice occurs at that temperature . An upper limit in the low 40s ( K ) can be set from vapor pressure equilibrium with nitrogen gas in Triton 's atmosphere . This is colder than Pluto 's average equilibrium temperature of 44 K ( − 229 ° C ) . Triton 's surface atmospheric pressure is only about 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 9 Pa ( 0 @.@ 014 – 0 @.@ 019 mbar ) . 
 Turbulence at Triton 's surface creates a troposphere ( a " weather region " ) rising to an altitude of 8 km . Streaks on Triton 's surface left by geyser plumes suggest that the troposphere is driven by seasonal winds capable of moving material of over a micrometre in size . Unlike other atmospheres , Triton 's lacks a stratosphere , and instead has a thermosphere from altitudes of 8 to 950 km , and an exosphere above that . The temperature of Triton 's upper atmosphere , at 95 ± 5 K , is higher than that at its surface , due to heat absorbed from solar radiation and Neptune 's magnetosphere . A haze permeates most of Triton 's troposphere , thought to be composed largely of hydrocarbons and nitriles created by the action of sunlight on methane . Triton 's atmosphere also has clouds of condensed nitrogen that lie between 1 and 3 km from its surface . 
 In 1997 , observations from Earth were made of Triton 's limb as it passed in front of stars . These observations indicated the presence of a denser atmosphere than was deduced from Voyager 2 data . Other observations have shown an increase in temperature by 5 % from 1989 to 1998 . These observations indicate Triton is approaching an unusually warm summer season that happens only once every few hundred years . Theories for this warming include a change of frost patterns on Triton 's surface and a change in ice albedo , which would allow more heat to be absorbed . Another theory argues the changes in temperature are a result of deposition of dark , red material from geological processes . Because Triton 's Bond albedo is among the highest within the Solar System , it is sensitive to small variations in spectral albedo . 
 = = Surface features = = 
 All detailed knowledge of the surface of Triton was acquired from a distance of 40 @,@ 000 km by the Voyager 2 spacecraft during a single encounter in 1989 . The 40 % of Triton 's surface imaged by Voyager 2 revealed blocky outcrops , ridges , troughs , furrows , hollows , plateaus , icy plains and few craters . Triton is relatively flat ; its observed topography never varies beyond a kilometer . There are relatively few impact craters on Triton . Recent analysis of crater density and distribution has suggested that in geological terms , Triton 's surface is extremely young , with regions varying from an estimated 50 million years old to just an estimated 6 million years old . 
 = = = Cryovolcanism = = = 
 Triton is geologically active ; its surface is young and has relatively few impact craters . Although Triton 's crust is made of various ices , its subsurface processes are similar to those that produce volcanoes and rift valleys on Earth , but with water and ammonia as opposed to liquid rock . Triton 's entire surface is cut by complex valleys and ridges , probably the result of tectonics and icy volcanism . The vast majority of surface features on Triton are endogenic — the result of internal geological processes rather than external processes such as impacts . Most are volcanic and extrusive in nature , rather than tectonic . 
 The Voyager 2 probe observed a handful of geyser @-@ like eruptions of invisible nitrogen gas and entrained dust from beneath the surface of Triton in plumes up to 8 km high . Triton is thus , along with Earth , Io , and Enceladus , one of the few bodies in the Solar System on which active eruptions of some sort have been observed . The best @-@ observed examples were named <unk> and <unk> ( after a Zulu water sprite and a Tongan sea spirit , respectively ) . 
 All the geysers observed were located between 50 ° and 57 ° S , the part of Triton 's surface close to the subsolar point . This indicates that solar heating , although very weak at Triton 's great distance from the Sun , plays a crucial role . It is thought that the surface of Triton probably consists of a translucent layer of frozen nitrogen overlying a darker substrate , which creates a kind of " solid greenhouse effect " . Solar radiation passes through the thin surface ice sheet , slowly heating and vaporizing subsurface nitrogen until enough gas pressure accumulates for it to erupt through the crust . A temperature increase of just 4 K above the ambient surface temperature of 37 K could drive eruptions to the heights observed . Although commonly termed " cryovolcanic " , this nitrogen plume activity is distinct from Triton 's larger scale cryovolcanic eruptions , as well as volcanic processes on other worlds , which are powered by the internal heat of the body in question . Analogous CO2 geysers on Mars are thought to erupt from its south polar cap each spring . 
 Each eruption of a Triton geyser may last up to a year , driven by the sublimation of about 100 million cubic metres ( 3 @.@ 5 × 10 ^ 9 cu ft ) of nitrogen ice over this interval ; dust entrained may be deposited up to 150 km downwind in visible streaks , and perhaps much farther in more diffuse deposits . Voyager 2 's images of Triton 's southern hemisphere show many such streaks of dark material . Between 1977 and the Voyager 2 flyby in 1989 , Triton shifted from a reddish colour , similar to Pluto , to a far paler hue , suggesting that lighter nitrogen frosts had covered older reddish material . The eruption of volatiles from Triton 's equator and their deposition at the poles may redistribute enough mass over the course of 10 @,@ 000 years to cause polar wander . 
 = = = Polar cap , plains and ridges = = = 
 Triton 's south polar region is covered by a highly reflective cap of frozen nitrogen and methane sprinkled by impact craters and openings of geysers . Little is known about the north pole because it was on the night side during the Voyager 2 encounter , but it is thought that Triton must also have a north polar ice cap . 
 The high plains found on Triton 's eastern hemisphere , such as <unk> Planum , cover over and blot out older features , and are therefore almost certainly the result of icy lava washing over the previous landscape . The plains are dotted with pits , such as Leviathan Patera , which are probably the vents from which this lava emerged . The composition of the lava is unknown , although a mixture of ammonia and water is suspected . 
 Four roughly circular " walled plains " have been identified on Triton . They are the flattest regions so far discovered , with a variance in altitude of less than 200 m . They are thought to have formed from eruption of icy lava . The plains near Triton 's eastern limb are dotted with black spots , the maculae . Some maculae are simple dark spots with diffuse boundaries , and other comprise a dark central patch surrounded by a white halo with sharp boundaries . Typical diameter of maculae is about 100 km and width of halo is between 20 and 30 km . Some speculate the maculae are outliers of the south polar cap , which retreats in summer . 
 There are extensive ridges and valleys in complex patterns across Triton 's surface , probably the result of freeze – thaw cycles . Many also appear to be tectonic in nature and may result from extension or strike @-@ slip faulting . There are long double ridges of ice with central troughs bearing a strong resemblance to Europan lineae ( although they have a larger scale ) , and which may have a similar origin , possibly shear heating from strike @-@ slip motion along faults caused by diurnal tidal stresses experienced before Triton 's orbit was fully circularized . These faults with parallel ridges expelled from the interior cross complex terrain with valleys in the equatorial region . The ridges and furrows , or sulci , such as <unk> Sulci , Ho Sulci , and Lo Sulci , are thought to be of intermediate age in Triton 's geological history , and in many cases to have formed concurrently . They tend to be clustered in groups or " packets " . 
 = = = <unk> terrain = = = 
 Triton 's western hemisphere consists of a strange series of fissures and depressions known as " cantaloupe terrain " because of its resemblance to the skin of a cantaloupe melon . Although it has few craters , it is thought that this is the oldest terrain on Triton . It probably covers much of Triton 's western half . 
 <unk> terrain , which is mostly dirty water ice , is known to exist only on Triton . It contains depressions 30 – 40 km in diameter . The depressions ( <unk> ) are probably not impact craters because they are all of similar size and have smooth curves . The leading hypothesis for their formation is <unk> , the rising of " lumps " of less dense material through a stratum of denser material . Alternative hypotheses include formation by collapses , or by flooding caused by cryovolcanism . 
 = = = Impact craters = = = 
 Due to constant erasure and modification by ongoing geological activity , impact craters on Triton 's surface are relatively rare . A census of Triton 's craters imaged by Voyager 2 found only 179 that were incontestably of impact origin , compared with 835 observed for Uranus 's moon Miranda , which has only three percent of Triton 's surface area . The largest crater observed on Triton thought to have been created by an impact is a 27 km @-@ diameter feature called <unk> . Although larger craters have been observed , they are generally thought to be volcanic in nature . 
 The few impact craters on Triton are almost all concentrated in the leading hemisphere — that facing the direction of the orbital motion — with the majority concentrated around the equator between 30 ° and 70 ° longitude , resulting from material swept up from orbit around Neptune . Because it orbits with one side permanently facing the planet , astronomers expect that Triton should have fewer impacts on its trailing hemisphere , due to impacts on the leading hemisphere being more frequent and more violent . Voyager 2 imaged only 40 % of Triton 's surface , so this remains uncertain . 
 = = Observation and exploration = = 
 The orbital properties of Triton were already determined with high accuracy in the 19th century . It was found to have a retrograde orbit , at a very high angle of inclination to the plane of Neptune 's orbit . The first detailed observations of Triton were not made until 1930 . Little was known about the satellite until Voyager 2 arrived at the end of the 20th century . 
 Before the arrival of Voyager 2 , astronomers suspected that Triton might have liquid nitrogen seas and a nitrogen / methane atmosphere with a density as much as 30 % that of Earth . Like the famous overestimates of the atmospheric density of Mars , this proved completely false . As with Mars , a denser atmosphere is postulated for its early history . 
 The first attempt to measure the diameter of Triton was made by Gerard Kuiper in 1954 . He obtained a value of 3 @,@ 800 km . Subsequent measurement attempts arrived at values ranging from 2 @,@ 500 to 6 @,@ 000 km , or from slightly smaller than the Moon ( <unk> @.@ 2 km ) to nearly half the diameter of Earth . Data from the approach of Voyager 2 to Neptune on August 25 , 1989 , led to a more accurate estimate of Triton 's diameter ( 2 @,@ 706 km ) . 
 In the 1990s , various observations from Earth were made of the limb of Triton using the occultation of nearby stars , which indicated the presence of an atmosphere and an exotic surface . The observations suggest that the atmosphere is denser than the Voyager 2 measurements had indicated . 
 New concepts for missions to the Neptune system to be conducted in the 2010s have been brought forward by NASA scientists on numerous occasions over the last decades . All of them identified Triton as being a prime target and a separate Triton lander comparable to the Huygens probe for Titan was frequently included in those plans . No efforts aimed at Neptune and Triton went beyond the proposal phase and NASA 's funding on missions to the outer Solar System is currently focused on the Jupiter and Saturn systems . 
 A lander mission to Triton has been proposed in which in @-@ situ propellant is used to " hop " across the surface . 
 = = Maps = = 
 = Malvern water = 
 Malvern water is a natural spring water from the Malvern Hills on the border of the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire in England . The Hills consist of very hard granite and limestone rock . <unk> in the rock retain rain water , which slowly permeates through , escaping at the springs . The springs release an average of about 60 litres a minute and the flow has never been known to cease . 
 Beneficial properties of the water have been reported for over four hundred years , and the reason for such benefits was a topic of scholarly discussion by 1817 . In the 19th century Malvern became famous for the water cure , resulting in its rapid development from a village to a busy town with many large Victorian and Edwardian hotels . The writings of the hydrotherapists James Gully and James Wilson , and well known patients who included Lord Lytton contributed to Malvern 's renown at that time . The water has been bottled on an industrial scale under the Schweppes brand from 1850 until 2010 , and is still bottled by a family @-@ owned company since 2009 as Holywell Malvern Spring Water . In 2012 the Holywell Water Co Ltd was granted permission to use the world famous " Malvern " name in its branding , thus becoming Holywell Malvern Spring Water . It has been drunk by several British monarchs . Elizabeth I drank it in public in the 16th century ; Queen Victoria refused to travel without it . 
 = = Purity = = 
 Malvern water has long been acclaimed for its purity . In 1756 Dr John Wall tested the water , found that it contained very few minerals , and said : " The Malvern water is famous for containing just nothing at all ... ! " William Heberden also noted the purity of Malvern water , stating " the Malvern water is purer than that of any other springs in England , which I ever examined or heard of " . 
 The natural untreated water is generally devoid of all minerals , bacteria , and suspended matter , approaching the purity of distilled water . In 1987 Malvern gained official EU status as a natural mineral water , a mark of purity and quality . However , in spite of regular quality analysis , drought in 2006 dried out the rock that filters the water , allowing the water to flow through it too quickly for the natural filtering process . Due to the slight impurities , the Coca @-@ Cola Company , manufacturer of the Schweppes brand , had to install filtration equipment , which reclassifies the water as spring water under EU law . 
 = = Springs = = 
 There are sources in about 70 locations around the Hills , where residents regularly fill containers free of charge , including the St Ann 's Well , which is housed in a building dating from 1815 , in the town of Great Malvern . Major popular water sources are : 
 Beauchamp Fountain – Cowleigh Road 
 Enigma Fountain plus Malvhina water feature , Belle Vue Terrace – town centre 
 Evendine Spring – Jubilee Drive ( west flank of the Hills ) 
 <unk> Spring – West Malvern Road 
 Holy Well – Malvern Wells 
 Jubilee Fountain – Malvern Wells 
 Morris Well , Wells Common – Lower Wyche 
 St Ann 's Well – Great Malvern 
 The <unk> Well dating from around 250 BC is one of the earliest to be documented . 
 = = Medicinal use = = 
 Local legend has it that the curative benefit of the spring water was known in mediaeval times . The medicinal value and the bottling of Malvern water are praised in verses 15 and 16 of " a poem attributed to the Reverend Edmund Rea , who became Vicar of Great Malvern in 1612 " . These are part of " an old song in praise of Malvern " , that was published with comments on a different and uncertain provenance by Chambers in his history of the town . 
 In 1622 , Richard Banister , the pioneering oculist , wrote the following verse about the Eye Well , close to the Holy Well in his Breviary of the Eyes . 
 In 1756 , Dr. John Wall published a 14 @-@ page pamphlet on the benefits of Malvern water , that reached a 158 @-@ page 3rd edition in 1763 . Further praise came from the botanist Benjamin Stillingfleet in 1757 , the poet Thomas Warton in 1790 , quoted in a review by the medical historian W.H. McMenemy . Cure tourism in Malvern got press mention . In a letter dated 18 July 1759 to Mrs Montague , Benjamin Stillingfleet wrote : " I have been at Malvern about twelve days , where , with difficulty , I have got a lodging , the place is so full , nor do I wonder at it , there being some instances of very extraordinary cures , in cases looked on as desperate , even by Dr. Wall , who first brought these waters into vogue ... The road is very fine , and made on purpose for the convenience of the drinkers " . Chambers , in a footnote to the " song " quoted above , wrote " Though modern visitors do not now lie in bushes , yet so crowded was Malvern one season that a lady of rank and fashion , with her equipage and servants were actually obliged to be sent to the Workhouse . It is now the custom , during the season , to let out this house to visitors , and the money gained this way is applied to the funds for maintaining the poor . " Nicholas Vansittart brought his wife Catherine to Malvern for a rest cure in 1809 . In 1828 , William Addison , the physician of The Duchess of Kent ( mother of Queen Victoria ) lectured about Malvern at the Royal Institution commending " its pure and invigorating air , the excellence of its water , and the romantic beauty of its scenery " . 
 In 1842 Drs James Manby Gully and James Wilson opened water cure clinics at Malvern , thus beginning the town 's prosperity . Based on the therapy offered at Vincent <unk> 's clinic in Gräfenberg , Silesia , then part of the Austrian Empire ( now in the Czech Republic ) , the centre was Britain 's first purpose built water cure establishment . As the fame of the establishment grew , Gully and Wilson became well @-@ known national figures . Two more clinics were opened at Malvern . Famous patients included Charles Darwin 's daughter ( who died and is buried in Malvern ) , Thomas Carlyle , Florence Nightingale , Lord Tennyson , Samuel Wilberforce , and Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton , whose writing contributed to the popularity of Malvern water . The fame of Gully and Wilson was not without detractors ; Sir Charles Hastings , the founder of the British Medical Association , was extremely critical of hydropathy , and of Dr Gully in particular . The cure was satirized by " Dr. <unk> " . 
 = = Commercialisation = = 
 Malvern water has been bottled and distributed in the UK and abroad from as early as the reign of James I , with water bottling at the Holy Well being recorded in 1622 . Various local grocers have bottled and distributed Malvern water during the 19th and early 20th centuries , but it was first bottled on a large commercial scale by Schweppes , who opened a bottling plant at Holywell in Malvern Wells in 1850 . As official caterers to the Great Exhibition of 1851 , Schweppes introduced the water as Malvern Soda , later renaming it Malvern Seltzer Water in 1856 . In 1890 Schweppes moved away from Holywell , entered into a contract with a Colwall family , and built a bottling plant in the village in 1892 . The Holywell was subsequently leased to John and Henry Cuff , who bottled there until the 1960s . The Holywell became derelict until 2009 when with the aid of a Lottery Heritage grant , production of 1200 bottles per day of Holywell Spring Water was recommenced by an independent family @-@ owned company . The well is believed to be the oldest bottling plant in the world . 
 In the 1850s Malvern Water was bottled by John and William Burrow at the Bottling Works Spring in Robson Ward 's yard on Belle Vue Terrace in Great Malvern . Bottling ceased here in the 1950s and the former bottling works are now furniture showrooms . Water for the Bottling Works Spring is piped from St Ann 's Well . 
 In 1927 , Schweppes acquired from the Burrows family <unk> Spring , in Colwall , on the western side of the Herefordshire Beacon , approximately two miles from Colwall village . The source here emerges at the fault line between the Silurian thrust and the Precambrian diorite and granite above it . The spring was renamed <unk> Spring , and in 1929 Schweppes commenced bottling . The factory employed 25 people who filled 26 million bottles annually . It was operated by Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises Ltd . , and the water was sold under the Schweppes brand name . On 20 October 2010 Coca @-@ Cola Enterprises , who owned the Malvern brand , announced that production would be ceasing as of 3 November 2010 . This decision , which was widely criticised both in the town and beyond , was due to the declining market share Malvern has on the overall water market . On 28 October 2011 , it was reported that the bottling plant is being sold to a property company . 
 = = Interest groups = = 
 Among the interest groups promoting the legacy of Malvern water , the two primary ones are The Malvern Spa Association , and The Friends of Malvern Springs and Wells . 
 The Malvern Spa Association ( MSA ) is a non @-@ profit organisation , founded in September 1998 , with two primary aims . " To conserve , protect and restore the Springs , Wells , Spouts and Fountains of the Malvern Hills " , and " to promote the study , conservation , development and awareness " of them , and of " Great Malvern as a Spa Town " . Apart from various fundraising activities and membership fees , the MSA receives funding through the Heritage Lottery Fund , which is managed by the Malvern Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty Unit ( Malvern Hills AONB ) , under the umbrella of the National Association for Areas of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( <unk> ) . The Malvern Hills AONB also provides grants via such mechanisms as the Sustainable Development Fund . The MSA was originally founded by the Spa Water Strategy Working Group , comprising Malvern town councillors and artist Rose Garrard . Its patrons are Lord and Lady Sandys , after whose family a spout located in Spring Lane , Malvern Link is named , and which was restored in 2005 as part of the Malvern heritage Project . In 2004 , in order to finance improvements and restoration to 20 historical sites , a grant of £ 270 @,@ 000 was awarded by the Heritage Lottery Fund . The MSA produces a free newsletter available at the Tourist Information Centre in Great Malvern , at St Ann 's Well and for download . 
 The Friends of Malvern Springs and Wells is an informal group that publishes a newsletter and promotes interest in the wells , including an award scheme for conservation or renovation of springs and wells and their immediate environment . The award scheme is the St Werstan Award for the Enhancement of Water Heritage , given in honour of St. Werstan , one of the earliest saints associated with Malvern . In August 2008 , the group 's St Werstan award for conservation or renovation of the springs and wells and their surroundings was presented to Coca @-@ Cola Great Britain . At the behest of the Friends , the company is also sponsoring a project to transfer an iconic mulberry tree sapling from Melbourne , Australia . The <unk> derives from a cutting taken from a mulberry tree originally planted in 1936 by George Bernard Shaw at the Malvern Festival . The tree was destroyed in a storm in 2000 , but research by members of the Friends group revealed that in 1956 , a cutting from the tree was sent to Malvern in Victoria , Australia . The Friends group also assists in the general maintenance of wells and spouts , and in organising events and well dressing ceremonies . According to research made by local historians , a tradition of well dressing in the Malverns dates from the 12th and 13th centuries when around 5 August each year , tribute was paid to St Oswald for water cures . The tradition of well dressing continues , fostered by interest groups and activities such as arts projects . 
 = = Art projects = = 
 In 1996 the Malvern Hills District Council appointed a Malvern Spa Water Strategy Working Group . Independently , in June 1996 , sculptor Rose Garrard proposed to the <unk> the creation of a sculpture trail by nationally known sculptors , placed at forgotten springs around the town centre . The council began with the installation of new water features as part of its plan to beautify the town centre . In 1997 the District Council implemented a Spring Water Arts Project to map water sources around the hills . Garrard undertook a two @-@ month artist 's residency and collaborated with the public , who provided locations of over two hundred water sources . Garrard was commissioned to create the drinking spout , Malvhina , which was unveiled on 4 September 1998 . 
 On 26 May 2000 , the Enigma Fountain , also by Garrard , was unveiled by The Duke of York . Its cost of £ 5 @,@ 000 was funded by the Malvern Hills District Council , public subscription , and support from by Severn Trent Water , West Midlands Arts , and local businesses . Located on the Bellevue Terrace island in the very centre of the town , together with the statue of Edward Elgar , the group of sculptures embodies both music and water , the two major aspects of Malvern 's cultural history . 
 Art projects continue in various ways . Each year in April a well dressing competition is organised around a theme set by the Malvern Spa Association , with Gold , Silver and Bronze awards presented to adult 's and children 's groups . The well dressing initiative usually takes place over a period of four or five days with the Malvern spouts starting the annual season of well dressing around the country in the Derbyshire tradition . In 2003 , photographer Bob <unk> gave permission to the BBC to publish 21 of his special <unk> views of the decorated wells and spouts . 
 For the 2010 competition based on ' Celebrations ' , a group of pupils of a local primary school decorated the Great Malvern Railway Station Trough with paper figures representing famous people who have visited Malvern , such as Shaw and Elgar , celebrating 150 years of the railway in the town . Also in 2010 , the connection of Florence Nightingale with Malvern water is being celebrated with the help of the Malvern Museum 's school poster competition . 
 Other art projects encapsulate different connections with Malvern water . In 2002 the Elmley Foundation donated an 8 @-@ foot water clock designed by French sculptor , and horologist Bernard <unk> to the Malvern theatre and the people of Malvern . The clock which is on permanent exhibition in the foyer area of the theatre represents the three main industries of the town : its science , theatre , and water . 
 = Estate houses in Scotland = 
 Estate houses in Scotland or Scottish country houses , are large houses usually on landed estates in Scotland . They were built from the sixteenth century , after defensive castles began to be replaced by more comfortable residences for royalty , nobility and local lairds . The origins of Scottish estate houses are in aristocratic emulation of the extensive building and rebuilding of royal residences , beginning with Linlithgow , under the influence of Renaissance architecture . In the 1560s the unique Scottish style of the Scots baronial emerged , which combined features from medieval castles , tower houses , and peel towers with Renaissance plans , in houses designed primarily for residence rather than defence . 
 After the Restoration ( 1660 ) the work of architect Sir William Bruce introduced to Scotland a new phase of classicising architecture , in the shape of royal palaces and estate houses incorporating elements of the Palladian style . In the eighteenth century Scotland produced some of the most important British architects , including the neo @-@ Palladian William Adam and his innovative son Robert Adam , who rejected the Palladian style and was one of the European initiators of neoclassical architecture , embodied in a series of estate houses in Scotland and England . The incorporation of " Gothick " elements of medieval architecture by William Adam helped launch a revival of the Scots baronial in the nineteenth century , given popularity by its use at Walter Scott 's Abbotsford House and Queen Victoria 's retreat at Balmoral Castle . In the twentieth century the building of estate houses declined as the influence of the aristocracy waned , and many were taken over by the National Trust for Scotland and Historic Scotland . 
 After the Reformation , and the departure of the Scottish court in 1603 , artists and artisans looked to secular patronage and estate houses became repositories of art and of elaborate furnishings . Estate houses were adorned with paintings , wood carvings and plasterwork . The Grand Tour encouraged the collection of classical art and the adoption of classical styles for new works that were incorporated in to the Adam Style . The Baronial revival resulted a synthesised Victorian style that combined elements of the Renaissance , symbols of landed power and national affiliation with modern fittings . From the late sixteenth century , many estate houses were surrounded by gardens influenced by Italian Renaissance gardens . From the late seventeenth century the formal gardens at Versailles and Dutch gardens were important models . In the eighteenth century less formal and symmetrical layouts became common with the development of the jardin anglais . In the nineteenth century there was a return of the formal garden near to the house . The development of the Palladian country house in the seventeenth century separated the family of the householder from the servants . Gentry families spent much of their time visiting family , friends or neighbours and hospitality was an important part of life . Major activities included hunting , cards , chess and music . Large and sumptuous meals were an important part of social life . In the eighteenth century , estate houses were designed as centres of public display , but in the nineteenth century they became increasingly private and developed distinct male areas . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Renaissance = = = 
 The origins of private estate houses in Scotland are in the extensive building and rebuilding of royal palaces that probably began under James III ( r . 1460 – 88 ) , accelerated under James IV ( r . 1488 – 1513 ) , and reached its peak under James V ( r . 1512 – 42 ) . These works have been seen as directly reflecting the influence of Renaissance styles . Linlithgow was first constructed under James I , under the direction of master of work John de Waltoun and was referred to as a palace , apparently the first use of this term in the country , from 1429 . This was extended under James III and began to correspond to a fashionable quadrangular , corner @-@ towered Italian signorial palace of a palatium ad moden castri ( a castle @-@ style palace ) , combining classical symmetry with neo @-@ chivalric imagery . There is evidence of Italian masons working for James IV , in whose reign Linlithgow was completed and other palaces were rebuilt with Italianate proportions . James V encountered the French version of Renaissance building while visiting for his marriage to Madeleine of Valois in 1536 and his second marriage to Mary of Guise may have resulted in longer term connections and influences . Work from his reign largely disregarded the insular style adopted in England under Henry VIII and adopted forms that were recognisably European . This was followed by re @-@ buildings at Holyrood , Falkland , Stirling and Edinburgh , described as " some of the finest examples of Renaissance architecture in Britain " . 
 Much of this work was planned and financed by James Hamilton of Finnart ( c . 1495 – 1540 ) , in addition to his work at Blackness Castle , Rothesay Castle , the house at Crawfordjohn , the " New Inn " in the St Andrews Cathedral Priory and the lodging at Balmerino Abbey for the ailing Queen Madeleine . Rather than slavishly copying continental forms , most Scottish architecture incorporated elements of these styles into traditional local patterns , adapting them to Scottish idioms and materials ( particularly stone and harl ) . Work undertaken for James VI demonstrated continued Renaissance influences , with the Chapel Royal at Stirling having a classical entrance built in 1594 and the North Wing of Linlithgow , built in 1618 , using classical pediments . Similar themes can be seen in the private houses of aristocrats , as in Mar 's Wark , Stirling ( c . 1570 ) and Crichton Castle , built for the Earl of Bothwell in 1580s . 
 = = = Scots Baronial = = = 
 The unique style of great private houses in Scotland , later known as Scots baronial , originated in the 1560s . It kept features of the high walled Medieval castles that had been made largely obsolete by gunpowder weapons and may have been influenced by the French masons brought to Scotland to work on royal palaces . It drew on the tower houses and peel towers , hundreds of which had been built by local lords since the fourteenth century , particularly in the borders . These abandoned defensible curtain walls in favour of a fortified refuge , designed to outlast a raid , rather than a sustained siege . They were usually of three stories , typically crowned with a parapet , projecting on corbels , continuing into circular bartizans at each corner . The new houses built from the late sixteenth century by nobles and lairds were primarily built for comfort , not for defence . They retained many of these external features , which had become associated with nobility , but with a larger ground plan . This was classically a " Z @-@ plan " of a rectangular block with towers , as at Colliston Castle ( 1583 ) and Claypotts Castle ( 1569 – 88 ) . 
 Particularly influential was the work of William Wallace , the king 's master mason from 1617 until his death in 1631 . He worked on the rebuilding of the collapsed North Range of Linlithgow from 1618 , Winton House for George Seton , 3rd Earl of Winton and began work on Heriot 's Hospital , Edinburgh . He adopted a distinctive style that applied elements of Scottish fortification and Flemish influences to a Renaissance plan like that used at Château d 'Ancy @-@ le @-@ Franc . This style can be seen in lords houses built at Caerlaverlock ( 1620 ) , Moray House , Edinburgh ( 1628 ) and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1675 – 89 ) , and was highly influential until the baronial style gave way to the grander English forms associated with Inigo Jones in the later seventeenth century . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 During the turbulent era of Civil Wars ( 1639 – 51 ) and the English occupation of Scotland ( 1651 – 60 ) , significant building in Scotland was largely confined to military architecture . After the Restoration in 1660 , large scale building began again , often incorporating more comprehensive ideas of reviving classicism . Sir William Bruce ( 1630 – 1710 ) , considered " the effective founder of classical architecture in Scotland " , was the key figure in introducing the Palladian style into Scotland , following the principles of the Venetian architect Andrea Palladio ( 1508 – 80 ) . Palladio 's ideas were strongly based on the symmetry , perspective and values of the formal classical temple architecture of the Ancient Greeks and Romans , and associated in England with the designs of Inigo Jones . Bruce popularised a style of country house amongst the nobility that encouraging the move towards a more continental , leisure @-@ oriented architecture . He built and remodelled country houses , including Thirlestane Castle and Prestonfield House . Among his most significant work was his own Palladian mansion at Kinross , built on the Loch Leven estate which he had purchased in 1675 . As the Surveyor and Overseer of the Royal Works he undertook the rebuilding of the Royal Palace of Holyroodhouse in the 1670s , which gave the palace its present appearance . After the death of Charles II , Bruce lost political favour , and later , following the Glorious Revolution , he was imprisoned more than once as a suspected Jacobite . These houses were predominantly built using well @-@ cut ashlar masonry on the façades , while rubble stonework was used only for internal walls . 
 James Smith worked as a mason on Bruce 's rebuilding of Holyrood Palace . In 1683 he was appointed to be Surveyor and Overseer of the Royal Works , and was responsible for maintenance of Holyrood Palace . With his father @-@ in @-@ law , the master mason Robert Mylne , Smith worked on Caroline Park in Edinburgh ( 1685 ) , and Drumlanrig Castle ( 1680s ) . Smith 's country houses followed the pattern established by William Bruce , with hipped roofs and pedimented fronts , in a plain but handsome Palladian style . Hamilton Palace ( 1695 ) was fronted by giant Corinthian columns , and a pedimented entrance , although was otherwise restrained . Dalkeith Palace ( 1702 – 10 ) was modelled after William of Orange 's palace at Het Loo in the Netherlands . 
 = = = Eighteenth century = = = 
 After the Act of Union of 1707 , growing prosperity in Scotland led to a spate of new building . Scotland produced some of the most significant architects of this era , including : Colen Campbell ( 1676 – 1729 ) , James Gibbs ( 1682 – 1754 ) and William Adam ( 1689 – 1748 ) , who created work that to some degree looked to classical models . Campbell was influenced by the Palladian style and has been credited with founding Georgian architecture . Architectural historian Howard Colvin has speculated that he was associated with James Smith and that Campbell may even have been his pupil . He spent most of his career in Italy and England and developed a rivalry with fellow Scot James Gibbs . Gibbs trained in Rome and also practiced mainly in England . His architectural style did incorporate Palladian elements , as well as forms from Italian baroque and Inigo Jones , but was most strongly influenced by the interpretation of the Baroque by Sir Christopher Wren . 
 William Adam was the foremost architect of his time in Scotland , designing and building numerous country houses and public buildings . Among his best @-@ known works are Hopetoun House near Edinburgh , and Duff House in Banff . His individual , exuberant , style was built on the Palladian , but with Baroque details inspired by Vanbrugh and Continental architecture . After his death , his sons Robert and John took on the family business , which included lucrative work for the Board of Ordnance . Robert emerged as leader of the first phase of the neo @-@ classical revival in England and Scotland from around 1760 until his death . He rejected the Palladian style as " ponderous " and " <unk> " . However , he continued its tradition of drawing inspiration directly from classical antiquity , influenced by his four @-@ year stay in Europe . He influenced the development of architecture , not just in Britain , but in Western Europe , North America and in Russia , where his patterns were taken by Scottish architect Charles Cameron . Adam 's main rival was William Chambers , another Scot , but born in Sweden . He did most of his work in London , with a small number of houses in Scotland . He was appointed architectural tutor to the Prince of Wales , later George III , and in 1766 , with Robert Adam , as Architect to the King . More international in outlook than Adam , he combined Neoclassicism and Palladian conventions and his influence was mediated through his large number of pupils . 
 = = = Baronial revival = = = 
 Some of the earliest evidence of a revival in Gothic architecture is from Scotland . Inveraray Castle , constructed from 1746 with design input from William Adam , displays the incorporation of turrets . These early Gothic homes were largely conventional Palladian style houses that incorporated some external features of the Scots baronial style . Robert Adam 's houses in this style include Mellerstain and Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton House in East Lothian , but it is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , remodelled by Adam from 1777 . 
 Important for the adoption of the style in the early nineteenth century was Abbotsford House , the residence of the novelist and poet , Sir Walter Scott . Re @-@ built for him from 1816 , it became a model for the modern revival of the baronial style . Common features borrowed from sixteenth- and seventeenth @-@ century houses included battlemented gateways , crow @-@ stepped gables , pointed turrets and machicolations . The style was popular across Scotland and was applied to relatively modest dwellings by architects such as William Burn ( 1789 – 1870 ) , David Bryce ( 1803 – 76 ) , Edward Blore ( 1787 – 1879 ) , Edward Calvert ( c . 1847 – 1914 ) and Robert Stodart Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) . The publication of Robert Billings ' Baronial and Ecclesiastical Architecture of Scotland ( 1848 – 52 ) provided a handbook for the style and the rebuilding of Balmoral Castle as a baronial palace ( and subsequent adoption as a royal retreat from 1855 – 58 ) confirmed its popularity . Estate house building boomed between about 1855 and the agricultural depression and Glasgow Bank crash of 1878 . Construction was now dominated by patronage from nouveau riche industrialists . The decline in numbers of servants , linked to the introduction of electricity , central heating and labour @-@ saving devices such as the vacuum cleaner , also led to changes in the scale of building . Arts and crafts designs first featured in Philip Webb 's ( 1831 – 1915 ) gothic design at Arisaig ( 1863 – 64 ) . It was pursed by William <unk> at <unk> House , Hoy ( 1898 ) for a Birmingham industrialist . 
 = = = Twentieth century to the present = = = 
 The Baronial style peaked towards the end of the nineteenth century , and the building of large houses declined in importance in the twentieth century . An exception was the work undertaken by John Kinross ( 1855 – 1955 ) . Beginning with the reconstruction of Thurston House , Dunbar , from 1890 he produced a series of major country house designs . The most important was <unk> House ( 1901 – 03 ) , built for James Miller ( 1864 – 1906 ) in the Adam style . The baronial style continued to influence the construction of some estate houses , including Skibo Castle , which was rebuilt for industrialist Andrew Carnegie ( 1899 – 1903 ) by Ross and Macbeth . English architect C. H. B. Quennell ( 1872 – 1935 ) designed a neo @-@ Georgian mansion at <unk> ( 1912 – 14 ) for the owner of a Moscow department store . 
 There was a lull in building after the First World War and social change undermined the construction of rural estate houses . Isolated examples included the houses designed by Basil Spence and built at Broughton Place ( 1936 ) and <unk> ( 1937 – 39 ) , which combined modern and traditional elements . The Second World War disrupted the occupation of estate houses , as they were used as wartime schools , barracks , evacuee housing and hospitals . After the war many were outdated , with a lack of electricity and modern plumbing . There was a shortage of live @-@ in servants and the heavily taxed aristocracy were also unable to find the money to modernise and maintain large houses . The shortage of building materials in the post @-@ war period also made estate houses valuable resources of stone . As a result 200 of the 378 architecturally important estate houses have been demolished , were destroyed in the period after 1945 , a higher proportion of the total than in England . Included in the destruction were works by Robert Adam , including <unk> House and Hamilton Palace . One firm , Charles Brand of Dundee , demolished at least 56 country houses in Scotland in the 20 years between 1945 and 1965 . The shortage of building materials further reduced the number of new large luxury houses . Isolated examples included Logan House , designed by David Style in the 1950s . In the 1960s there was Basil Hughes 's design at <unk> for the earl of Cadogan and the remodelling of Gask House by Claude Phillimore . This period also saw considerable restoration of existing houses . 
 = = Interiors = = 
 The creation of estate houses led to greater privacy , comfort and luxury for the families who lived in them . Interiors were remodelled , with broader staircases , family rooms were added and heating was improved . Oriel windows gave better views , more light and could be opened for fresh air . After the Reformation , which virtually ended religious patronage of art in Scotland , craftsmen and artists turned to secular patrons . With the departure of the Scottish court for England in 1603 , Jenny Wormald argues that there was a shift " from court to castle " in patronage and creativity ; estate houses became repositories of art and elaborate furnishings that illustrated the wealth and taste of their occupants . 
 One result was a flourishing of Scottish Renaissance painted ceilings and walls in estate houses . These included detailed coloured patterns and scenes , of which over a hundred examples survive . The designs relied upon continental pattern books that often led to the incorporation of humanist moral and philosophical symbolism , as well as elements that called on heraldry , piety , classical myths and allegory . The earliest example still extant is at the Hamilton palace of Kinneil , West Lothian , decorated in the 1550s for the then regent the James Hamilton , Earl of Arran . Other examples include the ceiling at Prestongrange House , undertaken in 1581 for Mark Kerr , Commendator of Newbattle , and the long gallery at Pinkie House , painted for Alexander Seaton , Earl of Dunfermline in 1621 . 
 Scottish estate houses were increasingly adorned with paintings , including portraits , landscapes and later classical , genre and historical paintings . Thomas Warrender ( fl . 1673 – 1713 ) made his living as a house decorator , working closely with architects , including William Adam . He may have trained James Norie ( 1684 – 1757 ) , who with his sons James ( 1711 – 36 ) and Robert ( d . 1766 ) also worked with the Adams , painting the houses of the peerage with Scottish landscapes that were pastiches of Italian and Dutch scenes . They tutored many artists and have been credited with the inception of the tradition of Scottish landscape painting that would come to fruition from the late eighteenth century . The painters Allan Ramsay ( 1713 – 84 ) , Gavin Hamilton ( 1723 – 98 ) , the brothers John ( 1744 – 68 / 9 ) and Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 85 ) , Jacob More ( 1740 – 93 ) and David Allan ( 1744 – 96 ) , mostly began in the tradition of the Nories , but were artists of European significance , spending considerable portions of their careers outside Scotland . Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) was the most significant artist of the eighteenth century to pursue his entire career in Scotland , and from this point Scottish painters would be able to be professionals in their homeland , often supplying the nobility and lairds with works to fill the walls of their houses . 
 Carving and plasterwork also became a feature of estate houses . Some of the finest domestic wood carving is in the Beaton panels made for Arbroath Abbey , which were eventually moved to the dining room of Balfour House in Fife . Carvings at Huntly Castle , rebuilt for George Gordon , 1st Marquess of Huntly in the early seventeenth century , focused on heraldic images . Their " popish " overtones led to them being damaged by an occupying Covenanter army in 1640 . From the seventeenth century there was elaborate use of carving in pediments and fireplaces , with heraldic arms and classical motifs . Plasterwork also began to be used , often depicting flowers and cherubs . William Bruce favoured Dutch carvers for his realisation of Kinross House , where there are festoons , trophies and cornucopia around the doorways and gates . This may have included the work of Jan van Sant <unk> , a Dutch carver known to have been living in Leith , who supplied Bruce with a carved heraldic <unk> in 1679 and who worked on Bruce 's rebuilding of Holyrood Palace . From 1674 the London plasterers George <unk> ( fl . 1660 – 76 ) and John <unk> ( fl . 1674 – 79 ) worked for Bruce at Thirlestane , Berwickshire and at Holyroodhouse . <unk> was also active at Balcaskie , Fife and probably at Kellie Castle . 
 In the eighteenth century the development of the Grand Tour took young Scottish aristocrats to the continent , particularly Rome , which was home to the exiled Jacobite Stuarts . This in turn fuelled interest in classical and Renaissance styles , and the buying of artistic works , particularly sculptures . However , the only major Scottish collection of marble before the nineteenth century was that of James Johnstone , 2nd Marquess of Annandale . As in England , commissions of new statuary tended to be crafted in relatively cheap lead and even more economical painted or gilded plaster . The plasterwork of John Cheere 's yard in London was particularly in demand . Also important was the work from the yard of John Bacon ( 1740 – 99 ) . Bacon was also a partner in Mrs Eleanor Coade 's Artificial Stone Manufactory at Lambeth in London . This produced a buff coloured ceramic that could be moulded to provide fine detail , and be fired in sections , but was impervious to frost and fire . Much cheaper than carved stone , <unk> was used for sphinxes , balustrading , capitals , coats of arms , tablets and ornamental vases . It was used extensively by the Adam brothers , particularly in the houses they built in Scotland , such as Cullen , Banff , Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , Dunbar Castle , East Lothian , Gosford House , East Lothian and Wedderburn , Berwickshire . They also supplied sculpture , candelabra and <unk> that made up the neo @-@ classical Adam Style . 
 Nineteenth @-@ century interiors could often be lavish and eclectic . The origins of this style were in Scott 's Abbotsford , where the author began the incorporation of actual old architectural fragments and pieces of furniture on a lavish scale ( the effective beginning of ' antique ' collecting in Scotland ) . He also initiated the treatment of new surfaces so as to resemble old ones , with new wood darkened to resemble old oak . The Adam solution of a castellated exterior with a neo @-@ classical interior was abandoned and in Baronial revival houses this change was extended to create a synthesised Victorian style that combined elements of the Renaissance , such as plastered or rubble walls , unpainted stone fireplaces and pitch pine timberwork , with seventeenth @-@ century style plaster ceilings . To this were added symbols of landed power and national affiliation , including displays of tartan , weaponry and stuffed animals ' heads . Integrated into these traditional materials and styles were modern fittings such as sprung upholstery , <unk> and water @-@ closets . 
 = = Gardens = = 
 Gardens , or yards , around medieval castles , abbeys and houses were formal and in the European tradition of herb garden , kitchen garden and orchard . They were often surrounded by defensive walls and they sometimes adjoined a hunting park . The first Renaissance style gardens in Scotland were built for the Stewart dynasty at their royal palaces . French gardeners were hired by James IV at Stirling in 1501 and James V at Holyrood in 1536 , where archaeological remains indicate there were sophisticated formal gardens . Similar landscaping is also found at Falkland and Linlithgow , including the king 's knot garden at Stirling . From the late sixteenth century , the landscaping of many estate houses was influenced by Italian Renaissance gardens . These were seen as retreats from the troubles of the world and were eulogised in country house poetry like that of William Drummond of Hawthornden ( 1585 – 1649 ) . Extensive gardens were developed at Pinkie House by Alexander Seton , 1st Earl of Dunfermline ( 1555 – 1622 ) , with lawns , fountains , ponds and aviaries for the entertainment of guests . Dunfermline 's nephew , George Seton , 3rd Earl of Winton ( 1584 – 1650 ) , planted a herb garden at Seaton House in 1620 . The Earl of Sutherland 's castle at Dunrobin was surrounded by orchards , herbs and flowers . The best surviving garden from the early seventeenth century is that at Edzell Castle , where , between 1604 and 1610 , David Lindsay ( 1551 ? – 1610 ) created an enclosure adorned with sculptures of the seven Cardinal Virtues , the seven Liberal Arts and the seven Planetary Deities , the expense of which eventually bankrupted him . 
 The legacy of the Auld Alliance , and the beginnings of the grand tour , meant that French styles were particularly important in Scotland , although adapted for the Scottish climate . From the late seventeenth century the gardens at Versailles , with their formal avenues , parterres and fountains that stressed symmetry and order , were a model . After the Glorious Revolution Dutch influences were also significant , with uniform planting and topiary . Gardening books from the continent and England became widely available in this period and the first gardening book published in Scotland , John Reid 's , Scots Gard <unk> ( 1683 ) , borrowed from John Evelyn 's ( 1658 ) translation of Nicholas de <unk> 's Le <unk> françois ( 1651 ) , adapting its ideas for Scottish conditions . In the late seventeenth century William Bruce put Scotland at the forefront of European garden design , lowering garden walls to incorporate the surrounding countryside into the vista . This allowed a focus on significant landscape features such as Bass rock at Balcaskie and Loch Leven Castle at Kinross . Alexander Edward ( 1651 – 1708 ) continued in the tradition established by Bruce , adding landscapes at houses including Hamilton Palace and Kinnaird castle , Angus . Grand schemes in the French tradition included James Douglas , 2nd Duke of Queensberry ( 1662 – 1711 ) reworking of the terraces at Drumlanrig Castle , which incorporated the Douglas family crest into the parterres design , and the militaristic earthworks undertaken for Field Marshal John Dalrymple , 2nd Earl of Stair ( 1679 – 1747 ) at Castle Kennedy , Wigtownshire . Earl of Mar 's ( 1675 – 1732 ) palace at Alloa was the grandest realisation of the Versailles style gardens in Scotland : it included canals , parterres , statues and ornamental trees . 
 In the eighteenth century there was a reaction against the " absolutism " and " popery " of the French court and a retreat from the expense of maintaining large formal gardens . Less symmetrical layouts became common with the development of the " natural " style of the jardin anglais , which attempted to create vistas of a rural idyll . The antiquarian John Clerk of <unk> ( 1676 – 1755 ) , one of the key figures in defining elite taste in Scotland , eulogising the estate garden in his poem The Country Seat ( 1727 ) , which built on the ideas of Alexander Pope . He created gardens at Mavisbank and Penicuik , Midlothian , with the help of William Adam , which combined formality with undulating ground . The move to a less formal landscape of parklands and irregular clumps of planting , associated in England with Capability Brown ( 1716 – 83 ) , was dominated in Scotland by his followers , Robert Robinson and Thomas White senior and junior . From 1770 and 1809 the Whites were involved in the planning of over 70 estate gardens in Scotland , including those at Glamis Castle and Scone Palace . Important publications included James Justice 's The Scottish Gardiner 's Director ( 1754 ) and the reputation of Scottish gardeners in managing greenhouses , hot walls and the cultivation of fruit trees meant that they began to be in demand in England . At the end of eighteenth century there began to be a reaction to the English style of garden , influenced by Picturesque taste and the spread of Ossianic Romanticism , which encouraged gardens in the wild . This resulted in creation of features like Ossian 's Hall of Mirrors at the Hermitage Dunkeld and the Hermit 's Cave at the Falls of <unk> , which put an emphasis on concealment and the surprise revelation of the natural . 
 In the nineteenth century the writings of Humphrey Repton ( 1752 – 1818 ) were highly influential in the return of the formal garden near to the house . His sons were directly involved in the restructuring of the landscape at <unk> , Fife . Walter Scott 's dislike of the sweeping away of the old formal gardens was also influential in creating an emphasis on preservation and restoration . His ideas were taken up by John Claudius Loudon ( 1783 – 1843 ) , the most prolific gardening author of the century in Britain , and were highly influential throughout the world . By 1850 ambitious formal gardens had been recreated at Drummond Castle , Dunrobin and <unk> . New plants from around the world , often discovered and sampled by Scots , such as the rhododendron and monkey puzzle tree , meant that Victorian and Edwardian gardens were characterised by an eclectic mix of the formal , picturesque and gardenesque . By the end of the century the ideas of William Robinson ( 1838 – 1935 ) , Gertrude Jekyll ( 1843 – 1932 ) and the Edinburgh @-@ based Frances Hope ( d . 1880 ) , arguing for informal flower @-@ based gardens , had begun to dominate . They resulted in a revival of the seventeenth @-@ century mixed flower and kitchen garden , as carried out at Kellie Castle , and <unk> , Fife by Robert Lorimer . 
 = = Social life = = 
 The development of the Palladian country house in the seventeenth century separated the family of the householder from the servants . Previously sharing the hall , and bedding down at a master 's feet , or door , servants were now given separate small chambers . Sometimes these were placed on a mezzanine floor , as at Kinross . Servants were less visible , using backstairs that kept them away from members of the family and guests and they fulfilled necessary and sometimes unpleasant tasks . They were also fewer in number , of lower social status and predominately female . A country house could have 10 to 20 servants and large houses had more . A hierarchy of positions developed from the butler and housekeeper to footmen and maids . The sexes were increasingly segregated into their own quarters . 
 Relatively isolated , gentry families spent much of their time visiting family , friends or neighbours . As a result hospitality was an important part of life . Leisure activities pursued by the gentry included hunting , cards and chess . Music remained important in noble houses , with accounts listing professional musicians hired to entertain the family and guests . However , professional musicians were expensive to maintain . In the eighteenth century members of the household often provided musical entertainment on the harpsichord , organ and piano . House libraries often contained considerable quantities of music , as at Dalkeith Palace , where the Duke of Buccleuch 's daughter collected vocal music between 1780 and 1800 . In the nineteenth century it was the women of the family who were the chief performers and men were not expected to play the piano in drawing rooms . 
 The consumption of large and sumptuous meals was an important part of social life . Some were elaborately planned , others the result of unexpected guests . These usually consisted of three or four courses , with a variety of dishes served in each course , from which the diner was expected to select . In the eighteenth century service was service à la française , where all the dishes were impressively displayed on tables at the same time , until the advent of service à la russe in the nineteenth century , when they were served sequentially . Alcohol in various forms and toasts were an important part of formal dining and until the Regency era dessert and drinks were often taken in a separate dessert room . 
 In the eighteenth century , estate houses were designed as centres of public display , but in the nineteenth century they became increasingly private . The first family wing in Britain was added to <unk> Castle in Ayrshire in 1820 by architect William Burn and the style became characteristic of the Victorian country house . From the 1830s distinct male areas of the house began to emerge , to which the men could withdraw and indulge in " masculine " conversation and activities , centred on the smoking and billiard rooms . From the 1870s gun rooms began to be added , mainly to cater for weapons for hunting weekends . The popularity of salmon fishing , deer stalking and grouse shooting , particularly in the Highlands , was confirmed by Queen Victoria 's purchase of the hunting lodge at Balmoral . It rapidly expanded as southern industrialists and businessmen began to see the sports offered by Scottish estates as a status symbol . Large areas of land were designated for hunting and hunting parties became a major part of the life of the Scottish estate house . There were also a wider range of activities that developed in the nineteenth century for members of the leisured classes , such as croquet , lawn tennis , billiards , carriage rides , charades and amateur dramatics . 
 = = Current ownership = = 
 In the twentieth century , as the finances and needs of the landed classes changed , many surviving country houses were sold and became boarding schools , hospitals , spa retreats , conference centres and hotels . The National Trust for Scotland ( founded 1931 ) cares for post @-@ Medieval castles and estate houses that were still in occupation until the twentieth century and are open to the public . Historic Scotland ( created as an agency in 1991 ) cares for over 300 properties , which are publicly accessible . The Landmark Trust restores and operates historic buildings as holiday homes . 
 = Equus ( genus ) = 
 Equus is a genus of mammals in the family Equidae , which includes horses , asses , and zebras . Within Equidae , Equus is the only recognized extant genus , comprising seven living species . The term equine refers to any member of this genus , including horses . Like Equidae more broadly , Equus has numerous extinct species known only from fossils . The genus most likely originated in North America and spread quickly to the Old World . Equines are odd @-@ toed ungulates with slender legs , long heads , relatively long necks , manes ( erect in most subspecies ) and long tails . All species are herbivorous , and mostly grazers with simpler digestive systems than ruminants but able to subsist on lower quality vegetation . 
 While the domestic horse and donkey ( along with their feral descendants ) exist worldwide , wild equine populations are limited to Africa and Asia . Wild equine social systems come in two forms ; a harem system with tight @-@ knit groups consisting of one adult male or stallion , several females or mares and their young or foals ; and a territorial system where males establish territories with resources that attract females , which associate very fluidly . In both systems , females take care of their offspring but males may play a role as well . Equines communicate with each other both visually and vocally . Human activities have threatened wild equine populations and out of the seven living species , only the plains zebra remains widespread and abundant . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word <unk> is Latin for " horse " , and is cognate with the Greek " ἵππος " ( hippos ) , " horse " , and Mycenaean Greek i @-@ <unk> / <unk> / ( cf. the alternative development of the Proto @-@ Greek <unk> in Ionic " <unk> " <unk> ) , the earliest attested variant of the Greek word , written in Linear B syllabic script . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The genus Equus was first described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . It is the only recognized extant genus in the family Equidae . The first equids were small , dog @-@ sized mammals ( e.g. <unk> ) adapted for browsing on shrubs during the Eocene , around 54 million years ago ( mya ) . These animals had three toes on the hind feet and four on the front feet with small hooves in place of claws but also had soft pads . Equids developed into larger , three @-@ toed animals ( e.g. <unk> ) during the Oligocene and Miocene . From there , the <unk> toes became progressively smaller through the Pleistocene until the emergence of the single @-@ toed Equus . 
 The genus Equus , which includes all extant equines , is believed to have evolved from <unk> , via the intermediate form <unk> . One of the oldest species is Equus <unk> , described as zebra @-@ like with a donkey @-@ like head shape . The oldest material to date was found in Idaho , USA . The genus appears to have spread quickly into the Old World , with the similarly aged E. <unk> documented from western Europe and Russia . Molecular phylogenies indicate that the most recent common ancestor of all modern equines ( members of the genus Equus ) lived ~ 5 @.@ 6 ( 3 @.@ 9 @-@ 7 @.@ 8 ) mya . Direct <unk> sequencing of a 700 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old middle Pleistocene horse <unk> bone from Canada implies a more recent 4 @.@ 07 mya for the most recent common ancestor within the range of 4 @.@ 0 to 4 @.@ 5 mya . 
 Mitochondrial evidence supports the division of Equus species into non @-@ <unk> ( which includes zebras and asses ) and <unk> or " true horses " ( which includes E. ferus and E. przewalskii ) . Of the extant equine species , the lineage of the asses may have diverged first , possibly as soon as Equus reached the Old World . Zebras appear to be monophyletic and differentiated in Africa where they are endemic . 
 Molecular dating indicates the <unk> lineage diverged from the non @-@ <unk> 4 mya . Genetic results suggest that all North American fossils of <unk> equines , as well as South American fossils traditionally placed in the subgenus E. ( <unk> ) , belong to E. ferus . Remains attributed to a variety of species and lumped together as New World stilt @-@ legged horses ( including E. francisci , E. tau , and E. <unk> ) probably all belong to a second species that was endemic to North America . The possible causes of the extinction of horses in the Americas ( ca . 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) have been a matter of debate . Hypotheses include climate change and overexploitation by newly arrived humans . Horses only returned to the American mainland with the arrival of the conquistadors in 1519 . 
 = = = All species and subspecies = = = 
 [ extinct species / subspecies are marked with † ] 
 Genus Equus 
 Subgenus Equus 
 Equus ferus Wild horse 
 Equus ferus caballus Domestic horse 
 † Equus ferus ferus Tarpan 
 Equus ferus przewalskii Przewalski 's horse 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † North American <unk> horses ( Pleistocene ; most likely synonymous with E. ferus ) : 
 † Equus lambei Yukon wild horse 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Subgenus † <unk> ( this subgenus and its species are possibly synonymous with E. ferus ) † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> Mexican horse 
 † New World stilt @-@ legged horse ( all following species within the group may be synonyms or ecomorphs of a single species ) † Equus francisci 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Subgenus <unk> 
 Equus africanus African wild ass 
 Equus africanus africanus Nubian wild ass 
 Equus africanus asinus Domestic donkey 
 † Equus africanus atlanticus Atlas wild ass 
 Equus africanus somalicus Somali wild ass 
 Equus hemionus <unk> or Asiatic ass 
 Equus hemionus hemionus Mongolian wild ass 
 † Equus hemionus <unk> Syrian wild ass 
 Equus hemionus <unk> Indian wild ass 
 Equus hemionus <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Equus hemionus onager Persian onager 
 Equus kiang Kiang 
 Equus kiang chu Northern kiang 
 Equus kiang kiang Western kiang 
 Equus kiang <unk> Eastern kiang 
 Equus kiang <unk> Southern kiang 
 † Equus <unk> European ass 
 † Equus altidens 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Subgenus Dolichohippus 
 Equus grevyi Grévy 's zebra 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Subgenus <unk> quagga Plains zebra 
 Equus quagga <unk> Grant 's zebra 
 Equus quagga <unk> <unk> zebra 
 Equus quagga <unk> Chapman 's zebra 
 Equus quagga <unk> Crawshay 's zebra 
 Equus quagga burchellii Burchell 's zebra 
 † Equus quagga quagga Quagga 
 Equus quagga selousi Selous ' zebra 
 Equus zebra Mountain zebra 
 Equus zebra <unk> Hartmann 's mountain zebra 
 Equus zebra zebra Cape mountain zebra 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Subgenus † <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> <unk> 's horse 
 incertae sedis 
 † Equus <unk> Hagerman horse 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus stenonis group 
 † Equus stenonis 
 † Equus stenonis <unk> 
 † Equus stenonis <unk> 
 † Equus stenonis <unk> ( Hippotigris <unk> ) 
 † Equus stenonis <unk> 
 † Equus stenonis vireti 
 † Equus sivalensis 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus verae 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † subgenus <unk> & <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus ( A. ) occidentalis 
 † Equus A. excelsus 
 † Equus ( H. ) pacificus 
 † Equus <unk> 
 † Equus <unk> 
 Equus major 
 † Equus giganteus group 
 † Equus giganteus 
 † Equus pectinatus 
 † Equus <unk> 
 = = = Hybrids = = = 
 Equines species can crossbreed with each other . The most common hybrid is the mule , a cross between a male donkey and a female horse . With rare exceptions , these hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce . A related hybrid , a <unk> , is a cross between a male horse and a female donkey . Other hybrids include the <unk> , a cross between a zebra and a horse and a <unk> or <unk> , a hybrid of a zebra and a donkey . In areas where Grévy 's zebras are sympatric with plains zebras , fertile hybrids do occur . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Physical characteristics = = = 
 Equines have significant differences in size , though all are characterized by long heads and necks . Their slender legs support their weight on one digit ( which evolved from the middle digits ) . The Grévy 's zebra is the largest wild species , standing up to 13 @.@ 2 hands ( 54 inches , 137 cm ) and weighing up to 405 kg ( 890 lb ) . Domesticated horses have a wider range of sizes . Heavy or draft horses are usually at least 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) high and can be as tall as 18 hands ( 72 inches , 183 cm ) and weigh from about 700 to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 200 lb ) . Some miniature horses are no taller than 30 inches ( 76 cm ) in adulthood . Sexual dimorphism is limited in equines . The penis of the male is vascular and lacks a bone ( baculum ) . Equines are adapted for running and for traveling over long distances . Their dentition is adapted for grazing ; they have large incisors that clip grass blades and highly crowned , ridged molars well suited for grinding . Males have spade @-@ shaped canines ( " <unk> " ) , which can be used as weapons in fighting . Equines have fairly good senses , particularly their eyesight . Their moderately long , erect ears are movable and can locate the source of a sound . 
 A dun @-@ colored coat with primitive markings that include a dorsal stripe and often leg striping and transverse shoulder stripes reflect the <unk> coat and are observed in most wild extant equine species . Only the mountain zebra lacks a dorsal stripe . In domestic horses , dun color and primitive markings exist in some animals across many breeds . The purpose of the bold black @-@ and @-@ white striping of zebras has been a subject of debate among biologists for over a century , but recent ( 2014 ) evidence supports the theory that they are a form of protection from biting flies . These insects appear to be less attracted to striped coats and , compared to other wild equines , zebras live in areas with the highest fly activity . With the exception of the domestic horses , which have long manes that lay over the neck and long tail hair growing from the top of the <unk> or dock , most equines have erect manes and long tails ending in a tuft of hair . The coats of some equine species undergo shedding in certain parts of their range and are thick in the winter . 
 = = = Ecology and daily activities = = = 
 Extant wild equines have scattered ranges across Africa and Asia . The plains zebra lives in lush grasslands and savannas of Eastern and Southern Africa , while the Mountain zebra inhabits mountainous areas of southwest Africa . The other equine species tend to occupy more arid environments with more scattered vegetation . The Grévy 's zebra is found in thorny scrubland of East Africa , while the African wild ass inhabits rocky deserts of North Africa . The two Asian wild ass species live in the dry deserts of the Near East and Central Asia and the <unk> 's wild horse 's habitat is the deserts of Mongolia . Only the range of the plains and Grévy 's zebras overlap . In addition to wild populations , domesticated horses and donkeys are widespread thanks to humans . In certain parts of the world , populations of feral horses and feral donkeys exist , which are descended from domesticated animals that were released or escaped into the wild . 
 Equines are <unk> hindgut fermenters . They prefer to eat grasses and sedges , but may also consume bark , leaves , buds , fruits and roots if their favored foods are scarce , particularly asses . Compared to ruminants , equines have a simpler and less efficient digestive system . Nevertheless , they can subsist on lower quality vegetation . After food is passed though the stomach , it enters the sac @-@ like <unk> where cellulose is broken down by micro @-@ organisms . Fermentation is quicker in equines than in ruminants ; 30 – 45 hours for a horse compared to 70 – 100 hours for a cow . Equines may spend 60 @-@ 80 percent of their time feeding , depending on the availability and quality of vegetation . In the African savannas , the plains zebra is a pioneer grazer ; mowing down the upper , less nutritious grass canopy and preparing the way for more specialized grazers like blue <unk> and Thomson 's gazelles which depend on shorter and more nutritious grasses below . 
 Wild equines may spend seven hours a day sleeping . During the day , they sleep standing up while at night they lie down . They regularly rub against trees , rocks and other objects and roll in around in dust for protection against flies and irritation . Except the mountain zebra , wild equines can roll over completely . 
 = = = Social behavior = = = 
 Equines are social animals with two basic social structures . Horses , plains zebras and mountain zebras live in stable , closed family groups or harems consisting of one adult male , several females and their offspring . These groups have their own home ranges which overlap and they tend to be nomadic . The stability of the group remains even when the family stallion dies or is displaced . Plains zebra groups gather into large herds and may create temporarily stable subgroups within a herd , allowing individuals to interact with those outside their group . Among harem @-@ holding species , this behavior has only otherwise been observed in primates like the gelada and the hamadryas baboon . Females of harem species benefit as males give them more time for feeding , protection for their young , as well as protection from predators and harassment by outside males . Among females in a harem , a linear dominance hierarchy exists based on the time at which they join the group . <unk> travel in a consistent filing order with the high @-@ ranking mares and their offspring leading the groups followed by the next highest ranking mare and her offspring and so on . The family stallion takes up the rear . Social grooming ( which involves individuals rubbing their heads against each other and nipping with the incisors and lips ) is important for easing aggression and maintaining social bonds and status . Young of both sexes leave their natal groups as they mature ; females are usually abducted by outside males to be included as permanent members of their harems . 
 In Grévy 's zebras and the wild ass species , adults have more fluid associations and adult males will establish large territories and monopolize the females that enter them . These species live in habitats with sparser resources and standing water and grazing areas may be separated . Groups of lactating females are able to remain in groups with non @-@ lactating ones and usually gather at foraging areas . The most dominant males establish territories near watering holes , where more sexually receptive females gather . <unk> have territories farther away , near foraging areas . Mares may wander through several territories but will remain in one when they have young . Staying in a territory offers a female protection from harassment by outside males , as well as access to a renewable resource . Some feral populations of horse exhibit features of both the harem and territorial social systems . 
 In both equine social systems , excess males gather in bachelor groups . These are typically young males who are not yet ready to establish a harem or territory . With the plains zebra , the males in a bachelor group have strong bonds and have a linear dominance hierarchy . Fights between males usually occur over estrus females and involve biting and kicking . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 When meeting for the first time or after they have separated , individuals may greet each other by rubbing and sniffing their noses followed by rubbing their cheeks , moving their noses along their bodies and sniffing each other 's genitals . They then may rub and press their shoulders against each other and rest their heads on one another . This greeting is usually performed among harem or territorial males or among bachelor males playing . 
 Equines produce a number of vocalizations and noises . Loud snorting is associated with alarm . <unk> is usually made when in pain , but bachelors will also squeal while play fighting . The contact calls of equines vary from the <unk> and <unk> of the horse , the barking of plains zebras , and the braying of asses and Grévy 's zebras . Equines also communicate with visual displays and the flexibility of their lips allows them to make complex facial expressions . Visual displays also incorporate the positions of the head , ears and tail . An equine may signal an intention to kick by laying back its ears and sometimes lashing the tail . Flattened ears , bared teeth and abrupt movement of the heads may be used as threatening gestures , particularly among stallions . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 Among harem @-@ holding species , the adult females mate only with their harem stallion , while in other species , mating is more promiscuous and the males have larger testes for sperm competition . <unk> in female equines lasts 5 – 10 days ; physical signs include frequent urination , flowing <unk> , and a swollen , everted labia . In addition , estrous females will stand with their hind legs spread and raise their tails when in the presence of a male . Males assess the female 's reproductive state with the flehmen response and the female will solicit mating by backing in . Length of gestation varies by species , it is roughly 11 to 13 months , and most mares will come into estrus again within a few days after foaling , depending on conditions . Usually , only a single foal is born , which is capable of running within an hour . Within a few weeks , foals will attempt to graze , but may continue to nurse for 8 – 13 months . Species in arid habitats , like the Grévy 's zebra , have longer nursing intervals and do not drink water until they are three months old . 
 Among harem @-@ holding species , foals are cared for mostly by their mothers , but if threatened by predators , the entire group works together to protect all the young . The group forms a protective front with the foals in the center and the stallion will rush at predators that come too close . In territory @-@ holding species , mothers may gather into small groups and leave their young in " kindergartens " under the guard of a territorial male while searching for water . Grévy 's zebra stallions may look after a foal in his territory to ensure that the mother stays , even though it may not be his . 
 = = Human relations = = 
 The earliest archaeological evidence for the domestication of the horse comes from sites in Ukraine and Kazakhstan , dating to approximately 4000 @-@ 3500 BC . By 3000 BC , the horse was completely domesticated and by 2000 BC there was a sharp increase in the number of horse bones found in human settlements in northwestern Europe , indicating the spread of domesticated horses throughout the continent . The most recent , but most irrefutable , evidence of domestication comes from sites where horse remains were interred with chariots in graves of the Sintashta and Petrovka cultures c . 2100 BC . Studies of variation in genetic material shows that very few wild stallions , possibly all from a single haplotype , contributed to the domestic horse , while many mares were part of early domesticated herds . 
 The Przewalski 's horse has been conclusively shown not to be an ancestor of the domestic horse , even though the two can hybridize and produce fertile offspring . The split between <unk> 's horse and E. ferus caballus is estimated to have occurred 120 @,@ 000 – 240 @,@ 000 years ago , long before domestication . Of the <unk> equines , E. ferus , it is E. ferus ferus , also known as the European wild horse or " tarpan " that shares ancestry with the modern domestic horse . In addition , it has also been hypothesized that tarpans that lived into modern times may have been hybridized with domestic horses . 
 Archaeological , biogeographical , and linguistic evidence suggest that the donkey was first domesticated by nomadic pastoral people in North Africa over 5 @,@ 000 years ago . The animals were used to help cope with the increased aridity of the Sahara and the Horn of Africa . Genetic evidence finds that the donkey was domesticated twice based on two distinct mitochondrial DNA <unk> . It also points to a single ancestor , the Nubian wild ass . Attempts to domesticate zebras were largely unsuccessful , though Walter Rothschild trained some to draw a carriage in England . 
 = = = Conservation issues = = = 
 Humans have had a great impact on the populations of wild equines . Threats to wild equines include habitat destruction and conflicts with local people and livestock . Since the 20th century , wild equines have been decimated over many of their former ranges and their populations scattered . In recent centuries , two subspecies , the quagga and the tarpan , became extinct . Only the plains zebra remains numerous and widespread . The IUCN lists the African wild ass as critically endangered , the Grévy 's zebra , mountain zebra and Przewalski 's horse as endangered , the <unk> as vulnerable , the kiang as lower risk and the plains zebra as least concern . The Przewalski 's horse was considered to be extinct in the wild from the 1960s to 1996 . However , following successful captive breeding , it has been reintroduced in Mongolia . 
 Feral horses vary in degree of protection and generate considerable controversy . For example , in Australia , they are considered a non @-@ native invasive species , often viewed as pests , though are also considered to have some cultural and economic value . In the United States , feral horses and burros are generally considered an introduced species because descend from domestic horses brought to the Americas from Europe . While they are viewed as pests by many livestock producers , conversely , there is also a view that E. ferus caballus is a reintroduced once @-@ native species returned to the Americas that should be granted endangered species protection . At present , certain free @-@ roaming horses and burros have federal protection as " living symbols of the historic and pioneer spirit of the West " under the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 , and in Kleppe v. New Mexico , the United States Supreme Court ruled that the animals so designated were , as a matter of law , wildlife . 
 = McDonnell Douglas AV @-@ 8B Harrier II = 
 The McDonnell Douglas ( now Boeing ) AV @-@ 8B Harrier II is a single @-@ engine ground @-@ attack aircraft that constitutes the second generation of the Harrier Jump Jet family . Capable of vertical or short takeoff and landing ( V / STOL ) , the aircraft was designed in the late 1970s as an Anglo @-@ American development of the British Hawker Siddeley Harrier , the first operational V / STOL aircraft . Named after a bird of prey , it is primarily employed on light attack or multi @-@ role missions , ranging from close air support of ground troops to armed reconnaissance . The AV @-@ 8B is used by the United States Marine Corps ( USMC ) , the Spanish Navy , and the Italian Navy . A variant of the AV @-@ 8B , the British Aerospace Harrier II , was developed for the British military , while another , the TAV @-@ 8B , is a dedicated two @-@ seat trainer . 
 The project that eventually led to the AV @-@ 8B 's creation started in the early 1970s as a cooperative effort between the United States and United Kingdom ( UK ) , aimed at addressing the operational inadequacies of the first @-@ generation Harrier . Early efforts centered on a larger , more powerful Pegasus engine to dramatically improve the capabilities of the Harrier . Due to budgetary constraints , the UK abandoned the project in 1975 . 
 Following the withdrawal of the UK , McDonnell Douglas extensively redesigned the earlier AV @-@ 8A Harrier to create the AV @-@ 8B . While retaining the general layout of its predecessor , the aircraft incorporates a new wing , an elevated cockpit , a redesigned fuselage , one extra hardpoint per wing , and other structural and aerodynamic refinements . The aircraft is powered by an upgraded version of the Pegasus , which gives the aircraft its V / STOL ability . The AV @-@ 8B made its maiden flight in November 1981 and entered service with the USMC in January 1985 . Later upgrades added a night @-@ attack capability and radar , resulting in the AV @-@ 8B ( NA ) and AV @-@ 8B Harrier II Plus , respectively . An enlarged version named Harrier III was also studied , but not pursued . The UK , through British Aerospace , re @-@ joined the improved Harrier project as a partner in 1981 , giving it a significant work @-@ share in the project . After corporate mergers in the 1990s , Boeing and BAE Systems have jointly supported the program . Approximately 340 aircraft were produced in a 22 @-@ year production program that ended in 2003 . 
 Typically operated from small aircraft carriers , large amphibious assault ships and simple forward operating bases , AV @-@ 8Bs have participated in numerous military and humanitarian operations , proving themselves versatile assets . US Army General Norman Schwarzkopf named the USMC Harrier II as one of the seven most important weapons of the Gulf War . The aircraft took part in combat during the Iraq War beginning in 2003 . The Harrier II has served in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan since 2001 , and was used in Operation Odyssey Dawn in Libya in 2011 . Italian and Spanish Harrier IIs have taken part in overseas conflicts in conjunction with NATO coalitions . During its service history , the AV @-@ 8B has had a high accident rate , related to the percentage of time spent in critical take @-@ off and landing phases . USMC and Italian Navy AV @-@ 8Bs are to be replaced by the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35B Lightning II , with the former expected to operate its Harriers until 2025 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In the late 1960s and early 1970s , the first @-@ generation Harriers entered service with the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and United States Marine Corps ( USMC ) , but were handicapped in range and payload . In short takeoff and landing configuration , the AV @-@ 8A ( American designation for the Harrier ) carried less than half the 4 @,@ 000 lb ( 1 @,@ 800 kg ) payload of the smaller A @-@ 4 Skyhawk , over a more limited radius . To address this issue , in 1973 Hawker Siddeley and McDonnell Douglas began joint development of a more capable version of the Harrier . Early efforts concentrated on an improved Pegasus engine , designated the Pegasus 15 , which was being tested by Bristol Siddeley . Although more powerful , the engine 's diameter was too large by 2 @.@ 75 in ( 70 mm ) to fit into the Harrier easily . 
 In December 1973 , a joint American and British team completed a project document defining an Advanced Harrier powered by the Pegasus 15 engine . The Advanced Harrier was intended to replace the original RAF and USMC Harriers , as well as the USMC 's A @-@ 4 . The aim of the Advanced Harrier was to double the AV @-@ 8 's payload and range , and was therefore unofficially named AV @-@ 16 . The British government pulled out of the project in March 1975 owing to decreased defense funding , rising costs , and the RAF 's insufficient 60 @-@ aircraft requirement . With development costs estimated to be around £ 180 – 200 million ( 1974 British pounds ) , the United States was unwilling to fund development by itself , and ended the project later that year . 
 Despite the project 's termination , the two companies continued to take different paths toward an enhanced Harrier . Hawker Siddeley focused on a new larger wing that could be retrofitted to existing operational aircraft , while McDonnell Douglas independently pursued a less ambitious , though still expensive , project catering to the needs of the US military . Using knowledge gleaned from the AV @-@ 16 effort , though dropping some items — such as the larger Pegasus engine — McDonnell Douglas kept the basic structure and engine for an aircraft tailored for the USMC . 
 = = = Designing and testing = = = 
 As the USMC wanted a substantially improved Harrier without the development of a new engine , the plan for Harrier II development was authorized by the United States Department of Defense ( DoD ) in 1976 . The United States Navy ( USN ) , which had traditionally procured military aircraft for the USMC , insisted that the new design be verified with flight testing . McDonnell Douglas modified two AV @-@ 8As with new wings , revised intakes , redesigned exhaust nozzles , and other aerodynamic changes ; the modified forward fuselage and cockpit found on all subsequent aircraft were not incorporated on these prototypes . Designated <unk> @-@ 8B , the first converted aircraft flew on 9 November 1978 , at the hands of Charles Plummer . The aircraft performed three vertical take @-@ offs and hovered for seven minutes at Lambert – St. Louis International Airport . The second aircraft followed on 19 February 1979 , but crashed that November due to engine flameout ; the pilot ejected safely . Flight testing of these modified AV @-@ 8s continued into 1979 . The results showed greater than expected drag , hampering the aircraft 's maximum speed . Further refinements to the aerodynamic profile yielded little improvement . Positive test results in other areas , including payload , range , and V / STOL performance , led to the award of a development contract in 1979 . The contract stipulated a procurement of 12 aircraft initially , followed by a further 324 . 
 Between 1978 and 1980 , the DoD and USN repeatedly attempted to terminate the AV @-@ 8B program . There had previously been conflict between the USMC and USN over budgetary issues . At the time , the USN wanted to procure A @-@ 18s for its ground attack force and , to cut costs , pressured the USMC to adopt the similarly @-@ designed F @-@ 18 fighter instead of the AV @-@ 8B to fulfill the role of close air support ( both designs were eventually amalgamated to create the multirole F / A @-@ 18 Hornet ) . Despite these bureaucratic obstacles , in 1981 , the DoD included the Harrier II in its annual budget and five @-@ year defense plan . The USN declined to participate in the procurement , citing the limited range and payload compared with conventional aircraft . 
 In August 1981 , the program received a boost when British Aerospace ( BAe ) and McDonnell Douglas signed a Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) , marking the UK 's re @-@ entry into the program . The British government was enticed by the lower cost of acquiring Harriers promised by a large production run , and the fact that the US was shouldering the expense of development . Under the agreement BAe was relegated to the position of a subcontractor , instead of the full partner status that would have been the case had the UK not left the program . Consequently , the company received , in man @-@ hours , 40 percent of the airframe work @-@ share . Aircraft production took place at McDonnell Douglas ' facilities in suburban St. Louis , Missouri , and manufacturing by BAe at its Kingston and Dunsfold facilities in Surrey , England . Meanwhile , 75 percent work @-@ share for the engine went to Rolls @-@ Royce , which had previously absorbed Bristol Siddeley , with the remaining 25 percent assigned to Pratt & Whitney . The two companies planned to manufacture 400 Harrier IIs , with the USMC expected to procure 336 aircraft and the RAF , 60 . 
 Four full @-@ scale development ( FSD ) aircraft were constructed . The first of these ( BuNo <unk> ) , used mainly for testing performance and handling qualities , made its maiden flight on 5 November 1981 , piloted by Plummer . The second and third FSD aircraft , which introduced wing leading @-@ edge root extensions and revised engine intakes , first flew in April the following year ; the fourth followed in January 1984 . The first production AV @-@ 8B was delivered to the Marine Attack Training Squadron 203 ( VMAT @-@ 203 ) at Marine Corps Air Station Cherry Point ( MCAS Cherry Point ) on 12 December 1983 , and officially handed over one month later . The last of the initial batch of 12 was delivered in January 1985 to the front @-@ line Marine Attack Squadron 331 ( VMA @-@ 331 ) . The engine used for these aircraft was the F402 @-@ RR @-@ <unk> , with 21 @,@ 450 lb ( 95 @.@ 4 kN ) of thrust ; aircraft from 1990 onwards received upgraded engines . 
 = = = Upgrades = = = 
 During the initial pilot conversion course , it became apparent that the AV @-@ 8B exhibited flight characteristics different from the AV @-@ 8A . These differences , as well as the digital cockpit fitted instead of the analog cockpit of the TAV @-@ 8A , necessitated additional pilot training . In 1984 , funding for eight AV @-@ 8Bs was diverted to the development of a two @-@ seat TAV @-@ 8B trainer . The first of the 28 TAV @-@ 8Bs eventually procured had its maiden flight on 21 October 1986 . This aircraft was delivered to VMAT @-@ 203 on 24 July 1987 ; the TAV @-@ 8B was also ordered by Italy and Spain . 
 With export interest from Brazil , Japan , and Italy serving as a source of encouragement to continue development of the Harrier II , McDonnell Douglas commenced work on a night @-@ attack variant in 1985 . With the addition of an infrared sensor and cockpit interface enhancements , the 87th production single @-@ seat AV @-@ 8B became the first Harrier II to be modified for night attacks , leaving the McDonnell Douglas production line in June 1987 . Flight tests proved successful and the night attack capability was validated . The first of 66 AV @-@ 8B ( NA ) s was delivered to the USMC in September 1989 . An equivalent version of the AV @-@ 8B ( NA ) also served with the RAF under the designation GR7 ; earlier <unk> aircraft were subsequently upgraded to GR7 standards . 
 In June 1987 , as a private venture , BAe , McDonnell Douglas , and Smiths Industries signed an MoU for the development of what was to become the AV @-@ 8B Plus , which saw the addition of radar and increased missile compatibility . The agreement was endorsed by the USMC and , after much consideration , the Spanish and Italian navies developed a joint requirement for a fleet of air @-@ defense Harriers . The United States , Spain , and Italy signed an MoU in September 1990 to define the responsibilities of the three countries and establish a Joint Program Office to manage the program . On 30 November 1990 , the USN , acting as an agent for the three participating countries , awarded McDonnell Douglas the contract to develop the improved Harrier . The award was followed by an order from the USMC in December 1990 for 30 new aircraft , and 72 rebuilt from older aircraft . Italy ordered 16 Harrier II Plus and two twin @-@ seat TAV @-@ 8B aircraft , while Spain signed a contract for eight aircraft . Production of the AV @-@ 8B Harrier II Plus was conducted , in addition to McDonnell Douglas ' plant , at CASA 's facility in Seville , Spain , and Alenia Aeronautica 's facility in Turin , Italy . The UK also participated in the program by manufacturing components for the AV @-@ 8B . 
 Production was authorized on 3 June 1992 . The maiden flight of the prototype ( BuNo <unk> ) took place on 22 September , marking the start of a successful flight @-@ test program . The first production aircraft was delivered to St. Louis and made its initial flight on 17 March 1993 . Deliveries of new aircraft took place from April 1993 to 1995 . At the same time , the plan to remanufacture existing AV @-@ 8Bs to the Plus standard proceeded . On 11 March 1994 , the Defense Acquisition Board approved the program , which initially involved 70 aircraft , with four converted in financial year 1994 . The program planned to use new and refurbished components to rebuild aircraft at a lower cost than manufacturing new ones . Conversion began in April 1994 , and the first aircraft was delivered to the USMC in January 1996 . 
 = = = End of production and further improvements = = = 
 In March 1996 , the US General Accounting Office ( GAO ) stated that it was cheaper to buy Harrier II Plus aircraft outright than to remanufacture existing AV @-@ 8Bs . The USN estimated the cost for remanufacture of each aircraft to be US $ 23 – 30 million , instead of $ 30 million for each new @-@ built aircraft , while the GAO estimated the cost per new aircraft at $ 24 million . Nevertheless , the program continued and , in 2003 , the 72nd and last AV @-@ 8B to be remanufactured for the USMC was delivered . Spain also participated in the program , the delivery of its last refurbished aircraft occurring in December 2003 , which marked the end of the AV @-@ 8B 's production ; the final new AV @-@ 8B had been delivered in 1997 . 
 In the 1990s , Boeing and BAE Systems assumed management of the Harrier family following corporate mergers that saw Boeing acquire McDonnell Douglas and BAe amalgamate with other defense companies to form BAE Systems . Between 1969 and 2003 , 824 Harriers of all models were delivered . In 2001 , Flight International reported that Taiwan might meet its requirement for a short take off and vertical landing ( STOVL ) aircraft by purchasing AV @-@ 8Bs , outfitted with the F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon 's APG @-@ 66 radar . A Taiwanese purchase would have allowed the production line to stay open beyond 2005 . Despite the possibility of leasing AV @-@ 8Bs , interest in the aircraft waned as the country switched its intentions to procuring the F @-@ 35 and upgrading its fleet of F @-@ 16s . 
 Although there have been no new AV @-@ 8B variants , in 1990 McDonnell Douglas and British Aerospace began discussions on an interim aircraft between the AV @-@ 8B and the next generation of advanced STOVL aircraft . The Harrier III would have presented an " evolutionary approach to get the most from the existing aircraft " , as many of the structures employed on the Sea Harrier and AV @-@ 8B would be used . The wing and the torsion box were to be enlarged to accommodate extra fuel and hardpoints to improve the aircraft 's endurance . Due to the increase in size , the wing would have had folding wingtips . To meet the heavier weight of the aircraft , Rolls @-@ Royce was expected to design a Pegasus engine variant that would have produced 4 @,@ 000 lbf ( 18 kN ) more thrust than the latest production variant at the time . The Harrier III would have carried weapons such as AIM @-@ 120 AMRAAM and AIM @-@ 132 ASRAAM missiles . Boeing and BAE Systems continued studying the design until the early 2000s , when the project was abandoned . 
 In 2013 , the USMC was studying potential enhancements to keep the AV @-@ 8B Harrier IIs up to date until its planned retirement , such as a helmet @-@ mounted cueing system . It is also predicted that additional work on the aircraft 's radars and sensor systems may take place . The Marines Corps Harrier II fleet was planned to remain in service until 2030 , owing to delays with the F @-@ 35B and the fact that the Harriers have more service life left than USMC F / A @-@ 18 Hornets . However , by 2014 the USMC had decided to retire the AV @-@ 8B sooner because changing the transition orders of Harrier II and Hornet fleets to the Lightning II would save $ 1 billion . Expected to become operational in 2015 , the F @-@ 35B will start to replace the AV @-@ 8B in 2016 , with the AV @-@ 8B expected to continue service until 2025 . Meanwhile , the AV @-@ 8B will receive revamped defensive measures , updated data @-@ link capability and targeting sensors , and improved missiles and rockets , among other enhancements . 
 = = Design = = 
