 We had Sharon Osbourne 's dad , Don Arden , managing us . He came up with the idea of having the stage set be Stonehenge . He wrote the dimensions down and gave it to our tour manager . He wrote it down in metres but he meant to write it down in feet . The people who made it saw fifteen metres instead of fifteen feet . It was 45 feet high and it wouldn 't fit on any stage anywhere so we just had to leave it in the storage area . It cost a fortune to make but there was not a building on earth that you could fit it into . 
 = = = Hiatus and Seventh Star ( 1984 – 86 ) = = = 
 Following the completion of the Born Again tour in March 1984 , vocalist Ian Gillan left Black Sabbath to re @-@ join Deep Purple , which was reforming after a long hiatus . Bevan left at the same time , and Gillan remarked that he and Bevan were made to feel like " hired help " by Iommi . The band then recruited an unknown Los Angeles vocalist named David Donato . The new line @-@ up wrote and rehearsed throughout 1984 , and eventually recorded a demo with producer Bob Ezrin in October . Unhappy with the results , the band parted ways with Donato shortly after . Disillusioned with the band 's revolving line @-@ up , bassist Geezer Butler quit Black Sabbath in November 1984 to form a solo band . " When Ian Gillan took over that was the end of it for me " , Butler later said . " I thought it was just a joke and I just totally left . When we got together with Gillan it was not supposed to be a Black Sabbath album . After we had done the album we gave it to Warner Bros. and they said they were going to put it out as a Black Sabbath album and we didn 't have a leg to stand on . I got really disillusioned with it and Gillan was really pissed off about it . That lasted one album and one tour and then that was it . " 
 Following Butler 's exit , sole remaining original member Tony Iommi put Black Sabbath on hiatus , and began work on a solo album with long @-@ time Sabbath keyboardist Geoff Nicholls . While working on new material , the original Black Sabbath line @-@ up were offered a spot at Bob Geldof 's Live Aid benefit concert ; the band agreed , performing at the Philadelphia show , on 13 July 1985 . The event marked the first time the original line @-@ up appeared on stage since 1978 , and also featured reunions of the Who and Led Zeppelin . Returning to his solo work , Iommi enlisted bassist Dave Spitz , drummer Eric Singer and initially intended to use multiple singers , including Rob Halford of Judas Priest , former Deep Purple and Trapeze vocalist Glenn Hughes , and former Black Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio . This plan didn 't work as he forecasted . " We were going to use different vocalists on the album , guest vocalists , but it was so difficult getting it together and getting releases from their record companies . Glenn Hughes came along to sing on one track and we decided to use him on the whole album . " 
 The band spent the remainder of the year in the studio , recording what would become Seventh Star . Warner Bros. refused to release the album as a Tony Iommi solo release , instead insisting on using the name Black Sabbath . Pressured by the band 's manager , Don Arden , the two compromised and released the album as " Black Sabbath featuring Tony Iommi " in January 1986 . " It opened up a whole can of worms really " , Iommi explained , " because I think if we could have done it as a solo album , it would have been accepted a lot more . " Seventh Star , which sounded little like a Black Sabbath album , incorporated more hard rock elements popularised by the 1980s Sunset Strip hard rock scene , and was panned by the critics of the era , although later reviewers such as Allmusic gave the album favourable reviews , calling the album " often misunderstood and underrated " . 
 The new line @-@ up rehearsed for six weeks preparing for a full world tour , although the band were eventually forced to use the Black Sabbath name . " I was into the ' Tony Iommi project ' , but I wasn 't into the Black Sabbath moniker " , Hughes said . " The idea of being in Black Sabbath didn 't appeal to me whatsoever . Glenn Hughes singing in Black Sabbath is like James Brown singing in Metallica . It wasn 't gonna work " . Just four days before the start of the tour , vocalist Glenn Hughes got into a bar fight with the band 's production manager John Downing which splintered the singer 's orbital bone . The injury interfered with Hughes ' ability to sing , and the band brought in vocalist Ray Gillen to continue the tour with W.A.S.P. and Anthrax , although nearly half of the US dates would eventually be cancelled because of poor ticket sales . 
 One vocalist whose status is disputed , both inside and outside Black Sabbath , is Christian evangelist and former Joshua frontman , Jeff Fenholt . Fenholt has insisted that he was a singer in Black Sabbath between January and May 1985 . Tony Iommi has never confirmed this . Fenholt gives a detailed account of his time with Iommi and Sabbath in Garry Sharpe @-@ Young 's book Sabbath Bloody Sabbath : The Battle for Black Sabbath . 
 = = = The Eternal Idol , Headless Cross and Tyr ( 1986 – 90 ) = = = 
 Black Sabbath began work on new material in October 1986 at Air Studios in Montserrat with producer Jeff <unk> . The recording was fraught with problems from the beginning , as <unk> left after the initial sessions to be replaced by producer Vic Coppersmith @-@ Heaven . Bassist Dave Spitz quit over " personal issues " , and former Rainbow and Ozzy Osbourne bassist Bob Daisley was brought in . Daisley re @-@ recorded all of the bass tracks , and wrote the album 's lyrics , but before the album was complete , he left to join Gary Moore 's backing band , taking drummer Eric Singer with him . After problems with second producer Coppersmith @-@ Heaven , the band returned to Morgan Studios in England in January 1987 to work with new producer Chris Tsangarides . While working in the UK , new vocalist Ray Gillen abruptly left Black Sabbath to form Blue Murder with John Sykes . The band enlisted former Alliance vocalist Tony Martin to re @-@ record Gillen 's tracks , and former Electric Light Orchestra drummer Bev Bevan to complete a few percussion overdubs . Before the release of the new album Black Sabbath accepted an offer to play six shows at Sun City , South Africa during the apartheid era . The band drew criticism from activists and artists involved with Artists United Against Apartheid , who had been boycotting South Africa since 1985 . Drummer Bev Bevan refused to play the shows , and was replaced by Terry Chimes , formerly of the Clash . 
 After nearly a year in production , The Eternal Idol was released on 8 December 1987 and ignored by contemporary reviewers . On @-@ line internet era reviews were mixed . AllMusic said that " Martin 's powerful voice added new fire " to the band , and the album contained " some of Iommi 's heaviest riffs in years . " Blender gave the album two stars , claiming the album was " Black Sabbath in name only " . The album would stall at No. 66 in the UK , while peaking at 168 in the US . The band toured in support of Eternal Idol in Germany , Italy and for the first time , Greece . Unfortunately , in part because of a backlash from promoters over the South Africa incident , other European shows were cancelled . Bassist Dave Spitz left the band shortly before the tour , and was replaced by Jo Burt , formerly of Virginia Wolf . 
 Following the poor commercial performance of The Eternal Idol , Black Sabbath were dropped by both Vertigo Records and Warner Bros. Records , and signed with I.R.S. Records . The band took time off in 1988 , returning in August to begin work on their next album . As a result of the recording troubles with Eternal Idol , Tony Iommi opted to produce the band 's next album himself . " It was a completely new start " , Iommi said . " I had to rethink the whole thing , and decided that we needed to build up some credibility again " . Iommi enlisted former Rainbow drummer Cozy Powell , long @-@ time keyboardist Nicholls and session bassist Laurence Cottle , and rented a " very cheap studio in England " . 
 Black Sabbath released Headless Cross in April 1989 , and it was also ignored by contemporary reviewers , although Allmusic contributor Eduardo Rivadavia gave the album four stars and called it " the finest non @-@ Ozzy or Dio Black Sabbath album " . Anchored by the number 62 charting single " Headless Cross " , the album reached number 31 on the UK charts , and number 115 in the US . Queen guitarist Brian May , a good friend of Iommi 's , played a guest solo on the song " When Death Calls " . Following the album 's release the band added touring bassist Neil Murray , formerly of Whitesnake , Gary Moore 's backing band , and Vow Wow . 
 The unsuccessful Headless Cross US tour began in May 1989 with openers Kingdom Come and Silent Rage , but because of poor ticket sales , the tour was cancelled after just eight shows . The European leg of the tour began in September , where the band were enjoying chart success . After a string of Japanese shows the band embarked on a 23 date Russian tour with Girlschool . Black Sabbath was one of the first bands to tour Russia , after Mikhail Gorbachev opened the country to western acts for the first time in 1989 . 
 The band returned to the studio in February 1990 to record Tyr , the follow @-@ up to Headless Cross . While not technically a concept album , some of the album 's lyrical themes are loosely based on Norse mythology . Tyr was released on 6 August 1990 , reaching number 24 on the UK albums chart , but was the first Black Sabbath release not to break the Billboard 200 in the US . The album would receive mixed internet @-@ era reviews , with Allmusic noting that the band " mix myth with metal in a crushing display of musical synthesis " , while Blender gave the album just one star , claiming that " Iommi continues to <unk> the Sabbath name with this unremarkable collection " . The band toured in support of Tyr with Circus of Power in Europe , but the final seven UK dates were cancelled because of poor ticket sales . For the first time in their career , the band 's touring cycle did not include US dates . 
 = = = Dehumanizer ( 1990 – 92 ) = = = 
 While on his own Lock Up the Wolves US tour in August 1990 , former Black Sabbath vocalist Ronnie James Dio was joined on stage at the Roy Wilkins Auditorium by former Black Sabbath bassist Geezer Butler to perform " Neon Knights " . Following the show , the two expressed interest in rejoining Black Sabbath . Butler convinced Iommi , who in turn broke up the current line @-@ up , dismissing vocalist Tony Martin and bassist Neil Murray . " I do regret that in a lot of ways " , Iommi said . " We were at a good point then . We decided to [ reunite with Dio ] and I don 't even know why , really . There 's the financial aspect , but that wasn 't it . I seemed to think maybe we could recapture something we had " . 
 Ronnie James Dio and Geezer Butler joined Tony Iommi and Cozy Powell in autumn of 1990 to begin working on the next Black Sabbath release . While rehearsing in November , Powell suffered a broken hip when his horse died , falling on the drummer 's legs . Unable to complete work on the album , Powell was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice , reuniting the Mob Rules era line @-@ up , and the band entered the studio with producer Reinhold Mack . The year @-@ long recording process was plagued with problems , primarily stemming from writing tension between Iommi and Dio . Some songs were re @-@ written multiple times . " Dehumanizer took a long time , it was just hard work " , Iommi said . " We took too long on it , that album cost us a million dollars , which is bloody ridiculous " . Dio later recalled the album as difficult , but worth the effort . " It was something we had to really wring out of ourselves , but I think that 's why it works " , he said . " Sometimes you need that kind of tension , or else you end up making the Christmas album " . 
 The resulting album , Dehumanizer was released on 22 June 1992 . In the US , the album was released on 30 June 1992 by Reprise Records , as Ronnie James Dio and his namesake band were still under contract with the label at the time . While the album received mixed reviews , it was the band 's biggest commercial success in a decade . Anchored by the top 40 rock radio single " TV Crimes " , the album peaked at number 44 on the Billboard 200 . The album also featured the song " Time Machine " , a version of which had been recorded for the 1992 film Wayne 's World . Additionally , the perception by many fans of a return of some semblance of the " real " Black Sabbath provided the band with some much needed momentum . 
 Black Sabbath began touring in support of Dehumanizer in July 1992 with Testament , Danzig , Prong , and Exodus . While on tour , former vocalist Ozzy Osbourne announced his first retirement , and invited Black Sabbath to open for his solo band at the final two shows of his No More Tours tour in Costa Mesa , California . The band agreed , aside from vocalist Ronnie James Dio , who told Iommi in no uncertain terms " I 'm not doing that . I 'm not supporting a clown . " Dio spoke of the situation in an interview years later : 
 I was told in the middle of the tour that we would be opening for Ozzy in Los Angeles . And I said , " No . Sorry , I have more pride than that . " A lot of bad things were being said from camp to camp , and it created this horrible schism . So by [ the band ] agreeing to play the shows in L.A. with Ozzy , that , to me , spelled out reunion . And that obviously meant the doom of that particular project . 
 Dio quit Black Sabbath following a show in Oakland , California on 13 November 1992 , one night before the band were set to appear at Osbourne 's retirement show . Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford stepped in at the last minute , performing two nights with the band . Iommi and Butler also joined Osbourne and former drummer Ward on stage for the first time since 1985 's Live Aid concert , performing a brief set of Black Sabbath songs . 
 = = = Cross Purposes and Forbidden ( 1993 – 96 ) = = = 
 Drummer Vinny Appice left the band following the reunion show to join Ronnie James Dio 's solo band , later appearing on Dio 's Strange Highways and Angry Machines . Iommi and Butler enlisted former Rainbow drummer Bobby Rondinelli , and reinstated former vocalist Tony Martin . The band returned to the studio to work on new material , although the project was not originally intended to be released under the Black Sabbath name . As Geezer Butler explains : 
 It wasn 't even supposed to be a Sabbath album ; I wouldn 't have even done it under the pretence of Sabbath . That was the time when the original band were talking about getting back together for a reunion tour . Tony and myself just went in with a couple of people , did an album just to have , while the reunion tour was ( supposedly ) going on . It was like an Iommi / Butler project album . 
 Under pressure from their record label , the band released their seventeenth studio album , Cross Purposes , on 8 February 1994 , under the Black Sabbath name . The album received mixed reviews , with Blender giving the album two stars , calling Soundgarden 's 1994 album Superunknown " a far better Sabbath album than this by @-@ the @-@ numbers potboiler " . Allmusic 's Bradley Torreano called Cross Purposes " the first album since Born Again that actually sounds like a real Sabbath record " . The album just missed the Top 40 in the UK reaching number 41 , and also reached 122 on the Billboard 200 in the US . Cross Purposes contained the song " Evil Eye " , which was co @-@ written by Van Halen guitarist Eddie Van Halen , although uncredited because of record label restrictions . Touring in support of Cross Purposes began in February with Morbid Angel and Motörhead in the US . The band filmed a live performance at the Hammersmith Apollo on 13 April 1994 , which was released on VHS accompanied by a CD , titled Cross Purposes Live . After the European tour with Cathedral and Godspeed in June 1994 , drummer Bobby Rondinelli quit the band and was replaced by original Black Sabbath drummer Ward for five shows in South America . 
 Following the touring cycle for Cross Purposes , bassist Geezer Butler quit the band for the second time . " I finally got totally disillusioned with the last Sabbath album , and I much preferred the stuff I was writing to the stuff Sabbath were doing " . Butler formed a solo project called <unk> , and released Plastic Planet in 1995 . The album contained the song " Giving Up the Ghost " , which was critical of Tony Iommi for carrying on with the Black Sabbath name , with the lyrics : You plagiarised and parodied / the magic of our meaning / a legend in your own mind / left all your friends behind / you can 't admit that you 're wrong / the spirit is dead and gone ( " I heard it 's something about me ... " said Iommi . " I had the album given to me a while back . I played it once , then somebody else had it , so I haven 't really paid any attention to the lyrics ... It 's nice to see him doing his own thing – getting things off his chest . I don 't want to get into a rift with Geezer . He 's still a friend . " 
 Following Butler 's departure , newly returned drummer Ward once again left the band . Iommi reinstated former members Neil Murray on bass and Cozy Powell on drums , effectively reuniting the Tyr line @-@ up . The band enlisted Body Count guitarist Ernie C to produce the new album , which was recorded in London in autumn of 1994 . The album featured a guest vocal on " Illusion of Power " by Body Count vocalist Ice @-@ T. The resulting Forbidden was released on 8 June 1995 , but failed to chart in the US or the UK . The album was widely panned by critics ; Allmusic 's Bradley Torreano said " with boring songs , awful production , and uninspired performances , this is easily avoidable for all but the most enthusiastic fan " ; while Blender magazine called Forbidden " an embarrassment ... the band 's worst album " . 
 Black Sabbath embarked on a world tour in July 1995 with openers Motörhead and Tiamat , but two months into the tour , drummer Cozy Powell left the band , citing health issues , and was replaced by former drummer Bobby Rondinelli . " The members I had in the last lineup – Bobby Rondinelli , Neil Murray – they 're great , great characters ... " Iommi told Sabbath fanzine Southern Cross . " That , for me , was an ideal lineup . I wasn 't sure vocally what we should do , but Neil Murray and Bobby Rondinelli I really got on well with . " 
 After completing Asian dates in December 1995 , Tony Iommi put the band on hiatus , and began work on a solo album with former Black Sabbath vocalist Glenn Hughes , and former Judas Priest drummer Dave Holland . The album was not officially released following its completion , although a widely traded bootleg called Eighth Star surfaced soon after . The album was officially released in 2004 as The 1996 DEP Sessions , with Holland 's drums re @-@ recorded by session drummer Jimmy Copley . 
 In 1997 , Tony Iommi disbanded the current line @-@ up to officially reunite with Ozzy Osbourne and the original Black Sabbath line @-@ up . Vocalist Tony Martin claimed that an original line @-@ up reunion had been in the works since the band 's brief reunion at Ozzy Osbourne 's 1992 Costa Mesa show , and that the band released subsequent albums to fulfill their record contract with I.R.S. Records . Martin later recalled Forbidden as a " filler album that got the band out of the label deal , rid of the singer , and into the reunion . However I wasn 't privy to that information at the time " . I.R.S. Records released a compilation album in 1996 to fulfill the band 's contract , titled The Sabbath Stones , which featured songs from Born Again to Forbidden . 
 = = = Reunion ( 1997 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In the summer of 1997 , Tony Iommi , Geezer Butler , and Ozzy Osbourne officially reunited to co @-@ headline the Ozzfest festival tour alongside Osbourne 's solo band . The line @-@ up featured Osbourne 's drummer Mike Bordin filling in for Ward , who was unable to participate because of previous commitments with his solo project , the Bill Ward Band . In December 1997 , the group was joined by Ward , marking the first reunion of the original four members since Osbourne 's 1992 " retirement show " . The original line @-@ up recorded two shows at the Birmingham NEC , which were released as the double live album Reunion on 20 October 1998 . Reunion reached number eleven on the Billboard 200 , and went platinum in the US . The album spawned the single " Iron Man " , which won Black Sabbath their first Grammy Award in 2000 for Best Metal Performance , 30 years after the song was originally released . Reunion also featured two new studio tracks , " Psycho Man " and " Selling My Soul " , both of which cracked the top 20 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . 
 Shortly before the band embarked on a European tour in the summer of 1998 , Ward suffered a heart attack and was temporarily replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice . Ward returned in time for the US tour with openers Pantera , which began in January 1999 and continued through the summer , headlining the annual Ozzfest tour . Following the Ozzfest appearances , the band was put on hiatus while members worked on solo material . Tony Iommi released his first official solo album , Iommi , in 2000 , while Osbourne continued work on his next solo release , Down to Earth . 
 Black Sabbath returned to the studio to work on new material with all four original members and producer Rick Rubin in the spring of 2001 , but the sessions were halted when Osbourne was called away to finish tracks for his solo album in the summer of 2001 . " It just came to an end " , Iommi said . " We didn 't go any further , and it 's a shame because [ the songs ] were really good " . Iommi commented on the difficulty getting all of the band members together to work on material : 
 It 's quite different recording now . We 've all done so much in between . In [ the early ] days there was no mobile phone ringing every five seconds . When we first started , we had nothing . We all worked for the same thing . Now everybody has done so many other things . It 's great fun and we all have a good chat , but it 's just different , trying to put an album together . 
 In March 2002 , Ozzy Osbourne 's Emmy winning reality TV show The Osbournes debuted on MTV , and quickly became a worldwide hit . The show introduced Osbourne to a broader audience and to capitalise , the band 's back catalogue label , Sanctuary Records released a double live album Past Lives , which featured concert material recorded in the 1970s , including the previously unofficial Live at Last album . The band remained on hiatus until the summer of 2004 when they returned to headline Ozzfest 2004 and 2005 . In November 2005 , Black Sabbath were inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame , and in March 2006 , after eleven years of eligibility , the band were inducted into the US Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . At the awards ceremony Metallica played two Black Sabbath songs , " Hole in the Sky " and " Iron Man " in tribute to the band . 
 = = = The Dio Years and Heaven and Hell ( 2006 – 10 ) = = = 
 While Ozzy Osbourne was working on new solo album material in 2006 , Rhino Records released Black Sabbath : The Dio Years , a compilation of songs culled from the four Black Sabbath releases featuring Ronnie James Dio . For the release , Iommi , Butler , Dio and Appice reunited to write and record three new songs as Black Sabbath . The Dio Years was released on 3 April 2007 , reaching number 54 on the Billboard 200 , while the single " The Devil Cried " reached number 37 on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart . Pleased with the results , Iommi and Dio decided to reunite the Heaven and Hell era line @-@ up for a world tour . While the line @-@ up of Osbourne , Butler , Iommi and Ward were still officially called Black Sabbath , the new line @-@ up opted to call themselves Heaven & Hell , after the album of the same name , to avoid confusion . When asked about the name of the group , Iommi stated " it really is Black Sabbath , whatever we do ... so everyone knows what they 're getting [ and ] so people won 't expect to hear ' Iron Man ' and all those songs . We 've done them for so many years , it 's nice to do just all the stuff we did with Ronnie again . " Ward was initially set to participate , but dropped out before the tour began due to musical differences with " a couple of the band members " . He was replaced by former drummer Vinny Appice , effectively reuniting the line @-@ up that had featured on the Mob Rules and Dehumanizer albums . 
 Heaven & Hell toured the US with openers Megadeth and Machine Head , and recorded a live album and DVD in New York on 30 March 2007 , titled Live from Radio City Music Hall . In November 2007 , Dio confirmed that the band had plans to record a new studio album , which was recorded in the following year . In April 2008 the band announced the upcoming release of a new box set and their participation in the Metal Masters Tour , alongside Judas Priest , Motörhead and Testament . The box set , The Rules of Hell , featuring remastered versions of all the Dio fronted Black Sabbath albums , was supported by the Metal Masters Tour . In 2009 , the band announced the name of their debut studio album , The Devil You Know , released on 28 April . 
 On 26 May 2009 Osbourne filed suit in a federal court in New York against Iommi alleging that he illegally claimed the band name . Iommi noted that he has been the only constant band member for its full 41 @-@ year career , and that his bandmates relinquished their rights to the name in the 1980s , therefore claiming more rights to the name of the band . Although , in the suit , Osbourne was seeking 50 % ownership of the trademark , he said that he hoped the proceedings would lead to equal ownership among the four original members . 
 In March 2010 , Black Sabbath announced that along with Metallica they would be releasing a limited edition single together to celebrate Record Store Day . It was released on 17 April 2010 . 
 Ronnie James Dio died on 16 May 2010 from stomach cancer . In June 2010 , the legal battle between Ozzy Osbourne and Tony Iommi over the trademarking of the Black Sabbath name ended , but the terms of the settlement have not been disclosed . 
 = = = Reunion and 13 ( 2010 – 14 ) = = = 
 In a January 2010 interview while promoting his biography I Am Ozzy , Osbourne stated that although he would not rule it out , he was doubtful there would be a reunion with all four original members of the band . Osbourne stated : " I 'm not gonna say I 've written it out forever , but right now I don 't think there 's any chance . But who knows what the future holds for me ? If it 's my destiny , fine . " In July , Butler said that there would be no reunion in 2011 , as Osbourne was already committed to touring with his solo band . However , by that August they had already met up to rehearse together , and continued to do so through the autumn . 
 On 11 November 2011 , Iommi , Butler , Osbourne , and Ward announced that they were reuniting to record a new album with a full tour in support beginning in 2012 . Guitarist Iommi was diagnosed with lymphoma on 9 January 2012 , which forced the band to cancel all but two shows ( Download Festival , and Lollapalooza Festival ) of a previously booked European tour . It was later announced that an intimate show would be played in their hometown Birmingham . It was the first concert since the reunion and the only indoors concerts that year . In February 2012 , drummer Ward announced that he would not participate further in the band 's reunion until he was offered a " <unk> contract " . 
 On 21 May 2012 , at the O2 Academy in Birmingham , Black Sabbath played their first concert since 2005 , with Tommy <unk> playing the drums . In June , they performed at Download Festival , followed by the last concert of the short tour at Lollapalooza Festival in Chicago . Later that month , the band started recording an album . 
 On 13 January 2013 , the band announced that the album would be released in June under the title 13 . Brad Wilk of Rage Against the Machine was chosen as the drummer , and Rick Rubin was chosen as the producer . Mixing of the album commenced in February . On 12 April 2013 , the band released the album 's track listing . The standard version of the album features eight new tracks , and the deluxe version features three bonus tracks . 
 The band 's first single from 13 , " God Is Dead ? " , was released on 19 April 2013 . On 20 April 2013 , Black Sabbath commenced their first Australia / New Zealand tour in 40 years , to be followed by a major North American Tour in Summer 2013 . The second single of the album , " End of the Beginning " , debuted on 15 May in a CSI : Crime Scene Investigation episode , where all three members appeared . In June 2013 , 13 topped both the UK Albums Chart and the US Billboard 200 . " God Is Dead ? " earned Black Sabbath their first Grammy Award in 14 years for Best Metal Performance in 2014 . 
 In July 2013 , Black Sabbath embarked on a North American Tour ( for the first time since July 2001 ) , followed by a Latin American tour in October 2013 . In November 2013 , the band started their European tour which lasted until December 2013 . In March and April 2014 , they made 12 stops in North America ( mostly in Canada ) as the second leg of their North American Tour before embarking in June 2014 on the second leg of their European tour , which ended with a concert at London 's Hyde Park . 
 = = = Final tour ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 On 29 September 2014 , vocalist Ozzy Osbourne told Metal Hammer that Black Sabbath would begin work on their twentieth studio album in early 2015 with producer Rick Rubin , followed by a final tour in 2016 . In an April 2015 interview , however , Osbourne said that these plans " could change " , and added , " We all live in different countries and some of them want to work and some of them don 't want to , I believe . But we are going to do another tour together . " 
 On 3 September 2015 , it was announced that Black Sabbath would embark on their final tour , titled The End , from January 2016 to February 2017 . Numerous dates and locations across the US , Canada , Europe , Australia and New Zealand were announced . The final shows of The End tour will take place at the Genting Arena in Birmingham on February 2 and February 4 , 2017 . 
 On 26 October 2015 , it was announced the band consisting of Osbourne , Iommi and Butler would be returning to the Download Festival on 11 June 2016 . Despite earlier reports that they would enter the studio before their farewell tour , Osbourne stated that there will not be another Black Sabbath studio album . However , an 8 @-@ track CD entitled The End was sold at dates on the tour . Along with some live recordings , the CD includes four unused tracks from the 13 sessions . 
 On 4 March 2016 , Iommi discussed future re @-@ releases of the Tony Martin @-@ era catalogue . He explained : " We 've held back on the reissues of those albums because of the current Sabbath thing with Ozzy Osbourne , but they will certainly be happening ... I 'd like to do a couple of new tracks for those releases with Tony Martin ... I 'll also be looking at working on Cross Purposes and Forbidden . " Martin has suggested that this could coincide with the 30th anniversary of The Eternal Idol , in 2017 . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Black Sabbath are a heavy metal band , whose music has also been described as psychedelic rock , blues rock , hard rock , progressive rock , proto @-@ progressive metal , and acid rock . The band have also been cited as a key influence on genres including stoner rock , doom metal , and sludge metal . 
 Early on Black Sabbath were influenced by Cream , the Beatles , Fleetwood Mac , Jimi Hendrix , John Mayall & the Bluesbreakers , Led Zeppelin and Jethro Tull . 
 Although Black Sabbath have gone through many line @-@ ups and stylistic changes , their core sound focuses on ominous lyrics and doomy music , often making use of the musical tritone , also called the " devil 's interval " . While their Ozzy @-@ era albums such as Sabbath Bloody Sabbath had slight compositional similarities to the progressive rock genre that was growing in popularity at the time , standing in stark contrast to popular music of the early 1970s Black Sabbath 's dark sound was dismissed by rock critics of the era . Much like many of their early heavy metal contemporaries , the band received virtually no airplay on rock radio . 
 As the band 's primary songwriter , Tony Iommi wrote the majority of Black Sabbath 's music , while Osbourne would write vocal melodies , and bassist Geezer Butler would write lyrics . The process was sometimes frustrating for Iommi , who often felt pressured to come up with new material . " If I didn 't come up with anything , nobody would do anything . " On Iommi 's influence , Osbourne later said : 
 Black Sabbath never used to write a structured song . There 'd be a long intro that would go into a jazz piece , then go all folky ... and it worked . Tony Iommi — and I have said this a zillion times — should be up there with the greats . He can pick up a guitar , play a riff , and you say , ' He 's gotta be out now , he can 't top that . ' Then you come back , and I bet you a billion dollars , he 'd come up with a riff that 'd knock your fucking socks off . 
 Beginning with their third album , Master of Reality , Black Sabbath began to feature tuned @-@ down guitars . In 1965 , before forming Black Sabbath , guitarist Tony Iommi suffered an accident while working in a sheet metal factory , losing the tips of two fingers on his right hand . Iommi almost gave up music , but was urged by the factory manager to listen to Django Reinhardt , a jazz guitarist who lost the use of two fingers . Inspired by Reinhardt , Iommi created two thimbles made of plastic and leather to cap off his missing fingertips . The guitarist began using lighter strings , and detuning his guitar , to better grip the strings with his prosthesis . Early in the band 's history Iommi experimented with different dropped tunings , including C ♯ tuning , or 3 semitones down , before settling on E ♭ / D ♯ tuning , or a half @-@ step down from standard tuning . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Black Sabbath has sold over 70 million records worldwide , including a RIAA @-@ certified 15 million in the US . They are one of the most influential heavy metal bands of all time . The band helped to create the genre with ground @-@ breaking releases such as Paranoid , an album that Rolling Stone magazine said " changed music forever " , and called the band " the Beatles of heavy metal " . Time Magazine called Paranoid " the birthplace of heavy metal " , placing it in their Top 100 Albums of All Time . Rolling Stone magazine ranked Black Sabbath number 85 in their list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . MTV placed Black Sabbath at number one on their Top Ten Heavy Metal Bands and VH1 placed them at number two on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock . VH1 ranked Black Sabbath 's " Iron Man " the number one song on their 40 Greatest Metal Songs countdown . Allmusic 's William Ruhlmann said : 
 Black Sabbath has been so influential in the development of heavy metal rock music as to be a defining force in the style . The group took the blues @-@ rock sound of late ' 60s acts like Cream , Blue Cheer , and Vanilla Fudge to its logical conclusion , slowing the tempo , accentuating the bass , and emphasising screaming guitar solos and howled vocals full of lyrics expressing mental anguish and macabre fantasies . If their predecessors clearly came out of an electrified blues tradition , Black Sabbath took that tradition in a new direction , and in so doing helped give birth to a musical style that continued to attract millions of fans decades later . 
 According to Rolling Stone 's Holly George @-@ Warren , " Black Sabbath was the heavy metal king of the 70s . " Although initially " despised by rock critics and ignored by radio programmers " , the group sold more than 8 million albums by the end of that decade . 
 = = = Influence and innovation = = = 
 Black Sabbath have influenced many acts including Iron Maiden , Slayer , Metallica , Nirvana , Korn , Mayhem , Venom , Judas Priest , Guns N ' Roses , Soundgarden , Body Count , Alice in Chains , Anthrax , Disturbed , Death , Opeth , Pantera , Megadeth , the Smashing Pumpkins , Slipknot , Foo Fighters , Fear Factory , Candlemass , Godsmack , and Van Halen . Two gold selling tribute albums have been released , Nativity in Black Volume 1 & 2 , including covers by Sepultura , White Zombie , Type O Negative , Faith No More , Machine Head , Primus , System of a Down , and Monster Magnet . 
 Metallica 's Lars Ulrich , who , along with bandmate James Hetfield inducted Black Sabbath into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2006 , said " Black Sabbath is and always will be synonymous with heavy metal " , while Hetfield said " Sabbath got me started on all that evil @-@ sounding shit , and it 's stuck with me . Tony Iommi is the king of the heavy riff . " former Guns N ' Roses guitarist Slash said of the Paranoid album : " There 's just something about that whole record that , when you 're a kid and you 're turned onto it , it 's like a whole different world . It just opens up your mind to another dimension ... Paranoid is the whole Sabbath experience ; very indicative of what Sabbath meant at the time . Tony 's playing style — doesn 't matter whether it 's off Paranoid or if it 's off Heaven and Hell — it 's very distinctive . " Anthrax guitarist Scott Ian said " I always get the question in every interview I do , ' What are your top five metal albums ? ' I make it easy for myself and always say the first five Sabbath albums . " 
 Lamb of God 's Chris Adler said : " If anybody who plays heavy metal says that they weren 't influenced by Black Sabbath 's music , then I think that they 're lying to you . I think all heavy metal music was , in some way , influenced by what Black Sabbath did . " Judas Priest vocalist Rob Halford commented : " They were and still are a groundbreaking band .. you can put on the first Black Sabbath album and it still sounds as fresh today as it did 30 @-@ odd years ago . And that 's because great music has a timeless ability : To me , Sabbath are in the same league as the Beatles or Mozart . They 're on the leading edge of something extraordinary . " On Black Sabbath 's standing , Rage Against the Machine guitarist Tom Morello states : " The heaviest , scariest , coolest riffs and the apocalyptic Ozzy wail are without peer . You can hear the despair and menace of the working @-@ class Birmingham streets they came from in every kick @-@ ass , evil groove . Their arrival ground hippy , flower @-@ power psychedelia to a pulp and set the standard for all heavy bands to come . " Phil Anselmo of Pantera and Down stated that " Only a fool would leave out what Black Sabbath brought to the heavy metal genre " . 
 According to Tracii Guns of L.A. Guns and former member of Guns N ' Roses , the main riff of " Paradise City " by Guns N ' Roses , from Appetite for Destruction ( 1987 ) , was influenced by the song " Zero the Hero " from the Born Again album . King Diamond guitarist Andy <unk> affirmed that the clean guitar part of " Sleepless Nights " from Conspiracy ( 1989 ) is inspired by Tony Iommi 's playing on Never Say Die ! . 
 In addition to being pioneers of heavy metal , they also have been credited for laying the foundations for heavy metal subgenres stoner rock , sludge metal , thrash metal , black metal and doom metal as well as for alternative rock subgenre grunge . According to the critic Bob <unk> , the band 's sound " shows up in virtually all of grunge 's most popular bands , including Nirvana , Soundgarden , and Alice in Chains " . 
 Tony Iommi has been credited as the pioneer of lighter gauge guitar strings . The tips of his fingers were severed in a steel factory , and while using thimbles ( artificial finger tips ) he found that standard guitar strings were too difficult to bend and play . He found that there was only one size of strings available , so after years with Sabbath he had strings custom made . 
 Culturally , Black Sabbath have exerted a huge influence in both television and literature and have in many cases become synonymous with heavy metal . In the film Almost Famous , Lester Bangs gives the protagonist an assignment to cover the band ( plot point one ) with the immortal line : ' Give me 500 words on Black Sabbath ' . Contemporary music and arts publication Trebuchet Magazine has put this to practice by asking all new writers to write a short piece ( 500 words ) on Black Sabbath as a means of proving their creativity and voice on a well documented subject . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current line @-@ up 
 Tony Iommi – lead guitar ( 1968 – present ) 
 Geezer Butler – bass guitar ( 1968 – 1979 , 1980 – 1985 , 1987 , 1990 – 1994 , 1997 – present ) 
 Ozzy Osbourne – lead vocals ( 1968 – 1977 , 1978 – 1979 , 1985 , 1997 – present ) 
 Touring members 
 Adam Wakeman – keyboards , back @-@ up guitar ( 2004 – 2006 , 2012 – present ) 
 Tommy <unk> – drums ( 2012 – present ) 
 = = Tours = = 
 Black Sabbath Tour 1970 
 Paranoid Tour 1970 – 1971 
 Master of Reality Tour 1971 – 1972 
 Vol . 4 Tour 1972 – 1973 
 Sabbath Bloody Sabbath Tour 1973 – 1974 
 Sabotage Tour 1974 – 1976 
 Technical Ecstacy Tour 1976 – 1977 
 Never Say Die ! Tour 1978 
 Heaven & Hell Tour 1980 – 1981 
 Mob Rules Tour 1981 – 1982 
 Born Again Tour 1983 
 Seventh Star Tour 1986 
 Eternal Idol Tour 1987 
 Headless Cross Tour 1989 
 Tyr Tour 1990 
 Dehumanizer Tour 1992 
 Cross Purposes Tour 1994 
 Forbidden Tour 1995 
 Ozzfest Tour 1997 
 European Tour 1998 
 Reunion Tour 1999 
 Ozzfest Tour 1999 
 US Tour 1999 
 European Tour 1999 
 Ozzfest Tour 2001 
 Ozzfest Tour 2004 
 European Tour 2005 
 Ozzfest Tour 2005 
 Black Sabbath Reunion Tour , 2012 – 2014 
 The End Tour 2016 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Black Sabbath ( 1970 ) 
 Paranoid ( 1970 ) 
 Master of Reality ( 1971 ) 
 Vol . 4 ( 1972 ) 
 Sabbath Bloody Sabbath ( 1973 ) 
 Sabotage ( 1975 ) 
 Technical Ecstasy ( 1976 ) 
 Never Say Die ! ( 1978 ) 
 Heaven and Hell ( 1980 ) 
 Mob Rules ( 1981 ) 
 Born Again ( 1983 ) 
 Seventh Star ( 1986 ) 
 The Eternal Idol ( 1987 ) 
 Headless Cross ( 1989 ) 
 Tyr ( 1990 ) 
 Dehumanizer ( 1992 ) 
 Cross Purposes ( 1994 ) 
 Forbidden ( 1995 ) 
 13 ( 2013 ) 
 = Kevin Martin ( curler ) = 
 Kevin Martin ( born July 31 , 1966 ) , nicknamed " The Old Bear " and " K @-@ Mart " , is a retired Canadian curler from Edmonton . He is considered by many commentators and former and current curlers to be the greatest curler of all time . 
 Over his 30 @-@ year curling career , he has won four Briers , a gold medal at the 2010 Winter Olympics , and one world championship . He has been to a total of three Winter Olympics and four World Championships , and has won a total of two Olympic medals and three World Championship medals . He has won 15 Grand Slam titles on the World Curling Tour ( the media count 18 , including three Players ' Championships won prior to its inclusion as a Grand Slam event ) , which includes a record eight Players ' Championship titles . Over the course of his career , his teams have won around $ 2 million . He was the first skip to win a " career Grand Slam , " winning a title in each Grand Slam event , after he won the Players ' Championship Grand Slam event in April 2005 . Martin also holds the record for the most Olympic victories , with 20 total wins at the Olympics . 
 During his career , Martin has also served as a major influence in the development of the sport of curling , establishing the competitive tier in the sport and setting the groundwork for the management of curling teams and the creation of high @-@ level competitive curling events . He is also known for contributing to the growth of curling , long known as a recreational and participant @-@ based sport , as a spectator sport . Martin retired from competitive curling in 2014 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Junior career = = = 
 Martin began curling when he was six years old . He took up the sport because his father was the vice president of his local curling club . Martin first came on the curling scene in 1985 when his Alberta team of Richard Feeney , Dan <unk> and Michael Berger won the Canadian Junior Championships in their first year together as a team . The rink ( a group of players ) finished the round robin in second place , with a win @-@ loss record of 7 – 4 , behind Prince Edward Island 's Kent Scales . This forced them into a semifinal against the third place Quebec rink , skipped by Steve Gagnon . They beat Quebec 5 – 4 , earning a spot in the final against Prince Edward Island which they won with a score of 6 – 3 . After winning the championship , he accompanied the Canadian team as an alternate at the 1985 World Junior Curling Championships . 
 By winning the 1985 Canadian junior championship , the team qualified for the following season 's ( 1986 ) World Juniors . The team went undefeated through the round robin and won their semifinal match against Sweden . However , in the final , they came up short , losing 7 – 6 to the Scottish team skipped by David Aitken . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Five years out of the World Junior Championships , Martin had formed a new team and won his first provincial championship . This qualified him and his team of Kevin Park , Dan <unk> and Don Bartlett for the 1991 Labatt Brier . At the 1991 Brier , Martin finished the round robin with an 8 – 3 win @-@ loss record , tying Saskatchewan for first place . Martin knocked off British Columbia in the semifinal , and then beat Saskatchewan ( skipped by Randy <unk> ) with a score of 8 – 4 in the final . The rink was then off to the 1991 Canada Safeway World Curling Championships in Winnipeg . Martin turned the tables , going undefeated through the round robin . After beating Norway 's Eigil <unk> in the semifinal , Martin 's team lost in the final , losing to Scotland 's David Smith with a score of 2 – 7 . 
 His 1991 Brier victory also earned him a spot at the 1992 Winter Olympics , where curling was just a demonstration sport at the time . Martin won all three of his round robin games before losing the semifinal to Switzerland with a score of 4 – 8 and losing to the United States with a score of 2 – 9 in the bronze medal match . 
 In 1992 , Martin won his second provincial championship . His team went 8 – 3 once again at the 1992 Labatt Brier , tying them in second place with Ontario . However , in the semifinal , the Ontario rink , skipped by Russ Howard , defeated Martin 's team by 7 – 4 . 
 Martin 's first World Curling Tour event was the 1993 Players ' Championship , then known as the " <unk> VO Cup " . His first WCT event win came the following season at the 1993 Kelowna <unk> . Later that season he won the 1994 Players ' Championship , which has been retroactively considered his first Slam win , even through the event occurred long before the Grand Slam series began . 
 = = = 1995 – 1999 = = = 
 After his two Brier seasons , Martin did not win the provincial title again until 1995 . In the meantime , he had made some line @-@ up changes in his team , and by the 1995 Labatt Brier , he had settled on James Pahl as his second , retaining Park and Bartlett as his third and lead , respectively . At the 1995 Brier , he placed in third after the round robin with a 7 – 4 win @-@ loss record , tied with Ontario and Prince Edward Island . Martin knocked off Ontario 's Ed Werenich in the page playoffs 3 vs. 4 match , but lost to Kerry <unk> 's Manitoba rink in the semifinal with a score of 9 – 3 . 
 In 1995 , Martin replaced Park and Pahl with Don Walchuk and Shawn Broda , respectively . Martin won his fourth provincial title , sending him to the 1996 Labatt Brier . The team placed first after the round robin , finishing with a 10 – 1 win @-@ loss record . However , in the page playoff 1 vs. 2 game , he lost to Manitoba 's Jeff Stoughton . In the semifinal , Martin rebounded with a win over Quebec , but the rematch against Stoughton in the final resulted in a loss in an extra end , which Stoughton stole after a light draw by Martin to win the game 8 – 7 . 
 In 1996 , Broda was replaced by Rudy <unk> on the team . With his new team , Martin won another provincial title , and at the 1997 Labatt Brier , he once again finished the round robin with a 10 – 1 win @-@ loss record . His only loss came to the undefeated Vic Peters rink of Manitoba . However , Martin met and defeated Peters twice in the playoffs , including winning the final with a score of 10 – 8 . With this win , Martin won his second Brier and the right to go to the 1997 Ford World Men 's Curling Championship . Martin topped the round robin at the Worlds , with a 7 – 2 win @-@ loss record , but lost to Sweden in the semifinal with a score of 6 – 4 and then to Scotland in the bronze medal match with a score of 8 – 4 . 
 In 1997 , Martin looked to represent Canada at the Olympics once again . The 1998 Winter Olympics would mark the first time curling would be an official medal sport at the games . At the 1997 Canadian Olympic Curling Trials , Martin 's rink finished with a 6 – 3 win @-@ loss record , tied in second place with Ed Werenich . Martin knocked off Werenich in the semifinal but lost to the then little known Mike Harris in the final with a score of 6 – 5 . For the next few years , Martin would fail to make it back to the Brier . In 1998 , Martin won his second Players ' Championship of his career , then known as the " <unk> World Curling Tour Championship " . 
 = = = 1999 – 2006 = = = 
 In 1999 , Martin dropped <unk> , who was embroiled by a scandal where he botched organizing a <unk> , and replaced him with Carter Rycroft , an upstart junior curler . In 2000 , Martin won his sixth provincial title . However , the 2000 Labatt Brier would be a flop for the team , which finished with a 6 – 5 win @-@ loss record out of the playoffs . That season , Martin won his third Players ' Championship . 
 Following a failed bid to win the 2001 Alberta championship , the team then boycotted the Brier , as prominent curling teams of the day wanted to focus more on the World Curling Tour , while the Canadian Curling Association scheduled events conflicting with major WCT events . In the meantime , however , Martin still had his sights set on an Olympic championship . The team went to the 2001 Canadian Olympic Curling Trials and finished first after the round robin with a 7 – 2 win @-@ loss record . That gave the team a bye to the finals , which Martin won by defeating Kerry <unk> with a score of 8 – 7 . 
 At the 2002 Winter Olympics , Martin lost just one round robin matchup and qualified for the playoffs . In the semifinal , Martin knocked off Sweden by a score of 6 – 4 . In the final , Martin faced Norway , skipped by Pål <unk> . The two teams kept the game fairly even , but in the final end , Martin had a simple draw against one Norway rock to win , which he missed , giving <unk> the win with a score of 6 – 5 . As a result , Norway clinched the gold medal , and Martin , representing Canada , won his third international silver . 
 Due to the boycott , Martin 's rink would not win another provincial title until 2006 . In the meantime , the team had amassed five Grand Slam titles and won the 2005 Canada Cup of Curling . 
 Martin played in his third Canadian Olympic Trials in 2005 . The event was a disappointment for the team , which finished with a 4 – 5 record . However , later in the season , they made it to the 2006 Tim Hortons Brier , Martin 's first Brier appearance in six years . The team finished the round robin tied in second place with an 8 – 3 record . However , in the page playoff 3 vs. 4 game , Martin 's rink was edged by Nova Scotia 's Mark Dacey 8 – 7 . The team would later win the 2006 Canada Cup of Curling . 
 = = = 2006 – 2013 = = = 
 On April 26 , 2006 Martin announced the breakup of his long @-@ time , Olympic silver medalist team of lead Don Bartlett , second Carter Rycroft and third Don Walchuk . The team had disappointed at the 2005 Trials , had not won a single Grand Slam title in the 2005 – 06 season , and topped it off by finishing fourth at the Brier . Martin replaced Walchuk , Rycroft and Bartlett with World Junior Champion skip John Morris at third , Marc Kennedy at second and Ben Hebert at lead . His new team won the 2007 Alberta provincials , and at their first Brier , the team finished the round robin with an 8 – 3 win @-@ loss record in second place , tied with Manitoba and Newfoundland and Labrador . The new team struggled at the 2007 Brier in Hamilton , and lost in the 3 vs. 4 game to Jeff Stoughton , 6 – 3 . Despite their Brier failure , however , the season was a success on the World Curling Tour , where they won three of the four Grand Slams . During the 2006 – 07 and 2007 – 08 curling seasons , Martin and his team won an unprecedented five consecutive Grand Slams , three in the 2006 – 07 season and two in the 2007 – 08 season . 
 The team won their second straight provincials in 2008 , sending them to the 2008 Tim Hortons Brier . On March 13 , 2008 , Martin 's team from Alberta became the first team since 2003 to go through the round robin at the Tim Hortons Brier undefeated . They finished the round robin with a perfect 11 – 0 win @-@ loss record . They knocked off Saskatchewan 8 – 7 in the 1 vs. 2 game , and then beat rival and defending champion Glenn Howard of Ontario 5 – 4 in the final . With that perfect finish , Martin won his third Brier title . Martin finally won his first World Championship at the 2008 World Men 's Curling Championship in Grand Forks , North Dakota . After finishing the round robin with a 10 – 1 win @-@ loss record , he lost to Scotland , skipped by David Murdoch , in the 1 vs. 2 game , only to beat them in a rematch in the final 6 – 3 . This was the first time Kevin Martin won a gold medal at an international curling event . The Martin rink finished the 2007 – 08 season with two more Grand Slam titles . Due to his Brier and World Championship successes in 2008 , the Canadian Curling Association selected Kevin Martin 's team ( along with Jennifer Jones , Kevin Koe and Stefanie Lawton ) to be Canada 's representatives on " Team North America " at the 2008 Continental Cup of Curling . 
 The 2008 – 09 season would be almost as successful for Martin . He once again qualified for the Brier , winning the Alberta provincial championship , and then once again went 13 – 0 in the 2009 Tim Hortons Brier . He knocked off Glenn Howard 7 – 6 followed by Jeff Stoughton in the final by a 7 – 4 result . A week later , at the 2009 Canada Cup of Curling , Martin won his third title , defeating fellow Edmonton rink Randy Ferbey in the final . At the 2009 Ford World Men 's Curling Championship , Martin won 10 straight games until he met Scotland in the final round robin game . Martin lost to Scotland and then lost to them again in the 1 – 2 page playoff game . Martin rebounded with a tight semifinal victory over Switzerland , but had to face Scotland in a third matchup in the final . The game was tied going into the last end with Martin having the last rock advantage . Before his first rock , Martin was lying one in a complicated setup . After spending about six minutes trying to decide which shot to try , he went against the wishes of his teammates and threw away his shot , forcing Scotland 's David Murdoch to make a double @-@ tap to sit shot . Murdoch made his shot , leaving Martin with a short @-@ raise double , which he missed , losing the championship to Scotland , 7 – 6 . 
 Martin 's team directly qualified for the 2009 Canadian Olympic Curling Trials in his hometown of Edmonton . In his fourth Trials , Martin lost just one round robin game . After defeating the previously undefeated Glenn Howard rink in his final round robin game , Martin got a bye to the final , which was against Howard , whom he defeated 7 – 3 . With the win , Martin earned the right to represent Canada for the second time at the Olympics . After the Olympic Trials , Martin 's rink failed to qualify for the playoffs at the 2010 Swiss Chalet National . This would mark the first time Martin failed to make the playoffs at a Grand Slam since 2003 . However , they proved they were worthy to represent Canada at the Olympics by winning the 2010 BDO Classic Canadian Open two weeks later . 
 At the 2010 Winter Olympics , Martin 's team went undefeated ( 9 – 0 ) during the round @-@ robin phase , becoming the first team to achieve this feat since the British curling team at the 1924 Chamonix Olympics . After winning the semifinal against Sweden 's Niklas Edin , Martin went on to win the gold medal , defeating Norway 's Thomas Ulsrud 6 – 3 , in a rematch of Martin 's only previous Olympic final . Martin wrapped up his Olympic season by winning the 2010 Players ' Championships , his second Grand Slam win of the year . He beat Brad Gushue in the final in an extra end . 
 It took the Martin rink until December 2010 to win another major <unk> . Martin claimed another Slam by winning the National again over Jeff Stoughton . However , he was defeated by Stoughton in the quarterfinal of the Canadian Open . 
 Martin made his eleventh appearance at the Brier playing for Alberta , after defeating Kevin Koe in the final of the provincials . He went through the round robin with a 9 – 2 win @-@ loss record , and had some trouble during the round robin after losing crucial games to Manitoba and Newfoundland / Labrador in less than 10 ends . After a close win over Glenn Howard in the round robin , Martin dropped a 4 – 5 decision to Howard after he missed a crucial shot in the 3 vs. 4 game of the playoffs , and he lost the bronze medal game to Brad Gushue 10 – 5 , playing without second Marc Kennedy , because Kennedy and his wife were expecting a child . Martin finished the 2010 – 11 season by winning his record 7th Players ' Championship . 
 Martin 's first event of the 2011 – 12 World Curling Tour was the Point Optical Curling Classic , where he finished as a runner @-@ up to Mike McEwen . He then won his first event of the season , the <unk> Curling Classic , against McEwen . He next participated in the Cactus Pheasant Classic as the defending champion , but lost to Randy Ferbey in the semifinals . At the World Cup of Curling , Martin finished the round robin with a 4 – 1 win @-@ loss record , but missed a chance to win another Grand Slam title after he was edged past by John Epping , 3 – 4 . He failed to make it into the playoffs at his next event , the Sun Life Classic . He and his team then competed in the Canada Cup of Curling , securing close wins over Glenn Howard and Jeff Stoughton in the round robin and finishing the round robin undefeated . He then played Howard in the final , and managed to defeat him with a score of 7 – 4 , winning his record 4th Canada Cup title as skip . He and his team also earned berths into the 2012 Canada Cup , Continental Cup , and , most importantly , the 2013 Olympic Trials . 
 Martin then went to Dawson Creek , British Columbia for a shot at an eighteenth Grand Slam title at the National . He went undefeated through the round robin and made it to the final , where he lost a close game 6 – 5 to Glenn Howard . In February , Martin and team went to Camrose , Alberta for the 2012 Boston Pizza Cup to play for a chance to represent Alberta at the 2012 Brier . They barely qualified for the playoffs after Martin broke his 22 @-@ game win streak at the provincials in losing their first qualifier game to Kevin Koe and then lost another qualifier game to Brock Virtue . They then defeated Robert <unk> in the bottom page playoff game and advanced to the semifinal against Virtue , where they lost a tight game in the tenth end . Martin 's loss meant that he will not be able to represent Alberta at the Brier for the first time since 2010 . It also marked the first time since 2005 that he has not won a provincial championship in which he participated . Martin then won the 2012 Pomeroy Inn & Suites Prairie Showdown final against Liu Rui , and then won the 2012 Victoria Curling Classic Invitational final against Mike McEwen . Martin wrapped up the season by participating in the 2012 Players ' Championship , finishing the round robin with a 5 – 2 win @-@ loss record . However , he was upset in the semifinals by John Epping , who went on to win the title . 
 Martin began his 2012 – 13 season with the Point Optical Curling Classic , where he was the runner @-@ up the previous year . He lost a close match in the semifinals to provincial rival Kevin Koe . He next played at the <unk> Curling Classic , and won his third straight title and his seventh title overall with a win in the final over Andrew <unk> . Martin participated at the Whites Drug Store Classic , but lost to Randy Bryden in the quarterfinals in an extra end . Martin then competed in the Masters Grand Slam of Curling , where he lost in the semifinals after a close loss to Koe in an extra end . Martin then participated in the Canada Cup of Curling , but was unable to match strong play from his opponents , and finished the event with a 1 – 5 win @-@ loss record , out of the playoffs . Martin was scheduled to play at the Canadian Open of Curling , but had to withdraw due to a hernia . He was replaced by Joe Frans , and the team finished outside of the playoffs . After recovering , Martin participated in the Continental Cup , where he assisted in leading Team North America to a fifth win over Team World . Martin also participated in the All @-@ Star Curling Skins Game , where his all @-@ star team lost in the semifinal against Glenn Howard 's all @-@ star team . Martin then competed in the Alberta provincials , where he clinched the first seed in the playoffs after edging provincial rival Kevin Koe . He defeated Aaron <unk> in the page playoff , and edged Koe in an extra end in the final to claim his twelfth provincial title . 
 At the 2013 Brier , Martin and team began the round @-@ robin with one win and four losses , including losses to Jeff Stoughton , Jean @-@ Michel Ménard , and eventual champion Brad Jacobs , before winning their final six matches . Despite a 7 – 4 win @-@ loss record , they did not qualify for the playoffs , placing fifth and becoming the first Alberta team since Martin 's squad in 2000 to miss the playoffs . At the Players ' Championship , Martin and team finished with a 2 – 2 win @-@ loss record , and they advanced to a tiebreaker , where they lost to John Epping . A few days after the conclusion of the Players ' Championship , Martin 's longtime third , John Morris , announced that he and Martin were parting ways . 
 = = = 2013 – 2014 = = = 
 A few weeks after Morris announced his departure from the team , Martin announced that David Nedohin , the fourth player on his former provincial rival Randy Ferbey 's team , would join Martin 's team . Martin and team won their first event of the season at the Shoot @-@ Out . They made the semifinals in their next event at the Point Optical Curling Classic , but Martin injured his back during the semifinal game . Jeff Sharp subbed in at lead , and Martin 's team finished the event as runners @-@ up to Jeff Stoughton . After winning the final of the Direct Horizontal Drilling Fall Classic over Brock Virtue and posting a semifinals finish at the Cactus Pheasant Classic , Martin played in the Masters Grand Slam , finishing the round robin with a 3 – 1 win @-@ loss record . He proceeded to win his games over Kevin Koe and Liu Rui before reaching the final , where he played a close game with Glenn Howard until Howard pulled away with the win . 
 Martin attempted to qualify for his fourth Olympics appearance through the 2013 Canadian Olympic Curling Trials . In the round robin , he and his team played consistently and posted a 6 – 1 win @-@ loss record , with their only loss coming to eventual champion Brad Jacobs . Their record qualified for the semifinal , where they lost a close game to John Morris 's team . Martin was hired by NBC Sports to work as a curling analyst during the 2014 Winter Olympics . 
 After starting off the Canadian Open of Curling with a 4 – 1 win @-@ loss record , Martin dropped his quarterfinals game against Brad Gushue in the final end of the game . Martin also posted a strong start at the next Grand Slam , The National , but lost to Glenn Howard in the quarterfinals . On April 18 , 2014 , amidst rumours of his front end , Marc Kennedy and Ben Hebert , joining provincial rival Kevin Koe in the next season , Martin announced his retirement from curling following the conclusion of the 2014 Players ' Championship . At the last tournament of his career , Martin posted a 3 – 2 win @-@ loss record in the round robin , and advanced to the playoffs . He edged John Epping and Mike McEwen en route to the final , where he recorded a 4 – 3 win over Brad Jacobs while curling at 98 % . He capped his career with an eighteenth Grand Slam title , his eighth at the Players ' Championship . 
 Martin will become a curling analyst for Sportsnet . Following the end of the season , it was announced that Martin had been inducted into the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 During his playing career , Martin greatly influenced the evolution of the sport of curling into a competitive sport . He was an instrumental part of the group that brought about the Grand Slam of Curling . In the early 2000s , he became the spokesperson for the promotion of the financial growth of curling , represented largely by the World Curling Tour , which was growing in popularity due to the benefits afforded by corporate sponsorship opportunities and cash prizes at tournaments . The Martin @-@ led boycott of the Canadian Curling Association for its refusal to allow the developments in the World Curling Tour to be mirrored in the Brier catalyzed not only the transformation of the Brier , but also the growth of the Grand Slam , and in doing so , ultimately allowed the sport of curling to become a legitimate spectator sport . The development of the competitive tier of the sport also marked a change in both the players of the sport and the sport itself , as evidenced by improvements in the development and training of curlers as athletes and improvements in the quality of curling games due to better ice conditions and precision @-@ based gameplay . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Grand Slam record = = = 
 = = = Teams = = = 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 World Junior Curling Championships All @-@ Star skip : 1986 
 Hec Gervais Award ( Brier MVP ) : 1997 , 2009 
 Brier Shot of the Week Award : 1997 
 Brier first all @-@ star team skip : 1996 , 2008 , 2009 
 Brier second all @-@ star team skip : 2006 , 2007 
 World Curling Tour ( WCT ) MVP : 2008 – 09 
 WCT Team of the Year : 2008 – 09 
 WCT MVP : 2009 – 10 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Martin is married to Shauna Martin and has three children , Karrick , <unk> , and <unk> . Karrick has curled competitively , most recently as the lead for Brendan <unk> and as the alternate for his father at the 2013 Tim Hortons Brier . 
 Martin is the owner and operator of Kevin 's Rocks @-@ n @-@ <unk> , a curling supply shop located at the Saville Sports Centre . He has owned his own business since 1991 . Prior to that , he was an ice maker . 
 Martin has a degree in petroleum engineering technology from the Northern Alberta Institute of Technology ( NAIT ) , which he earned upon graduating in 1987 . He also curled at NAIT under the tutelage of coach Jules <unk> , who has coached Martin since they met at NAIT . Martin also received an honorary bachelor 's degree in technology management in 2010 , and received the Alumni Award of Distinction in 2011 for his achievements in curling . 
 Martin is very invested in building the future of the game of curling . He regularly runs curling academies at the Saville Sports Centre . Each summer he organizes a curling camp for junior players called the " Kevin Martin Summer Curling Academy " . The Academy is targeted at elite junior players looking to take their game to a higher level . Martin has also created a mobile app with purchasable content , which includes drills and tips aimed at helping curlers improve their game . 
 = Asian house martin = 
 The Asian house martin ( Delichon dasypus ) is a migratory passerine bird of the swallow family Hirundinidae . It has mainly blue @-@ black upperparts , other than its white rump , and has pale grey underparts . Its three subspecies breed in the Himalayas and in central and eastern Asia , and spend the winter lower in the mountains or in Southeast Asia . This species is locally abundant and is expanding northward in Siberia , so there are no concerns about its conservation status . 
 This martin breeds in colonies , building mud nests under an overhang on a vertical cliff or the wall of a building . Both sexes build the nest , incubate the three or four white eggs and feed the chicks . The Asian house martin feeds on small insects taken in flight , usually caught high in the air . The presence of terrestrial springtails and Lepidoptera larvae in its diet indicates that food is sometime picked from the ground . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Asian house martin was first formally described from a bird collected in Borneo by French naturalist and ornithologist Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1850 as Chelidon dasypus , shortly before it was moved to the new genus Delichon by British entomologist Frederic Moore and American naturalist Thomas Horsfield in 1854 . Delichon is an anagram of the Ancient Greek term χελιδών ( chelīdōn ) , meaning " swallow " , and dasypus is from Greek <unk> " rough @-@ legged " . This martin 's closest relatives are the two other members of the Delichon genus , the Nepal house martin and the common house martin . There are three subspecies : 
 D. d. dasypus , the nominate subspecies described by Bonaparte , which breeds in eastern Russia and nearby islands 
 D. d. cashmeriensis , the Himalayan and central Asian form described by English ornithologist John Gould in 1858 from a Kashmiri specimen obtained by Andrew Leith Adams 
 D. d. nigrimentalis , the form which is found in the south east of the breeding range , was described by German ornithologist Ernst Hartert in 1910 from a specimen taken in Fujian , southeast China . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult Asian house martin of the nominate subspecies is 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long , dark steel blue above with a contrasting white rump , grey @-@ washed white underparts , and a slightly forked tail . The tail and upperwings are brownish @-@ black , and the underwings are grey @-@ brown . The legs and feet are brownish @-@ pink and covered with white feathers , the eyes are brown , and the bill is black . There are few differences in appearance between the sexes , although the male is somewhat whiter below than the female , especially in fresh plumage . The juvenile bird is less glossy and has dark brown upperparts , sometimes with a brownish wash to the rump , and grey @-@ white underparts . 
 D. d. <unk> has brighter blue upperparts and a whiter rump than the slightly larger nominate race . The third , smallest , race is D. d. nigrimentalis . All three subspecies can be distinguished from the similar Nepal house martin by the latter species ' black chin , black undertail coverts and much squarer tail . The Asian house martin is more similar to the common house martin , but is darker underneath and has a less deeply forked tail . Confusion is most likely between adult male Asian house martins , which have paler underparts , and the eastern race of common house martin , D. urbicum lagopodum which has a less forked tail than the western subspecies , although it still shows a more pronounced fork than Asian . 
 This species ’ song is a rippling metallic trill , and is a sibilant twitter , and call is a dry metallic cheep , often with two or three syllables . It is similar to that of common house martin , but more rasping . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The nominate subspecies of the Asian house martin , D. d. dasypus , breeds in the southeast of Russia , the Kuril Islands , Japan and sometimes Korea . It migrates through eastern China to winter in the Malay Peninsula , Borneo , the Philippines , Java and Sumatra ; a few birds remain around hot springs in Japan . D. d. cashmeriensis breeds in the Himalayas from Afghanistan east to Sikkim and northwards into Tibet and western and central China . It is found between 1 @,@ 500 – 5 @,@ 000 m ( 4 @,@ 900 – 16 @,@ 400 ft ) altitude , although mainly in the 2 @,@ 400 – 4 @,@ 000 m ( 7 @,@ 900 – 13 @,@ 100 ft ) range . This martin is a short @-@ range migrant , mainly wintering at lower altitudes in the foothills of the Himalayas , but with some birds on the plains of northeastern India , and smaller numbers further afield in Burma and northern Thailand . The third race , D. d. nigrimentalis , breeds in southeastern China and southern Siberia . Its wintering grounds are unknown , but birds in Taiwan just move to lower altitudes in winter . Non @-@ breeding Asian house martin have been recorded as far west as the United Arab Emirates . The range of D. d. cashmeriensis overlaps with that of the Nepal house martin , although they breed at somewhat different altitudes . The height separation and the small differences in appearance seem sufficient to prevent interbreeding . 
 The preferred habitat of the Asian house martin is valleys and gorges in mountainous areas or coastal cliffs , where natural caves or crevices provide nest sites . It will also breed on large man @-@ made sites like temples , hotels or power stations . This martin tends to move to lower altitude open or hilly country in its wintering areas , although it has been recorded at up to 2 @,@ 565 m ( 8 @,@ 415 ft ) in Thailand . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The Asian house martin is a cliff nester , breeding in colonies sited under an overhang on a vertical cliff , usually with the nests not touching . It also frequently nests on large buildings such as temples and bridges , but not to the same extent as the common house martin . The nest is a deep mud cone lined with grasses or feathers . Unlike its relatives , the Asian house martin frequently does not complete the enclosure of its nest , leaving it open instead like a deeper version of a barn swallow nest . A Russian study found half the nests in its Baikal research area to be of the open type , and the Himalayan subspecies D. d. <unk> has also been recorded as building a shallow cup nest . 
 The normal clutch is three or four ( occasionally up to six ) plain white eggs averaging 20 @.@ 2 mm × 14 @.@ 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 80 in × 0 @.@ 56 in ) and weighing 2 @.@ 1 g ( 0 @.@ 074 oz ) . The incubation and fledging times are unknown , but are probably similar to those of the common house martin , which has an incubation period of 14 to 16 days until the eggs hatch , and a further 22 to 32 days to fledging . Both sexes build the nest , incubate the eggs and feed the chicks . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 This martin feeds on insects taken in flight . As with its relatives it tends to feed high in the air , taking mostly small flies , aphid and Hymenoptera such as winged ants . A wide range of other insects are caught , including Lepidoptera , beetles and lacewings . The presence in the diet of terrestrial springtails and Lepidoptera larvae indicate that food is sometime picked from the ground . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 Birds often carry parasites , both external lice and fleas , and internal blood parasites . The Asian house martin is a host of the house martin flea Ceratophyllus hirundinis , and has recently been shown to carry signs of avian malaria . The predators of this martin appear to be little studied , but are presumably similar to those of the common house martin , namely fast flying falcons such as Oriental hobby which can chase down their prey in flight . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The Asian house martin has a large range that does not appear to be contracting , and its numbers appear to be stable , although the total population is unknown . Since the range is more than 20 @,@ 000 square kilometres ( 7 @,@ 700 sq mi ) , and there are more 10 @,@ 000 mature individuals , in the absence of any large decline in distribution or numbers the species does not appear to meet the criteria to be considered vulnerable , and is currently evaluated as Least Concern . This species is locally abundant and appears to be expanding its range northwards in southern Siberia . 
 = Street House Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery = 
 The Street House Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery is an Anglo @-@ Saxon burial ground , dating to the second half of the 7th century AD , that was discovered at Street House Farm near Loftus , in the unitary authority of Redcar and Cleveland , England . Monuments dating back as far as 3300 BC are located in the vicinity of the cemetery , which was discovered after aerial photography revealed the existence of an Iron Age rectangular enclosure . The excavations , carried out between 2005 and 2007 , revealed over a hundred graves dating from the 7th century AD and the remains of several buildings . An array of jewellery and other artefacts was found , including the jewels once worn by a young high @-@ status Anglo @-@ Saxon woman who had been buried on a bed and covered by an earth mound . 
 The woman 's identity is unknown , but the artefacts and the layout of the cemetery are similar to finds in the east and south @-@ east of England . There are contradictory indications of whether the occupants of the cemetery were Christian or pagan , as there signs of both traditions are present . It perhaps represents a fusion of the two traditions during the " Conversion Period " when Christianity was taking hold among the Anglo @-@ Saxons but pagan rituals had not yet been displaced , even among Christians . Archaeologists have suggested that the woman and at least some of the people buried around her may have migrated from the south , where bed burials were more common . They may all have been buried together within the space of a single generation , after which the cemetery was abandoned . The finds were acquired by Kirkleatham Museum , Redcar , in 2009 and have been on display there since 2011 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The vicinity of Street House Farm , located on Upton Hill to the north @-@ east of the town of Loftus , has been known to archaeologists for some decades as an area of interest . An Early Neolithic long cairn and mortuary structure dating to about 3300 BC , on which a round barrow was built in the Early Bronze Age , was excavated over the course of three seasons between 1979 and 1981 . In 1984 , the archaeologist Blaise Vyner discovered the remains of an enigmatic structure that he dubbed the " Street House <unk> " ( a contraction of " what @-@ is @-@ it " ) . This was a segmented circle of 56 wooden posts built around 2200 BC . In the centre of the structure , which was approximately 8 metres ( 26 ft ) wide , were two D @-@ shaped posts encircled by a raised stone bank . After a short period of usage the <unk> was dismantled and the posts burned . Its purpose is unknown but it is likely to have had some kind of religious or cultic significance . 
 = = Excavations = = 
 One of those involved in the 1979 – 81 dig , archaeologist Steve Sherlock , decided to return to the site after aerial photographs revealed the presence of a rectangular Iron Age enclosure in the vicinity of the Bronze Age monuments . Initial excavations were carried out during ten days in September 2004 . It was thought initially that the site was purely Iron Age or perhaps Romano @-@ British . A more in @-@ depth excavation was carried out in July 2005 after a geophysical survey revealed the existence of a large roundhouse , dating from the Iron Age , in the centre of the enclosure . The work revealed three roundhouses , several Iron Age ditches and a series of pits that were evidently graves . The latter came as a complete surprise and were found to date from the Anglo @-@ Saxon period . Various artefacts dating to between 650 and 700 AD were excavated but no bones were recovered , as the acidic soil had destroyed any organic material long ago . Thirty graves were found during the initial excavation . 
 In 2006 , the archaeologists returned to search for the settlement that they believed was associated with the graves . There are examples elsewhere , such as at Garton Green Lane Crossing in the Yorkshire Wolds , of 7th @-@ century graves associated with prehistoric monuments , and it was initially thought that the Street House graves were a similar example . However , the excavation uncovered another twelve graves . It was realised that the cemetery was far larger than first thought , so the following year an archaeological survey of the entire site was attempted . A total of 109 graves was found by the end of the 2007 dig , forming a complex monument laid out in a unique square fashion around a central mound , a bed burial and a building that had possibly served as a mortuary . 
 Further excavations were carried out in 2010 and 2011 to examine a Neolithic cairn and a Bronze Age mound found near the cemetery , as well as to investigate two areas within the Iron Age enclosure . In 2012 , a new excavation found the ruins of a sizeable Roman villa dating to around 370 AD , which had possibly been used by an important Romano @-@ British chieftain . It was located only about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) south of the Saxon graves and would have been part of an agricultural estate . 
 = = Layout of the graves = = 
 The cemetery consists of neat lines of graves arranged on an east – west alignment , covering a nearly square area of about 36 by 34 metres ( 118 ft × 112 ft ) , in a layout not seen in any other known Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery . The enclosure within which the cemetery was laid out was many centuries older , dating to about 200 BC ; the establishment of a cemetery within its boundaries was probably intended to serve as a deliberate link to the past . It would still have been clearly visible in Saxon times . The layout of the cemetery seem to have consciously reflected that of the earlier enclosure , with its apparent main entrance aligned with that of the enclosure . 
 Most of the graves were laid out in a highly ordered fashion with a double row on the north and south sides . Each grave was set 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) apart on an east – west axis and 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) apart north to south . None were intercut . They were arranged in a pattern that formed a square enclosure , with a gap in the southern side forming a main entrance and another smaller gap on the eastern side forming a secondary entrance or exit . The degree of precision visible in the layout strongly suggests that the cemetery was planned in advance . 
 There are several groups of graves , numbering around 22 per cent of the total , that do not fit into the overall square plan of the cemetery . A few of these seem to have been older burials , possibly Romano @-@ British , but the others may have been laid out by different groups of people in Saxon times . The most notable of these " non @-@ standard " burials is that of the woman dubbed the " Saxon Princess " near the very centre of the enclosure . Although her burial has attracted the most attention for the quality of its finds , it may not have been the most important grave in the cemetery . A second larger mound stood a short distance away , partly surrounded by a ring ditch . No burial was found within and the mound has been interpreted as a mausoleum or memorial to an important individual . It is noteworthy that the " Saxon Princess " and a number of burials in the cemetery 's north @-@ east quadrant were arranged in an arc around the mound , suggesting that it may have been seen as the focal point of the cemetery . 
 The discovery of the graves ' east – west alignment has prompted suggestions that the cemetery reflected Christian tradition , although the evidence overall is contradictory about whether the occupants were Christians . The individual graves were fairly uniform in size , usually measuring 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long , 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) wide and in their original form about 0 @.@ 6 metres ( 2 @.@ 0 ft ) deep . They had a rectangular plan with rounded corners and a flat base . The bodies were not interred in coffins ; the graves ' occupants were buried in their clothes , accompanied by various items that they owned or were given as tokens by mourners . Although none of the bodies have survived it is thought from their size that most of the graves were intended for women , laid out fully extended . A substantial number are too small for an adult of normal height to have been laid out in such a way and , judging from analogous Saxon graves found elsewhere in England , it is thought that these might have contained crouched burials . The two different methods of burial – crouched versus fully extended – may therefore indicate some difference in ethnic affiliations or political or religious identities . 
 Some of the graves are marked by plain triangular stones set at one end . These are not carved or inscribed with names as in Christian cemeteries , but are similar to markers found in pagan cemeteries . Some graves are interrupted by <unk> cut into them , possibly indicating the presence of wooden poles that might have served as markers or supported wooden structures within the graves . This is unusual in the north of England , though comparable examples have been found in Kent in the south @-@ east . 
 In addition to the graves , several buildings stood within the cemetery . A larger rectangular structure with an east @-@ west alignment , identified from postholes left in the ground , stood on the east side . It has been interpreted as a chapel or shrine . A smaller <unk> – a type of sunken building – which is thought to have been used as a mortuary chapel was located close by in the central area of the cemetery . An Iron Age roundhouse had also once been located within the north @-@ west quadrant but was no longer standing at the time the cemetery was laid out . All of these buildings would have stood on the crest of a ridge , and would have been especially prominent to travelers arriving from the south . 
 The cemetery seems to have been laid out on a single occasion and used for only a short time afterwards . It is thought that the mourners would have entered through the south side and assembled in the empty south @-@ western area of the cemetery before proceeding to the shrine to carry out the burial rites . After interring the deceased in a grave they may have used the eastern entrance to leave the cemetery . Alternatively , different groups of people may have used the two entrances , perhaps reflecting the fact that some of the graves do not fit into the overall square plan and may therefore belong to a different group . 
 = = Artefacts = = 
 64 individual graves , comprising 59 per cent of the total in the cemetery , were found to contain artefacts . Certain types of artefact can help to identify the gender of the occupants ; male graves , for instance , tend to contain weapons and tools , while female ones are associated with jewellery , shears and <unk> ( belt hooks ) which were used to suspend keys or small tools . 34 of the graves contained such gender @-@ specific goods , of which 19 were associated with females and 15 with males . The female graves seem to have been predominantly located in the north and west of the cemetery and the males in the south and east . It is possible that the paired graves may have been those of spouses , a pattern that is apparent from Saxon cemeteries elsewhere in the country . 
 15 of the graves contained beads and items of ironwork were found in 25 graves . A seax ( a type of short sword with a blade on one edge ) was found in grave 29 and was the only weapon found in the cemetery . The discovery of such weapons as grave goods is extremely rare , as their value meant that they were typically passed on from father to son rather than being buried with a person . It originally measured about 55 centimetres ( 22 in ) long but had broken into four pieces , and part of the pommel and handle also survived . Its blade had been decorated with a punched pattern along the top edge . Smaller domestic knives were found in 19 graves as well as other items made of iron such as belt buckles and sets of keys . In grave 81 , two whetstones for sharpening knives were discovered along with the knives themselves , one resting on top of each whetstone . 
 A variety of jewellery , beads , and charms was also found . 100 beads in total were recovered from 16 graves , though only two had more than 10 beads . The small number of beads found in the remaining 14 graves is indicative of how styles had changed ; in the 6th century it was customary for women to wear up to 100 relatively plain beads at a time in the form of necklaces , but by the mid @-@ 7th century , the fashion was for a small number of high @-@ quality beads which may have been attached with wire or carried in a bag . A very unusual discovery was made in grave 21 – the remnants of a necklace comprising eight beads and two Iron Age gold coins minted by the Corieltauvi tribe of modern Lincolnshire some time between 15 – 45 AD , before the Roman conquest of Britain . Holes had been drilled in the coins , which were more than 600 years old by the time they were buried , to convert them into items of jewellery . Their excellent condition suggests that they had not been used for long , or at all , as currency ; it is possible that they had been part of a hoard buried shortly after they were minted and were rediscovered during Saxon times . The discovery of Roman coins in a Saxon grave of this period is unique to the Street House cemetery . It is likely that they were valued because of the cross @-@ shaped designs on the coins ' reverse . 
 Jewellery found in the Street House cemetery 
 An elaborate gold pendant was found in grave 10 along with three beads ; all four had apparently been worn together on a chain or a thread , which did not survive . Although it is small – only 27 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter – it is intricately decorated with a gold filigree in the shape of figures of eight ( though the similarity in form to the numeral is merely coincidental ) . Its design is typical of jewellery made after 650 AD and comparable examples have been found elsewhere in Yorkshire . In grave 70 , a gold pendant measuring 44 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 7 in ) in diameter was found during the 2007 excavation . It is decorated with elaborate filigrees like the brooch but it also incorporates four circular settings , each of which was inset with a red gemstone , though only two of the stones have survived . Several beads were found alongside the pendant and seem to have been part of the necklace of which it was a part . 
 = = The " Saxon Princess " bed burial = = 
 The most important grave , and the most spectacular set of artefacts , was found near the centre of the cemetery . Grave 42 was a deep , wide pit in which a high @-@ status individual was buried on top of a wooden bed with iron fittings . The body lying on the bed was most likely that of a woman of very high @-@ ranking noble descent , possibly royalty , as the quantity and quality of the jewellery found in the grave is indicative of a woman ranking at the top of Anglo @-@ Saxon society . Such burials are highly unusual ; only a dozen are known in the whole of the UK , and the one at Street House is the most northerly known . 
 Although nothing remains of either the body or the bed , surviving artefacts and the 56 pieces of ironwork that held the bed together have enabled the burial to be reconstructed in considerable detail . The bed was made from ash wood , held together with a variety of iron plates , cleats , staples , nails , stays , and decorative scrolls . It measured 1 @.@ 8 by 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft × 2 @.@ 6 ft ) and may once have been roofed with an ornamental awning or canvas , perhaps made of cloth draped over timber posts . Traces of mineralised cloth and either grass or reed were found still attached to some of the nails , indicating the possible nature of the mattress . Two pieces of ironwork showed signs of repair and reuse , suggesting that the bed had been in use some time before the burial and was not specially made for the interment . This raises the possibility that the bed was either that of the deceased woman or a significant bed of some other person . It may have been dismantled elsewhere , brought to the cemetery and reassembled and repaired so that it could be used for the burial . 
 The jewellery consists of three gold pendants , two glass beads , one gold wire bead , and a fragment of a jet hair pin . The pendants and beads all seem to have been strung together , probably forming a necklace that was in place around the neck of the body . Two of the pieces consist of gold cabochon pendants inset with jewels , while the third is a very elaborate shield @-@ shaped jewel inlaid with 57 red garnets and a larger scallop @-@ shaped gem in the centre . The garnets rest on a thin layer of gold leaf to reflect the light and increase their luminosity . It may have been created from recycled older pieces of jewellery , as the size , shape and thickness of the individuals garnet are all different . 
 The quality of the piece is outstanding and comparable to that of the artefacts found at the famous Anglo @-@ Saxon cemetery at Sutton Hoo in Suffolk . Its design is unique and has no known parallels elsewhere in Anglo @-@ Saxon <unk> ; its creator must have been one of the best <unk> in the country at the time . Its shape is a significant link with early Christianity . The scallop had long been associated with love , fertility and birth and was a symbol of the classical goddesses Aphrodite and her Roman counterpart Venus , who was said to have floated ashore on a scallop shell ( as in Sandro Botticelli 's famous depiction of The Birth of Venus ) . By the 4th century , however , Christians had adopted the scallop as a symbol of rebirth through baptism and life as a journey towards a heavenly reunion with God . It came to be particularly associated with pilgrimages and was later adopted as a pilgrim 's badge . 
 An analysis conducted using X @-@ ray fluorescence has found that the pendant was made from a highly debased gold alloy , with only 37 % of the alloy consisting of gold and the remainder consisting of silver with some copper . It is likely that the gold came from melted @-@ down coins of the Merovingian dynasty of Francia . The Frankish currency underwent a similar debasing at around this time . The link with Francia is illustrative of the trading and cultural links that existed between Anglo @-@ Saxon England and continental Europe at the time . 
 A grave found a short distance away also contained jewellery , including a gold pendant , silver brooch , and glass beads . It is thought that the occupant may have had a close connection with the woman in the bed burial – perhaps a relative or a lady @-@ in @-@ waiting who was buried with her mistress . 
 = = Interpretations and historical context = = 
 At the time of the cemetery 's use in the latter part of the 7th century , Britain was divided into a number of kingdoms ruled by different ethnic groups – the native Picts in the north ( in what is now Scotland ) , the native Britons in the west of what is now England , Wales and south @-@ western Scotland , and the immigrant Angles , Saxons , and Jutes in the east and south of modern England and south @-@ eastern Scotland . Until the early 7th century , the north @-@ east of England and parts of Scotland were ruled by two Saxon kingdoms : Deira in modern Yorkshire , and Bernicia from north of the River Tees to the Firth of Forth . By the time of the burials the two kingdoms had merged to form the powerful kingdom of Northumbria . 
 There were considerable connections – political , trading , and cultural – between the Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms and this is demonstrated in the burial ground found at Street House . The practice of burying people in beds seems to have been very uncommon in the north ; most of the bed burials found so far have been in southern England , in Cambridgeshire , Essex , Suffolk , and Wiltshire . Several of the brooches and beads found in the graves are thought to have come from Kent and some of the jewellery and beadwork has strong parallels with finds from East Anglia . The Iron Age gold coins found in one grave came from a tribe that lived in the East Midlands , which suggests that their owner , likewise , was not local . 
 The identity of the woman in the bed is not known , but the archaeologists who excavated the site have suggested that she was " a female member of the local aristocracy , probably a princess and an outsider , whose personal status was strong enough to act as a catalyst for the site " and that her companions were similarly " a group of people of high status from outside the region . " Average life expectancy at the time was short – only 32 years for men and 28 years for women – so it is possible that the cemetery was used exclusively by members of the " princess 's " community and ceased to be used when the last member died . This would fit with its short period of usage , perhaps only 30 years or so , judging from the age of the artefacts found during the excavations . Steve Sherlock , the site 's discoverer , believes that she was buried first and that the other graves were dug around hers afterward . Next to her grave is a probable male grave , to which it may be linked . The close proximity of the graves and their offset from the rest of the graves in the cemetery raises questions about whether the occupants were related . 
 The cemetery provides some hints to the woman 's local connections and religious affiliations . She was buried around or soon after the time when St. Hilda of Whitby was active in the region , first at Hartlepool Abbey , then at Whitby Abbey , which was founded in 657 . The woman may well have known St. Hilda , who came from a similar aristocratic background and had lived for a while in East Anglia , where bed burials were more common . It is unclear , however , whether the woman was also a Christian . Features such as the typically Christian east @-@ west orientation of the graves have been cited in support of a Christian affiliation , but on the other hand the cemetery was built on an ancient pagan site and there is no obvious reason why a Christian princess would not have been buried at Whitby alongside fellow Christians . As Christianity was spreading across the region at this time , the possible Christian features of the cemetery could be due simply to local social convention favouring some Christian styles in burial rituals , even for non @-@ Christians . Steve Sherlock considers the bed burial to be " stridently pagan , a sort of rare , female equivalent of ship burials , as she is laid out on a vehicle to deliver her to the afterworld , " however , and he suggests that she may have been the centre of a pagan cult that was active alongside local Christians . 
 Others have argued that the cemetery represents a fusion of Christian and pagan Saxon customs . It was not until the end of the 7th century that the practice of burying people in consecrated ground around a church became the norm . There are examples of known Christians being buried in an ostensibly pagan fashion , as was the case for the late 7th century Kentish princess <unk> , sister of the abbess of Minster @-@ in @-@ Thanet . She was buried in a traditional tumulus a mile east of her sister 's minster . John Blair argues that the Church in early Saxon England may have tolerated Christians being given pagan burial rites due to the ' <unk> ' effect this would have had on a pagan site . This would have been consistent with the advice given by Pope Gregory the Great in 601 that Saxon shrines should be converted to Christian use , rather than being destroyed , and that pagan festivals and rites should be converted into Christian ones . On this interpretation , the cemetery may symbolise the continuity between the pagan past and the increasingly Christianised present . 
 = = Conservation , acquisition and display = = 
 The discovery was announced on 20 November 2007 and several of the finds were displayed to the press at Kirkleatham Museum near Redcar . Ashok Kumar , the local Member of Parliament at the time , lent his support to a campaign to keep the artefacts in Redcar and Cleveland , saying : " It 's essential they are kept in this area at Kirkleatham Museum and not merely deposited at a museum in London where there would be no guarantee of permanent display . I ... want to see these treasures kept here so local people and schoolchildren can view them as part of their local heritage and as an aid to their understanding of the past . " The Culture Minister , Margaret Hodge , confirmed in a House of Commons debate that the British Museum would not object to Kirkleatham acquiring the finds . 
 The Teesside coroner held an inquest on 12 October 2008 that found that the finds were treasure trove under the terms of the Treasure Act 1996 . The rules of treasure trove require that a panel of experts determine the market value of a find , half of which is paid to the finder and the other half to the landowner . However , the landowner at Street House waived his share because he wanted to ensure that a local museum would be able to purchase the artefacts . The Heritage Lottery Fund provided Kirkleatham Museum with a grant of £ 274 @,@ 000 to fund the purchase and create a new Anglo @-@ Saxon gallery to display the artefacts . 
 The finds were purchased by the museum in April 2009 and underwent conservation by specialists at Durham University and York Archaeological Trust . Using tools of the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , a replica of the bed was created for the exhibition by Richard Darrah , an expert in early woodwork , and blacksmith Hector Cole , a <unk> of medieval @-@ style ironwork . A short film about the princess was made at the Anglo @-@ Saxon museum at Bede 's World in Jarrow with a narration by Stephen Tompkinson . Prior to the opening of the exhibition at Kirkleatham , the finds were put on display for five days in May 2011 at Loftus Town Hall , where they attracted nearly 1 @,@ 700 visitors . 
 The exhibition at Kirkleatham has proved extremely popular ; by October 2011 it had already attracted more than 28 @,@ 000 visitors in only four months . In April 2012 the exhibition attracted further praise when the museum won the prestigious Renaissance Museum title at the annual Journal and Arts Council Awards . 
 = Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden is a 2011 concert special which documents the February 21 and 22 , 2011 shows of American pop singer Lady Gaga 's worldwide concert , The Monster Ball Tour . Filmed at Madison Square Garden in Gaga 's hometown of New York City , the two @-@ hour special was directed by the singer 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson and produced by HBO . It was first broadcast on the channel on May 7 , 2011 , a day after Gaga 's last date of The Monster Ball Tour . The special was released on November 21 , 2011 , on DVD and Blu @-@ ray by Media Blasters . 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden features concert footage as well as pre @-@ concert and backstage content . The special received critical acclaim ; critics praised Gaga 's performance and the onstage theatrics while expressing doubt in Gaga 's sincerity during her monologues and in pre @-@ concert scenes . When aired , the special was watched by 1 @.@ 2 million viewers and was nominated for five awards at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards , winning one for Outstanding Picture Editing for a Special ( Single or Multi @-@ Camera ) . 
 The video album released for the special includes extra footage like a capella performances and photo gallery . The 5 @.@ 1 surround sound of the release utilized DTS @-@ HD Master Audio and new technology to provide the viewer an optimum experience of watching the live concert . Emphasis was given on the main music and the vocals sung during the concert , while adjusting them against the screaming and the cheering of the crowd . The release was a commercial success , reaching the top of the DVD charts in the United States , France and Italy and the top @-@ ten in other nations . It received double platinum certifications in Australia and France , while in the United Kingdom , it was certified gold . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Monster Ball Tour was the second worldwide concert tour by Lady Gaga . Staged in support of her EP The Fame Monster ( 2009 ) and comprising a set list of songs from the EP and her debut album The Fame ( 2008 ) , the tour visited arenas and stadiums from 2009 through 2011 . Described as " the first @-@ ever pop electro opera " by Gaga , the tour was announced in October 2009 after an intended joint concert tour with hip @-@ hop artist Kanye West was suddenly canceled . The tour commenced four days after the release of The Fame Monster in November 2009 . A revision of the tour occurred after only a few months of performances , due to Gaga 's concern that the original version was constructed within a very short span of time . The stage of the original show looked like a frame , comparable to that of a hollowed @-@ out television set . Since The Fame Monster dealt with the paranoias Gaga had faced , the main theme of the original shows became human evolution , while elements of the canceled tour with West were still included in some parts . From 2010 onward , the revamped shows had a New York theme and portrayed a story set in the city , where Gaga and her friends got lost and had to find their way to " the Monster Ball " . Both versions of the show were divided into five segments , with the last being the encore . Each of them featured Gaga in new outfits , singing songs related to the concept of the segment , as they were followed by a video interlude . 
 The tour received general critical acclaim , with critics praising Gaga 's singing abilities , the theatricality of the show , and her sense of style and fashion . The Monster Ball was a commercial success , with sold @-@ out shows and demand for tickets prompting organizers to add more dates to the itinerary . It ultimately grossed an estimated $ 227 @.@ 4 million ( $ 239 million in 2016 dollars ) from 200 reported shows and an audience of 2 @.@ 5 million , becoming one of the highest @-@ grossing tours of all time . At the 2010 Billboard Touring Awards , Gaga won the Breakthrough Performer Award , as well as the Concert Marketing and Promotion Award , the latter being an acknowledgment of her partnership with sponsor Virgin Mobile . 
 = = Content = = 
 The special opens with a black @-@ and @-@ white introduction that sees Gaga ordering a cup of coffee from a New York convenience store before being escorted by security into a black SUV , where she reminisces about the many times she had been at the arena to watch other acts perform , and realizes that she will now be performing there herself . After being escorted backstage , she removes her makeup and cries as she discusses feeling like a " loser " . She then sings the opening lines of " Marry the Night " while preparing to take the stage . Full @-@ color footage of the concert ( shot on February 21 and 22 , 2011 ) is then seen , interspersed with black @-@ and @-@ white backstage footage . The special ends with another black @-@ and @-@ white backstage scene where Gaga and her backup singers perform " Born This Way " a capella . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was filmed at Madison Square Garden in Gaga 's hometown of New York City , the two @-@ hour special was directed by the singer 's choreographer Laurieann Gibson and produced by HBO , with the first broadcast on the channel on May 7 , 2011 , a day after Gaga 's last date of The Monster Ball Tour . The channel had released a trailer for the special in YouTube and a poster in their website , which showed Gaga with her characteristic pyrotechnic bra emitting sparks . According to Billboard , the special was watched by 1 @.@ 2 million viewers . The special received critical acclaim . On review aggregate website Metacritic , the special holds a rating of 81 out of 100 based on four critic reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . Jed Gottlieb of the Boston Herald wrote , " [ B ] etween the orgy of visuals — stripper strobes , androgynous dancers and a very loose , X @-@ rated ' Wizard of Oz ' theme — we get some great song and dance numbers : ' Poker Face ' , ' Paparazzi ' and ' Bad Romance ' . These are amazing hits , club @-@ thumping tracks that define joy and sadness for a generation of suburban teens and the urban disenfranchised . " However , he felt that the show 's non @-@ concert content was not genuine , and found the special to be similar to Madonna 's 1991 documentary Madonna : Truth or Dare . The A.V. Club 's Genevieve Koski gave the special a B + rating , claiming that Gaga " proves that she is a performer " and that " she puts on a show " , though she felt that the concert was overly emotional and artistically ambitious , and that Gaga 's on @-@ stage banter was slightly annoying . Koski also compared the special to the Madonna documentary . Linda <unk> from New York Post was also positive in her assessment of the concert special . She complimented the behind the scenes footage , the costumes and the dancing and the pyrotechnics of the show , describing it as " a concert that would make Madonna ’ s shows look like run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill dinner theater . " A review in website Idolator described Gaga as " ringleader of her own circus — in complete control of her little monsters " . It went on to appreciate Gaga 's vocals and the fact that she did not lip @-@ synch , as well as the hurried costume changes , while commending the " raw " nature of the show . 
 Paul Schrodt of Slant Magazine was more critical in his review , though he gave it a 2 @.@ 5 star ( out of 4 ) rating . While he positively called Gaga 's performances outrageous and " occasionally fierce " , he questioned Gaga 's authenticity , both on stage and in the pre @-@ concert scenes . Ultimately , he wrote , " Unsurprisingly , HBO 's Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden raises more questions about Stefani Germanotta ( Gaga 's birth name ) than it answers , which is probably as it should be . " Radio host Howard Stern also compared the black @-@ and @-@ white scenes of the special to Madonna : Truth or Dare , adding that when he darts a glance at Lady Gaga , she is occasionally registered in his brain as Madonna . On his show , Stern was also critical of inappropriateness and <unk> of the numerous speeches Gaga gave between the songs in the special , calling them " prattle " , " drivel " , and " condescending " . Dedicating over half an hour of his show on May 9 and 10 , 2011 , to express his criticism of the concert , Stern compared the manner of Gaga 's speaking to professional wrestling due to echoing , Gaga 's gasping between the words , and the audience 's arguable inability to hear the words enough to understand them . In particular , Gaga claimed in the concert that her incentive to work is to " set [ her audience ] free " , not money . Stern attempted to debunk that claim by arguing that Gaga takes potentially psychiatric problems of her audience lightly by urging her fans to " forget all of [ their ] insecurities " overnight . 
 The special received five nominations at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards . It was nominated for Outstanding Variety , Music or Comedy Special ; Outstanding Directing for a Variety , Music or Comedy Special ; Outstanding Technical Direction , Camerawork , Video Control for a Miniseries , Movie or a Special ; Outstanding Picture Editing for a Special ( Single or Multi @-@ Camera ) ; and Outstanding Lighting Design / Lighting Direction for a Variety , Music or Comedy Special . It won the picture editing award and lost all of its other bids . The five nominations were among the 104 HBO received for 2011 ; it made up over one @-@ fifth of the total nominations . The special also received a nomination at the 2012 Dorian Awards in the category of " TV Musical Program of the Year " . 
 = = Video album = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray on November 21 , 2011 , and was also released as a digital download to iTunes Store . In addition to the content of the original HBO broadcast , it includes new , previously @-@ unseen footage . The video is also a part of a bundled package — along with the 17 @-@ track special edition of Born This Way and a remix album , Born This Way : The Remix — titled Born This Way , The Collection , which was released the same day . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was captured with a 14 @-@ camera High Definition shoot . The Blu @-@ ray edition of the video album is presented in an aspect ratio of 1 @.@ 78 : 1 , encoded with MPEG @-@ 4 AVC and grants a 1080i transfer . It contains two audio tracks DTS @-@ HD Master Audio 5 @.@ 1 and LPCM 2 @.@ 0 . According to Jim Belcher , Vice President for Advanced Technology and Production of Universal Music Group , the advanced technologies associated with Dolby DTS @-@ HD would allow the audience the best experience while viewing the DVD . 
 Brian Riordan , one of the engineers who worked on mastering the audio for the DVD described in a video interview with Rolling Stone how the mix was achieved . He recalled getting a call from one of the show 's producers who were looking for specialized sound arrangements to acquire an authentic live concert feeling for the release . Riordan remembered that the main difficulty was trying to preserve the " craziness " of the audience and Gaga 's fans , and their screaming during the concert , nevertheless make the music of the show primary . His team used <unk> which did not use compression , instead one @-@ to @-@ one audio mixing giving the whole sound system " much more of an impactful experience " . Riordan decided to engineer the concert sound as " center @-@ channeled " since Gaga did not use backing audio , resulting in the listener getting the whole impact of her vocals , when listened with a headphone . Other difficulty faced by team included converting the heavy production of Gaga 's songs to a live format and utilizing the singer 's bands . " You also have the crowd , the house going nuts and all the reverberations at Madison Square Garden , so it was really difficult for me to figure out globally how real , how dry , how punchy can we get this thing to sound " , he added . Initially Riordan had featured more of the live instrumentation and mixed the songs a number of times , however felt that they needed a dry reverb hence he pondered on the mix along with co @-@ producer coming to a consensus regarding the sound . According to Riordan , the mixing process was approved by Gaga who watched the cuts while travelling on the tour however , she did not ask Riordan to change anything , unlike previous projects the engineer had undertaken . The 5 @.@ 1 mix was further orchestrated by using the sound recordings from the microphones placed around the audience members in Madison Square Garden , giving a new dimension to the surround sound in the Blu @-@ ray . 
 It has a length of over 114 minutes and contains five subtitles : English , French , Spanish , Portuguese and German . Extra features added to the release included another a cappella version of " Born This Way " which was performed on stage unlike the one in the closing credits . A photo gallery was also included as well as backstage footage showing Gaga meeting with actress Liza Minnelli . According to Jeffrey Kauffman of Blu @-@ ray.com , the audio tracks were commendable for their crisp sound . He stated that " One of the best things about this concert is despite its artifice , even its artificiality , there 's absolutely no question that Lady Gaga is actually singing . What a novel idea for a live concert , and one that seemed especially refreshing after having just sat through the Britney Spears Live : The Femme Fatale Tour concert Blu @-@ ray , where Brit 's live voice was all but buried in the pre @-@ records . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 In the United States , it entered Billboard 's Top Music Video chart at the top , selling 26 @,@ 000 copies of the DVD — the greatest total for a music video since Beyoncé Knowles ' I Am ... World Tour live CD / DVD sold 37 @,@ 000 and 31 @,@ 000 copies in its first two weeks in November and December 2010 , and held this title until the release of Adele 's Live at the Royal Albert Hall . Its final appearance on the chart was for the issue dated November 30 , 2013 , where upon it tallied a total of 64 weeks in side the chart . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden became the fourth best @-@ selling music video of 2011 in the United States . 
 In Australia , the DVD debuted at number two on the ARIA DVD Chart . The next week , it remained in the same position , while being certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 15 @,@ 000 copies of the DVD . Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden was certified double platinum in January 2012 , denoting shipments of 30 @,@ 000 copies . It was the fifth and eleventh best selling DVD of 2011 and 2012 in Australia , respectively . The DVD charted on the UK Music Video chart at number four , for the issue dated December 3 , 2011 . It was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for selling more than 25 @,@ 000 copies . Across Europe , the DVD reached the top of the charts in France and Italy , the former region it was also certified double platinum by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 30 @,@ 000 copies of the release . It reached the top @-@ ten of the charts in other nations . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 Bonus content 
 " Born This Way " ( a cappella ) – 3 : 16 
 " Backstage at the Monster Ball " – 12 : 50 
 Photo gallery 
 Track listing adapted from Amazon.com. 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden DVD booklet . 
 Main personnel 
 Production crew 
 Costumes and makeup 
 Sound Department 
 Special Effects 
 Lighting crew 
 Principal photography 
 = Stargazy pie = 
 Stargazy pie ( sometimes called <unk> <unk> pie or other variants ) is a Cornish dish made of baked pilchards , along with eggs and potatoes , covered with a pastry crust . Although there are a few variations with different fish being used , the unique feature of stargazy pie is fish heads ( and sometimes tails ) protruding through the crust , so that they appear to be gazing skyward . This allows the oils released during cooking to flow back into the pie . 
 The dish is traditionally held to have originated from the village of Mousehole in Cornwall and is traditionally eaten during the festival of Tom Bawcock 's Eve to celebrate his heroic catch during a very stormy winter . According to the modern festival , which is combined with the Mousehole village illuminations , the entire catch was baked into a huge stargazy pie , encompassing seven types of fish and saving the village from starvation . The story of Bawcock was popularised by Antonia Barber 's children 's book The Mousehole Cat , which featured the star @-@ <unk> pie . In 2007 contestant Mark Hix won the BBC 's Great British Menu with a variant of the dish . 
 = = Description = = 
 Stargazy pie is a pastry @-@ based fish pie which , by tradition , is filled with whole pilchards . Critically , the pilchards must retain their heads , which then poke through the pastry top , appearing to gaze at the stars . The position of the fish allows the oil that is released during cooking to drain into the pie , adding a fuller flavour and ensuring the pie is moist . The celebrity chef Rick Stein suggested also poking the pilchards ' tails through the pie crust to give the effect of leaping through water . 
 In spite of the fact that the British Food Trust describes the dish as being fun as well as amusing to children , it has been listed in " <unk> ! Disgusting things people eat " , a lifestyle feature by the New York Daily News based upon the book by an American author , Neil Setchfield . On Tom Bawcock 's Eve it is served in The Ship Inn , the only pub in Mousehole , sometimes after a re @-@ enactment of the legend . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The pie originates from the fishing village of Mousehole in Cornwall . As with many parts of Cornish heritage , a legend has appeared about its origins . In this case , the pie is served to celebrate the bravery of Tom Bawcock , a local fisherman in the 16th century . The legend explains that one winter had been particularly stormy , meaning that none of the fishing boats had been able to leave the harbour . As Christmas approached , the villagers , who relied on fish as their primary source of food , were facing starvation . 
 On 23 December , Tom Bawcock decided to brave the storms and went out in his fishing boat . Despite the stormy weather and the difficult seas , he managed to catch enough fish to feed the entire village . The entire catch ( including seven types of fish ) was baked into a pie , which had the fish heads poking through to prove that there were fish inside . Ever since then , the Tom Bawcock 's Eve festival is held on 23 December in Mousehole . The celebration and memorial to the efforts of Tom Bawcock sees the villagers parading a huge stargazy pie during the evening with a procession of handmade lanterns , before eating the pie itself . 
 An older feast , held by the fishermen towards the end of December , included a pie cooked with different fish to represent the variety of catches the men hoped to achieve in the coming year . There is a possibility that Tom Bawcock 's Eve is an evolution of this festival . Since 1963 , the festival has been run against the backdrop of the Mousehole village illuminations , where the entire harbour is lit up , along with many other displays . One set of lights even represents the pie itself , showing fish heads and tails protruding from a pie dish underneath six stars . 
 There was a rumour that the entire festival was a fabrication by the landlord of The Ship Inn in the 1950s . However , festivities had been recorded by Morton Nance , an author on the Cornish language , in 1927 in the magazine Old Cornwall . His description was regarding the festivities prior to 1900 , though he doubted the reality of Tom Bawcock , suggesting it was in fact " Beau Coc " . He also went on to confirm that the origins of the festival dated back to pre @-@ Christian times , though it is unclear at what time the stargazy pie became part of the festivities . Morton Nance went on to restore the traditional song sung on Tom Bawcock 's Eve , played to the local tune " wedding March " . 
 A legend surrounding stargazy pie , along with the other unusual pies of Cornwall , is that they were the reason that the Devil never came to Cornwall . In his book Popular romances of the west of England ; or , The drolls , traditions , and superstitions of old Cornwall , a collection of Cornish traditions , Robert Hunt explains that the Devil crossed the River Tamar to Torpoint . The chapter , entitled " The Devil 's <unk> , etc " , reasons that the Devil discovered the Cornish would put anything in a pie and decided to leave before they took a fancy to a " <unk> " pie , returning to Devon . 
 = = Recipes = = 
 The original pie in the legend included sand eels , horse mackerel , pilchards , herring , dogfish and ling along with a seventh fish . In a traditional pie , the primary ingredient is the pilchard ( sardine ) , although mackerel or herring is used as a substitute . Richard Stevenson , chef at The Ship Inn in Mousehole , suggests that any white fish will work for the filling , with pilchards or herring just added for the presentation . Prior to putting it in the pie the fish should be skinned and boned ( except the head and tail ) , to allow for ease of eating . Along with the fish , the other traditional ingredients are thickened milk , eggs and boiled potatoes . 
 Many recipe variations around the traditional ingredients exist , some of which include hard @-@ boiled eggs , bacon , onion , mustard or white wine . Other alternatives to the main fish can be crayfish and rabbit or mutton . The recipes for the stargazy pie are all topped with a pastry lid , generally shortcrust but sometimes puff pastry , through which the fish heads and sometimes tails protrude . 
 For presentation , one suggestion is that the pilchards are arranged with their tails toward the centre of the pie and their heads poking up through the crust around the edge . As it includes potatoes and pastry , the pie can be served on its own or with crusty bread , sometimes with vegetables . Other suggested accompaniments are Cornish <unk> , Rhubarb chutney , poached eggs or a slice of lemon . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The children 's book The Mousehole Cat by Antonia Barber is inspired by Tom Bawcock 's Eve . It is the story of Tom Bawcock and his loyal black and white cat , <unk> , setting sail to catch the fish . When the boat hits the storm , it is represented by a giant " Storm @-@ Cat " , allowing <unk> to eventually save the day by soothing the storm with her purring . This purring becomes a song and while the Storm @-@ Cat is resting Tom is able to haul in his catch and return to the village . When they arrive back at the village , the entire catch is baked into a " Star @-@ <unk> " pie , on which the villagers feast . Notably , Antonia Barber points out that stargazy pie was a staple of Mousehole diet before Tom 's heroic fishing expedition , however , whereas according to tradition it dates from his return and legendary catch . 
 The main course of the second series of the Great British Menu was won by Mark Hix , head chef at The Ivy in London , with a variation on stargazy pie , which combined rabbit and crayfish for the filling , poking some crayfish through the pie crust . Hix had previously created a mutton and crayfish for a festival aimed at increasing the use of the meat , and it was served at his London restaurants for a time . 
 In the children 's book , The Lighthouse Keeper 's Cat by Ronda and David Armitage , the protagonist 's favourite dish is stargazy pie , and he is rewarded with one at the end . 
 The name is used as the title of a 1975 albums by Cornish folk singer Brenda Wootton . American rock band The Silver Seas ( under their previous name The Bees U.S. ) also released an album entitled Starry <unk> Pie in 2004 . The album and title track were based upon a recipe in a cookbook which band member Daniel <unk> remembered from his childhood . 
 The dish was featured in the 2004 film Ladies in Lavender , which is set in 1930s Cornwall . Characters from the film discuss the recipe used and the option of using coley fish in lieu of pilchards . 
 The dish has been presented in a parody programme on Chinese English @-@ language radio as a dish that " has come to epitomise British cuisine in Chinese eyes " . 
 = Vietnamese Cambodians = 
 Vietnamese Cambodians ( Khmer : <unk> ្ <unk> , <unk> ) refer to ethnic Vietnamese living in Cambodia . They mostly reside in southeastern parts Cambodia bordering Vietnam or on boathouses in the Tonlé Sap lake and Mekong rivers . The first Vietnamese came to settle modern @-@ day Cambodia from the early 19th century during the era of the Nguyễn lords , and most of the Vietnamese came to Cambodia during the periods of French colonial administration and the People 's Republic of Kampuchea administration . During the Khmer Republic and Khmer Rouge governments in the 1970s , the Vietnamese were targets of mass genocides thousands of Vietnamese were killed and many more sought refuge in Vietnam . Ethnic relations between the Khmers and Vietnamese are poor , and the Vietnamese have been the main target of xenophobic attacks by political parties since the 1990s . Most of the Vietnamese are stateless residents of Cambodia , and as a result they face difficulties in getting access to education , employment and housing . 
 = = History = = 
 Vietnamese settlers began to settle in modern @-@ day Cochinchina and Ho Chi Minh City from the 1620s onwards . To the Cambodians , these lands were known as Kampuchea Krom and traditionally under the control of the Khmer Empire . From the era of Chey <unk> II onwards , they came under the control of the Nguyễn lords . In 1813 , Emperor Gia Long sent 10 @,@ 000 Vietnamese troops into Phnom Penh and some members of the Cambodian royal family came under the control of the Vietnamese court . The Nguyen court imposed Vietnamese customs upon the Cambodian populace , and names of towns and provinces were changed to Vietnamese ones . Vietnamese settlers were encouraged to settle in Cambodia and official documents from the Vietnamese court recorded an average of 5 @,@ 000 Vietnamese settlers coming into Cambodia in the 1830s . The policies imposed by the Nguyen court stirred resentment among the Cambodian populace and provoked occasional rebellions . 
 In 1880 , the French colonial administration to provide subject status to Vietnamese residents in Cambodia . Over the next fifty years , large numbers of Vietnamese migrated to Cambodia . Population censuses conducted by the French recorded an increase in the Vietnamese population from about 4 @,@ 500 in the 1860s to almost 200 @,@ 000 at the end of the 1930s . When the Japanese invaded Indochina in 1940 , Vietnamese nationalists in Cambodia launched a brief but unsuccessful attempt to attack the French colonial administrators . In 1954 , a citizenship law was passed on the basis of knowledge in the Khmer language and national origin , and effectively excluded most Vietnamese and Chinese Cambodians . At the grassroots level , Vietnamese also faced occasional cases of violent intimidation from the Cambodians . During a Sangkum congress in 1962 , politicians debated on the issue of citizenship on Cambodia 's ethnic minorities and a resolution was passed not to grant naturalization of Vietnamese residents . 
 When Lon Nol assumed power in 1970 , the Khmer Republic government launched a propaganda campaign to portray the ethnic Vietnamese as agents of the Vietcong . About 30 @,@ 000 Vietnamese were arrested and killed in prison , while an additional 200 @,@ 000 were repatriated to Vietnam . Five years later in 1975 , some 200 @,@ 000 to 250 @,@ 000 Vietnamese remained in Cambodia when the Khmer Rouge seized power . About three quarters of them were expelled to Vietnam , and the remaining 20 @,@ 000 who remained are those who are of mixed @-@ Vietnamese and Khmer descent . Those who remained were either killed or massacred by the regime . By the time Vietnamese troops entered Cambodia in 1979 , virtually all of Cambodia 's Vietnamese population were either displaced or killed . Vietnam established a new regime known as the People 's Republic of Kampuchea ( PRK ) , and Vietnamese advisers were appointed in the new government administration . In 1983 , the PRK government formulated an official policy to encourage former Vietnamese residents of Cambodia to return and settle down . Vietnamese immigrants who had no family ties to Cambodia also came to settle in the country , as there was little border control to limit Vietnamese migrants from entering the country . The Vietnamese were recognised as an official minority under the PRK regime , and Overseas Vietnamese Associations were established in parts of Cambodia with sizeable Vietnamese populations . The PRK government also identity cards were issued to them until the withdrawal of Vietnamese troops in 1990 . 
 Vietnamese migrant workers started to arrive from 1992 onwards due to the creation of new job opportunities by the UNTAC administration . At the same time , the UNTAC administration allowed the opening of political offices and political parties such as FUNCINPEC and the BLDP began to propagate anti @-@ Vietnamese sentiments among the populace to shore up electorate support in the 1993 general elections . In November 1992 , the Khmer Rouge which controlled northwestern parts of Cambodia , passed a resolution to target systematic killings of Vietnamese soldiers and civilians . The first guerrilla @-@ style attacks by the Khmer Rouge on Vietnamese civilians started in December 1992 , and Khmer Rouge soldiers justified the killings by claiming that some of the civilians were Vietnamese soldiers in disguise . The spate of killings by Khmer Rouge prompted some 21 @,@ 000 ethnic Vietnamese to flee to Vietnam in March 1993 . 
 In August 1994 , the National Assembly of Cambodia introduced an immigration law which authorises the deportation of illegal immigrants . The UNHCR perceived the law as targeting Vietnamese migrants in Cambodia , and the Cambodian government later stepped in to assure that no mass deportations of Vietnamese refugees would be implemented . The Khmer Rouge continued to carry out sporadic attacks on Vietnamese civilians until they surrendered in 1999 . Ethnic Vietnamese continue to face discrimination from Cambodian society , and encountered physical intimidation from society and government authorities especially during the general elections or when disputes between Cambodia and Vietnam arise . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 The Vietnamese are generally concentrated along the river banks of the Tonlé Sap lake and Mekong river which encompass the provinces of Siem Reap , Kampong <unk> and Pursat . Smaller populations may be found in Phnom Penh as well as southeastern provinces bordering Vietnam , namely Prey Veng , Svay Rieng , Kampot , <unk> , Kratié and Takeo . The Vietnamese population was at its largest in 1962 when the government census showed that they were the country 's largest minority and reflected 3 @.@ 8 % of the country 's population . Demographic researchers returned higher estimated numbers of Vietnamese than government censuses reflect . For example , in the 1960s , the number of resident Vietnamese may be as high as 400 @,@ 000 , while another Cambodian @-@ based researcher , Michael Vickery had estimated the Vietnamese resident population to be between 200 @,@ 000 and 300 @,@ 000 in 1986 . On the other hand , government censuses conducted during the 1980s put the figures to be no more than 60 @,@ 000 . The following population figures shows population figures of ethnic Vietnamese based on figures derived from government censuses : 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The Vietnamese identify themselves as adherents of Mahayana Buddhism , Cao Đài or Roman Catholicism . Vietnamese Buddhists are mainly found among impoverished communities living in the Tonle Sap or the rural parts of Cambodia . As Vietnamese Buddhists derive their religious doctrines and beliefs from Chinese folk religion , they participate in religious rituals organised by Chinese Cambodians during festive seasons . Vietnamese communities that have settled down in Cambodia have adopted Khmer Theravada Buddhist practices to some extent . Vietnamese adherents of Roman Catholicism consist of descendants of refugees that fled the religious persecution during the reign of Tự Đức . They are split between city dwellers based in Phnom Penh and fishing communities that are based in Tonle Sap . Vietnamese Catholics make up about 90 % of Cambodia 's Roman Catholic community , and in the 1960s they had about 65 @,@ 000 adherents in the country . Most of the Vietnamese Catholics were either deported to Vietnam or killed in March 1970 , and it was only in 1990 that the Catholic church was allowed to re @-@ establish itself in Cambodia . In 2005 , there were about 25 @,@ 000 Catholics in the country . 
 A minority of Vietnamese are also followers of the Cao Đài faith which was introduced in 1927 . The Cao Đài faith attracted both Vietnamese and Cambodian adherents within the first few years of its founding , but a royal decree which outlawed the religion and efforts by Cambodian nationalists to prosecute Khmer adherents led to Cao Dai being observed solely by Vietnamese from the 1930s onwards . A Cao Đài temple was built in Mao Tse Tung Boulevard in 1937 , and in the 1960s there were about 70 @,@ 000 adherents in Cambodia . Cao Đài was outlawed during the Khmer Republic and Khmer Rouge regimes , but regained official recognition in 1985 and has about 2 @,@ 000 adherents in 2000 . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 The Vietnamese as a whole exhibit varying levels of fluency in the Khmer and Vietnamese languages . Vietnamese that live in self @-@ contained fishing communities along the Tonle Sap use Vietnamese in their day @-@ to @-@ day conversations and have individuals that have limited Khmer language skills and those that are bilingual in both languages . On the other hand , Vietnamese that live in predominantly Khmer @-@ speaking neighbourhoods send their children to public schools , and as a result the children are able to speak Khmer fluently but show very limited understanding of Vietnamese . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Field research carried out by ethnologists such as Stefan Ehrentraut shows that only a minority of Vietnamese children attend public schools , with figures varying across different provinces . In Kampong <unk> and Siem Reap where the Vietnamese live along the river banks , enrolment into public schools fare below 10 % , whereas in other provinces such as Kampot and Kratie the proportion are higher . As the majority of Vietnamese do not carry citizenship papers , they were unable to enrol their children into public schools . For those who send their children to schools , most of them only attend school for a few years and seldom complete Grade 12 as Vietnamese parents were unable to afford school fees . Vietnamese students also faced difficulties in academic work , as classes are taught exclusively in the Khmer language , and Vietnamese children that grew up speaking Vietnamese at home have limited competency in Khmer . In some Vietnamese communities based in the Tonle Sap and Mekong rivers , there are private schools that are run by Vietnamese community associations and Christian organisations . The private schools cater the teaching of the Vietnamese language , and are mostly attended by children of impoverished families . 
 = = Economy = = 
 During the French colonial administration , educated Vietnamese were employed in the civil service administration as secretaries , clerks and bureaucrats . When Cambodia gained independence in 1953 , the Sihanouk @-@ led government phased out most of the Vietnamese civil servants with Cambodians , and they sought employment in banks and commercial enterprises as secretaries and other office @-@ based positions . In the 1960s , urban @-@ dwelling Vietnamese with lower education backgrounds also worked as mechanics in car repair and machine shops owned by Chinese businessmen . Vietnamese immigrants that settled in the countryside worked as fishermen along the Tonle Sap lake and Mekong river , and also as rubber plantation workers in Kampong Cham and Kratie provinces . 
 As most Vietnamese are stateless residents , they seek a living through ad @-@ hoc various industries such as the construction , recycling and prostitution industries or as street <unk> . Vietnamese that live along the Tonle Sap lake and Mekong rivers are subsistence fishermen . A sizeable number of these stateless Vietnamese consisted of migrants that came to Cambodia between 1992 and 1993 during the UNTAC administration . The majority of Vietnamese still live below the poverty line , although a very small number of Vietnamese are represented in the Cambodian business sector . One example is Sok Kong , the head of the business conglomerate <unk> which owns state concessionaires in the country 's petroleum , tourism and entrepot industries . 
 = = Relations with community and society = = 
 = = = Government = = = 
 Almost 90 % of ethnic Vietnamese are stateless residents of Cambodia , and do not carry citizenship papers such as identity cards or birth certificates . The 1996 Cambodian law on nationality technically permits Vietnamese residents born in Cambodia to take up citizenship , but faced resistance from mid @-@ ranking interior ministry officials who generally refrain from registering Vietnamese residents due to concerns of political implications from opposition parties if citizenship were to be granted . A minority of Vietnamese residents were able to obtain citizenship only after paying bribes to interior ministry officials , or were married to Khmer spouses . The minority of Vietnamese residents who hold citizenship reported of interior ministry officials confiscating their citizenship papers . As a result , the Vietnamese faced legal restrictions from getting access to public healthcare , education , employment and buying land for housing as the majority do not carry Cambodian citizenship . Stateless Vietnamese built floating settlements in @-@ lieu of buying land @-@ based dwellings which require citizenship papers . According to field research carried out by Cambodia 's Minority Rights Organisation , interior ministry officials would confront Vietnamese fishermen in the Tonle Sap and demand bribes in order to allow them to carry out fishing . 
 = = = Inter @-@ ethnic relations = = = 
 Ethnic Khmers have a poor perception of the Vietnamese community , due to persistent feelings of communal animosity from the past history of Vietnamese rule over Cambodia . In 1958 , a survey conducted by Donald Willmott upon high school students in Phnom Penh showed that relations with Chinese were generally rated as friendly , whereas Khmer students viewed their Vietnamese classmates with suspicion . Relations between the Vietnamese and Chinese are considerably better , as both ethnic groups share a close cultural affinity . Chinese males sometimes take Vietnamese wives , particularly in Phnom Penh and eastern parts of the country where there are large Chinese and Vietnamese communities . In recent years , field research carried out by Ehrentraut in 2013 suggested that ethnic relations between Vietnamese have deteriorated not only with the ethnic Khmer , but also with the Cham and Chinese Cambodians . 
 Most Vietnamese are unrepresented in the Cambodian commune councils as they lack Cambodian citizenship . According to respondents from Ehrentraut 's field research , the majority of Cambodian commune chiefs and officials express support in excluding Vietnamese representatives from getting citizenship and participating commune elections and meetings due to contempt . The Vietnamese appoint their own village heads , and convey community concerns Vietnamese community associations ( Vietnamese : <unk> hội <unk> <unk> <unk> Việt ) that was first established in 2003 . The community associations own limited assets and obtains funding from membership fees , donations from the Vietnamese embassy in Cambodia and sale of cemetery land from the Vietnamese communities . The funds are subsequently used to address Vietnamese communal concerns which includes supporting religious places of worship and teaching of the Vietnamese language , as well as providing assistance to disadvantaged families . While the community associations have the tacit support of the Vietnamese community , the majority do not accept membership for fear of getting social stigma from mainstream Cambodian society . As of 2013 , branches of these associations are established in 19 out of 23 provinces across Cambodia . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 The issue of Vietnamese presence in Cambodia has been used as a topic by political parties to shore up electorate support since the 1993 general elections . Mainstream political parties that participated in the 1993 election included FUNCINPEC , BLDP and <unk> , and they broached on topics concerning the presence of Cambodia 's Vietnamese population and perceived Vietnamese interference in the government during campaign trails . These political parties also charged that the presence of Vietnamese in the country were the cause of economic failures , and promises were made to expel the Vietnamese in the situation that they win the elections . During this same period of time , the Khmer Rouge which has earlier refused to participate in the elections also espoused similar anti @-@ Vietnamese sentiments with mainstream political parties albeit on a more extreme form . The Khmer Rouge would issue statements and radio broadcasts accusing UNTAC of collaborating with Vietnam , and called for expulsion of the Vietnamese population through force . They would follow up with attacks upon Vietnamese civilians , which continued even after the end of the 1993 elections . 
 When the 1998 general elections were held , FUNCINPEC and the then @-@ newly formed Sam Rainsy Party repeated the use of anti @-@ Vietnamese rhetoric in their campaigns . The leaders of these two parties , Norodom Ranariddh and Sam Rainsy charged that some stateless Vietnamese had bribed state officials to obtain citizenship and the Vietnamese government still maintained political influence over the ruling party , the Cambodian People 's Party . At the same time , number of incidences of violent attacks against Vietnamese civilians rose , which are carried out by both the Khmer Rouge remnants and Cambodian civilians alike . The number of politically motivated acts of violence against Vietnamese civilians reduced after 2000 , and in the subsequent 2003 and 2008 general elections opposition political parties the use of anti @-@ Vietnamese rhetoric was also reduced . In October 2009 , Sam Rainsy charged Vietnam of encroaching into Cambodian territory in their border demarcation exercise , and led a group of activists to uproot Cambodian @-@ Vietnamese border posts in Svay Rieng . Although Sam Rainsy was sentenced to imprisonment in absentia over this incident , the incident became a major focus in electoral campaigns by the Cambodia National Rescue Party ( CNRP ) for the 2013 general elections . CNRP leaders also stoked claims on historical ties of Kampuchea Krom , and led to more anti @-@ Vietnamese sentiments among CNRP supporters . When the CNRP narrowly lost the 2013 elections , they launched a series of anti @-@ government protests between 2013 @-@ 2014 which resulted in incidents of Vietnamese shops in Phnom Penh being ransacked . 
 The vast majority of the Vietnamese support the CPP , and those who carry Cambodian citizenship would vote for the party . Vietnamese support for the CPP has mostly driven by strong anti @-@ Vietnamese sentiments from other political parties . Although many members within the rank and file of the CPP share anti @-@ Vietnamese sentiments with other political parties , the CPP maintained an openly neutral stance towards the Vietnamese community . According to Ehrentraut , the CPP 's neutral stance was a balance between not providing open support for the Vietnamese community , which would have the potential effect of losing electoral votes to other political parties , while at the same time maintaining close ties with the Vietnamese government which the CPP had historical ties dating back to 1979 . Vietnamese who hold Cambodian citizenship have also expressed fear over physical insecurity during election periods , which is most apparent during the 1993 and 2013 elections when Vietnamese civilians faced physical intimidation from the Khmer Rouge and CNRP supporters respectively and have abstained from participating in elections . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Corfield , Justin ( 2009 ) . The History of Cambodia . ABC @-@ CLIO . ISBN <unk> . 
 Heder , <unk> R. ; et al . ( 1995 ) . Propaganda , Politics and Violence in Cambodia : Democratic Transition Under United Nations Peace @-@ Keeping . M.E. Sharpe . ISBN <unk> . 
 Harris , Ian ( 2008 ) . Cambodian Buddhism : History and Practice . University of Hawaii Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> @-@ <unk> , Sri ( 1997 ) . Nationalism and Cultural Revival in Southeast Asia : Perspectives from the Centre and the Region . Otto Harrassowitz Verlag . ISBN <unk> . 
 <unk> , Joachim ( 2015 ) . Ethnic Groups of Cambodia Vol 2 : Profile of Austro @-@ Asiatic @-@ Speaking Peoples . <unk> . ISBN <unk> . 
 Willmott , William E. ( 1967 ) . The Chinese in Cambodia . Publications Centre : University of British Columbia . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Reports and journals = = = 
 Amer , Ramses ( 2013 ) . " Domestic Political Change and Ethnic Minorities - A Case Study of the Ethnic Vietnamese in Cambodia " ( PDF ) . Asia @-@ Pacific Social Science Review ( Institute for security and development policy , Sweden ) 3 ( 2 ) : 87 – 101 . Retrieved 1 March 2015 . 
 Ang , <unk> ( March 2014 ) . " <unk> ON EARTH : An Investigative Report On the Current Living Conditions and Legal Status of Ethnic Vietnamese in Cambodia " ( PDF ) . Minority Rights Organisation . Retrieved 2 March 2015 . 
 Ehrentraut , Stefan ( 2013 ) . " Challenging Khmer Citizenship : Minorities , the State , and the International Community in Cambodia " ( PDF ) . Asia @-@ Pacific Social Science Review ( Universität Potsdam ) . doi : 10 @.@ 1080 / <unk> @.@ 2010 @.@ <unk> . Retrieved 1 March 2015 . 
 <unk> , Christopher E. ( 2008 ) . " Widening the Colonial Encounter : Asian Connections Inside French Indochina During the Interwar Period " ( PDF ) . Modern Asian Studies ( Cambridge University Press ) : 1 – 40 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1017 / <unk> . Retrieved 1 March 2015 . 
 Pen <unk> and Heng <unk> ( July 2014 ) . " Cambodia Socio @-@ Economic Survey 2013 " ( PDF ) . National Institute of Statistics , Ministry of Planning , Government of Cambodia . Retrieved 2015 @-@ 01 @-@ 16 . 
 <unk> , Ewa ( 30 September 2009 ) . " Demographic Expert Report - Khmer Rouge Victims in Cambodia , April 1975 - January 1979 - A critical Assessment of Major Estimates " ( PDF ) . Extraordinary Chamber in the Courts of Cambodia . Retrieved 1 March 2015 . 
 = Jack Hinton = 
 John Daniel " Jack " Hinton , VC ( 17 September 1909 – 28 June 1997 ) was a New Zealand soldier who served during the Second World War . He was awarded the Victoria Cross , the highest and most prestigious award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces , for his actions at Kalamata on 29 April 1941 during the Battle of Greece . 
 Born in 1909 , Hinton was a foreman at the Public Works Department when the Second World War began . He volunteered for service abroad with the Second New Zealand Expeditionary Force and was posted to the 20th Battalion . Wounded during the fighting at Kalamata , he was made a prisoner of war and made several escape attempts from camps in Germany . He was freed in April 1945 by advancing American forces . After the war , he managed several hotels and was also involved in horse racing industry until his retirement in 1980 . He died in 1997 at the age of 87 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Hinton , known as Jack , was born in Colac Bay in Southland , New Zealand , on 17 September 1909 , one of seven children of Harry Hinton , a railway man , and Elizabeth Mary . He was educated at local schools and on most days , before starting lessons , would milk a herd of 40 cows . When he was 12 , he ran away from home after an argument with his father . He found a job at a grocer 's in a nearby town but after a year signed on as a <unk> aboard a Norwegian whaling ship , which spent the 1921 / 1922 whaling season in the Southern Ocean . On his return , and after reconciling with his parents , he started working as a shepherd . He soon tired of this and began the life of a <unk> , working from town to town as he travelled around the South Island . 
 Hinton spent most of the next several years on the West Coast working in railroad construction , mining for gold , picking fruit , hauling coal , and saw milling . Sport was a passion ; he boxed as a lightweight and also ran foot races and played rugby for Hokitika . 
 In the 1930s , Hinton found regular employment in the Public Works Department , which was building bridges and roads throughout the West Coast . He gained respect for his honesty and hard @-@ working nature and became a foreman in the department . In 1937 , he invested his earnings into a pub for which his future wife , Eunice Henriksen , had the lease . 
 = = World War II = = 
 At the outbreak of war , Hinton enlisted in the 2nd New Zealand Expeditionary Force ( 2NZEF ) , which was being raised for service abroad . He was posted to the 20th Battalion , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Howard Kippenberger , and based at Burnham Military Camp . One of the older volunteers of the battalion , he was soon promoted to the rank of corporal , and not long after was made a sergeant . The battalion embarked for the Middle East as part of the 4th Infantry Brigade , 2nd New Zealand Division , in January 1940 . 
 Hinton was not always respectful of military authority . Shortly after the New Zealanders arrived in Egypt , he was commanding a squad practising on a rifle range when visited by the division 's commander , Major General Bernard Freyberg , who asked him how the men were shooting . " How would you expect them to bloody well shoot ? " , replied Hinton , " not enough bloody rations , stinking heat and sand " . Freyberg asked him to repeat the comment , which he did word for word . Freyberg took note of Hinton 's name and instructed him to carry on . There was a subsequent increase in rations , while Hinton was advised by his company commander on how best to speak to senior officers . 
 = = = Battle of Greece = = = 
 In March 1941 , the 2nd New Zealand Division was one of several Allied units deployed to Greece to help prepare for an expected invasion by Italian and German troops . When the invasion began on 6 April 1941 , the 20th Battalion briefly saw action at Thermopylae before being withdrawn , but Hinton missed this fighting as he was with the division 's reinforcement battalion , which was initially based in Athens before it moved to the port of Kalamata . It had been decided that the Allied forces would abandon Greece ; at Kalamata , the reinforcement battalion , along with several thousand other , mainly Australian , troops , was awaiting evacuation . On 28 April , the New Zealanders were waiting for transport when advance units of the German 5th Panzer Division began to attack the town with machine @-@ gun fire and self @-@ propelled 6 @-@ inch guns . 
 Hearing gunfire in the distance , Hinton , wanting to assist in the defence of the Allied positions , went to the headquarters of Brigadier Leonard Parrington , the officer in command of the evacuation . Hinton vehemently protested , in strong language , an order from Parrington to surrender . On being threatened with a court @-@ martial for speaking to a senior officer in such a manner , he issued his own threat of proceedings against Parrington for defeatist talk and then left to determine for himself the situation . Other men of the reinforcement battalion were making preparations to move into the town and face the Germans . In the meantime , Hinton had collected his own party of 12 soldiers and led them into the town but came under fire . Ignoring an order from a nearby officer to retreat , he rushed forward to the nearest enemy gun and , hurling two grenades , killed the crew . He continued towards the town 's waterfront , clearing out two light machine @-@ gun nests and a mortar with grenades , then dealt with the garrison of a house where some of the enemy were sheltering . He then assisted in the capture of an artillery piece , but shortly after was shot in the stomach , immobilised and captured , one of about 6 @,@ 000 Allied soldiers made a prisoner of war ( POW ) . 
 Officially listed as missing in action until August 1941 , Hinton spent several weeks in a hospital near Athens until he was well enough to be transferred to a POW camp in Germany . In the meantime , a recommendation for the Victoria Cross ( VC ) for Hinton was dispatched by Major George Thomson , a medical officer who had witnessed his actions in Kalamata . After an investigation , a decision was made to award Hinton the VC , which was duly gazetted on 14 October 1941 . The citation read as follows : 
 On the night of 28th – 29th April , 1941 , during the fighting in Greece , a column of German armoured forces entered Kalamata ; this column , which contained several armoured cars , 2 " guns , and 3 " mortars , and two 6 " guns , rapidly converged on a large force of British and New Zealand troops awaiting embarkation on the beach . When the order to retreat to cover was given , Serjeant Hinton , shouting " to Hell with this , who 'll come with me , " ran to within several yards of the nearest gun ; the gun fired , missing him , and he hurled two grenades which completely wiped out the crew . He then came on with the bayonet followed by a crowd of New Zealanders . German troops abandoned the first 6 " gun and retreated into two houses . Serjeant Hinton smashed the window and then the door of the first house and dealt with the garrison with the bayonet . He repeated the performance in the second house and as a result , until overwhelming German forces arrived , the New Zealanders held the guns . Serjeant Hinton then fell with a bullet wound through the lower abdomen and was taken prisoner . 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 The announcement of Hinton 's VC was made within a week of Lieutenant Charles Upham , another member of the 20th Battalion , being awarded a VC for his actions during the fighting in the Battle of Crete . This prompted a joke that circulated within the battalion : " Join the 20th and get a VC . " While a prisoner of war at Stalag IX @-@ C , Hinton made several escape attempts . He was being punished with solitary confinement for one such attempt when his VC was gazetted . He was paraded before his fellow prisoners and presented with a VC ribbon by the camp 's commandant before being returned to his cell to complete his punishment . 
 By April 1945 , the Allied advance into Germany threatened Hinton 's POW camp . The Germans evacuated the camp but Hinton , feigning sickness , remained behind . Once the guards had left , he was able to find keys to the gates and let himself out . He soon made contact with soldiers of the United States 6th Armoured Division . Dressed in civilian clothes , he was initially treated with suspicion but soon convinced the Americans of his identity . He borrowed an American uniform and went forward to the frontline with the 44th Infantry Division and assisted in the capture of three villages and rounding up of German POWs . Senior American officers soon found out about Hinton 's presence with their troops and sent him to England , where he arrived on 12 April 1945 . 
 Hinton remained in England for over three months , awaiting repatriation to New Zealand . During this time , on 11 May 1945 , he received his VC from King George VI at an investiture held at Buckingham Palace . Charles Upham , his comrade from the 20th Battalion , received a bar to his VC at the same ceremony . Transport finally available , Hinton departed for New Zealand in early July and arrived on 4 August 1945 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After returning home , Hinton initially was indecisive about what to do with his life . Like many of his fellow soldiers who had returned home , he struggled to adapt to civilian life . He was also extremely uncomfortable with the public attention he received because of his status as a VC recipient . He eventually found work managing hotels on behalf of Dominion Breweries . He was initially based at the Thistle Hotel , a notorious drinking establishment in Auckland , for three years , during which he received a belated mention in despatches for his escape attempts while a POW . In December 1949 he moved to Hamilton to manage the Hamilton East Hotel . This was the first of many moves up and down the country to manage hotels . 
 During his time as a hotelier , Hinton made several overseas trips , the first of which was to attend the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . He also regularly attended VC and George Cross celebrations , including the VC centenary in 1956 . In 1963 , Eunice , who Jack had married following the death of her first husband in the 1950s , died from a heart attack . In 1968 , he was married again , to Molly Schumacher , a barmaid at the <unk> Hotel in Auckland , which Hinton was running at the time . While in Auckland , he was heavily involved in the horse racing industry and acted as a steward at the Auckland Trotting Club . 
 Hinton retired in 1980 and he and Molly moved to Ashburton in the South Island . He spent much of his retirement fishing and in 1990 shifted to Christchurch to be nearer to Molly 's relatives . He died on 28 June 1997 and was honoured with a military funeral , attended by 800 people . The Chief of General Staff , Major General Piers Reid , delivered a eulogy . The New Zealand Parliament honoured him with a minute 's silence at a sitting on 1 July 1997 . He was survived by his second wife ; he had no children from either of his marriages . He is buried in Christchurch , in the Returned Servicemen 's League Section of the Ruru Lawn Cemetery . He is remembered with a plaque in his birthplace of Colac Bay , and the restaurant at the Christchurch Returned Servicemen 's Association is named for him . 
 = = Victoria Cross = = 
 Hinton 's VC was loaned by his family to the Army Museum New Zealand at Waiouru , where it is on display . On Sunday , 2 December 2007 , it was one of nine VCs among a hundred medals stolen from the museum . On 16 February 2008 , New Zealand Police announced all the medals had been recovered as a result of a NZ $ 300 @,@ 000 reward offered by Michael Ashcroft and Tom Sturgess . 
 = 1961 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1961 Atlantic hurricane season featured the highest number of major hurricanes – Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale – until being tied by 2005 . The season officially began on June 15 , and lasted until November 15 . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the Atlantic basin . It was an above average season in terms of tropical storms , with a total of 11 named storms . The first system , Hurricane Anna , developed in the eastern Caribbean Sea near the Windward Islands on July 20 . It brought minor damage to the islands , as well as wind and flood impacts to Central America after striking Belize as a hurricane . Anna caused one death and about $ 300 @,@ 000 ( 1961 USD ) in damage . Activity went dormant for nearly a month and a half , until Hurricane Betsy developed on September 2 . Betsy peaked as a Category 4 hurricane , but remained at sea and caused no impact . 
 One of the most significant storms of the season was Hurricane Carla , which peaked as a Category 5 hurricane , before weakening slightly and striking Texas . Carla caused 43 deaths and approximately $ 325 @.@ 74 million in damage . Hurricane Debbie was a Category 3 storm that existed in the eastern Atlantic Ocean . Early in its duration , unsettled weather from Debbie in Cape Verde resulted in a plane crash that killed 60 people . Debbie then brushed Ireland as either a Category 1 hurricane or shortly after becoming extratropical . The next storm , Hurricane Esther , threatened to strike New England as a major hurricane , but rapidly weakened and made landfall in Massachusetts as only a tropical storm . Impact was generally minor , with about $ 6 million in damage and seven deaths , all of which from a United States Navy plane crash . An unnamed tropical storm and Hurricane Frances caused minimal impact on land . In mid @-@ October , Tropical Storm Gerda brought flooding to Jamaica and eastern Cuba , resulting in twelve deaths . 
 Another significant storm was Hurricane Hattie , a late @-@ season Category 5 hurricane that struck Belize . Hattie caused 319 confirmed fatalities and about $ 60 @.@ 3 million in damage . Destruction was so severe in Belize that the government had to relocate inland to a new city , Belmopan . The remnants of Hattie may have contributed to the development of Tropical Storm Simone in the eastern Pacific Ocean . In early November , the depression that would later strengthen into Hurricane Jenny brought light rainfall to Puerto Rico . The final storm , Tropical Storm Inga , dissipated on November 8 , after causing no impact on land . On September 11 , three hurricanes existed simultaneously – Betsy , Carla , and Debbie – the most on a single day in the Atlantic basin since 1893 and until 1998 . Collectively , the storms of the 1961 Atlantic hurricane season caused about $ 391 million in damage and at least 348 fatalities . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The Atlantic hurricane season officially began on June 15 . It was an above average season in which eleven tropical storms formed ; this was above the 1950 – 2000 average of 9 @.@ 6 named storms . Eight of these reached hurricane status , also above of the 1950 – 2000 average of 5 @.@ 9 . Furthermore , seven storms reached major hurricane status ; thus , 1961 had the most major hurricanes , until being tied by 2005 . Of the seven , two became Category 5 hurricanes . Four hurricanes and two tropical storms made landfall during the season , causing 348 deaths and $ 391 @.@ 6 million in damage . Hurricane Debbie also caused damage and deaths , despite remaining offshore and then after becoming extratropical . 
 Although the season officially began on June 15 , the first tropical cyclone , Hurricane Anna , did not develop until July 20 . After Anna dissipated on July 24 , there were no other systems in July or the month of August . Tropical cyclogenesis did not resume until Hurricane Betsy developed on September 2 . During the next four days , two other tropical cyclones formed – Carla and Debbie . On September 11 , the three storms – Betsy , Carla , and Debbie – existed simultaneously the hurricanes , the most in a single day since 1893 and until 1998 . Esther , which developed on September 10 , did not reach hurricane status until September 12 . Later that day , a tropical storm that went unnamed formed over the Bahamas and moved across the East Coast of the United States for its brief duration . 
 After Debbie became extratropical on September 26 , another tropical cyclone developed four days later , Hurricane Frances . Thereafter , tropical cyclogenesis slowed in October , which featured only two systems , Gerda and Hattie . The latter was the strongest tropical cyclone of the season , peaking with maximum sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 920 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . After weakening slightly , Hattie struck Belize on October 31 , before dissipating on November 1 . Later that day , Hurricane Jenny developed near Antigua . Jenny remained weak for much of its duration and became extratropical on November 8 . The final system , Tropical Storm Inga , formed in the Gulf of Mexico on November 5 . Three days later , Inga dissipated , one week before the season officially ended . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 205 , one of the highest values recorded . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . Subtropical cyclones are excluded from the total . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Anna = = = 
 An easterly wave developed into Tropical Storm Anna in the vicinity of the Windward Islands on July 20 . The storm moved westward across the Caribbean Sea . Favorable environmental conditions allowed Anna to reach hurricane intensity late on July 20 . Early on the following day , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane . Intensification continued , and later on July 21 , Anna became a major hurricane . After attaining peak intensity on July 22 , the hurricane slightly weakened while brushing the northern coast of Honduras . Further weakening occurred ; when Anna made landfall in Belize on July 24 , winds decreased to 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Anna rapidly weakened over land and dissipated later that day . 
 As a developing tropical cyclone over the Windward Islands , Anna produced strong winds over Grenada , though damage was limited to some crops , trees , and telephone poles . Other islands experienced gusty winds , but no damage . Passing just north of Venezuela , the hurricane produced strong winds over the country , peaking as high as 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Strong winds caused widespread damage in northern Honduras . Throughout the country , at least 36 homes were destroyed and 228 were damaged . Severe damage in the Gracias a Dios Department left hundreds of people homeless . Additionally , high winds toppled approximately 10 @,@ 000 coconut trees . Overall , Anna caused one fatality and $ 300 @,@ 000 in damage , primarily in Central America . 
 = = = Hurricane Betsy = = = 
 In early September , a tropical wave was noted in the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . On September 2 , the disturbance was analyzed to have attained tropical storm strength , after nearby ship reports indicated strong winds associated with anomalously low barometric pressures . Moving steadily northwestward , Betsy gradually intensified under favorable conditions . By 12 : 00 UTC the following day , the storm had strengthened to Category 1 hurricane intensity . Shortly after , a trough situated along 50 ° W steered Betsy to a more northerly course . Another low @-@ pressure area later formed in the trough , perturbing the ridge to the north of Betsy for much of its initial stages , causing the hurricane 's central pressure to rise , despite an increase in sustained winds . However , on September 5 , a shortwave forced the low northeastward , allowing for Betsy to strengthen further . 
 Later on September 5 , Betsy attained Category 4 hurricane strength , before subsequently reaching peak intensity the following day with winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a central pressure of 945 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 91 inHg ) , based on reconnaissance flights into the system . However , as a result of missing the short wave itself , the hurricane later weakened and fell to Category 3 intensity while located about 440 miles ( 710 km ) east @-@ northeast of Bermuda . Betsy weakened further to Category 2 hurricane before becoming nearly stationary beginning on September 6 , where it maintained its intensity for several days . A separate , minor trough was later able to move the system northeastwards on September 9 . Moving into highly latitudes , Betsy began to weaken , degenerating back to Category 1 hurricane intensity on September 11 before transitioning into an extratropical cyclone the following day . The extratropical remnants continued northeastward and weakened , before dissipating west of Ireland early on September 12 . Due to its distance from any landmasses , no damage was associated with the tropical cyclone . 
 = = = Hurricane Carla = = = 
 A tropical depression developed from an area of squally weather embedded within the ITCZ in the southwestern Caribbean Sea on September 3 . Initially a tropical depression , it strengthened slowly while heading northwestward , and by September 5 , the system was upgraded to Tropical Storm Carla . About 24 hours later , Carla was upgraded to a hurricane . Shortly thereafter , the storm curved northward while approaching the Yucatán Channel . Late on September 7 , Carla entered the Gulf of Mexico while passing just northeast of the Yucatán Peninsula . By early on the following day , the storm became a major hurricane . Resuming its northwestward course , Carla continued intensification and on September 11 , it was upgraded to a Category 5 hurricane . Later that day , Carla weakened slightly , but was still a large and intense hurricane when the storm made landfall near Port O 'Connor , Texas with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . It weakened quickly inland and was reduced to a tropical storm on September 12 . Heading generally northward , Carla transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on September 13 , while centered over southern Oklahoma . However , the remnants continued generally northeastward and entered Canada on September 14 , before dissipating near Cape <unk> early on September 16 . 
 While crossing the Yucatán Channel , the outer bands of Carla brought gusty winds and severe local flooding in western Cuba and the Yucatán Peninsula , though no damage or fatalities were reported . Although initially considered a significant threat to Florida , the storm brought only light winds and small amounts of precipitation , reaching no more than 3 @.@ 15 in ( 80 mm ) . In Texas , wind gusts as high as 170 mph ( 270 km / h ) were observed in Port Lavaca . Additionally , several tornadoes spawned in the state caused notable impacts , with the most destructive tornado resulting in 200 buildings severely damaged , of which at least 60 were destroyed , and eight deaths and 55 injuries . Throughout the state , Carla destroyed 1 @,@ 915 homes , 568 farm buildings , and 415 other buildings . Additionally , 50 @,@ 723 homes , 5 @,@ 620 farm buildings , and 10 @,@ 487 other buildings suffered damage . There were 34 fatalities and at least $ 300 million in losses in Texas alone . Several tornadoes also touched down in Louisiana , causing the destruction of 140 homes and 11 farms and other buildings , and major damage to 231 additional homes and 11 farm and other buildings . Minor to moderate damage was also reported to 748 homes and 75 farm and other buildings . Six deaths and $ 25 million in losses in Louisiana were attributed to Carla . Heavy rainfall occurred in several other states , especially in Kansas , where flash flooding severely damaged crops and drowned five people . Overall , Carla resulted in $ 325 @.@ 74 million in losses and 46 fatalities . In Canada , the remnants of Carla brought strong winds to Ontario and New Brunswick , though impact was primarily limited to power outages and falling trees and branches . 
 = = = Hurricane Debbie = = = 
 A tropical disturbance was first identified in late August over Central Africa . It was estimated to have become a tropical storm on September 6 . Later that day , Debbie passed through the southern Cape Verde Islands as a strong tropical storm or minimal hurricane , resulting in a plane crash that killed 60 people . Once clear of the islands , data on the storm became sparse , and the status of Debbie was uncertain over the following several days as it tracked west @-@ northwestward and later northward . It was not until a commercial airliner intercepted the storm on September 10 that its location was certain . The following day , Debbie intensified and reached its peak intensity as a Category 3 hurricane with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . The hurricane gradually slowed its forward motion and weakened . By September 13 , Debbie 's motion became influenced by the westerlies , causing the system to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . 
 The system passed over the western Azores as a minimal hurricane on September 15 . At this point , there is uncertainty as to the structure of Debbie , whether it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone or maintained identity as a tropical system . Regardless , the system deepened as it neared the British Isles , skirting the coast of Western Ireland on September 16 . Shortly thereafter , the system was confirmed to have become extratropical as it continued towards the northeast . In Ireland , Debbie brought record winds to much of the island , with a peak gust of 114 mph ( 183 km / h ) measured just offshore . Widespread wind damage and disruption occurred , downing tens of thousands of trees and power lines . Countless structures sustained varying degrees of damage , with many smaller buildings destroyed . Agriculture experienced extensive losses to barley , corn and wheat crops . Throughout Ireland , Debbie killed 18 people , with 12 in the Ireland and six in Northern Ireland . It caused $ 40 – 50 million in damage in the Republic and at least £ 1 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 4 million ) in Northern Ireland . The storm also battered parts of Great Britain with winds in excess of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . 
 = = = Hurricane Esther = = = 
 On September 10 , Television Infrared Observation Satellite ( TIROS ) III observed an area of disturbed weather well southwest of the Cape Verde Islands . Later that day , a tropical depression developed about 540 miles ( 870 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southernmost Cape Verde Islands . Moving northwestward , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Esther on September 11 , before reaching hurricane intensity on the following day . Early on September 13 , Esther curved westward and deepened into a major hurricane . The storm remained a Category 3 hurricane for about four days and gradually moved in west @-@ northwestward direction . Late on September 17 , Esther strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane and peaked with sustained winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) on September 18 . 
 The storm curved north @-@ northeastward on September 19 , while offshore North Carolina . Esther began to weaken while approaching New England and fell to Category 3 intensity on September 21 . Early on September 22 , the storm turned eastward and rapidly weakened to a tropical storm . It then executed a large cyclonic loop , until curving northward on September 25 . Early on the following day , Esther struck Cape Cod , hours before emerging into the Gulf of Maine . Later on September 26 , the storm made landfall in southeastern Maine , before weakening to a tropical depression and becoming extratropical over southeastern Quebec . The remnants persisted for about 12 hours , before dissipating early on September 27 . Between North Carolina and New Jersey effects were primarily limited to strong winds and minor beach erosion and coastal flooding due to storm surge . In New York , strong winds led to severe crop losses and over 300 @,@ 000 power outages . High tides caused coastal flooding and damage a number of pleasure boats . Similar impact was reported in Massachusetts . Additionally , some areas observed more than 8 inches ( 200 mm ) of rainfall , flooding basements , low @-@ lying roads , and underpasses . Overall , damage was minor , totaling about $ 6 million . There were also seven deaths reported when United States Navy P5M aircraft crashed about 120 miles ( 190 km ) north of Bermuda . 
 = = = Unnamed Tropical Storm = = = 
 TIROS III imagery indicated a vortex east of the Bahamas between September 9 and September 12 . A tropical depression formed at 12 : 00 UTC on September 12 , after TIROS revealed a surface circulation . The depression tracked northward and intensified into a tropical storm while located offshore North Carolina . Early on September 14 , it made landfall in the state near Wilmington , North Carolina with winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . The storm curved northeastward and accelerated across the Mid @-@ Atlantic , New England , and New Brunswick . Upon reaching the Gulf of Saint Lawrence on September 15 , it weakened to a tropical depression and subsequently dissipated . 
 Impact from the storm was generally minor . In North Carolina , 3 @.@ 12 inches ( 79 mm ) of precipitation fell at Williamston . Strong winds lashed Rhode Island , with winds as high as 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) in Point Judith . About 29 @,@ 000 homes were left without electricity , while 1 @,@ 200 lost telephone service . Hundreds of small crafts and a few ferries and barges were swamped or sank . Hurricane @-@ force wind gusts in Massachusetts felled trees , electrical wires , and TV antennas . Some roads in the southeastern portion of the state were blocked by fallen trees . Similar impact was reported in Maine . Additionally , two homes were damaged by falling trees . One person was injured by a flying wooden plank . 
 = = = Hurricane Frances = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave organized into a tropical depression on September 30 , east of the northern Lesser Antilles . Six hours later , the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Frances . Heading westward , it crossed through the Leeward Islands and entered the Caribbean Sea on October 1 . Thereafter , the lack of divergence at high levels prevented significant strengthening for a few days . While situated south of Puerto Rico on October 2 , Frances curved northwestward . The storm brought heavy rainfall to Puerto Rico , peaking at 10 @.@ 15 inches ( 258 mm ) in the <unk> Baja barrio of Maricao . Considerable damage to roads and bridges occurred . However , due to swift evacuations of residents by the Civil Defense and American Red Cross , no fatalities were reported . 
 Tracking to the northwest , Frances made landfall near Cap Cana , Dominican Republic early on October 3 with winds of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . No impact was reported on the island . Later on October 3 , Frances emerged into the Atlantic Ocean just southeast of the Turks and Caicos Islands . Thereafter , the storm accelerated somewhat and resumed intensification , reaching hurricane status on October 4 . Around that time , it curved northeastward and deepened further . Early on October 7 , Frances attained its peak intensity with winds of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 948 mbar ( 28 @.@ 0 inHg ) . The storm passed by Bermuda around that time , where it dropped 1 @.@ 35 inches ( 34 mm ) of precipitation . Later on October 7 , Frances re @-@ curved to the north . Early on the following day , it turned northwestward and began to weaken , falling to tropical storm intensity around 06 : 00 UTC on October 9 . Six hours later , Frances became extratropical over the Gulf of Maine . The remnants curved east @-@ northeastward and struck Nova Scotia , before dissipating early on October 10 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Gerda = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave developed into a tropical depression on October 16 , while located south of Jamaica . Shortly thereafter , the depression made landfall in Clarendon Parish . It continued northward and made another landfall near Santa Cruz del Sur , Cuba on October 17 . The depression brought heavy rainfall to Jamaica and eastern Cuba . In the former , flooding caused damage to roads and forced many to evacuate their homes in western Kingston . Five fatalities were reported in Jamaica . Flooding in eastern Cuba resulted in seven deaths . After striking Cuba , the depression emerged into the Atlantic and then crossed the Bahamas . 
 The depression accelerated to the north @-@ northeast and finally began to strengthen . Late on October 19 , the depression reached tropical storm intensity and was named Gerda , while located between Bermuda and the East Coast of the United States . The storm curved northeastward on October 20 , while peaking with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , a Texas Tower offshore Massachusetts observed hurricane @-@ force winds . At 00 : 00 UTC on October 21 , Gerda transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , while situated about 100 miles ( 160 km ) east @-@ southeast of Barrington , Nova Scotia . Damage from the storm in New England was " about the same as that from a typical wintertime <unk> " . The remnants of Gerda moved northeastward and then to the east , before dissipating between Newfoundland and the Azores late on October 22 . 
 = = = Hurricane Hattie = = = 
 In late October , an area of low pressure persisted in the western Caribbean Sea for several days . On October 27 , a ship and the airport on San Andres Island reported a closed center of circulation associated with the low . Thus , the system was classified as Tropical Storm Hattie starting on October 27 . Moving towards the north and north @-@ northeast , the storm quickly gained hurricane status and major hurricane status the following day . Hattie turned towards the west to the east of Jamaica , and strengthened into a Category 5 hurricane , with maximum sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) before weakening to Category 4 status at landfall south of Belize City . Continuing southwest , the storm rapidly weakened over the mountainous terrain of Central America , dissipating on November 1 . The remnants may have contributed to the development of Tropical Storm Simone in the eastern Pacific Ocean . 
 Hattie first affected regions in the southwestern Caribbean , producing hurricane @-@ force winds and causing one death on San Andres Island . It was initially forecast to continue north and strike Cuba , which prompted evacuations . Little effects were reported as Hattie turned to the west , although rainfall reached 11 @.@ 5 in ( 290 mm ) on Grand Cayman . The worst damage was in the country of Belize . The former capital , Belize City , was flooded by a powerful storm surge and high waves and affected by strong winds . The territory governor estimated 70 % of the buildings in the city were damaged , which left over 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . The damage was severe enough that it prompted the government to relocate inland to a new city , Belmopan . In the territory , Hattie left about $ 60 million in damage and caused 307 deaths . The government estimated that Hattie was more damaging than a hurricane in 1931 that killed 2 @,@ 000 people ; the lower toll for Hattie was due to advance warning . Elsewhere in Central America , the hurricane killed 11 people in Guatemala and one in Honduras . 
 = = = Hurricane Jenny = = = 
 A surface trough of low pressure developed in the eastern Caribbean Sea on October 30 . The trough split , with the northern portion spawning a tropical depression near Antigua at 12 : 00 UTC on November 1 . In the early stages of Jenny , light rainfall was observed in Puerto Rico , peaking at 4 @.@ 97 inches ( 126 mm ) . Moving northeastward ahead of an upper @-@ level trough , the depression remained weak for over four days . On November 3 , it curved eastward , before briefly turning to the southeast on November 4 . The depression tracked in a circular path during the next 24 hours , moving northeastward , north @-@ northwestward , and then west @-@ northward . Finally , the system strengthened into Tropical Storm Jenny early on November 6 . 
 Jenny intensified further and reached hurricane status at 12 : 00 UTC on November 6 . Later that day , the United States Weather Bureau began advisories and described Jenny as having " characteristic of many storms in the sub @-@ tropics late in the hurricane season . " Around 18 : 00 UTC on November 6 , Jenny attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 974 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Thereafter , the storm briefly decelerated and weakened , falling to tropical storm intensity around midday on November 7 . Jenny curved northeastward and continued to weaken . A reconnaissance flight into the system on November 8 indicated that the storm became extratropical about 895 miles ( 1 @,@ 440 km ) east of Bermuda . The extratropical remnants continued to move northeastward and weakened , dissipating late on November 9 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Inga = = = 
 Early on November 4 , the SS Navigator encountered a weather system in the Gulf of Mexico that produced northwesterly winds of 81 to 92 mph ( 130 to 148 km / h ) . Reconnaissance aircraft data indicated that Tropical Storm Inga developed at 00 : 00 UTC on November 5 , while located about 145 miles ( 233 km ) northeast of Veracruz . A strong high pressure system and a cold front entering the Gulf of Mexico from Texas caused the storm to move southward and then southeastward . Inga slowly strengthened and peaked as a 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) tropical storm early on November 7 . Thereafter , the storm became nearly stationary and began weakening . By 12 : 00 UTC on November 8 , Inga dissipated in the Bay of Campeche , as reconnaissance aircraft found no closed circulation . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 A report from Mexico indicates that a tropical depression off the west coasts of Tabasco and Coatzacoalcos . The depression significantly impacted the northern portions of Veracruz with heavy rainfall on June 30 . However , the Atlantic hurricane best track does not list this system as a tropical depression . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms ( tropical storms and hurricanes ) that formed in the North Atlantic in 1961 . Storms were named Frances , Hattie , Inga and Jenny for the first time in 1961 . The names Carla and Hattie were later retired . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = ARA Moreno = 
 ARA Moreno was a dreadnought battleship designed by the American Fore River Shipbuilding Company for the Argentine Navy ( Armada de la República Argentina ) . Named after Mariano Moreno , a key member of the first independent government of Argentina , the First Assembly ( Primera Junta ) , Moreno was the second dreadnought of the Rivadavia class , and the fourth built during the South American dreadnought race . 
 Argentina placed orders for Moreno and its only sister ship , Rivadavia , in reply to a Brazilian naval building program . During their construction , the two dreadnoughts were subject to numerous rumors involving Argentina selling the two battleships to a country engaged in the First World War , but these proved to be false . After Moreno was completed in March 1915 , a series of engine problems occurred during the sea trials which delayed its delivery to Argentina to May 1915 . The next decade saw the ship based in Puerto Belgrano as part of the Argentine Navy 's First Division before sailing to the United States for an extensive refit in 1924 and 1925 . During the 1930s the ship was occupied with diplomatic cruises to Brazil , Uruguay , and Europe until the Second World War broke out . During this time , Moreno was employed little as Argentina was neutral . Decommissioned in 1949 , Moreno was scrapped in Japan beginning in 1957 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Moreno 's genesis can be traced to the numerous naval arms races between Chile and Argentina , which in turn were spawned by territorial disputes over their mutual borders in Patagonia and Puna de Atacama along with control of the Beagle Channel . Naval races flared up in the 1890s and in 1902 ; the latter was eventually settled via British mediation . Provisions in the dispute @-@ ending treaty imposed restrictions on both countries ' navies . The United Kingdom 's Royal Navy bought the two Constitución @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships that were being built for Chile , and Argentina sold its two Rivadavia @-@ class armored cruisers under construction in Italy to Japan . 
 After HMS Dreadnought was commissioned , Brazil decided in early 1907 to halt three obsolescent pre @-@ dreadnoughts which were under construction in favor of two or three dreadnoughts . These ships , which were designed to carry the heaviest battleship armament in the world at the time , came as an abrupt shock to the navies of South America , and Argentina and Chile quickly canceled the 1902 armament @-@ limiting pact . Argentina in particular was alarmed at the possible power of the ships . The Minister of Foreign Affairs , Manuel Augusto Montes de Oca , remarked that even one Minas Geraes @-@ class ship could destroy the entire Argentine and Chilean fleets . While this may have been hyperbole , either one was much more powerful than any single vessel in the Argentine fleet . Although debates raged in Argentina over whether it would be prudent to counter Brazil 's purchase by acquiring their own dreadnoughts , which would cost upwards of two million pounds sterling , further border disputes — particularly near the River Plate with Brazil — decided the matter , and they ordered Rivadavia and Moreno from the Fore River Shipbuilding Company in the United States . 
 = = Construction and trials = = 
 After the two new dreadnoughts were awarded to Fore River , Moreno was subcontracted out to the New York Shipbuilding Corporation of Camden , New Jersey as called for in the final contract . Moreno 's keel was laid on 9 July 1910 , and construction was overseen by the Argentine Naval Commission . After the completion of the hull , it was launched on 23 September 1911 . Isabel <unk> , wife to the chief of the Argentine Naval Commission , sponsored Moreno . The ship was then moored to a dock to commence fitting @-@ out , which was finished on 15 February 1915 . It was commissioned into the Argentine Navy nine days later . 
 Over the course of their construction , Rivadavia and Moreno were the subject of various rumors insinuating that Argentina would accept the ships and then sell them to a European country or Japan , a fast @-@ growing rival to the United States . The rumors were partially true ; Argentina was looking to get rid of the battleships and devote the proceeds to opening more schools . This angered the American government , which did not want its warship technology offered to the highest bidder — yet they did not want to exercise a contract @-@ specified option that gave the United States first choice if the Argentines decided to sell , as naval technology had already progressed past the <unk> , particularly in the adoption of the " all @-@ or @-@ nothing " armor scheme . Instead , the United States and its State Department and Navy Department put diplomatic pressure on the Argentine government . 
 The Argentine government , bolstered by socialist additions in the legislature , introduced several bills in May 1914 which would have put the battleships up for sale , but the bills were all defeated by late June . Following the commencement of the First World War , the German and British ambassadors to the United States both complained to the US State Department ; the former believed that the British were going to be given the ships as soon as they reached Argentina , and the latter charged the United States with ensuring that the ships fell into Argentina 's possession only . International armament companies attempted to influence Argentina into selling them to one of the smaller Balkan countries , from which they would find their way into the war . 
 In October 1914 , Moreno sailed the New York Naval Shipyard to be painted , then conducted its sea trials starting on the 25th . Reporters for several newspapers , including The New York Times , and American naval officers were allowed on board during this time ; the Times reporters gave a glowing account of the alcohol @-@ serving café on the ship , calling it " the cutest little bar on any of the seven seas " — alcohol was banned on U.S. Navy ships . 
 The trials were plagued with serious engine trouble , culminating in the failure of an entire turbine on 2 November . Moreno was forced to put in at Rockland , Maine — where many of the observers on board were left to be brought back by train to Camden — before proceeding for repairs to the Fore River Shipyard , which had built the ship 's engines . 
 In early 1915 , nearly five years after construction had begun , the shipbuilding contractors demanded payment from the Argentine government for additional work , but the Argentines did not believe this was warranted , as Moreno had been scheduled to be completed more than a year prior . After mediation offered by Franklin D. Roosevelt , the Assistant Secretary of the Navy at the time , Moreno was released on 20 February to Argentine sailors who had been staying in American battleships moored in the Philadelphia Navy Yard . 
 Even Moreno 's departure was marked by mishaps . On the night of 26 March , Moreno accidentally rammed and sank the barge Enterprise in the Delaware River , 30 miles ( 48 km ) south of Philadelphia near the city of New Castle . No one was hurt , but the battleship accidentally ran aground immediately after . Efforts to refloat it succeeded , and Moreno continued on its way at around 7 : 30 the next morning without damage . On the 29th , President Woodrow Wilson was hosted for lunch on board the warship , accompanied by the Argentine ambassador to the United States , Romulo S. <unk> . On 15 April , Moreno ran aground in the river again , this time near Reedy Island . Like the previous time , the ship was not damaged and tugs were able to refloat the ship the next day . 
 = = Service = = 
 Moreno docked in Argentina for the first time on 26 May 1915 . The ship was immediately assigned to the Argentine Navy 's First Division , based out of the major naval base of Puerto Belgrano , and remained there until 1923 when it was put into the reserve fleet . In 1924 , Moreno was sent to the United States for modernization . The opportunity to show the flag was not missed ; Moreno made stops in Valparaiso and Callao before transiting the Panama Canal and sailing north . 
 Most of the work was done in Philadelphia , though armament changes were made in Boston . Moreno was converted to use fuel oil instead of coal , was fitted with a new fire @-@ control system , rangefinders were added to the fore and aft superfiring turrets , and the aft mast was replaced by a tripod . To reduce exhaust interference when spotting ships in a battle , a funnel cap was installed . The main armament 's range was increased from 13 @,@ 120 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) to 20 @,@ 800 yards ( 19 @,@ 000 m ) , and the turrets were modified to double the firing rate . The 6 @-@ inch secondary armament was retained , but the smaller 4 @-@ inch guns were taken off in favor of four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) anti @-@ aircraft guns and four 3 @-@ pounders . 
 When Moreno returned to Argentina in August 1926 , it was initially assigned to the training division of the Navy before being reassigned to the First Division . In 1932 , Moreno was moved into a new Battleship Division with Rivadavia . The remainder of the 1930s was filled with diplomatic cruises . Moreno , escorted by the three Mendoza @-@ class destroyers , brought Argentine president Agustín Pedro Justo to Brazil in 1933 for a major diplomatic visit . Departing in the afternoon of 2 October , he arrived in Rio de Janeiro on the morning of 7 October to huge celebrations . Brazilian ships of the first and second squadrons , along with three squadrons worth of warplanes , met Moreno at sea and escorted it to the harbor . When Justo landed and traveled by car to <unk> Palace , the road was flanked by a plethora of army and naval forces along with thousands of citizens . Rio was described as " ablaze with light " , and a 95 @-@ foot ( 29 m ) high imitation of France 's Arc de Triomphe was erected , onto which various colors were projected . Justo then took a royal train , originally designed for Albert I of Belgium 's use during Brazil 's 1922 centennial celebrations , to Sao Paulo . After three days , he traveled to Santos , where he boarded Moreno to travel first to Uruguay , then back to Argentina ; he arrived in the latter on 22 October . 
 In 1934 , Moreno was sent as one of Argentina 's representatives for the anniversary of Brazil 's independence . In 1937 , Rivadavia and Moreno were sent on a diplomatic cruise to Europe . Departing Argentina on 6 April , they split up when they reached the English Channel . Moreno participated in the British Spithead Naval Review , where The New York Times described it as " a strange vestigial sea monster in this company of more modern fighting ships . " Afterward , Moreno met up with Rivadavia at Brest , France and cruised together to Wilhelmshaven before splitting up again ; Moreno went to Bremen , while Rivadavia put in at Hamburg . They then sailed for home and arrived in Puerto Belgrano on 29 June . 
 In September 1939 , Moreno and Rivadavia traveled together to Brazil with naval cadets . However , before they could return , four Buenos Aires @-@ class destroyers had to be sent to escort the ships back , as the Second World War had erupted in Europe . Since Argentina remained neutral in the war , Moreno saw little active service . By 1949 , the venerable dreadnought had been decommissioned into reserve and was used as a barracks . In 1955 , Moreno was used as a prison ship during the Liberating Revolution ( Revolución Libertadora ) . The ship was stricken from the navy list on 1 October 1956 ; on 11 January 1957 , Argentina sold Moreno for scrap for $ 2 @,@ 468 @,@ 660 to the Japanese Yawata Iron and Steel Company . On 12 May , the Argentine fleet assembled to salute the battleship one last time as it was towed out by the Dutch @-@ owned ocean tugs Clyde and Ocean . Moreno was taken through the Panama Canal to the <unk> , arriving on 17 August . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = SMS Kronprinz = 
 SMS Kronprinz was the last battleship of the four @-@ ship König class of the German Imperial Navy . The battleship was laid down in November 1911 and launched on 21 February 1914 . She was formally commissioned into the Imperial Navy on 8 November 1914 , just over 4 months after the start of World War I. The name Kronprinz ( Eng : " Crown Prince " ) refers to Crown Prince Wilhelm , and in June 1918 , the ship was renamed Kronprinz Wilhelm in his honor . The battleship was armed with ten 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in five twin turrets and could steam at a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Along with her three sister ships , König , Grosser Kurfürst and Markgraf , Kronprinz took part in most of the fleet actions during the war , including the Battle of Jutland on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . Although near the front of the German line , she emerged from the battle unscathed . She was torpedoed by the British submarine HMS J1 on 5 November 1916 during an operation off the Danish coast . Following repairs , she participated in Operation Albion , an amphibious assault in the Baltic , in October 1917 . During the operation Kronprinz engaged the Tsesarevich and forced her to retreat . 
 After Germany 's defeat in the war and the signing of the Armistice in November 1918 , Kronprinz and most of the capital ships of the High Seas Fleet were interned by the Royal Navy in Scapa Flow . The ships were disarmed and reduced to skeleton crews while the Allied powers negotiated the final version of the Treaty of Versailles . On 21 June 1919 , days before the treaty was signed , the commander of the interned fleet , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , ordered the fleet to be scuttled to ensure that the British would not be able to seize the ships . Unlike most of the other scuttled ships , Kronprinz was never raised for scrapping ; the wreck is still on the bottom of the harbour . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 Kronprinz was ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Brandenburg and built at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel under construction number 182 . Her keel was laid in May 1912 and she was launched on 21 February 1914 . The ship was scheduled to be completed in early 1915 , but work was expedited after the outbreak of World War I in mid @-@ 1914 . Fitting @-@ out work was completed by 8 November 1914 , the day she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . She had cost the Imperial German Government 45 million Goldmarks . 
 Kronprinz displaced 25 @,@ 796 t ( 25 @,@ 389 long tons ) as built and 28 @,@ 600 t ( 28 @,@ 100 long tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 175 @.@ 4 m ( 575 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 19 @.@ 5 m ( 64 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 19 m ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She was powered by three Parsons steam turbines and three oil @-@ fired and twelve coal @-@ fired boilers , which developed a total of 45 @,@ 570 shaft horsepower ( 33 @,@ 980 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 She was armed with ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns arranged in five twin gun turrets : two superfiring turrets each fore and aft and one turret amidships between the two funnels . Her secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns and five 50 cm ( 20 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow and two on each beam . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Kronprinz was completed in November 1914 ; following her commissioning she joined the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . Kronprinz completed her sea trials on 2 January 1915 . The first operation in which she participated was an uneventful sortie by the fleet into the North Sea on 29 – 30 March . Three weeks later , on 17 – 18 April , she and her sisters supported an operation in which the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group laid mines off the Swarte Bank . Another sweep by the fleet occurred on 22 April ; two days later III Squadron returned to the Baltic for another round of exercises . On 8 May an explosion occurred in the center turret 's right gun . The Baltic exercises lasted until 13 May , at which point the III Squadron returned to the North Sea . Another minelaying operation was conducted by the II Scouting Group on 17 May , with the battleship again in support . 
 Kronprinz participated in a fleet operation into the North Sea which ended without combat from 29 until 31 May 1915 . The ship supported a minelaying operation on 11 – 12 September off Texel . The fleet conducted another sweep into the North Sea on 23 – 24 October . Several uneventful sorties followed on 5 – 7 March 1916 , 31 March and 2 – 3 April . Kronprinz supported a raid on the English coast on 24 April 1916 conducted by the German battlecruiser force of the I Scouting Group . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 CET , and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short gun duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 Kronprinz was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . Kronprinz was the rearmost ship of the V Division of the III Battle Squadron , the vanguard of the fleet . She followed her sisters König , the lead ship , Grosser Kurfürst , and Markgraf . The III Battle Squadron was the first of three battleship units ; directly astern were the Kaiser @-@ class battleships of the VI Division , III Battle Squadron . Directly astern of the Kaiser @-@ class ships were the Helgoland and Nassau classes of the II Battle Squadron ; in the rear guard were the obsolescent Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the I Battle Squadron . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König 's crew spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later , the order to open fire was given . 
 Kronprinz 's sisters opened fire on the British battlecruisers , but Kronprinz was not close enough to engage them . Instead , she and ten other German battleships fired at the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron . Kronprinz fired at HMS Dublin from 17 : 51 to 18 : 00 at ranges of 17 @,@ 000 – 18 @,@ 600 m ( 55 @,@ 800 – 61 @,@ 000 ft ) , then shifted her fire to the fast battleship Malaya at 18 : 08 at a range of 17 @,@ 000 m . Kronprinz fired first with semi @-@ armor @-@ piercing shells to find the range to her target , then with standard armor @-@ piercing shells . By the time Malaya drew out of range 13 minutes later , only one hit had been reported by Kronprinz 's gunners . According to naval historian John Campbell , this hit was more likely " the flash of the Malaya 's guns seen through haze and smoke " . During this period , several salvos fell close to Kronprinz , though none struck her . Kronprinz again reached a firing position against Malaya at 18 : 30 , but was only able to fire for six minutes before the British ship again pulled away . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , several British destroyers attempted a torpedo attack against the leading ships of the German line . The destroyer Onslow fired a pair of torpedoes at Kronprinz at a range of 7 @,@ 300 m ( 24 @,@ 000 ft ) , though both missed . The German cruiser Wiesbaden had been disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible , and Rear Admiral Paul Behncke in König ordered his four ships to maneuver to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British III and IV Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . Kronprinz and her sisters fired heavily on the British cruisers , but failed to drive them off . In the ensuing melee , the British armored cruiser Defence was struck by several heavy caliber shells from the German dreadnoughts . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a massive explosion , destroyed the cruiser . John Campbell notes that although Defence 's destruction is usually attributed to the battlecruiser Lützow , there is a possibility that it was Kronprinz 's fire that destroyed the ship . After the destruction of Defence , Kronprinz shifted her fire to Warrior ; the British cruiser was badly damaged and forced to withdraw from the battle . She was unable to reach port , and was abandoned the following morning . 
 By 20 : 00 , the German line was ordered to turn eastward to disengage from the British fleet . Markgraf , directly ahead of Kronprinz , had engine problems and fell out of formation , then fell in behind Kronprinz . Between 20 : 00 and 20 : 30 , Kronprinz and the other III Squadron battleships engaged the British 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron as well as the battleships of the Grand Fleet . Kronprinz attempted to find the range by observing the British muzzle flashes , but the worsening visibility prevented her gunners from acquiring a target . As a result , she held her fire in this period . Kronprinz was violently shaken by several near misses . At 20 : 18 , Scheer ordered the fleet to turn away a third time to escape from the murderous British gunfire ; this turn reversed the order of the fleet and placed Kronprinz toward the end of the line . After successfully withdrawing from the British , Scheer ordered the fleet to assume night cruising formation , though communication errors between Scheer aboard Friedrich der Grosse and Westfalen , the lead ship , caused delays . The fleet fell into formation by 23 : 30 , with Kronprinz the 14th vessel in the line of 24 capital ships . 
 Around 02 : 45 , several British destroyers mounted a torpedo attack against the rear half of the German line ; Kronprinz spotted several unidentified destroyers in the darkness . Kronprinz held her fire , and she and the other battleships turned away to avoid torpedoes . One torpedo , fired by the destroyer Obedient , exploded about 100 yd ( 91 m ) behind Kronprinz , in the battleship 's wake . Both Obedient and Faulknor reported a hit on Kronprinz , though she was undamaged by the near miss . Heavy fire from the German battleships forced the British destroyers to withdraw . The High Seas Fleet had managed to punch through the British light forces and subsequently reached Horns Reef by 04 : 00 on 1 June , and Wilhelmshaven a few hours later . The I Squadron battleships took up defensive positions in the outer roadstead , while Kronprinz , Kaiser , Kaiserin , and Prinzregent Luitpold stood ready just outside the entrance to Wilhelmshaven . 
 In the course of the battle , Kronprinz had fired 144 armor @-@ piercing and semi @-@ armor @-@ piercing rounds from her main battery guns , though the exact numbers of each are unknown . The ship did not fire her secondary 15 cm or 8 @.@ 8 cm guns during the entire engagement . Of the four König @-@ class ships , only Kronprinz escaped damage during the battle . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 On 18 August 1916 , Kronprinz took part in an operation to bombard Sunderland . Admiral Scheer attempted a repeat of the original 31 May plan ; the two serviceable German battlecruisers — Moltke and Von der Tann — supported by three dreadnoughts , were to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . The rest of the fleet , including Kronprinz , would trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Admiral Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just eleven weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 Kronprinz participated in two uneventful fleet operations , one a month prior on 16 July to the north of Helgoland , and one into the North Sea on 18 – 20 October . Kronprinz and the rest of III Squadron were sent to the Baltic directly afterward for training , which lasted until 2 November . Upon returning from the Baltic , Kronprinz and the rest of III Squadron were ordered to cover the retrieval of a pair of U @-@ boats that were stranded on the Danish coast . On the return trip , on 5 November 1916 , Kronprinz was torpedoed by the British submarine J1 near Horns Reef . The torpedo struck the ship beneath the forward @-@ most gun turret and allowed approximately 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ; 280 short tons ) of water into the ship . Kronprinz maintained her speed and reached port . The following day she was placed in drydock at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven for repairs , which lasted until 4 December . 
 After returning to the III Squadron , Kronprinz took part in squadron training in the Baltic before conducting defensive patrols in the German Bight . During training maneuvers on 5 March 1917 , Kronprinz was accidentally rammed by her sister ship Grosser Kurfürst in the Heligoland Bight . The collision caused minor flooding ; Kronprinz shipped some 600 t ( 590 long tons ; 660 short tons ) of water . She again went into the drydock in Wilhelmshaven , from 6 March to 17 May . On 11 September , Kronprinz was detached for training in the Baltic . She then joined the Special Unit for Operation Albion . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The V Division included the four König @-@ class ships , and was by this time augmented with the new battleship Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on 12 October ; at 03 : 00 König anchored off Ösel in Tagga Bay and disembarked soldiers . By 05 : 50 , König opened fire on Russian coastal artillery emplacements , joined by Moltke , Bayern , and the other three König @-@ class ships . Simultaneously , the Kaiser @-@ class ships engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula ; the objective was to secure the channel between Moon and Dagö islands , which would block the only escape route of the Russian ships in the Gulf . Both Grosser Kurfürst and Bayern struck mines while maneuvering into their bombardment positions , with minimal damage to the former . Bayern was severely damaged , and had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs . After the bombardment , Kronprinz departed the area for Putziger Wiek , where she refueled . The ship passed through Irben Strait on 16 October . 
 On 16 October , it was decided to detach a portion of the invasion flotilla to clear the Russian naval forces in Moon Sound ; these included the two Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts . To this end , Kronprinz and König , along with the cruisers Strassburg and Kolberg and a number of smaller vessels , were sent to engage the Russian battleships . They arrived by the morning of 17 October , but a deep Russian minefield thwarted their progress . The Germans were surprised to discover that the 30 @.@ 5 cm guns of the Russian battleships out @-@ ranged their own 30 @.@ 5 cm guns . The Russian ships managed to keep the range long enough to prevent the German battleships from being able to return fire , while still firing effectively on the German ships , and the Germans had to take several evasive maneuvers to avoid the Russian shells . By 10 : 00 , the minesweepers had cleared a path through the minefield , and Kronprinz and König dashed into the bay . At around 10 : 15 , Kronprinz opened fire on Tsarevitch and Bayan , and scored hits on both . König , meanwhile , dispatched Slava . The Russian vessels were hit dozens of times , until at 10 : 30 the Russian naval commander , Admiral Bakhirev , ordered their withdrawal . 
 On 18 October , Kronprinz was slightly grounded , though the damage was not serious enough to necessitate withdrawal for repairs . By 20 October , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On the 26th , Kronprinz was more seriously grounded on the return trip to Kiel . She managed to reach Kiel on 2 November , and subsequently Wilhelmshaven . Repairs were effected from 24 November to 8 January . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 On 27 January 1918 , the Kaiser directed that the ship be renamed Kronprinz Wilhelm in honor of the Crown Prince . The ship was formally renamed on 15 June 1918 , the 30th anniversary of the Kaiser 's reign . Kronprinz Wilhelm and her three sisters were to have taken part in a final fleet action at the end of October 1918 , days before the Armistice was to take effect . The bulk of the High Seas Fleet was to have sortied from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet ; Scheer — by now the Grand Admiral ( Großadmiral ) of the fleet — intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , in order to retain a better bargaining position for Germany , despite the expected casualties . Many of the war @-@ weary sailors felt the operation would disrupt the peace process and prolong the war . On the morning of 29 October 1918 , the order was given to sail from Wilhelmshaven the following day . Starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen and then on several other battleships , including Kronprinz Wilhelm , mutinied . The unrest ultimately forced Hipper and Scheer to cancel the operation . Informed of the situation , the Kaiser stated " I no longer have a navy . " 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks , and their crews were reduced to 200 officers and men . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Treaty of Versailles . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June 1919 , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk at the next opportunity . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . Kronprinz Wilhelm sank at 13 : 15 ; The British guard detail panicked in their attempted to prevent the Germans from scuttling the ships ; British soldiers aboard a nearby drifter shot and killed a stoker from Kronprinz Wilhelm . In total , the guards killed nine Germans and wounded twenty @-@ one . The remaining crews , totaling some 1 @,@ 860 officers and enlisted men , were imprisoned . 
 Kronprinz Wilhelm was never raised for scrapping , unlike most of the other capital ships that were scuttled . Kronprinz Wilhelm and two of her sisters had sunk in deeper water than the other capital ships , which made a salvage attempt more difficult . The outbreak of World War II in 1939 put a halt to all salvage operations , and after the war it was determined that salvaging the deeper wrecks was financially impractical . The rights to future salvage operations on the wreck were sold to Britain in 1962 . The depth in which the three battleships sank insulated them from the radiation released by the use of atomic weapons . As a result , Kronprinz Wilhelm and her sisters are one of the few remaining sources of radiation @-@ free steel . The ships have occasionally had steel removed for use in scientific devices . Kronprinz Wilhelm and the other vessels on the bottom of Scapa Flow are a popular dive site , and are protected by a policy barring divers from recovering items from the wrecks . 
 = The Sarah Jane Adventures = 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures is a British science fiction television programme , that was produced by BBC Cymru Wales for CBBC , created by Russell T Davies starring Elisabeth Sladen . The programme is a spin @-@ off of the long @-@ running BBC science fiction programme Doctor Who and is aimed at a younger audience than Doctor Who . It focuses on the adventures of Sarah Jane Smith , an investigative journalist who , as a young woman , had numerous adventures across time and space . 
 The series debuted on BBC One with a 60 @-@ minute special , " Invasion of the Bane " , on 1 January 2007 , and broadcast through to 2011 . It was nominated for a British Academy Children 's Award in 2008 in the Drama category , and for a BAFTA Cymru in 2009 in the Children 's Drama category . The programme won a Royal Television Society 2010 award for Best Children 's Drama . 
 = = Series = = 
 A full series of ten 25 @-@ minute episodes began on 24 September 2007 . The first series consisted of five two @-@ part stories , and a second series , comprising six two @-@ part stories , began airing on 29 September 2008 . A third series , once again comprising six two @-@ part stories to make a total of twelve episodes , with Russell T Davies serving as executive producer , aired from 15 October 2009 to 20 November 2009 . 
 The fourth series was aired from 11 October 2010 . An episode of another spin @-@ off series , Sarah Jane 's Alien Files , was shown immediately after each of the first episodes of the stories . Filming for three of six two @-@ part serials planned for the fifth series was completed prior to Elisabeth Sladen 's death on 19 April 2011 . Although some UK media , including the Sun , reported in early May 2011 that production of the series was to continue , the BBC has stated explicitly that no further episodes will be filmed . The fifth series was broadcast starting 3 October 2011 on Mondays and Tuesdays . It finished just two weeks later on 18 October 2011 . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In 2006 , Children 's BBC expressed an interest in producing a Doctor Who spin @-@ off . Their initial idea was " a drama based on the idea of a young Doctor Who " , but Russell T Davies vetoed this . " Somehow , the idea of a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Doctor , on Gallifrey inventing sonic screwdrivers , takes away from the mystery and intrigue of who he is and where he came from , " said Davies . He suggested instead a series based on the Doctor 's former companion Sarah Jane Smith . 
 The character of Sarah Jane Smith , played by Sladen , appeared in Doctor Who from 1973 to 1976 , alongside Jon Pertwee as the Third Doctor and later Tom Baker as the Fourth Doctor . A pilot episode for another Doctor Who spin @-@ off series , K @-@ 9 and Company , made in 1981 , featured Sarah Jane and the robot dog K @-@ 9 ; however , a full series was never commissioned . Sarah Jane and K @-@ 9 returned to Doctor Who in various media many times over the years , most notably in the 20th anniversary special The Five Doctors ( 1983 ) , and in episodes School Reunion ( 2006 ) , The Stolen Earth / Journey 's End ( 2008 ) and The End of Time ( 2010 ) . 
 Sarah Jane is frequently voted the most popular Doctor Who companion by both Doctor Who fans and members of the general public . The prospect of a new television series focusing on Sarah Jane was first rumoured in The Sun in March 2006 , prior to the airing of " School Reunion " ; the report at that time suggested that Sarah Jane and K @-@ 9 would both appear in the series . The fact that a Sarah Jane series was being developed was first confirmed in the BBC 's in @-@ house newsletter , Ariel , in early August 2006 . These early rumours were associated with the working title Sarah Jane Investigates . 
 K @-@ 9 's only appearances in the show 's first two series were a cameo in the special and an appearance in the last episode of the first series . This was due to the concurrent development of the independently produced children 's series , K @-@ 9 , which features a remodelled version of K @-@ 9 with only indirect nods to Doctor Who . However , in 2009 the robot appeared with the Sarah Jane Adventures cast in a sketch for Comic Relief , and K @-@ 9 appeared in 6 episodes of the third series , followed by two more appearances in the fourth series . He did not appear at all in Series 5 . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Production on the full series began in April 2007 . Two of the five two @-@ part stories were scripted by the special 's co @-@ writer Gareth Roberts . Bad Girls and New Captain Scarlet writer Phil Ford wrote two stories and Phil Gladwin wrote one . Creator and executive producer Russell T Davies was going to write one story but was forced to drop out due to other work commitments . 
 = = Cast and crew = = 
 In addition to Sladen , the first series of the programme stars Yasmin Paige as Maria Jackson , Sarah Jane 's 13 @-@ year @-@ old neighbour in Ealing , west London , and Tommy Knight as a boy named Luke , who is adopted by Sarah Jane at the conclusion of the introductory story . The third member of Sarah Jane 's young entourage is 14 @-@ year @-@ old called Clyde Langer , played by Daniel Anthony , who is introduced in the first episode of the proper series . Actress Porsha Lawrence <unk> briefly played Maria 's friend , Kelsey Harper , in the 2007 New Year 's Day special Invasion of the Bane which was created before the start of the series . Maria and her family are written out of the series in the first story of the second series , The Last Sontaran , but Maria and her father return briefly in the second part of The Mark of the Berserker . In the second story of that series , The Day of the Clown , several new regular cast members are introduced : Rani Chandra and her parents , <unk> , and Gita ( played by <unk> Mohindra , Ace Bhatti , and Mina Anwar , respectively ) . 
 Joseph Millson appears throughout the first series as Maria 's recently separated father , Alan , with Chrissie Jackson , Maria 's mother , played by Juliet Cowan . One other regular is Alexander Armstrong of comedy duo Armstrong and Miller , who provides the voice of Mr Smith , an extraterrestrial computer in Sarah Jane 's <unk> 2007 special featured Samantha Bond as the scheming villain Mrs Wormwood and Jamie Davis as her PR agent Davey . The first series included among its guest cast Jane Asher as Sarah Jane 's childhood friend Andrea Yates , Floella Benjamin as Professor Rivers , who returned in Series 2 , Series 3 and Series 5 , and Phyllida Law as Bea Nelson @-@ Stanley . The second series guest starred Bradley Walsh as an evil alien clown in the story The Day of the Clown and Russ Abbot as a sinister astrologer in Secrets of the Stars . Also appearing in the second series were Gary Beadle and Jocelyn Jee <unk> , who portrayed Clyde 's parents Paul and Carla in The Mark of the Berserker ; <unk> reprised her role briefly in Series 4 and more prominently in series 5 . Nicholas Courtney guest starred in Enemy of the Bane as classic Doctor Who character Sir Alistair Lethbridge @-@ Stewart , and Samantha Bond also returned as Wormwood for the episode . 
 The original executive producers for The Sarah Jane Adventures were Phil Collinson , Russell T Davies and Julie Gardner . Susie Liggat produced the pilot , but Matthew Bouch worked as producer of the series . Co @-@ writer Gareth Roberts , writing in Doctor Who Magazine , said , " We 're all determined that this will be a big , full @-@ blooded drama ; that nobody should ever think of it as ' just ' a children 's programme . " Sue Nott was the executive producer of the second series for CBBC . 
 In December 2007 , the BBC released a statement that Julie Gardner would be replaced by Piers Wenger as executive producer for Doctor Who in January 2009 , but that she would continue to executive @-@ produce Torchwood and The Sarah Jane Adventures through 2008 . 
 The fourth series in 2010 was executive produced by Russell T Davies and Nikki Wilson , and the producers were Brian Minchin and frequent writer Phil Ford . During this series , Cyril Nri was introduced as a new recurring character called The <unk> . The production team remained in place for the completed episodes of Series 5 , which were shot concurrently with Series 4 . The show 's abbreviated fifth and final series introduced a new main character named Sky , played by Sinead Michael . The episode that introduced Sky also featured a return appearance by the <unk> , but the fact that the second half of the series was never produced left his story arc , as well as other ongoing plot points , unresolved . A special edition of Doctor Who Magazine , The Sarah Jane Companion Volume 3 , published in August 2012 , detailed the plotlines of the three unfilmed stories . 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = = Doctor Who characters = = = 
 Including K @-@ 9 and Sarah Jane , some characters from the past or current run of Doctor Who have appeared in The Sarah Jane Adventures . 
 Numerous others have been referenced in dialogue . Several former companions of the Doctor are referenced in the story Death of the Doctor , and the episode also includes brief on @-@ screen flashbacks showing the Third , Fourth and Tenth Doctors . Companion Harry Sullivan is referenced separately in dialogue on several occasions and a photograph of the character is visible in one episode . In an issue of Doctor Who Magazine , Sophie Aldred was read an email from Russell T. Davies , in which he declared his plans to bring Ace into a story had the show continued . The episode Sky was originally to have featured the Eleventh Doctor , but Matt Smith was not available . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures was first seen by its original British audience in the form of a 60 @-@ minute New Year 's Day special in 2007 , titled " Invasion of the Bane " , which was co @-@ written by Russell T Davies and Gareth Roberts . " Invasion of the Bane " was not a pilot , although the story does contains many conventional introductory elements common to pilots . Creator Russell T Davies has commented upon the exceptional broadcast situation , saying " Sarah Jane Adventures is slightly unusual in that it was commissioned before we 'd written the script . If we 'd written a load of rubbish , they 'd still have had to make it . " He refers to " Invasion of the Bane " simply as the " first episode " . The story focused on Sarah Jane 's investigation of a popular and addictive soft drink called Bubble Shock ! . 
 Series one of the show aired in September of that year , consisting of five two @-@ part half @-@ hour stories . Individual half @-@ hour episodes aired once a week on BBC One , with episodes airing a week ahead on children 's digital channel CBBC . The final part aired in November 2007 . The second series started in September 2008 using the same format , with six stories instead of five , ending the series in December . The third series started 15 October 2009 , twice weekly ( Thursdays and Fridays ) on BBC One from 15 October to 20 November . The fourth series aired from 11 October 2010 . The first of each story pair was accompanied by an episode of Sarah Jane 's Alien Files , a set of 25 @-@ minute episodes in which a member of the cast updates Mr. Smith 's database about certain aliens . It accompanied series 4 of the programme . 
 Due to the illness of Elisabeth Sladen , and her subsequent death on 19 April 2011 , filming for the second half of the fifth series , which was due to air in the autumn of 2011 , was postponed and later cancelled . Filming for three stories of the fifth series had been finished , and thus post @-@ production on these stories was completed . The final series was aired from 3 to 18 October 2011 on CBBC and ended with a tribute to Elisabeth Sladen in the form of a video montage of scenes from the series and Doctor Who . 
 The script of the unfilmed Sarah Jane Adventures episode The Thirteenth Floor was rewritten and broadcast as an episode of Wizards vs Aliens . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures has been generally well received by critics and the viewing public . At the end of the first series , Abi Grant of The Daily Telegraph wrote : " With the debate about the future of children 's TV still rumbling on , this is what the BBC does best , and despite lacking the production values of Doctor Who , it 's still top tea @-@ time programming . " Daniel Martin of The Guardian described the show as looking very promising and more convincing than another Doctor Who spinoff Torchwood . Review website DVD Talk called the series " wonderful " , " thoughtful " and " imaginative children 's entertainment " that was highly recommended . The series also received praise for its willingness to tackle " darker themes [ such as ] Alzheimer 's , homelessness and loss . " 
 At Metacritic , the first series received an generally favourable score of 66 out of 100 based on five critics . As the series progressed reviews became slightly more positive with DVD Talk reviewer David Cornelius saying that the " second series is even better than the first . " However Eric <unk> from DVD Verdict stated that the second series suffered from " poor scripts and horrible acting " , criticising it for having " simple plots , too many conveniences and having corny humour . " Series three is described by Guy Clapperton of review site <unk> as being slightly braver than its predecessors , while Bullz @-@ <unk> described it as " a sweet , fun little show , with some neat ideas " with " its heart very much in the right place . " Reviews for the final series were sympathetic for the series ' end and the unavoidably incomplete nature of the series ( following the death of Elisabeth Sladen ) and its story arcs . Stephen Kelly from The Guardian said that it was " a fitting tribute to Elisabeth Sladen " and has occupied a " unique place in the <unk> " . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = = International broadcast = = 
 The BBC 's children 's channel BBC Kids began broadcasting The Sarah Jane Adventures with " Invasion of the Bane " on 13 January 2008 , airing the rest of the series back @-@ to @-@ back on Sundays thereafter . The South African channel SABC 2 started airing the series beginning on 9 February 2008 . The Hong Kong channel ATV World , which has also aired Doctor Who and Torchwood , aired this series starting 17 February 2008 . The first series began airing on Sci Fi in the USA beginning on 11 April 2008 , but this is the only series broadcast on American television as of Summer 2010 , though later series have continued to be released on DVD in America without a prior television broadcast . In Australia , The Sarah Jane Adventures started on 31 October 2008 on Nickelodeon Australia . In Brazil , the show started airing on 19 November 2012 on TV Cultura , right after their broadcast of Doctor Who series 6 ended . It also screens in New Zealand on Nickelodeon New Zealand , and in Belgium on <unk> . In 2013 the show started airing on <unk> in Arabic . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 = = = Toys = = = 
 Character Options have been awarded a licence to produce Sarah Jane Adventure play sets , action figures , and a ' Sonic Lipstick ' toy . Four 2 @-@ figure sets have been released : Sarah Jane and Star Poet ; Sarah Jane and General <unk> ; Sarah Jane and Child Slitheen and Sarah Jane and Graske . Also released are Sarah Jane 's Sonic Lipstick with Watch Scanner and Alien Communicator . Character Options have now discontinued the range due to lack of customer interest . 
 = = = Audio adventures = = = 
 Ten audiobooks have been released on CD , all but the last two read by the series lead , Elisabeth Sladen , who read them in the first person in character as Sarah Jane Smith . The final two books , released in November 2011 after Sladen 's death , were read by Daniel Anthony and <unk> Mohindra , respectively , though not as their characters . 
 The first two were the first time that BBC Audiobooks had commissioned new content for exclusive release on audio . 
 A 20 minute mini @-@ episode in two parts called " The Monster Hunt " written by Trevor Baxendale and read by <unk> Mohindra was made especially for the Monster Hunt game on the Sarah Jane Adventures website . Two more comics were released " Return of the <unk> " and " Defending Bannerman Road " . All comics were available as a pdf and a free mp3 download on the official Sarah Jane Adventures website . 
 = = = Comics = = = 
 Five The Sarah Jane Adventures comics were released on the official Sarah Jane Adventures website . Four of them were audio and comic adventures read by <unk> Mohindra . A pdf <unk> and a mp3 audio track was available to download of all of the comics . Next to the <unk> stories the comic The Silver Bullet was published on the website . It is the comic that Clyde Langer wrote in the Sarah Jane Adventures episode The Curse of Clyde Langer . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures merchandising revived the concept of the novelisation , which had been part of the Doctor Who franchise from the 1970s to the 1990s ( principally under the editorship of author and former Who script editor Terrance Dicks ) . The first series and most of the second were adapted in this way , but later series saw only a few releases and a transition from print to e @-@ books . 
 In September 2010 , Pearson Education published four " photo @-@ novelisations " based on stories from the third series : 
 = = = Magazines and Books = = = 
 Although there has never been a Sarah Jane Adventures magazine there have been three special editions of the Doctor Who Magazine , focused on the Sarah Jane Adventures , as well as regular mentions in the standard editions of Doctor Who Magazine . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 = = = = DVD = = = = 
 = = = = Blu @-@ ray = = = = 
 = = = Past official BBC websites = = = 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures Series 2 @,@ 3 @,@ 4 via Internet Archive 
 The Sarah Jane Adventures Series 1 Internet Archive 
 = Auschwitz concentration camp = 
 Auschwitz concentration camp ( German : <unk> Auschwitz , also <unk> Auschwitz [ <unk> ̯ <unk> <unk> ] ) was a network of German Nazi concentration camps and extermination camps built and operated by the Third Reich in Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany during World War II . It consisted of Auschwitz I ( the original camp ) , Auschwitz II – Birkenau ( a combination concentration / extermination camp ) , Auschwitz III – Monowitz ( a labor camp to staff an IG Farben factory ) , and 45 satellite camps . 
 Auschwitz I was first constructed to hold Polish political prisoners , who began to arrive in May 1940 . The first extermination of prisoners took place in September 1941 , and Auschwitz II – Birkenau went on to become a major site of the Nazi Final Solution to the Jewish Question . From early 1942 until late 1944 , transport trains delivered Jews to the camp 's gas chambers from all over German @-@ occupied Europe , where they were killed with the pesticide Zyklon B. At least 1 @.@ 1 million prisoners died at Auschwitz , around 90 percent of them Jewish ; approximately 1 in 6 Jews killed in the Holocaust died at the camp . Others deported to Auschwitz included 150 @,@ 000 Poles , 23 @,@ 000 Romani and Sinti , 15 @,@ 000 Soviet prisoners of war , 400 Jehovah 's Witnesses , and tens of thousands of others of diverse nationalities , including an unknown number of homosexuals . Many of those not killed in the gas chambers died of starvation , forced labor , infectious diseases , individual executions , and medical experiments . 
 In the course of the war , the camp was staffed by 7 @,@ 000 members of the German Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , approximately 12 percent of whom were later convicted of war crimes . Some , including camp commandant Rudolf Höss , were executed . The Allied Powers refused to believe early reports of the atrocities at the camp , and their failure to bomb the camp or its railways remains controversial . One hundred forty @-@ four prisoners are known to have escaped from Auschwitz successfully , and on October 7 , 1944 , two Sonderkommando units — prisoners assigned to staff the gas chambers — launched a brief , unsuccessful uprising . 
 As Soviet troops approached Auschwitz in January 1945 , most of its population was evacuated and sent on a death march . The prisoners remaining at the camp were liberated on January 27 , 1945 , a day now commemorated as International Holocaust Remembrance Day . In the following decades , survivors , such as Primo Levi , Viktor Frankl , and Elie Wiesel , wrote memoirs of their experiences in Auschwitz , and the camp became a dominant symbol of the Holocaust . In 1947 , Poland founded a museum on the site of Auschwitz I and II , and in 1979 , it was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Discrimination against Jews began immediately after the Nazi seizure of power in Germany on January 30 , 1933 . The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service , passed on April 7 that year , excluded most Jews from the legal profession and the civil service . Similar legislation soon deprived Jewish members of other professions of the right to practise . Violence and economic pressure were used by the regime to encourage Jews to leave the country voluntarily . Jewish businesses were denied access to markets , forbidden to advertise in newspapers , and deprived of access to government contracts . Citizens were harassed and subjected to violent attacks and boycotts of their businesses . 
 In September 1935 the Nuremberg Laws were enacted . These laws prohibited marriages between Jews and people of Germanic extraction , extramarital relations between Jews and Germans , and the employment of German women under the age of 45 as domestic servants in Jewish households . The Reich Citizenship Law stated that only those of Germanic or related blood were defined as citizens . Thus Jews and other minority groups were stripped of their German citizenship . By the start of World War II in 1939 , around 250 @,@ 000 of Germany 's 437 @,@ 000 Jews emigrated to the United States , Palestine , the United Kingdom , and other countries . 
 The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism , racial hygiene , and eugenics , and combined them with pan @-@ Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more Lebensraum ( living space ) for the Germanic people . Nazi Germany attempted to obtain this new territory by invading Poland and the Soviet Union , intending to deport or kill the Jews and Slavs living there , who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race . After the invasion of Poland in September 1939 , German dictator Adolf Hitler ordered that the Polish leadership and intelligentsia should be destroyed . Approximately 65 @,@ 000 civilians were killed by the end of 1939 . In addition to leaders of Polish society , the Nazis killed Jews , prostitutes , Romani , and the mentally ill . SS @-@ Obergruppenführer ( Senior Group Leader ) Reinhard Heydrich , then head of the Gestapo , ordered on September 21 that Jews should be rounded up and concentrated into cities with good rail links . Initially the intention was to deport the Jews to points further east , or possibly to Madagascar . 
 = = = Auschwitz I = = = 
 After this part of Poland was annexed by Nazi Germany , Oświęcim ( Auschwitz ) was located administratively in Germany , Province of Upper Silesia , <unk> Kattowitz , Landkreis Bielitz . It was first suggested as a site for a concentration camp for Polish prisoners by SS @-@ Oberführer Arpad Wigand , an aide to Higher SS and Police Leader for Silesia , Erich von dem Bach @-@ Zelewski . Bach @-@ Zelewski had been searching for a site to house prisoners in the Silesia region , as the local prisons were filled to capacity . Richard Glücks , head of the Concentration Camps Inspectorate , sent former Sachsenhausen concentration camp commandant Walter Eisfeld to inspect the site , which already held sixteen dilapidated one @-@ story buildings that had once served as an Austrian and later Polish Army barracks and a camp for transient workers . Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler , head of the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , approved the site in April 1940 , intending to use the facility to house political prisoners . SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer ( lieutenant colonel ) Rudolf Höss oversaw the development of the camp and served as the first commandant . SS @-@ Obersturmführer ( senior lieutenant ) Josef Kramer was appointed Höss 's deputy . Auschwitz I , the original camp , became the administrative center for the whole complex . 
 Local residents were evicted , including 1 @,@ 200 people who lived in shacks around the barracks . Around 300 Jewish residents of Oświęcim were brought in to lay foundations . From 1940 to 1941 , 17 @,@ 000 Polish and Jewish residents of the western districts of Oświęcim were expelled from places adjacent to the camp . The Germans also ordered expulsions of Poles from the villages of <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Bór , and <unk> to the General Government . German citizens were offered tax concessions and other benefits if they would relocate to the area . By October 1943 , more than 6 @,@ 000 Reich Germans had arrived . The Nazis planned to build a model modern residential area for incoming Germans , including schools , playing fields , and other amenities . Some of the plans went forward , including the construction of several hundred apartments , but many were never fully implemented . Basic amenities such as water and sewage disposal were inadequate , and water @-@ borne illnesses were commonplace . 
 The first prisoners ( 30 German criminal prisoners from the Sachsenhausen concentration camp ) arrived in May 1940 , intended to act as functionaries within the prison system . The first mass transport to Auschwitz concentration camp , which included Catholic prisoners , suspected members of the resistance , and 20 Jews , arrived from the prison in Tarnów , Poland , on June 14 , 1940 . They were interned in the former building of the Polish Tobacco Monopoly , adjacent to the site , until the camp was ready . 
 The inmate population grew quickly as the camp absorbed Poland 's intelligentsia and dissidents , including the Polish underground resistance . By March 1941 , 10 @,@ 900 were imprisoned there , most of them Poles . By the end of 1940 , the SS had confiscated land in the surrounding area to create a 40 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 15 sq mi ) " zone of interest " surrounded by a double ring of electrified barbed wire fences and watchtowers . Like other Nazi concentration camps , the gates to Auschwitz I displayed the motto <unk> macht frei ( " Work brings freedom " ) . 
 = = = Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau = = = 
 The initial victories of Operation Barbarossa in the summer and fall of 1941 against Hitler 's new enemy , the Soviet Union , led to dramatic changes in Nazi anti @-@ Jewish ideology and the profile of prisoners brought to Auschwitz . Construction on Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau began in October 1941 to ease congestion at the main camp . Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler , head of the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) , intended the camp to house 50 @,@ 000 prisoners of war , who would be interned as forced laborers . Plans called for the expansion of the camp first to house 150 @,@ 000 and eventually as many as 200 @,@ 000 inmates . An initial contingent of 10 @,@ 000 Soviet prisoners of war arrived at Auschwitz I in October 1941 , but by March 1942 only 945 were still alive , and these were transferred to Birkenau , where most of them died from disease or starvation by May . By this time Hitler had decided to annihilate the Jewish people , so Birkenau was repurposed as a combination labor camp / extermination camp . 
 The chief of construction of Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau was Karl Bischoff . Unlike his predecessor , he was a competent and dynamic bureaucrat who , in spite of the ongoing war , carried out the construction deemed necessary . The Birkenau camp , the four crematoria , a new reception building , and hundreds of other buildings were planned and realized . Bischoff 's plans initially called for each barrack to have an occupancy of 550 prisoners ( one @-@ third of the space allotted in other Nazi concentration camps ) . He later changed this to 744 prisoners per barrack . The SS designed the barracks not so much to house people as to destroy them . 
 The first gas chamber at Birkenau was the " red house " ( called Bunker 1 by SS staff ) , a brick cottage converted into a gassing facility by tearing out the inside and bricking up the windows . It was operational by March 1942 . A second brick cottage , the " white house " or Bunker 2 , was converted some weeks later . These structures were in use for mass killings until early 1943 . Himmler visited the camp in person on July 17 and 18 , 1942 . He was given a demonstration of a mass killing using the gas chamber in Bunker 2 and toured the building site of the new IG Farben plant being constructed at the nearby town of Monowitz . 
 In early 1943 , the Nazis decided to increase greatly the gassing capacity of Birkenau . Crematorium II , originally designed as a mortuary , with morgues in the basement and ground @-@ level incinerators , was converted into a killing factory by installing gas @-@ tight doors , vents for the Zyklon B ( a highly lethal cyanide @-@ based pesticide ) to be dropped into the chamber , and ventilation equipment to remove the gas thereafter . It went into operation in March . Crematorium III was built using the same design . Crematoria IV and V , designed from the start as gassing centers , were also constructed that spring . By June 1943 , all four crematoria were operational . Most of the victims were killed using these four structures . 
 = = = = The Gypsy camp = = = = 
 On December 10 , 1942 , Himmler issued an order to send all Sinti and Roma ( Gypsies ) to concentration camps , including Auschwitz . A separate camp for Roma was set up at Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau known as the <unk> ( Gypsy Family Camp ) . The first transport of German Gypsies arrived on February 26 , 1943 , and was housed in Section B @-@ IIe of Auschwitz II . Approximately 23 @,@ 000 Gypsies had been brought to Auschwitz by 1944 , 20 @,@ 000 of whom died there . One transport of 1 @,@ 700 Polish Sinti and Roma was killed upon arrival , as they were suspected to be ill with spotted fever . 
 Gypsy prisoners were used primarily for construction work . Thousands died of typhus and noma due to overcrowding , poor sanitary conditions , and malnutrition . Anywhere from 1 @,@ 400 to 3 @,@ 000 prisoners were transferred to other concentration camps before the murder of the remaining population . 
 On August 2 , 1944 , the SS cleared the Gypsy camp . A witness in another part of the camp later told of the Gypsies unsuccessfully battling the SS with improvised weapons before being loaded into trucks . The surviving population of 2 @,@ 897 was then killed en masse in the gas chambers . The murder of the Romani people by the Nazis during World War II is known in the Romani language as the Porajmos ( devouring ) . 
 = = = Auschwitz III = = = 
 After examining several sites for a new plant to manufacture <unk> , a type of synthetic rubber essential to the war effort , chemicals manufacturer IG Farben chose a site near the towns of <unk> and <unk> ( Monowitz in German ) , about 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) east of Auschwitz I and 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) east of the town of Oświęcim . Financial support in the form of tax exemptions was available to corporations prepared to develop industries in the frontier regions under the Eastern Fiscal Assistance Law , passed in December 1940 . In addition to its proximity to the concentration camp , which could be used as a source of cheap labor , the site had good railway connections and access to raw materials . In February 1941 , Himmler ordered that the Jewish population of Oświęcim should be expelled to make way for skilled laborers that would be brought in to work at the plant . All Poles able to work were to remain in the town and were forced to work building the factory . Himmler visited in person in March and decreed an immediate expansion of the parent camp to house 30 @,@ 000 persons . Development of the camp at Birkenau began about six months later . Construction of IG Auschwitz began in April , with an initial force of 1 @,@ 000 workers from Auschwitz I assigned to work on the construction . This number increased to 7 @,@ 000 in 1943 and 11 @,@ 000 in 1944 . Over the course of its history , about 35 @,@ 000 inmates in total worked at the plant ; 25 @,@ 000 died as a result of malnutrition , disease , and the physically impossible workload . In addition to the concentration camp inmates , who comprised a third of the work force , IG Auschwitz employed slave laborers from all over Europe . 
 Initially the laborers walked the seven kilometers from Auschwitz I to the plant each day , but as this meant they had to rise at 3 : 00 am , many arrived exhausted and unable to work . The camp at Monowitz ( also called Monowitz @-@ Buna or Auschwitz III ) was constructed and began housing inmates on October 30 , 1942 , the first concentration camp to be financed and built by private industry . In January 1943 the <unk> ( labor education camp ) was moved from the parent camp to Monowitz . These prisoners were also forced to work on the building site . The SS charged IG Farben three Reichsmarks per hour for unskilled workers , four for skilled workers . Although the camp administrators expected the prisoners to work at 75 percent of the capacity of a free worker , the inmates were only able to perform 20 to 50 percent as well . Site managers constantly threatened inmates with transportation to Birkenau for death in the gas chambers as a way to try to increase productivity . Deaths and transfers to the gas chambers at Birkenau reduced the prisoner population of Monowitz by nearly a fifth each month ; numbers were made up with new arrivals . Life expectancy of inmates at Monowitz averaged about three months . Though the factory was initially expected to begin production in 1943 , shortages of labor and raw materials meant start @-@ up had to be postponed repeatedly . The plant was almost ready to commence production when it was overrun by Soviet troops in 1945 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Various other German industrial enterprises , such as Krupp and Siemens @-@ Schuckert , built factories with their own <unk> . There were 45 such satellite camps , 28 of which served corporations involved in the armaments industry . Prisoner populations ranged from several dozen to several thousand . <unk> were built at <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and other centers as far afield as the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia . Satellite camps were designated as <unk> ( external camp ) , <unk> ( extension or subcamp ) , or Arbeitslager ( labor camp ) . Industries with satellite camps included coal mines , foundries and other metal works , chemical plants , and other industries . Prisoners were also made to work in forestry and farming . 
 = = = Evacuation , death marches , and liberation = = = 
 In November 1944 , with the Soviet Red Army approaching through Poland , Himmler ordered gassing operations to cease across the Reich . Crematoria II , III , and IV were dismantled , while Crematorium I was transformed into an air raid shelter . The Sonderkommando were ordered to remove other evidence of the killings , including the mass graves . The SS destroyed written records , and in the final week before the camp 's liberation , burned or demolished many of its buildings . 
 Himmler ordered the evacuation of all camps in January 1945 , charging camp commanders with " making sure that not a single prisoner from the concentration camps falls alive into the hands of the enemy . " On January 17 , 58 @,@ 000 Auschwitz detainees were evacuated under guard , largely on foot ; thousands of them died in the subsequent death march west towards Wodzisław Śląski . Approximately 20 @,@ 000 Auschwitz prisoners made it to Bergen @-@ Belsen concentration camp in Germany , where they were liberated by the British in April 1945 . 
 Those too weak or sick to walk were left behind . When the 322nd Rifle Division of the Red Army arrived at the camp on January 27 they found around 7 @,@ 500 prisoners and about 600 corpses had been left behind . Among the items found by the Soviet soldiers were 370 @,@ 000 men 's suits , 837 @,@ 000 women 's garments , and 7 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 8 @.@ 5 short tons ) of human hair . 
 The camp 's liberation received little press attention at the time . Rees attributes this to three factors : the previous discovery of similar crimes at Majdanek concentration camp , competing news from the Allied summit at Yalta , and the Soviet Union 's interest , for propaganda purposes , in minimizing attention to Jewish suffering . Due to the vast extent of the camp area , at least four divisions took part in liberating the camp : 100th Rifle Division ( established in Vologda , Russia ) , 322nd Rifle Division ( Gorky , Russia ) , 286th Rifle Division ( Leningrad ) , and 107th Motor Rifle Division ( Tambov , Russia ) . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 After liberation , parts of Auschwitz I served first as a hospital for liberated prisoners . Soviet and Polish investigators worked in the initial months to document the war crimes of the SS . In the two years that followed , the Soviets dismantled and exported the IG Farben factories , and the Birkenau barracks were looted by Polish civilians . Area residents sifted the mass graves and ashes for gold . Until 1947 , some of the facilities were used as a prison camp of the Soviet NKVD . 
 After the site became a museum in 1947 , exhumation work lasted for more than a decade . Antoni <unk> , the oldest known survivor of Auschwitz , died aged 108 on October 21 , 2012 , in <unk> , Poland . 
 Camp commandant Rudolf Höss was pursued by the British Intelligence Corps , who arrested him at a farm near Flensburg , Germany , on March 11 , 1946 . Höss confessed to his role in the mass killings at Auschwitz in his memoirs and in his trial before the Supreme National Tribunal in Warsaw , Poland . He was convicted of murder and hanged at the camp on April 16 , 1947 . 
 Around 12 percent of Auschwitz 's 6 @,@ 500 staff who survived the war were eventually brought to trial . Poland was more active than other nations in investigating war crimes , prosecuting 673 of the total 789 Auschwitz staff brought to trial . On November 25 , 1947 , the Auschwitz Trial began in Kraków , when Poland 's Supreme National Tribunal brought to court 40 former Auschwitz staff . The trial 's defendants included commandant Arthur <unk> , women 's camp leader Maria Mandel , and camp leader Hans <unk> . The trials ended on December 22 , 1947 , with 23 death sentences , 7 life sentences , and 9 prison sentences ranging from three to fifteen years . Hans Münch , an SS doctor who had several former prisoners testify on his behalf , was the only person to be acquitted . 
 Other former staff were hanged for war crimes in the Dachau Trials and the Belsen Trial , including camp leaders Josef Kramer , Franz <unk> , and <unk> <unk> ; doctor Friedrich <unk> ; and guards Irma <unk> and Elisabeth <unk> . The Frankfurt Auschwitz Trials , held in West Germany from December 20 , 1963 to August 20 , 1965 , convicted 17 of 22 defendants , giving them prison sentences ranging from life to three years and three months . Bruno Tesch and Karl Weinbacher , the owner and the chief executive officer of the firm Tesch & Stabenow , one of the suppliers of Zyklon B , were executed for knowingly supplying the chemical for use on humans . 
 = = Command and control = = 
 Camp guards were members of the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( Death 's Head Units ) . Around 7 @,@ 000 SS personnel in total were posted to Auschwitz during the war . Of these , 4 percent of SS personnel were officers and 26 percent were non @-@ commissioned officers , while the remainder were rank @-@ and @-@ file members . Approximately three in four SS personnel worked in security . Others worked in the medical or political departments , in the camp headquarters , or in the economic administration , which was responsible for the property of dead prisoners . SS personnel at the camp included 200 women , who worked as guards , nurses , or messengers . The overall command authority for the entire camp was Department D ( the Concentration Camps Inspectorate ) of the SS @-@ Wirtschafts @-@ Verwaltungshauptamt ( SS Economics Main Office ; SS @-@ WVHA ) . 
 Auschwitz was considered a comfortable posting by many SS members , due to many amenities and the abundance of slave labor . Of the various prisoner groups , SS officers preferred Jehovah 's Witnesses for household slaves because of their nonviolent behavior . Höss lived with his wife and children in a villa just outside the camp grounds . Other SS personnel were also initially allowed to bring <unk> , wives , and children to live at the camp , but when the SS camp grew more crowded , Höss restricted further arrivals . Facilities for the SS personnel and their families included a library , swimming pool , coffee house , and a theater that hosted regular performances . 
 One prisoner in each work detail or prisoner block — usually an Aryan — was appointed as a Kapo ( " head " or " overseer " ) . The Kapos received better rations and lodging and wielded tremendous power over other prisoners , whom they often abused . Very few Kapos were prosecuted after the war , due to the difficulty in determining which Kapo atrocities had been performed under SS orders and which had been individual actions . 
 About 120 SS personnel were assigned to the gas chambers and lived on site at the crematoria . Several SS personnel oversaw the killings at each gas chamber , while the bulk of the work was done by the mostly Jewish prisoners known as Sonderkommando ( special squad ) . Sonderkommando responsibilities included guiding victims to the gas chambers and removing , looting , and <unk> the corpses . 
 The <unk> were housed separately from other prisoners , in somewhat better conditions . Their quality of life was further improved by access to the goods taken from murdered prisoners , which Sonderkommando were sometimes able to steal for themselves and to trade on Auschwitz 's black market . Hungarian doctor Miklós Nyiszli reported that the Sonderkommando numbered around 860 prisoners when the Hungarian Jews were being killed in 1944 . Many Sonderkommando committed suicide due to the horrors of their work ; those who did not generally were shot by the SS in a matter of weeks , and new Sonderkommando units were then formed from incoming transports . Almost none of the 2 @,@ 000 prisoners placed in these units survived to the camp 's liberation . 
 = = Life in the camps = = 
 The prisoners ' day began at 4 : 30 am ( an hour later in winter ) with morning roll call . Dr. Miklós Nyiszli describes roll call as beginning 3 : 00 am and lasting four hours . The weather was cold in Auschwitz at that time of day , even in summer . The prisoners were ordered to line up outdoors in rows of five and had to stay there until 7 : 00 am , when the SS officers arrived . Meanwhile , the guards would force the prisoners to squat for an hour with their hands above their heads or levy punishments such as beatings or detention for infractions such as having a missing button or an improperly cleaned food bowl . The inmates were counted and re @-@ counted . Nyiszli describes how even the dead had to be present at roll call , standing supported by their fellow inmates until the ordeal was over . When he was a prisoner in 1944 – 45 , five to ten men were found dead in the barracks each night . The prisoners assigned to Mengele 's staff slept in a separate barracks and were awoken at 7 : 00 am for a roll call that only took a few minutes . 
 After roll call , the Kommando , or work details , walked to their place of work , five abreast , wearing striped camp fatigues , no underwear , and ill @-@ fitting wooden shoes without socks . A prisoner 's orchestra ( such as the Women 's Orchestra of Auschwitz ) was forced to play cheerful music as the workers left the camp . Kapos were responsible for the prisoners ' behavior while they worked , as was an SS escort . The working day lasted 12 hours during the summer and a little less in the winter . Much of the work took place outdoors at construction sites , gravel pits , and lumber yards . No rest periods were allowed . One prisoner was assigned to the latrines to measure the time the workers took to empty their bladders and bowels . Sunday was not a work day , but the prisoners did not rest ; they were required to clean the barracks and take their weekly shower . Prisoners were allowed to write ( in German ) to their families on Sundays . Inmates who did not speak German would trade some of their bread to another inmate for help composing their letters . Members of the SS censored the outgoing mail . 
 A second mandatory roll call took place in the evening . If a prisoner was missing , the others had to remain standing in place until he was either found or the reason for his absence discovered , regardless of the weather conditions , even if it took hours . After roll call , individual and collective punishments were meted out , depending on what had happened during the day , before the prisoners were allowed to retire to their blocks for the night and receive their bread rations and water . Curfew was two or three hours later . The prisoners slept in long rows of wooden bunks , lying in and on their clothes and shoes to prevent them from being stolen . 
 According to Nyiszli , " Eight hundred to a thousand people were crammed into the superimposed compartments of each barracks . Unable to stretch out completely , they slept there both lengthwise and crosswise , with one man 's feet on another 's head , neck , or chest . Stripped of all human dignity , they pushed and shoved and bit and kicked each other in an effort to get a few more inches ' space on which to sleep a little more comfortably . For they did not have long to sleep " . 
 The types of prisoners were distinguishable by triangular pieces of cloth , called Winkel , sewn onto on their jackets below their prisoner number . Political prisoners had a red triangle , Jehovah 's Witnesses had purple , criminals had green , and so on . The nationality of the inmate was indicated by a letter stitched onto the Winkel . Jews had a yellow triangle , overlaid by a second Winkel if they also fit into a second category . Uniquely at Auschwitz , prisoners were tattooed with their prisoner number , on the chest for Soviet prisoners of war and on the left arm for civilians . 
 Prisoners received a hot drink in the morning , but no breakfast , and a thin meatless vegetable soup at noon . In the evening they received a small ration of moldy bread . Most prisoners saved some of the bread for the following morning . Nyiszli notes the daily intake did not exceed 700 calories , except for prisoners being subjected to live medical experimentation , who were better fed and clothed . Sanitary arrangements were poor , with inadequate latrines and a lack of fresh water . In Auschwitz II @-@ Birkenau , latrines were not installed until 1943 , two years after camp construction began . The camps were infested with vermin such as disease @-@ carrying lice , and the inmates suffered and died in epidemics of typhus and other diseases . Noma , a bacterial infection occurring among the malnourished , was a common cause of death among children in the Gypsy camp . 
 Block 11 of Auschwitz I was the prison within the prison , where violators of the numerous rules were punished . Some prisoners were made to spend the nights in standing cells . These cells were about 1 @.@ 5 m2 ( 16 sq ft ) , and held four men ; they could do nothing but stand , and were forced during the day to work with the other prisoners . Prisoners sentenced to death for attempting to escape were confined in a dark cell and given neither food nor water while being left to die . 
 In the basement were the " dark cells " , which had only a very tiny window and a solid door . Prisoners placed in these cells gradually suffocated as they used up all the oxygen in the cell ; sometimes the SS lit a candle in the cell to use up the oxygen more quickly . Many were subjected to hanging with their hands behind their backs for hours , even days , thus dislocating their shoulder joints . 
 = = Selection and extermination process = = 
 On July 31 , 1941 , Hermann Göring gave written authorization to Heydrich , Chief of the Reich Main Security Office ( RSHA ) , to prepare and submit a plan for Die Endlösung der Judenfrage ( the Final Solution of the Jewish question ) in territories under German control and to coordinate the participation of all involved government organizations . The resulting Generalplan Ost ( General Plan for the East ) called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia , for use as slave labor or to be murdered . In addition to eliminating Jews , the Nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan . Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians . Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists . 
 Plans for the total eradication of the Jewish population of Europe — eleven million people — were formalized at the Wannsee Conference on January 20 , 1942 . Some would be worked to death and the rest would be killed . Initially the victims were killed with gas vans or by Einsatzgruppen firing squads , but these methods proved impracticable for an operation of this scale . By 1942 , killing centers at Auschwitz , Sobibór , Treblinka , and other Nazi extermination camps replaced Einsatzgruppen as the primary method of mass killing . 
 The first mass exterminations at Auschwitz took place in early September 1941 , when 900 inmates were killed by gathering them in the basement of Block 11 and gassing them with Zyklon B. This building proved unsuitable for mass gassings , so the site of the killings was moved to the crematorium at Auschwitz I ( Crematorium I , which operated until July 1942 ) . There , more than 700 victims could be killed at once . In order to keep the victims calm , they were told they were to undergo disinfection and de @-@ <unk> . They were ordered to undress outside and then were locked in the building and gassed . After its decommissioning as a gas chamber , the building was converted to a storage facility and later served as an air raid shelter for the SS . The gas chamber and crematorium were reconstructed after the war using the original components , which remained on site . Some 60 @,@ 000 people were killed at Crematorium I. 
 Mass exterminations were moved to two provisional gas chambers ( Bunkers 1 and 2 ) , where the killings continued while the larger Crematoria II , III , IV , and V were under construction . Bunker 2 was temporarily reactivated from May to November 1944 , when large numbers of Hungarian Jews were exterminated . In summer 1944 the capacity of the crematoria and outdoor incineration pits was 20 @,@ 000 bodies per day . A planned sixth facility — Crematorium VI — was never built . 
 Prisoners were transported from all over German @-@ occupied Europe by rail , arriving in daily convoys . By July 1942 , the SS were conducting " selections " . Incoming Jews were segregated ; those deemed able to work were sent to the selection officer 's right and admitted into the camp , and those deemed unfit for labor were sent to the selection officer 's left and immediately gassed . The group selected to die , about three @-@ quarters of the total , included almost all children , women with small children , all the elderly , and all those who appeared on brief and superficial inspection by an SS doctor not to be completely fit . After the selection process was complete , those too ill or too young to walk to the crematoria were transported there on trucks or killed on the spot with a bullet to the head . The belongings of the arrivals were seized by the SS and sorted in an area of the camp called " Canada " , so called because Canada was seen as a land of plenty . Many of the SS at the camp enriched themselves by pilfering the confiscated property . 
 SS officers told the victims they were to take a shower and undergo delousing . The victims undressed in an outer chamber and walked into the gas chamber , which was disguised as a shower facility . Some were even issued soap and a towel . The Zyklon B was delivered by ambulance to the crematoria by a special SS bureau known as the Hygienic Institute . The actual delivery of the gas to the victims was always handled by the SS , on the order of the supervising SS doctor . After the doors were shut , SS men dumped in the Zyklon B pellets through vents in the roof or holes in the side of the chamber . The victims were dead within 20 minutes . Despite the thick concrete walls , screaming and moaning from within could be heard outside . In one failed attempt to muffle the noise , two motorcycle engines were revved up to full throttle nearby , but the sound of yelling could still be heard over the engines . 
 Sonderkommando wearing gas masks then dragged the bodies from the chamber . The victims ' glasses , artificial limbs , jewelry , and hair were removed , and any dental work was extracted so the gold could be melted down . The corpses were burned in the nearby incinerators , and the ashes were buried , thrown in the river , or used as fertilizer . 
 The gas chambers worked to their fullest capacity from April – July 1944 , during the massacre of Hungary 's Jews . Hungary was an ally of Germany during the war , but it had resisted turning over its Jews until Germany invaded that March . A rail spur leading directly into Birkenau was completed that May to deliver the victims closer to the gas chambers . From 14 May until early July 1944 , 437 @,@ 000 Hungarian Jews , half of the pre @-@ war population , were deported to Auschwitz , at a rate of 12 @,@ 000 a day for a considerable part of that period . The incoming volume was so great that the SS resorted to burning corpses in open @-@ air pits as well as in the crematoria . The last selection took place on October 30 , 1944 . 
 = = = Medical experiments = = = 
 German doctors performed a wide variety of experiments on prisoners at Auschwitz . SS doctors tested the efficacy of X @-@ rays as a sterilization device by administering large doses to female prisoners . Prof. Dr. Carl <unk> injected chemicals into women 's uteruses in an effort to glue them shut . Bayer , then a subsidiary of IG Farben , bought prisoners to use as research subjects for testing new drugs . Prisoners were also deliberately infected with spotted fever for vaccination research and exposed to toxic substances to study the effects . 
 The most infamous doctor at Auschwitz was Josef Mengele , known as the " Angel of Death " . Particularly interested in research on identical twins , Mengele performed cruel experiments on them , such as inducing diseases in one twin and killing the other when the first died to perform comparative autopsies . He also took a special interest in dwarfs , and he deliberately induced noma in twins , dwarfs , and other prisoners to study the effects . 
 Kurt Heissmeyer took twenty Jewish children from Auschwitz to use in pseudoscientific medical experiments at the Neuengamme concentration camp . In April 1945 , the children were killed by hanging to conceal the project . 
 A skeleton collection was obtained from among a pool of 115 Jewish Auschwitz inmates , chosen for their perceived stereotypical racial characteristics . Rudolf Brandt and Wolfram Sievers , general manager of the Ahnenerbe ( a Nazi research institute ) , were responsible for delivering the skeletons to the collection of the Anatomy Institute at the Reich University of Strasbourg in the Alsace region of Occupied France . The collection was sanctioned by Himmler and under the direction of August Hirt . Ultimately 87 of the inmates were shipped to Natzweiler @-@ <unk> and killed in August 1943 . Brandt and Sievers were later convicted in the Doctors ' Trial in Nuremberg . 
 = = = Death toll = = = 
 The exact number of victims at Auschwitz is difficult to fix with certainty , because many prisoners were never registered and much evidence was destroyed by the SS in the final days of the war . As early as 1942 , Himmler visited the camp and ordered that " all mass graves were to be opened and the corpses burned . In addition the ashes were to be disposed of in such a way that it would be impossible at some future time to calculate the number of corpses burned . " 
 Shortly following the camp 's liberation , the Soviet government stated that four million people had been killed on the site , a figure now regarded as greatly exaggerated . While under interrogation , Höss said that Adolf Eichmann told him that two and a half million Jews had been killed in gas chambers and about half a million more had died of other causes . Later he wrote , " I regard the figure of two and a half million as far too high . Even Auschwitz had limits to its destructive possibilities " . Gerald Reitlinger 's 1953 book The Final Solution estimated the number killed to be 800 @,@ 000 to 900 @,@ 000 , and Raul Hilberg 's 1961 work The Destruction of the European Jews estimated the number killed to be a maximum of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 Jewish victims . 
 In 1983 , French scholar George <unk> was one of the first to use German data on deportations to estimate the number killed at Auschwitz , arriving at a figure of 1 @,@ 471 @,@ 595 deaths , including 1 @.@ 35 million Jews and 86 @,@ 675 Poles . A larger study started by Franciszek Piper used timetables of train arrivals combined with deportation records to calculate at least 960 @,@ 000 Jewish deaths and at least 1 @.@ 1 million total deaths , a figure adopted as official by the Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau State Museum in the 1990s . Piper also stated that a figure of as many as 1 @.@ 5 million total deaths was possible . 
 By nation , the greatest number of Auschwitz 's Jewish victims were from Hungary , accounting for 438 @,@ 000 deaths , followed by Polish Jews ( 300 @,@ 000 deaths ) , French ( 69 @,@ 000 ) , Dutch ( 60 @,@ 000 ) , and Greek ( 55 @,@ 000 ) . Fewer than one percent of Soviet Jews murdered in the Holocaust were killed in Auschwitz , as German forces had already been driven from Russia when the killing at Auschwitz reached its peak in 1944 . Approximately 1 in 6 Jews killed in the Holocaust died at the camp . 
 The next largest group of victims were non @-@ Jewish Poles , who accounted for 70 @,@ 000 to 75 @,@ 000 deaths . Twenty @-@ one thousand Roma and Sinti were killed , along with 15 @,@ 000 Soviet POWs and 10 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 peoples of other nations . Around 400 Jehovah 's Witnesses were imprisoned at Auschwitz , at least 152 of whom died . An estimated 5 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 gay men prosecuted under German Penal Code Section 175 ( proscribing sexual acts between men ) were detained in concentration camps of which an unknown number were sent to Auschwitz ; of those sent to Auschwitz 80 percent died . 
 = = Escapes , resistance , and the Allies ' knowledge of the camps = = 
 Inmates were at times able to distribute information from the camp via messages and shortwave radio transmissions . The Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile in London first reported the gassing of prisoners on July 21 , 1942 . However , these reports were for a long time discarded as exaggerated or unreliable by the Allied Powers , Germany 's opponents . 
 Information regarding Auschwitz was also available to the Allies during the years 1940 – 43 by the accurate and frequent reports of Polish Home Army ( Armia Krajowa ) Captain Witold Pilecki . Pilecki was the only known person to volunteer to be imprisoned at Auschwitz concentration camp , spending 945 days there . He gathered evidence of genocide and organized resistance structures known as Związek <unk> <unk> ( ZOW ) at the camp . His first report was smuggled to the outside world in November 1940 , through an inmate who was released from the camp . He eventually escaped on April 27 , 1943 , but his personal report of mass killings was dismissed as exaggeration by the Allies , as were his previous reports . 
 The first information about Auschwitz concentration camp was published in winter 1940 – 41 in the Polish underground newspapers Polska <unk> ( " Poland lives " ) and Biuletyn Informacyjny ( " Newsletter " ) . From 1942 members of the Bureau of Information and Propaganda of the Warsaw area Home Army published in occupied Poland a few brochures based on the accounts of escapees . The first of these was a fictional memoir " Oświęcim . Pamiętnik <unk> " ( " Auschwitz : Diary of a prisoner " ) , written by Halina <unk> and published in April 1942 in Warsaw . Also published in 1942 were the books Auschwitz : <unk> <unk> ( " Auschwitz : camp of death " ) written by Natalia <unk> , and W <unk> ( " In Hell " ) by Zofia Kossak @-@ Szczucka , the Polish writer , social activist , and founder of Żegota . 
 In 1943 , the Kampfgruppe Auschwitz ( Combat Group Auschwitz ) was organized with the aim of sending out information about what was happening . Sonderkommandos buried notes in the ground , hoping they would be found by the camp 's liberators . The group also took and smuggled out photographs of corpses and preparations for mass killings in mid @-@ 1944 . 
 The attitude of the Allies changed with receipt of the detailed , 32 @-@ page Vrba – Wetzler report , compiled by two Jewish prisoners , Rudolf Vrba and Alfréd Wetzler , who escaped on April 7 , 1944 . This report finally convinced Allied leaders that mass killings were taking place in Auschwitz . Details from the Vrba @-@ Wetzler report were released to the Swiss press by diplomat George Mantello and printed on June 6 by The New York Times . Auschwitz Plans originating with the Polish government were provided to the U.K foreign ministry in August 1944 . 
 Starting with a plea from the Slovakian rabbi Chaim Michael Dov Weissmandl in May 1944 , there was a growing campaign by Jewish organizations to persuade the Allies to bomb Auschwitz or the railway lines leading to it . At one point British Prime Minister Winston Churchill ordered that such a plan be prepared , but he was told that precision bombing the camp to free the prisoners or disrupt the railway was not technically feasible . 
 In 1978 , historian David S. Wyman published an essay titled " Why Auschwitz Was Never Bombed " , arguing that the US Air Force had the capability to attack Auschwitz and should have done so ; books by Bernard Wasserstein and Martin Gilbert raised similar questions about British inaction . Since the 1990s , other historians have argued that Allied bombing accuracy was not sufficient for Wyman 's proposed attack , and that counterfactual history is an inherently problematic endeavor . The controversy over this decision has lasted to the present day in both countries . 
 = = = Individual escape attempts = = = 
 At least 802 prisoners attempted to escape from the Auschwitz camps , mostly Polish or Soviet prisoners fleeing from work sites outside the camp . 144 were successful . The fates of 331 of the escapees are unknown . A common punishment for escape attempts was death by starvation ; the families of successful escapees were sometimes arrested and interned in Auschwitz and prominently displayed to deter others . If someone did manage to escape , the SS picked ten people at random from the prisoner 's block and starved them to death . 
 A daring escape from Auschwitz was staged on June 20 , 1942 by four Polish prisoners : Eugeniusz Bendera ( auto mechanic at the camp ) , Kazimierz <unk> , Stanisław Gustaw <unk> , and Józef <unk> . After breaking into a warehouse , the four dressed as members of the SS @-@ Totenkopfverbände ( the SS units responsible for concentration camps ) , armed themselves , and stole an SS staff car , which they then drove unchallenged through the main gate . 
 On June 24 , 1944 , a Belgian @-@ Polish Jew , Mala <unk> , escaped with her Polish boyfriend , <unk> <unk> dressed in a stolen prisoner @-@ guard uniform . They were later recaptured , tortured , and executed by the SS . On July 21 , 1944 , inmate Jerzy Bielecki , dressed in an SS uniform and using a faked pass , managed to cross the camp 's gate together with his Jewish girlfriend , Cyla . Both survived the war . 
 = = = Birkenau revolt = = = 
 The Sonderkommando units were aware that as witnesses to the killings , they themselves would eventually be killed to hide Nazi crimes . Though they knew that it would mean their deaths , the Sonderkommando of Birkenau Kommando III staged an uprising on October 7 , 1944 , following an announcement that some of them would be selected to be " transferred to another camp " — a common Nazi ruse for the murder of prisoners . The Sonderkommando attacked the SS guards with stones , axes , and makeshift hand grenades . As the SS set up machine guns to attack the prisoners in Crematorium IV , the Sonderkommando in Crematorium II also revolted , some of them managing to escape the compound . The rebellion was suppressed by nightfall . 
 Ultimately , three SS guards were killed — one of whom was burned alive by the prisoners in the oven of Crematorium II — and 250 Sonderkommando were killed . Hundreds of prisoners escaped , but were all soon captured and executed , along with an additional group who participated in the revolt . Crematorium IV was destroyed in the fighting , and a group of prisoners in the gas chamber of Crematorium V was spared in the chaos . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In the decades since its liberation , Auschwitz has become a primary symbol of the Holocaust . Historian Timothy D. Snyder attributes this to the camp 's high death toll as well as to its " unusual combination of an industrial camp complex and a killing facility " , which left behind far more witnesses than single @-@ purpose killing facilities such as Chełmno or Treblinka . The United Nations General Assembly has designated January 27 , the date of the camp 's liberation , as International Holocaust Remembrance Day . In a speech on the fiftieth anniversary of the liberation , German chancellor Helmut Kohl described Auschwitz as the " darkest and most horrific chapter of German history " . 
 Notable memoirists of the camp include Primo Levi , Elie Wiesel , and Tadeusz Borowski . In If This Is a Man , Levi wrote that the concentration camps represented the epitome of the totalitarian system : 
 [ N ] ever has there existed a state that was really " totalitarian . " ... Never has some form of reaction , a corrective of the total tyranny , been lacking , not even in the Third Reich or Stalin 's Soviet Union : in both cases , public opinion , the <unk> , the foreign press , the churches , the feeling for justice and humanity that ten or twenty years of tyranny were not enough to eradicate , have to a greater or lesser extent acted as a brake . Only in the Lager [ camp ] was the restraint from below non @-@ existent , and the power of these small satraps absolute . 
 Psychiatrist Viktor Frankl drew on his imprisonment at Auschwitz in composing Man 's Search for Meaning ( 1946 ) , one of the most widely read works about the camp . An existentialist work , the book argues that individuals can find purpose even among great suffering , and that this sense of purpose sustains them . Wiesel wrote about his own imprisonment at Auschwitz in Night ( 1960 ) and other works , and became a prominent spokesman against ethnic violence . In 1986 , he was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize . 
 Camp survivor Simone Veil was later elected President of the European Parliament , serving from 1979 – 82 . Two Auschwitz victims — Maximilian Kolbe , a priest who volunteered to die by starvation in place of a stranger , and Edith Stein , a Jewish convert to Catholicism — were later named saints of the Roman Catholic Church . 
 = = = Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau State Museum = = = 
 On July 2 , 1947 , the Polish government passed a law establishing a state memorial to the victims of Nazism on the site of the camp . In 1955 , an exhibition opened displaying prisoner mug shots ; hair , suitcases , and shoes taken from murdered prisoners ; canisters of Zyklon B pellets ; and other objects related to the killings . UNESCO added the camp to its list of World Heritage Sites in 1979 . In 2011 , the museum drew 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 visitors . 
 Pope John Paul II performed mass over the train tracks leading to the camp on June 7 , 1979 . In the decades following his visit , controversies erupted over a group of Carmelite nuns founding a convent on the site and erecting a large cross originally used in the pope 's mass . Protesters objected to what they saw as Christianization of the site , while others argued that the cross 's presence effectively recognized the camp 's Catholic victims . 
 On September 4 , 2003 , three Israeli Air Force F @-@ 15 Eagles performed a fly @-@ over of Auschwitz @-@ Birkenau during a ceremony at the camp below . The flight was led by Major @-@ General Amir Eshel , the son of Holocaust survivors . On January 27 , 2015 , some 300 Auschwitz survivors and other guests gathered under a giant tent at the entrance to Auschwitz II Birkenau to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the camp 's liberation . Attendees included president of the World Jewish Congress Ronald Lauder , film director Steven Spielberg , and world leaders such as Polish president Bronisław Komorowski and King Willem @-@ Alexander of the Netherlands . As the number of remaining survivors decreases each year , the attendance at the event is unlikely to be surpassed at future major anniversaries . Commemorations also took place at Yad Vashem in Israel , Theresienstadt concentration camp , and in Berlin and Moscow . 
 Museum curators note that some visitors try to take artefacts as souvenirs , which is strictly prohibited and usually leads to criminal charges . For example , on June 22 , 2015 , two British men were convicted of theft for stealing apparel buttons and shards of decorative glass they found on the ground near the area where camp victims ' confiscated personal effects were stored . The men , both 17 years old , received probation and were fined £ 170 . Curators said that similar thefts happen once or twice a year . 
 = History of Poland ( 1945 – 89 ) = 
 The history of Poland from 1945 to 1989 spans the period of Soviet communist dominance imposed after the end of World War II over what had become the Polish People 's Republic . These years , while featuring general industrialization and urbanization and many improvements in the standard of living in Poland , were marred by social unrest and severe economic difficulties . 
 Near the end of World War II , the advancing Soviet Red Army pushed out the Nazi German forces from occupied Poland . In February 1945 , the Yalta Conference sanctioned the formation of a provisional government of Poland from a compromise coalition , until postwar elections . Joseph Stalin , the leader of the Soviet Union , manipulated the implementation of that ruling . A practically communist @-@ controlled Provisional Government of National Unity was formed in Warsaw by ignoring the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile based in London since 1940 . 
 During the subsequent Potsdam Conference in July – August 1945 , the three major allied powers ratified the colossal westerly shift of Polish borders and approved its new territory between the Oder – Neisse line and Curzon Line . Caused by the events of World War II , for the first time in its history Poland became an ethnically homogeneous nation @-@ state without prominent minorities . The new population pattern was a result of the destruction of indigenous Polish @-@ Jewish population in the Holocaust , the flight and expulsion of Germans in the west , resettlement of Ukrainians in the east , and the repatriation of Poles from Kresy . The new government solidified its political power over the next two years , while the communist Polish United Workers ' Party ( PZPR ) under Bolesław Bierut gained firm control over the country , which would become part of the postwar Soviet sphere of influence in Central and Eastern Europe . 
 Following Stalin 's death in 1953 , a political " thaw " in the Soviet sphere allowed a more liberal faction of the Polish communists , led by Władysław Gomułka , to gain power . By the mid @-@ 1960s , Poland began experiencing increasing economic , as well as political , difficulties . They culminated in the March 1968 political crisis and in December 1970 , when a consumer price hike led to a wave of strikes . The government introduced a new economic program based on large @-@ scale borrowing from the West , which resulted in a rise in living standards and expectations , but the program meant growing integration of Poland 's economy with the world economy and it faltered after the 1973 oil crisis . In 1976 , the government of Edward Gierek was forced to raise prices again , and this led to another wave of public protests . 
 This vicious cycle of repression and reform and the economic @-@ political struggle acquired new characteristics with the 1978 election of Karol Wojtyła as Pope John Paul II . Wojtyła 's unexpected elevation strengthened the opposition to the authoritarian and ineffective system of nomenklatura @-@ run state socialism , especially with the pope 's first visit to Poland in 1979 . In early August 1980 , a new wave of strikes resulted in the founding of the independent trade union " Solidarity " ( Polish Solidarność ) led by electrician Lech Wałęsa . The growing strength and activity of the opposition caused the government of Wojciech Jaruzelski to declare martial law in December 1981 . However , with the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev in the Soviet Union , increasing pressure from the West , and dysfunctional economy , the regime was forced to negotiate with its opponents . The 1989 Round Table Talks led to Solidarity 's participation in the 1989 election ; its candidates ' striking victory gave rise to the first of the succession of transitions from communist rule in Central and Eastern Europe . In 1990 , Jaruzelski resigned from the presidency of the Republic of Poland and , after the December 1990 elections , was succeeded by Wałęsa . 
 = = Creation of the Polish People 's Republic ( 1944 – 48 ) = = 
 = = = Wartime devastation , border and population shifts = = = 
 Before World War II , a third of Poland 's population was composed of ethnic minorities . Poland had about 35 million inhabitants in 1939 , but fewer than 24 million in 1946 , within the respective borders . Of the remaining population over three million were ethnic minorities , such as Germans , Ukrainians and Jews , most of whom would soon leave Poland . Poland suffered the heaviest proportionate human losses during World War II , amounting to 16 – 17 percent of its population . It is estimated that up to 6 million Polish citizens died from war @-@ related causes between 1939 and 1945 . The approximate figure includes 3 million Jewish @-@ Polish victims as part of the above total . The number of ethnically Polish victims was perhaps 2 million . 
 The historical minorities in Poland were most significantly affected , whereas Poland 's multiethnic diversity reflected in prior national censuses was all but gone within several years after the war . The Polish educated class suffered greatly . A large proportion of the country 's pre @-@ war social and political elite perished and a large proportion were dispersed . 
 Poland suffered catastrophic damage to its infrastructure during the war , which caused it to lag even further behind the West in its industrial output . The losses in national resources and infrastructure amounted to over 30 % of the pre @-@ war potential . Poland 's capital of Warsaw was among the most devastated cities – over 80 percent destroyed in the aftermath of the Warsaw Uprising of 1944 . Nonetheless , resulting from forced migration , there was a rapid increase in population to 23 @.@ 9 million shown in the first post @-@ war census of 14 February 1946 . The Polish state acquired more highly developed western territories and lost the more economically backward eastern regions . Already in 1948 the prewar level of industrial production was exceeded in global and per capita terms during the first Three @-@ Year Plan ( Plan <unk> ) fueled by the collective desire to rebuild shattered lives . 
 The implementation of the immense task of reconstructing the country was accompanied by the struggle of the new government to acquire centralized authority , further complicated by the mistrust a considerable part of society held for the new regime and by disputes over Poland 's postwar borders , which were not firmly established until mid @-@ 1945 . In 1947 Soviet pressure caused the Polish government to reject the American @-@ sponsored Marshall Plan , and to join the Soviet Union @-@ dominated Comecon in 1949 . The Soviet forces present engaged in plunder of the former eastern territories of Germany which were being transferred to Poland , stripping it of valuable industrial equipment , infrastructure and factories and sending them to the Soviet Union . 
 After the Soviet annexation of the Kresy territories east of the Curzon line , about 2 million Poles were " repatriated " ( moved or were transferred or expelled ) from these areas into the new western and northern territories east of the Oder @-@ Neisse line , which were transferred from Germany to Poland under the Potsdam Agreement . Others stayed in what had become the Soviet Union and more went to Poland after 1956 . Additional settlement with people from central parts of Poland brought the number of Poles in what the government called the Recovered Territories up to 5 million by 1950 . The former German population of 10 million had fled or was expelled to post @-@ war Germany by 1950 , of which 5 million were involved in involuntary transfers in the " Polish part of the operation " . The expulsion of the Germans was the result of the Allied decisions finalized in Potsdam . 
 With the repatriation of Ukrainians from Poland to the Soviet Union and the 1947 Operation Vistula dispersing the remaining Ukrainian minority , and with most of the former Jewish minority exterminated by Nazi Germany during the Holocaust and many of the survivors emigrating to the West and to newly created Israel , Poland for the first time became an ethnically homogeneous nation state . The government @-@ imposed and spontaneous movements of people amounted to one of the greatest demographic upheavals in European history . 
 Warsaw and other ruined cities were cleared of rubble — mainly by hand — and rebuilt with great speed ( one of the successes of the Three @-@ Year Plan ) at the expense of former German cities like Wrocław , which often provided the needed construction material . Wrocław , Gdańsk , Szczecin and other formerly German cities were also completely rebuilt . 
 Historian Norman Davies found the new Polish frontiers , from the Polish interests point of view , entirely advantageous , but realized at the cost of enormous suffering and specious justifications . The radically new Eastern European borders constituted a " colossal feat of political engineering " , but could not be derived from immemorial historical determinations , as claimed by the communist propaganda . 
 The Regained Territories Exhibition ( Polish : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , a propaganda exhibition celebrating " the restoration of the Recovered Territories to Poland " after the end of Second World War , was opened on 21 July 1948 by Bolesław Bierut and lasted for 100 days . About 2 million people visited the exhibition and the <unk> monument was built in front of the Centennial Hall in Wrocław . 
 = = = Consolidation of communist power = = = 
 Even before the Red Army entered Poland , the Soviet Union was pursuing a deliberate strategy to eliminate anti @-@ communist resistance forces to ensure that Poland would fall under its sphere of influence . In 1943 , following the revelation of the Katyn massacre , Stalin severed relations with the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile in London . However , to appease the United States and the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union agreed at the February 1945 Yalta Conference to allow the formation of a coalition government composed of the communists , including the Polish Workers ' Party ( Polska Partia <unk> ; PPR ) , as well as pro @-@ Western elements in exile and in Poland , and subsequently to arrange for free elections to be held . 
 After the prewar Communist Party of Poland was eliminated in Stalin 's purges in 1938 ( some five thousand Polish communists were brought to Russia and killed ) , a group of survivors , led by Marceli <unk> , Bolesław <unk> and Paweł Finder , convinced in 1941 the Soviets in Moscow of the need to reestablish a Polish party . The conspiratorial core of the new Polish Workers ' Party was assembled in Warsaw in January 1942 , and after the deaths or arrests of the above leaders there , Władysław Gomułka emerged as the PPR 's First Secretary by the end of 1943 . Gomułka was a dedicated communist in the national tradition of the Polish leftist movement , who loathed the Soviet practices he experienced while being trained in Russia and Ukraine in the 1930s , but was convinced of the historic necessity of alliance with the Soviet Union . He may have survived the purges because of being imprisoned in Poland for illegal labor @-@ organizing activities in 1938 – 39 . Throughout the German occupation , Gomułka remained in Poland and was not a part of the Moscow @-@ reared Stalin 's Polish circle . In Polish society of 1945 , Gomułka 's party was marginally small in comparison to other political groups . 
 With the beginning of the liberation of Polish territories and the failure of the Armia Krajowa 's Operation Tempest in 1944 , control over Polish territories passed from the occupying forces of Nazi Germany to the Red Army , and from the Red Army to the Polish communists , formally led by their Polish Committee of National Liberation ( Polski Komitet <unk> Narodowego ; PKWN ) , an early government , from late July 1944 in existence in Lublin . The Polish communists became the most influential Polish factor in the politics of emerging Poland , despite having minuscule popular support . PKWN recognized the legal continuity of the March Constitution of Poland , as opposed to the April Constitution . On September 6 , PKWN issued its momentous land reform decree , the consequences of which would fundamentally alter the antiquated social and economic structure of the country . Over one million peasant families benefited from the <unk> of the larger estates . 
 Thus from its outset , the Yalta decision favored the communists , who enjoyed the advantages of Soviet support within the Soviet plan of bringing Eastern Europe securely under the influence of the Soviet Union , as well as control over crucial government departments such as the security services ( this activity was initially dominated by Lavrentiy Beria 's Soviet NKVD ) . Beginning in the later part of 1944 , following the defeat of the Warsaw Uprising and the promotion of the populist program of the PKWN , the London exiled government 's delegation was increasingly seen by the majority of Poles as a failed enterprise , its political @-@ military organizations became isolated , and the resistance against the new communist political and administrative forces decisively weakened . The population was tired of the years of oppression and conflict and the ideas expressed in the PKWN Manifesto and their progressive implementation attracted widening social support . From 1944 in liberated areas , responding to promulgated slogans , workers spontaneously took over existing factory installations , established workers ' councils , undertook reconstruction , activation and production . A considerable labor struggle and compulsion were necessary for the PPR to claim the factories and enforce its own rules . 
 The PKWN was reshaped into the Provisional Government ( Rząd Tymczasowy Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej ; <unk> ) , which functioned from January 1945 . This government was headed by Edward <unk> @-@ Morawski , a socialist , but the communists , mostly non @-@ PPR Soviet employees , such as Michał Rola @-@ <unk> , held a majority of key posts . In April 1945 , a Polish @-@ Soviet treaty of friendship and cooperation was signed ; it severely limited the possibilities of future Western or émigré impact or internal cooperation with non @-@ communist political forces in Poland . The consecutive early Soviet @-@ influenced governments were subordinate to the unelected , communist @-@ controlled parliament , the State National Council ( Krajowa Rada Narodowa ; <unk> ) , formed by Gomułka and his PPR in occupied Warsaw in January 1944 . The communist governmental structures were not recognized by the increasingly isolated Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile , which had formed its own quasi @-@ parliament , the Council of National Unity ( Rada Jedności Narodowej ; <unk> ) . 
 The Yalta agreement stipulated a governmental union in Poland of " all democratic and anti @-@ Nazi elements " . The prime minister of the Polish government @-@ in @-@ exile , Stanisław Mikołajczyk , resigned his post in 1944 , and having accepted the Yalta terms went to Moscow , where he negotiated with Bierut the shape of a " national unity " government " . Mikołajczyk , along with several other exiled Polish leaders , returned to Poland in July 1945 . 
 The new Polish Provisional Government of National Unity ( Tymczasowy Rząd Jedności Narodowej ; TRJN ) — as the Polish government was called until the elections of 1947 — was established on 28 June 1945 . <unk> @-@ Morawski was kept as prime minister , Gomułka became first deputy prime minister and Mikołajczyk second deputy and minister of agriculture . The government was " provisional " and the Potsdam Conference soon declared that before a regular government is created , free elections must be held and a permanent constitutional system established . 
 The communists ' principal rivals were the veterans of the Armia Krajowa movement , Mikołajczyk 's Polish People 's ( Peasant ) Party ( Polskie Stronnictwo <unk> ; PSL ) , and the veterans of the Polish armies which had fought in the West . Of particular practical importance was Mikołajczyk 's People 's Party , because it was legally recognized by the communists and thus able to function within the political arena . The People 's Party wanted to prevent the communists from monopolizing power and eventually establish a parliamentary polity with a market economy by winning the promised elections . Mikołajczyk hoped that an independent Polish state , friendly with the Soviet Union , would be allowed to act as a bridge between the east and the west . 
 Soviet @-@ oriented parties , backed by the Soviet Red Army and in control of the security forces , held most of the power , concentrated especially in the Polish Workers ' Party under Władysław Gomułka and Bolesław Bierut . Bierut represented the influx of appointees to the Polish party coming ( during and after the war ) from the Soviet Union and imposed by the Soviets , a process accelerated at the time of the PPR Congress of December 1945 . The Party 's membership dramatically increased from perhaps a few thousand in early 1945 to over one million in 1948 . 
 As a show of communist rule and Soviet domination , sixteen prominent leaders of the Polish anti @-@ Nazi underground were brought to trial in Moscow in June 1945 . Their removal from the political scene precluded the possibility of a democratic transition called for by the Yalta agreements . The trial of the defendants , falsely and absurdly accused of collaboration with the Nazis , was watched by British and American diplomats without protest . The absence of the expected death sentences was their relief . The exiled government in London , after Mikołajczyk 's resignation led by Tomasz Arciszewski , ceased to be officially recognized by Great Britain and the United States on 5 July 1945 . 
 In the years 1945 – 47 , about 500 @,@ 000 Soviet soldiers were stationed in Poland . Between 1945 and 1948 , some 150 @,@ 000 Poles were imprisoned by the Soviet authorities . Many former Home Army members were apprehended and executed . During the PPR Central Committee Plenum of May 1945 , Gomułka complained that the Polish masses regard the Polish communists as the " NKVD 's worst agency " and Edward Ochab declared the withdrawal of the Soviet Army from Poland a high priority . But in the meantime tens of thousands of Poles died in the postwar struggle and persecution and tens of thousands were sentenced by courts on fabricated and arbitrary charges or deported to the Soviet Union . The status of Soviet troops in Poland was not legalized until late 1956 , when the Polish @-@ Soviet declaration " On the legal status of Soviet forces temporarily stationed in Poland " was signed . The Soviet Northern Group of Forces would be permanently stationed in Poland . 
 = = = <unk> elections , defeat of Mikołajczyk = = = 
 Stalin had promised at the Yalta Conference that free elections would be held in Poland . However , the Polish communists , led by Gomułka and Bierut , while having no intention of giving up power , were also aware of the limited support they enjoyed among the general population . To circumvent this difficulty , in 1946 a national plebiscite , known as the " 3 times YES " referendum ( 3 <unk> <unk> ; 3 × <unk> ) , was held first , before the parliamentary elections . The referendum comprised three fairly general , but politically charged questions about the Senate , national industries and western borders . It was meant to check and promote the popularity of communist initiatives in Poland . Since most of the important parties at the time were leftist or centrist – and could have easily approved all three options – Mikołajczyk 's Polish People 's Party ( PSL ) decided , not to be seen as merging into the " Government Bloc " , to ask its supporters to oppose one of them : the abolition of the Senate . The communists voted " 3 times YES " . The partial results , reconstructed by the PSL , showed that the communist side was met with little support ; in Kraków where the actual ballots were counted , only 16 % of the population voted in favor of their proposed Option One . However , the large @-@ scale electoral fraud and intimidation won the communists a claimed majority of 68 % in the carefully controlled poll , which led to the nationalization of industry and state control of economic activity in general , land reform , and a unicameral national parliament ( Sejm ) . 
 The communists consolidated power by gradually whittling away the rights of their non @-@ communist foes , particularly by suppressing the leading opposition party – Mikołajczyk 's PSL . In some widely publicized cases , the perceived enemies were being sentenced to death on trumped up charges — among them Witold Pilecki , the organizer of the Auschwitz resistance , and numerous leaders of Armia Krajowa and the Council of National Unity . Many resistance fighters were murdered extrajudicially , or forced to exile . The opposition members were also persecuted by administrative means . Although the ongoing persecution of the former anti @-@ Nazi and right @-@ wing organizations by state security kept some partisans in the forests , the actions of the Ministry of Public Security of Poland ( UB , Polish secret police ) , NKVD and the Red Army steadily diminished their numbers . The right @-@ wing insurgency radically decreased after the amnesty of July 1945 and faded after the amnesty of February 1947 . 
