 By 1946 , all rightist parties had been outlawed , and a new pro @-@ government Democratic Bloc was formed in 1947 which included only the Polish Workers ' Party and its leftist allies . On 19 January 1947 , the first parliamentary elections took place featuring primarily PPR and allied candidates and a potentially politically potent opposition from the Polish People 's Party , whose strength and role had already been seriously compromised due to government control and persecution . Results were adjusted by Stalin himself to suit the communists , whose bloc claimed 80 % of the votes . The British and American governments protested the poll for its blatant violations of the Yalta and Potsdam accords . The rigged elections effectively ended the multiparty system in Poland 's politics . After the referendum dress rehearsal , the vote fraud was much better concealed and spread into various forms and stages and its actual scale is not known . With all the pressure and manipulations , a NKVD colonel charged with the election supervision reported to Stalin that about 50 % of the vote was cast for the regime 's Democratic Bloc nationwide . In the new Sejm , out of 444 seats , 27 were given to Mikołajczyk 's party . Stanisław Mikołajczyk , who declared the results to be falsified and was threatened with arrest or worse , fled the country and other opposition leaders also left . Western governments did not act further and the Poles felt abandoned again . In the same year , the new Sejm created the Small Constitution of 1947 . Over the next two years , the communists monopolized their political power in Poland . 
 = = = Polish United Workers ' Party and its rule = = = 
 Additional force in Polish politics , the long @-@ established Polish Socialist Party ( Polska Partia <unk> , PPS ) , suffered a fatal split at this time , as the ruling Stalinists applied the salami tactics to dismember the opposition . Communist politicians cooperated with the left @-@ wing PPS faction led by Józef Cyrankiewicz , prime minister under new president Bierut from February 1947 . The socialists ' originally tactical decision to collaborate with the communists resulted in their institutional demise . Cyrankiewicz visited Stalin in Moscow in March 1948 to discuss the idea of a party merger . The Kremlin , increasingly uncomfortable with Gomułka 's communist party leadership , concurred , and Cyrankiewicz secured his own political place for the future ( until 1972 ) . In December 1948 , after the removal of Gomułka and imposition of Bierut as the communist Polish Workers ' Party chief , the PPR and Cyrankiewicz 's rump PPS joined ranks to form the Polish United Workers ' Party ( Polska <unk> Partia <unk> ; PZPR ) , in power for the next four decades . Poland became a de facto one @-@ party state and a satellite state of the Soviet Union . Only two other parties were allowed to exist legally : United People 's Party , a small farmers ' party , and the Democratic Party , a token intelligentsia party ( see also : political organization in Poland 1945 – 1989 ) . 
 As the period of Sovietization and Stalinism began , the PZPR was anything but united . The most important split among the communists occurred before the union with PPS , when the Stalinists forced Gomułka out of the PPR 's top office and suppressed his native communist faction . The PZPR had become divided into several factions , which espoused different views and methods and sought different degrees of the Polish state 's distinction and independence from the Soviet Union . While the official ideology , the Russian version of Marxism , was new to Poland , the communist regime continued , in many psychologically and practically important ways , the precepts , methods and manners of past Polish ruling circles , including those of the Sanation , the National Democracy , and the 19th century traditions of cooperation with the partitioning powers . 
 With Poland being a member of the Soviet Bloc , the Party 's pursuits of power and reform were permanently hindered by the restrictions and limits imposed by the rulers of the Soviet Union , by the resentful attitude of Polish society , acutely conscious of its lack of national independence and freedoms , and by the understanding of the Party managers that their positions would terminate once they stop conforming to the requirements of the Soviet alliance ( because of both the lack of public support and Soviet reaction ) . Poland 's political history was governed by the mutual dependence of the Soviets and the Polish communists . 
 The nomenklatura political elite developed . It comprised leaders , administrators and managers within the ruling party structure , in all branches of central and local government and in institutions of all kinds . The nomenklatura members were appointed by the Party and exercised political control in all spheres of public life , for example economic development , industry management or education . For the Party , the privileged nomenklatura layer was maintained to assure the proper placement of people who were ideologically reliable and otherwise qualified , but the revisionist dissidents Jacek Kuroń and Karol Modzelewski later described this system as a class dictatorship of central political bureaucracy for its own sake . The Polish public widely approved the many social undertakings of the communist government , including family apartment construction , child care , worker vacation and resorts , health care and full employment policies , but the special privileges granted nomenklatura and the security services were resented . 
 = = Stalinist era ( 1948 – 56 ) = = 
 = = = Removal of Gomułka , Stalinist repressions = = = 
 As in other Eastern Bloc countries , there was a Soviet @-@ style political purge of communist officials in Poland after 1948 , accused of " nationalist " or other " deviationist " tendencies . In September , Władysław Gomułka who opposed Stalin 's direct control of the Polish PPR party , was charged , together with a group of communist leaders who like Gomułka spent the war in Poland , with ideological departure from Leninism , and dismissed from the post of the Party 's first secretary . Gomułka , accused of " right @-@ wing nationalist deviations " , had indeed emphasized the Polish socialist traditions and severely criticized Rosa Luxemburg 's SDKPiL party for belittling Polish national aspirations . More insidiously , the Soviets claimed Gomułka 's participation in an anti @-@ Soviet international conspiracy . Following Bolesław Bierut 's order , he was arrested by the Ministry of Public Security ( MBP ) in early August 1951 and interrogated by Romkowski and Fejgin , as demanded by the Soviets . Gomułka was not subjected to physical torture unlike other communists persecuted under the regime of Bierut , Jakub Berman and other Stalin 's associates . Under interrogation he defiantly conducted his defense , threatened to reveal " the whole truth " if put on a trial , and remained unbroken . Gomułka was thus placed in prison without a typical show trial until released in December 1954 . Bierut , heading the victorious PPR faction whose members spent the war in the Soviet Union , replaced Gomułka as the PPR ( and then the PZPR ) leader . Gomułka remained protected by his Polish comrades to the best of their ability and the record of his sometime defiance came in handy when in 1956 there was an opportunity for the Polish party to reassert itself . 
 The Stalinist government was controlled by Polish communists originating from wartime factions and organizations operating in the Soviet Union under Stalin , such as the Union of Polish Patriots . Their leaders at that time included Wanda Wasilewska and Zygmunt Berling . Now in Poland , those who remained politically active and in favor ruled the country , aided by the MBP and Soviet " advisers " , who were placed in every arm of the government and state security as a guarantee of the pro @-@ Soviet policy of the state . The most important of them was Konstantin Rokossovsky ( Konstanty <unk> in Polish ) , defense minister of Poland from 1949 to 1956 , former marshal and war hero in the Soviet Armed Forces . Military conscription was introduced following a postwar hiatus and , under the careful tutelage of the Soviet advisers , the army soon reached its permanent size of 400 @,@ 000 men . 
 The Soviet @-@ style secret police and the central security office Urząd Bezpieczeństwa ( UB ) grew to around 32 @,@ 000 agents as of 1953 . At its Stalinist peak , there was one UB agent for every 800 Polish citizens . The MBP was also in charge of the Internal Security Corps , the Civil Militia ( MO ) , border guard , prison staff and paramilitary police ORMO used for special actions ( with over 100 @,@ 000 members ) . The ORMO originated from popular self @-@ defense efforts , a spontaneous reaction to the explosion of crime in the power vacuum of 1944 – 45 . In February 1946 the PPR channeled and formalized this citizen militia movement , creating its ostensibly crime control voluntary ORMO structure . 
 Primarily in Stalin 's lifetime , the public prosecutors and judges as well as functionaries of the MBP , Służba Bezpieczeństwa and the <unk> WP military police engaged in acts recognized by international law as crimes against humanity and crimes against peace . One example was the torture and execution of seven members of the 4th Headquarters of the combatant post @-@ Home Army Freedom and Independence ( WiN ) organization in the Mokotów Prison in Warsaw , after the official amnesty and their voluntary disclosure . All executed members of the WiN took active part in anti @-@ Nazi resistance during World War II . The postwar Polish Army , intelligence and police were full of Soviet NKVD officers who stationed in Poland with the Northern Group of Forces until 1956 . 
 Mass arrests continued during the early 1950s . In October 1950 , 5 @,@ 000 people were arrested in one night , in the so @-@ called " Operation K " . It was during these <unk> that the new constitution of July 1952 was promulgated and the state officially became the Polish People 's Republic . In 1952 over 21 @,@ 000 people were arrested , and according to official data , by the second half of 1952 there were 49 @,@ 500 political prisoners being held . In one very shocking case , the former Home Army commander Emil <unk> was subjected to several years of brutal persecution in the Soviet Union and Poland before being executed in February 1953 , just before Stalin 's death . 
 Resistance to the Soviet and native Stalinists was widespread among not only the general population but also the PZPR ranks , which limited the oppressive system 's damage in Poland to well below that of other European communist @-@ ruled countries . Political violence after 1947 was not widespread . The Church , subjected to partial property confiscations , remained largely intact , the marginalized to a considerable degree intelligentsia retained its potential to affect future reforms , the peasantry avoided wholesale collectivization and remnants of private enterprise survived . Gradual liberalizing changes took place between Stalin 's death in 1953 and the Polish October of 1956 . 
 = = = Nationalization and centrally planned economy = = = 
 In February 1948 , Minister of Industry Hilary Minc attacked the Central Planning Office of Poland as a " bourgeois " remnant , the Office was abolished and the Polish Stalinist economy was born . The government , headed by President Bierut , Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz and Marxist economist Minc , embarked on a sweeping program of economic reform and national reconstruction . Poland was brought into line with the Soviet model of a " people 's republic " and centrally planned socialist economy , in place of the façade of democracy and partial market economy which the regime had maintained until 1948 . 
 The relationships of ownership of the industry , the banking sector and rural property after the nationalization and the land reform were fundamentally altered . The changes , implemented in the name of egalitarianism , enjoyed broad societal approval and support . 
 The structure of the Polish economy was established in the late 1940s and the early 1950s . Soviet @-@ style planning begun in 1950 with the Six @-@ Year Plan . The plan focused on rapid development of heavy industry ( " accelerated industrialization " driven by Soviet military demands ) and ( eventually futile ) collectivization of agriculture . Among the main projects was the Lenin Steelworks and its supporting " socialist city " of Nowa Huta ( New Steel Mill ) , both built from the scratch in the early 1950s near Kraków , of which Nowa Huta soon became a part . The land seized from prewar large landowners was redistributed to the poorer peasants , but subsequent attempts at taking the land from farmers for collectivization met wide resentment . In what became known as the battle for trade , the private trade and industry were nationalized . Within few years most private shops disappeared from Poland . The regime embarked on the campaign of collectivization ( State Agricultural Farms were created ) , although the pace of this change was slower than in other Soviet satellites . Poland remained the only Eastern Bloc country where individual peasants would continue to dominate agriculture . A Soviet @-@ Polish trade treaty , initiated in January 1948 , dictated the dominant direction of Poland 's future foreign trade and economic cooperation . 
 In 1948 the United States announced the Marshall Plan initiative to help rebuild postwar Europe and thus gain more political power there . After initially welcoming the idea of Poland 's participation in the plan , the Polish government declined the American offer under pressure from Moscow . Also , following the Uprising of 1953 in East Germany , Poland was forced by the Soviet Union to give up its claims to compensation from Germany , which as a result paid no significant compensation for war damages , either to the Polish state or to Polish citizens . Poland received compensation in the form of land and property left behind by the German population of the annexed western territories . 
 Despite the lack of American aid , the East European " command economies " , including Poland , made some progress in bridging the historically existing wealth gap with the market economy driven Western Europe . Because of the capital accumulation the Polish national income grew in real terms by over 76 % and the agricultural and industrial production more than doubled between 1947 and 1950 . The economic transition and industrialization were accompanied and made possible by massive social transformations , as peasants migrated and were converted into city dwelling working class ( 1 @.@ 8 million between 1946 and 1955 ) and the country went through a period of rapid urbanization . The influx of cheap labor and the availability of the Soviet market facilitated an accumulation of resources , despite low productivity and insufficient investment in new technologies . The centrally planned socialist economies of Eastern Europe did relatively better than the West in terms of the post @-@ war years growth , only to sustain economic damage later , especially after the 1973 oil crisis . However , the rise in living standards caused by the earlier industrial dynamics was not comparable to that in the West . 
 = = = Reforms , resistance and beginning of de @-@ Stalinization = = = 
 The last Polish – Soviet territorial exchange took place in 1951 . Some 480 km2 ( 185 sq mi ) of land along the border were swapped between Poland and the Soviet Union . The adjustment was made to the decisive economic benefit of the Soviet side due to rich deposits of coal given up by Poland . Within eight years following the exchange , the Soviets built four large coal mines there , producing 15 million tons of coal annually . Poland increased its area of scenic wooded ecosystems in the western part of the Eastern Carpathian Mountains and its territory became even more compact . 
 The constitution of 1952 guaranteed universal free health care . The large state @-@ owned enterprises provided to employees an extensive range of welfare and leisure activities , including housing , sports facilities and hospitals , which started to diminish in the 1970s . In the early 1950s , the Stalinist regime also carried out major changes to the education system . The communist program of free and compulsory school education for all , and the establishment of new free universities , received much support . The communists screened out what facts and interpretations were to be taught ; history and other sciences had to follow Marxist views approved by ideological censorship . During 1951 – 53 , a large number of prewar professors who were perceived as " reactionary " by the new regime was dismissed from universities . The government control over art and artists deepened . The Soviet @-@ style socialist realism became the only formula accepted by the authorities after 1949 . Most works of art and literature presented to the public had to be in line with the views of the Party and thus present its propaganda ( see also : Socialist realism in Poland ) . 
 The reforms often brought relief for a significant part of the population . After the Second World War many people were willing to accept communist rule in exchange for the restoration of relatively normal life ; hundreds of thousands joined the communist party and actively supported the regime . Nonetheless , a latent popular discontent remained present . Many Poles adopted an attitude that might be called " resigned cooperation " . Others , like some of the remnants of the Home Army , the Freedom and Independence organization that originated from it and especially the National Armed Forces , actively opposed the communists , hoping for a World War III that would liberate Poland . Those who took up arms against the communist regime are collectively known as the cursed soldiers . Most had surrendered during the amnesty of 1947 , but brutal repressions by the secret police continued and some fought well into the 1950s . 
 The communists further alienated many Poles by persecuting the Catholic Church . The PAX Association created in 1947 and led by the former prewar far @-@ right activist Bolesław Piasecki , attempted to divide the Catholic movement and promote a communist rule @-@ friendly , collaborationist church . The PAX did not get very far in molding the Catholic public opinion , but published numerous books and officially approved daily Catholic press . In 1953 the Primate of Poland , Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński was placed under house arrest , even though before he had been willing to make compromises with the government . In the early 1950s , the war against religion by the secret police led to the arrest and torture of hundreds of Polish religious personalities , culminating in the Stalinist show trial of the Kraków Curia . The Office of the Council of Ministers ( government ) produced a list of regime @-@ approved bishops . See also : Polish anti @-@ religious campaign . 
 The constitution of 1952 on paper guaranteed all sorts of democratic rights and freedoms . In reality , the country was controlled extra @-@ constitutionally by the Polish United Workers ' Party , which used its own rules and practices to supervise all governmental institutions specified in the constitution . The post of President of Poland was replaced with the collective Council of State , but Bierut , the Party 's first secretary , remained the effective leader of Poland . In the future , the existence of a constitution with democratic provisions would give the opposition a legal tool and a way to pressure the regime . 
 Stalin died in 1953 , which was followed by a partial thaw in Poland . Nikita Khrushchev became first secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . The PZPR 's Second Congress deliberated in March 1954 . Cyrankiewicz , previously replaced by Bierut , was returned to the post of prime minister ( to remain in this capacity until December 1970 ) . The Six @-@ Year Plan was adjusted to increase production of items for popular consumption . Khrushchev , present at the Congress , asked Bierut for the reasons of the continuing detention of Gomułka , " a good communist " ; Bierut denied having specific knowledge of Gomułka 's imprisonment . 
 Following the defection to the West and revelations of its official Józef Światło , the Ministry of Public Security was abolished in December 1954 . Gomułka and his associates were freed from confinement and censorship was slightly relaxed . The two notable periodicals braving the prohibitions were Po <unk> [ Simply ] and Nowa Kultura [ The New Culture ] ( Po <unk> was closed down and its defenders brutally pacified in October 1957 , just one year after Gomułka 's rise to power ) . From early 1955 , the Polish press engaged in criticizing the Stalinist recent past and praising the older Polish socialist traditions ( social democratic Marxism and national independence ) . Political discussion clubs were on the rise throughout the country . The Party itself appeared to be moving in the social democratic direction . Leftist intellectuals , who had joined the Party because of their commitment to social justice , were heading in that direction more decisively and they soon gave rise to the Polish revisionism movement . 
 In February 1956 Khrushchev denounced Stalin 's cult of personality at the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party and embarked on a reform course . The de @-@ Stalinization of official Soviet ideology left Poland 's Stalinist hardliners in a difficult position . While unrest and desire for reform and change among both intellectuals and workers was beginning to surface throughout the Eastern Bloc , the death of Stalin 's ally Bierut in March 1956 in Moscow ( the veteran hardliner chief was attending the Soviet party 's congress ) exacerbated an existing split in the Polish party . In March Bierut was succeeded by Edward Ochab as first secretary . As the 20th Congress launched also a process of partial democratisation of Polish political and economic life , Ochab engaged in reforms intended to promote industrial decentralization and improve living standards . 
 The number of security agents was cut by 22 % and , by a widespread amnesty , 35 @,@ 000 detainees across the entire country were released . 9 @,@ 000 imprisoned for political reasons were freed in all . <unk> Stalinists , such as Jakub Berman , Roman Romkowski and Anatol Fejgin , were removed from power , some arrested . Berman , dismissed in May , by Gomułka 's decision was never prosecuted . Under Gomułka , a few perpetrators of Stalinist crimes were prosecuted and sentenced to prison terms . A much broader plan to charge the responsible and verify all of the security apparatus was formally presented by the prosecutors , but the action was not approved by Gomułka , who counted among the Stalinist persecution victims , as did his wife . Gomułka conducted some purges and reforms but did not want to destabilize the security system , now under his control , by wide @-@ ranging formal prosecutions . 
 = = Gomułka 's road to socialism ( 1956 – 70 ) = = 
 = = = Polish October = = = 
 Beginning on 28 June 1956 , workers in the industrial city of Poznań , who had repeatedly , but in vain petitioned the authorities to intervene and improve their deteriorating situation , went on strike and rioted in response to a cut in wages and changed working conditions . Demonstrations by factory workers turned into a huge city @-@ wide protest . 16 tanks , 2 armoured personnel carriers and 30 vehicles were brought to bear by a local military commander . Some of them were seized by the protesters , who also broke into the local government buildings . 57 people were killed and several hundred injured in two days of fighting . Several major military formations entered the scene , but the army 's role was mainly that of support of the police and the security forces action . At the Poznań radio station , Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz in his widely publicized speech warned and threatened the rioters : he " … who will dare raise his hand against the people 's rule may be sure that … the authorities will chop off his hand " . Of the 746 people officially detained during and in the aftermath of the disturbances , almost 80 % were workers . The authorities launched an investigation , attempting to uncover a claimed premeditated instigation and involvement by Western or anticommunist underground centers . Such efforts were unsuccessful and the events were found to have been spontaneous and locally supported . The Poznań revolt 's lasting impact was that it caused a deeper and more liberal realignment within the Polish communist party and its relationship to Moscow . 
 Deeply shaken by the protests and violence , the 7th Plenum of the Central Committee , held in July 1956 , split into two groups , the " ethno @-@ nationalist " Natolin and the " reformist " Puławy factions , named after the locations where they held their meetings . Natolin consisted largely of communist officials from the army and state security , including Mieczysław Moczar , Zenon Kliszko and Zenon Nowak , who advocated the removal of " Stalin 's Jewish protégés " , but were themselves of Stalinist sympathies . Puławy faction included communists of Jewish origin from the security apparatus , many of whom spent the war in the Soviet Union , disillusioned opportunists , and members of the old communist intelligentsia . Many were former Stalinist fanatics , past Gomułka 's enemies , now turned liberal reformers , supporters of Gomułka 's return to power . Both factions supported the Sovietization of Poland with somewhat different aims , but the staunch Stalinists lacked the support of Khrushchev . The regime turned to conciliation : wage rises and other reforms for the Poznań workers were announced . In the Party and among the intellectuals demands calling for wider reforms of the Stalinist system were becoming more widespread and intense . 
 Realizing the need for new leadership , in what became known as the Polish October , the Politburo chose Gomułka , who had been released from prison and reinstated in the Party , and the Central Committee 's 8th Plenum elected him without a Soviet approval the new first secretary of the PZPR . Subsequently Gomułka convinced the Soviet leaders that he would preserve the Soviet influence in Poland . Gomułka 's elevation was preceded by ominous Soviet military moves and an arrival of Soviet high @-@ level delegation led by Khrushchev , which flew into Warsaw to witness and influence the upheaval in the Polish party . After the sometimes confrontational encounters and negotiations , they soon returned to Moscow , where the Soviet leader announced on 21 October that the idea of an armed intervention in Poland should be abandoned . This position was soon reinforced by the pressure from communist China , which expressed its great power aspirations and demanded that the Soviets leave the new Polish leadership alone . On 21 October in Warsaw Gomułka 's return to power was accomplished , giving rise to the era of national communism in Poland . Gomułka pledged to dismantle Stalinism and in his acceptance speech raised numerous social democratic @-@ sounding reformist ideas , giving hope to the left @-@ wing revisionists and others in Polish society that the communist state was , after all , <unk> . The revisionists replaced and claimed to represent the worker movement , recently defeated in Poznań . The main goals in pursuit of which they engaged were political freedom and self @-@ management in state enterprises . However , the end of Soviet influence in Eastern Europe was nowhere in sight . On 14 May 1955 , the Warsaw Pact was signed in the Polish capital , to counteract the earlier establishment of NATO . 
 Many Soviet officers serving in the Polish Armed Forces were dismissed , but very few Stalinist officials were put on trial for the repressions of the Bierut period . The Puławy faction argued that mass trials of Stalinist officials , many of them Jewish , would incite animosity toward the Jews . Konstantin Rokossovsky and other Soviet advisers were sent home , and the Polish communist establishment and system took on a more independent orientation . Gomułka realized that the Soviets would never allow Poland to leave the Warsaw Pact because of Poland 's strategic position between the Soviet Union and Germany . He agreed that Soviet troops could remain in Poland and that no overt anti @-@ Soviet outbursts would be allowed . However , Gomułka formalized the Polish @-@ Soviet relations and the unprecedented , in the Soviet @-@ allied state relations , military cooperation treaty signed in December 1956 stated that the stationing of the Soviet forces in Poland " can in no way violate the sovereignty of the Polish state and cannot lead to their interference in internal matters of the Polish People 's Republic " . Poland avoided the risk of a Soviet armed intervention of the kind that crushed the 1956 Hungarian Revolution in October . Gomułka had a pragmatic awareness of political realities and for the duration of his career he rewarded the Soviets for his internal leeway with loyal support . In one act of defiance , the Polish delegation at the United Nations abstained in November 1956 from the vote condemning the Soviet intervention in Hungary . 
 There were repeated attempts by some Polish academics and philosophers , many related to the prewar Lwów – Warsaw school – such as Leszek Kołakowski , Stanisław <unk> and Adam <unk> – to develop a specific form of Polish Marxism . Their attempts to create a bridge between Poland 's history and Marxist ideology were mildly successful , although stifled due to the regime 's unwillingness to risk the wrath of the Soviet Union for deviating too far from the Soviet party line . Kołakowski , a leading revisionist , was verbally attacked by Gomułka in 1957 , expelled from the Party in 1966 and in 1968 had to emigrate . 
 = = = Scaling back of campaign promises = = = 
 Poland welcomed Gomułka 's rise to power with relief . Many Poles still rejected communism , but the realities of Soviet dominance dictated that Poland could not shake @-@ off communist rule . Gomułka promised an end to police terror , greater intellectual and religious freedom , higher wages , and the reversal of collectivization ; and to some degree he fulfilled these promises . Although little changed socioeconomically , the intelligentsia experienced significant gains felt as " a certain diversity and revitalization of elite public life " . The dissident Club of the Crooked Circle , a discussion group considered a precursor of the KOR , survived until 1962 . Other forms of collective community expression and a legally guaranteed academic autonomy lasted until the 1968 Polish political crisis . The academic discourse was in marked contrast to the treatment afforded to workers , whose self @-@ management councils that had spontaneously formed in 1956 were neutralized and brought under control of the Party by 1958 . In the communist era , because of their class role in the official ideology and leadership 's sensibilities , workers enjoyed some clout and a degree of protection of their economic interests , on the condition that they refrained from engaging in independent politics or publicly exerting pressure . 
 In October 1957 , Poland 's foreign minister Adam <unk> proposed a European nuclear @-@ free zone that would include the territories of Poland , West Germany , East Germany and Czechoslovakia . In August 1961 the new Berlin Wall cemented the division of Europe . 
 After the first wave of reform , Gomułka 's regime started to move back on their promises . The communist control over the mass media and universities was gradually tightened , and many of the younger and more reformist members of the Party were forced out . The reform @-@ promising Gomułka of 1956 turned into the authoritarian Gomułka of the 1960s . Although Poland enjoyed a period of relative stability in that decade , the idealism of the " Polish October " faded away . The decisions made at the XIII Plenum of the Central Committee ( 1963 ) meant a definite end of the post @-@ October liberalization period . The demise of Gomułka 's tactical allies , the Puławy faction , gradually replaced by Gomułka 's own people , was marked by the removal from the Politburo of Roman <unk> , the leading Jewish politician . 
 Poland under Gomułka 's rule was generally described as one of the more " liberal " communist regimes . However , Poles could still go to prison for writing political satire about the Party leader , as Janusz Szpotański did , or for publishing a book abroad . A March 1964 " Letter of the 34 " , signed by leading intellectuals and delivered to the office of Prime Minister Cyrankiewicz , criticized the worsening censorship and demanded a more open cultural policy , as guaranteed by the Constitution . Jacek Kuroń and Karol Modzelewski were expelled from the Party and from 1965 imprisoned for written criticism ( the Open Letter to the Party ) of the Party rule and pointing out the contradictory nature of the supposedly workers ' state . Kuroń and Modzelewski accused the regime of betraying the revolutionary cause ; like many younger Polish reformers , they spoke from leftist positions and were ideologically closely aligned with Western radicals of the 1960s . 
 In the following years , the regime became steadily less liberal and more repressive . Gomułka 's popularity declined as his initial vision lost its impetus . He reacted to increasing criticism by refusing to budge and insulating himself with the help of cronies , of whom Zenon Kliszko was the most influential . Kliszko 's advice in the long run turned out not to be constructive . Intellectuals , students and other Poles became disillusioned and frustrated with Gomułka regime 's record and his own self @-@ righteous style . Within the Party , the Minister of the Interior Mieczysław Moczar and his nationalist @-@ communist faction , " the Partisans " ( and the much broader system of political clientele known as <unk> ) , were looking for an opportunity to assert their dominance . 
 By the mid @-@ 1960s , Poland was starting to experience also economic difficulties and the appreciable thus far standard of living improvements were showing signs of stagnation ( during 1960 – 70 real wages for workers grew only by an average of 1 @.@ 8 % per year ) . The postwar economic boom was ending and the increasingly globalized and integrated world economy was becoming inhospitable to national development operating behind trade barriers . Similar to other communist regimes , Poland was spending too much on heavy industry , armaments and prestige projects , and too little on consumer production . The failure of Soviet @-@ style collectivization returned the collectivized land to the peasants , but most of their farms were too small to be prosperous and productivity in agriculture remained low . Economic relations with West Germany were frozen due to East German interference and resistance to economic integration . Gomułka attributed the signs of economic decline to the faulty implementation of the fundamentally correct directions issued by the central organs of the Party . He failed to appreciate the corrective role of the market , whose feedback could not be replaced by theoretical computations , planning and administrative decisions . On the other hand , pursuing conservative investment rather than consumption oriented economic policies , his regime generated no foreign debt . 
 From 1960 , the regime increasingly implemented anti @-@ Catholic policies , including harassment , atheistic propaganda , and measures that made carrying out religious practices more difficult . In 1965 , the Conference of Polish Bishops issued the Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops . In 1966 , the celebrations of the 1,000th anniversary of the Baptism of Poland led by the Primate , Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński and other bishops , who toured the country , turned into a huge demonstration of the power and popularity of the Catholic Church in Poland . In fierce competition , the state authorities conducted their own national celebrations , stressing the origin of the Polish statehood , but the display of the Polish Church hierarchy 's command of enormous crowds in a land ruled by the communists must have impressed the Catholic prelates in the Vatican and elsewhere . The state @-@ church dialogue , symbolized by the presence of the few Znak independent Catholic deputies in parliament , was rapidly deteriorating . 
 = = = 1968 events = = = 
 By the 1960s , rival regime officials and their followers , generally people of a younger generation , had begun to plot against the rule of Gomułka and his associates . Poland 's security chief Mieczysław Moczar , a wartime communist partisan commander , based his appeal on nationalistic rhetoric combined with anti @-@ intelligentsia and anti @-@ Jewish sentiments and became the chief challenger . The party leader in Upper Silesia , Edward Gierek , who had become involved with the communist movement as a teenage mining industry laborer in France , also emerged as a possible alternative leader . Gierek was favored by the more pragmatic and technocratic members of the nomenklatura . From January 1968 , Polish revisionist opposition and other circles were strongly influenced by the developing movement of the Prague Spring . 
 In March 1968 , student demonstrations at Warsaw University broke out in the wake of the government 's banning of the performance of a play by Adam Mickiewicz ( Dziady , written in 1824 ) at the National Theatre in Warsaw earlier that year , because of its alleged " anti @-@ Soviet references " . Subsequently state security and ORMO units attacked protesting university students in several major cities . 
 In what became known as the March 1968 events , Moczar used the spontaneous and informal celebrations of the outcome of the 1967 Arab – Israeli war and the Warsaw theatre affair as pretexts to launch an anti @-@ intellectual and anti @-@ Semitic ( officially designated as " anti @-@ Zionist " ) press campaign , whose real goal was to weaken the pro @-@ reform liberal party faction and attack other circles . Thousands of generally secular and integrated people of Jewish origin lost their employment and some 15 @,@ 000 Jews emigrated between 1967 and 1971 . Of prewar Europe 's largest Jewish community , only several thousand people remained in Poland . 
 Other victims were college students , many of whom were expelled from their institutions and had their careers destroyed , academic teachers who tried to defend the students and the academic institutions themselves : Warsaw University had several departments administratively dissolved . Liberal intelligentsia members , Jewish or not , were removed from the government and other places of employment . Leftist intellectuals and student leaders lost what was left of their faith in the ostensibly socialist government . Finally the Party itself was purged of many thousand suspect members , people who somehow did not fit the new environment of intolerance and hatred . The 1968 purges meant also the beginning of a large scale generational replacement of the Party executive membership , a process that continued into the early 1970s , after Gomułka 's departure . The prewar communist cadres were removed and people whose careers were formed in People 's Poland took their place , which , early in his term , gave Gomułka 's successor Edward Gierek one of the youngest in Europe elites of power . 
 The revisionist dissident prominence in the 1968 events overshadowed the equally significant awakening taking place among the working class of Poland . Gdańsk , where thousands of students and workers fought the police on March 15 , had the highest in the country rate of administrative detentions and court cases . The greatest proportion of people arrested and imprisoned in March and April 1968 in Poland were classified by the authorities as " workers " . 
 An internal attempt was made to discredit Gomułka 's leadership , but there were aspects of the ongoing witch hunt which he found to be to his advantage and he tolerated it until the societal damage wrecked by the Moczar movement had become irreversible . Gomułka 's regime reasserted itself and was saved by a combination of international and domestic factors , including the Moczar faction 's inability to take over the party and state apparatus . The Soviet Union , now led by Leonid Brezhnev , was preoccupied with the crisis in Czechoslovakia and not inclined to support personal changes in the Polish leadership . 
 In August 1968 , the Polish People 's Army took part in the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia . Some Polish intellectuals protested , and Ryszard Siwiec burned himself alive during the official national holiday celebrations . The Polish participation in the crushing of the Czech liberal communism ( called socialism with a human face , and , according to David Ost , constituting the crowning achievement of Marxist revisionism ) further alienated Gomułka from his former liberal supporters . But within the Party , the opposition to Gomułka faded and the 5th Congress of the PZPR in November reconfirmed his rule . Brezhnev , who attended the gathering , used the occasion to expound his Brezhnev Doctrine , a self @-@ granted Soviet right to forcefully intervene if an allied state strays too far from the fraternal course . 
 = = = Treaty with West Germany , food riots and the ousting of Gomułka = = = 
 In December 1970 Gomułka scored a major political victory when Poland obtained a West German recognition of the post @-@ World War II borders . The German side secured the right to emigrate to West Germany for the residents of Poland of German identity and to help financially those who stayed by granting pensions : hundreds of thousands eventually became affected . German Chancellor Willy Brandt , who signed the agreement , also asked on his knees for forgiveness for the crimes of the Nazis ( <unk> <unk> ) . His gesture was understood in Poland as being addressed to all Poles , although it was actually made at the site of the Warsaw Ghetto and was thus directed primarily toward the Jews . The notable reconciliation process between the Polish and German nations was initiated five years earlier , when the Polish Church issued its famous Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops , criticized then by the Polish government . 
 Gomułka felt proud and secure after the new treaty with West Germany , his milestone political achievement . It signified a lasting trend in Poland 's international policy : extricating the country from the disproportional dependence on Russia , and compensating the security vulnerability by building good relations with Germany . 
 But the event could not mask the economic crisis into which Poland was drifting , exacerbated by Soviet demands for more military spending . Although the system of fixed , artificially low food prices kept urban discontent under control , it caused further economic strain . In the long run the situation was unsustainable , and on 12 December 1970 ( just before Christmas ) , the regime suddenly announced massive increases in the prices of basic foodstuffs , the government 's main source of hard currency when exported . The new measures were incomprehensible to many urban workers , and their provocative timing ( the most intense food purchase period for most Polish families ) led to strong social reaction and ultimately Gomułka 's fall from power . 
 On 14 – 19 December 1970 mass demonstrations against the price rises broke out in the northern coastal cities of Gdańsk , Gdynia , Elbląg and Szczecin . In violent confrontations at those and other locations 19 public buildings were destroyed or damaged , including the Party headquarters in Gdańsk and Szczecin . The PZPR Central Committee was deliberating in Warsaw , but a smaller conference , led by Gomułka , issued an authorization for a limited use of lethal force to defend lives and property . Nevertheless , Gomułka remained determined to impose a forceful resolution of the conflict . Among the leaders of the Party who arrived on the coast and directed the local enforcement actions , initially in Gdańsk , were Zenon Kliszko and Stanisław <unk> . In Gdynia , the soldiers were instructed to prevent protesters from returning to factory buildings ; they fired into a crowd of workers emerging from commuter trains . Fatal confrontations took place also in Szczecin . The exact number of people killed in the region in December is not known , but is believed to be higher than the officially given figure of 44 . 
 The protest movement spread to other cities , leading to more strikes and causing angry workers to occupy many factories . The general strike across Poland was scheduled for December 21 , 1970 . 
 The Party leadership meeting in Warsaw on 20 December recognized the danger that the working class revolt presented to their system , and , in consultations with the disturbed Soviet leaders , proceeded with arranging the resignation of Gomułka , who was by then stressed out and ill . Several of his collaborators were also removed . Edward Gierek was drafted as the new first secretary . Mieczysław Moczar , another strong contender , was not trusted ( or was even blamed for the current debacle ) by the Soviets . 
 Another strike in Szczecin broke out on 22 January 1971 . In a risky move , Gierek went to Szczecin on 24 January and to Gdańsk the next day . He met the workers personally , apologizing for the mistakes of the past and saying that as a former worker himself he understood their plight and would now govern Poland for the people . Workers striking in Szczecin formulated demands in the area of freely elected worker councils and union representatives . Gierek agreed , but the authorities soon marginalized and eliminated the worker leaders from the legally existing structures and their places of employment . The February 1971 Łódź strikes followed and concentrated on economic demands . Afterwards prices were lowered , wage increases were announced , and sweeping economic and political changes were promised . 
 The Polish opposition movement , traditionally led by the intelligentsia , after the two heavy blows of 1968 and 1970 was in disarray and silent . Its tenuous connection with the " communist " party was permanently broken , but a new strategy had yet to emerge . However , already in 1971 Leszek Kołakowski published in the émigré Kultura journal a seminal article entitled Theses on Hope and <unk> . It attempted to theoretically necessitate and practically justify a civil democratizing resistance movement , valid even in the repressed and seemingly deadlocked society of state socialism . 
 = = Gierek decade ( 1970 – 80 ) = = 
 = = = Catching up with the West = = = 
 Gierek , like Gomułka in 1956 , came to power on a raft of promises that everything would be different from now on : wages would rise , prices would remain stable , there would be freedom of speech , and those responsible for the violence at Gdynia and elsewhere would be punished . Although Poles were much more skeptical than they had been in 1956 , Gierek was believed to be an honest and well @-@ intentioned man , and his promises bought him some time . He used this time to create a new economic program , one based on large @-@ scale borrowing from banks in the West — mainly from the United States and West Germany — to buy technology that would upgrade Poland 's production of export goods . This massive borrowing , estimated to have totaled over 24 billion US ( 1970s ) dollars during Gierek 's years , was used to re @-@ equip and modernize Polish industry , and to import consumer goods to give the workers more incentive to work . 
 For the next few years , the new regime optimistically engaged in reform and experimentation and for the first time many Poles could afford to buy cars , televisions and other consumer goods . The authorities made sure that the workers received proper wages . The peasants had their compulsory deliveries abolished , were paid higher prices for their products and free health service was finally extended to rural , self @-@ employed Poland . The intellectuals had censorship eased and Poles were able to travel to the West and maintain foreign contacts with little difficulty . Relations with the Polish emigrant communities were strengthened . There was some cultural and political relaxation and an improved freedom of speech environment , exercised for example by the respected weekly <unk> of the Polish Party . Massive investments were made , expected to both improve the standard of living of the various segments of society and establish an internationally competitive Polish industry and agriculture , based on purchases of Western technology . The modernized manufacturing would result in a vastly expanded export of Polish @-@ made products to the West , which in turn would generate hard currency to pay @-@ off the debts . 
 This " New Development Strategy " , based on import @-@ led growth , depended on the present global economic conditions and the program faltered suddenly because of worldwide recession and increased oil prices . The effects of the 1973 – 74 oil crisis produced an inflationary surge followed by a recession in the West , which resulted in a sharp increase in the price of imported consumer goods in Poland , coupled with a decline in demand for Polish exports , particularly coal . Poland 's foreign debt , absent at the time of Gomułka 's departure , rose rapidly under Gierek to reach a multibillion @-@ dollar figure . Continuing borrowing from the West had become increasingly difficult . Consumer goods began to disappear from Polish shops . The new factories built by Gierek 's regime also proved to be largely ineffective and mismanaged , as the basics of market demand and cost effectiveness were often ignored . The significant internal economic reform , promised by the Gierek team , had not materialized . 
 The Western credits thus helped spur industrial growth and helped Gierek 's policy of consumerism , but just for a few years . The industrial production grew by an average of 10 % per year between 1971 and 1975 ( the years remembered later by many older Poles as most prosperous , considering not only the communist period in Poland ) , only to dwindle to less than 2 % in 1979 . Debt servicing that took 12 % of export earnings in 1971 , rose to 75 % in 1979 . 
 In 1975 , Poland and almost all other European countries became signatories of the Helsinki Accords and a member of Organization for Security and Co @-@ operation in Europe ( OSCE ) , the creation of which marked the high point of the period of " détente " between the Soviet Union and the United States . Despite the regime 's promises that the freedoms listed in the agreement would be implemented in Poland , there was little change . However , the Poles were gradually becoming more aware of the rights they were being denied and emboldened by the knowledge of their government 's treaty obligations . 
 Gierek government 's growing difficulties led also to increased dependence on the Soviet Union , including tight economic cooperation and displays of submissiveness not seen under Gomułka 's rule . The constitution , amended in February 1976 , formalized the alliance with the Soviet Union and the leading role of the communist party . The language of the proposed changes was softened after protests by intellectuals and the Church , but the regime felt it needed additional authority given the indebtedness to the West and the deepening economic crisis . The divisive issues raised helped to coalesce the emerging circles of active political opposition . 
 Nevertheless , the regime of Gierek deemphasized the Marxist ideology and from his time the " communist " governments of Poland concentrated on pragmatic issues and current concerns . In Polish economic politics new lasting trends were initiated , such as the emphasis on individual initiative , personal aspirations and competition , which some interpreted as an attack on egalitarianism ( social inequalities were indeed increasing ) . Sections of the intelligentsia , nomenklatura and small business gave rise to the emerging middle class . The new " socialist " ways were less totalitarian , stressed innovation , modern management methods and engaged workers , all seen as necessary to push the outdated economy past the constant crisis stage . Poland of the 1970s became more open to the world and entered the global economy , which permanently changed society , creating at the same time a new type of crisis vulnerability . The opposition thinking , its promotion of society formed by active individuals , developed along complementary concepts . 
 = = = Renewal of social unrest and the rise of organized opposition = = = 
 As a result of the 1970 worker rebellion food prices remained frozen and were artificially low . The demand for food products exceeded the supply also because of the higher real wages , which already in the first two years of Gierek 's government increased more than during the entire decade of the 1960s . In June 1976 , in an attempt to reduce consumption , the government introduced a long @-@ announced and several times delayed , but radical price increase : basic foodstuffs had their prices raised by an average of 60 % , three times the rate of Gomułka 'a increases from six years before . The associated wage rises were skewed toward the better @-@ off part of the population . The result was an immediate nationwide wave of strikes , with violent demonstrations , looting and labor unrest at the Ursus Factory near Warsaw , in Radom , Płock and other places . The government quickly backed down and repealed the price rises , but the strike leaders were arrested and put on trial . A series of " spontaneous " large scale public gatherings , intended to convey the " anger of the people " at the " trouble @-@ makers " was staged by the Party leadership in a number of cities , but the Soviet pressure prevented further attempts at raising prices . Gierek 's cordial in the past relations with Leonid Brezhnev were now seriously damaged . Food ration cards , introduced because of the destabilized market in August 1976 , were to remain a feature of life in Poland for the duration of the People 's Republic . The regime 's retreat , having occurred for the second time in several years , amounted to an unprecedented defeat . Within the rigid political system , the government was neither able to reform ( it would lose control and power ) , nor to satisfy society 's staple needs , because it had to sell abroad all it could to make foreign debt and interests payments . This quandary , combined with the daily reality of the lack of necessities , facilitated the consolidation of organized opposition . 
 Because of the 1976 disturbances and the subsequent arrests , mistreatment and dismissals of worker militants , a group of intellectuals led by Jacek Kuroń , Antoni Macierewicz , Jan Józef Lipski and Adam Michnik founded and operated the Workers ' Defence Committee ( Komitet Obrony Robotników ; KOR ) . The aim of the KOR was to assist the worker victims of the 1976 repression . Working to support the spontaneous workers ' movements , the dissidents recognized the necessarily predominant role of the working class in resisting the abuses of the regime and the newly formed opposition increasingly became characterized by an alliance of intelligentsia with workers . The KOR , according to Modzelewski , constituted the core of organized opposition and a seed of political alternative ; clearing the way for other opposition formations , it engendered political pluralism . More opposition groups indeed soon followed , including the Movement for Defense of Human and Civic Rights ( <unk> ) , Free Trade Unions of the Coast ( <unk> ) and the Confederation of Independent Poland ( KPN ) . The periodical Robotnik ( " The Worker " ) was distributed in factories from September 1977 . The idea of independent trade unions was first raised by the Gdańsk and Szczecin workers striking in 1970 – 71 , but was later developed and promoted by the KOR and its leftist collaborators , which led to the establishment in 1978 of Free Trade Unions , the precursor of Solidarity . The KPN represented the minority at that time right @-@ wing of the Polish opposition scene . The opposition members tried to resist the regime by denouncing it for violating the Polish constitution , Polish laws and Poland 's international obligations . They fit within the post @-@ Helsinki Soviet Bloc human rights movements and for the most part had not yet developed more radical , anti @-@ system orientations . 
 For the rest of the 1970s , resistance to the regime grew , assuming also the forms of student groups , clandestine newspapers and publishers , importing books and newspapers , and even a " Flying University " . The regime practiced various forms of repression against the budding reform movements . 
 = = = Polish Pope John Paul II = = = 
 On 16 October 1978 , Poland experienced what many Poles literally believed to be a miracle . Cardinal Karol Wojtyła , the archbishop of Kraków , was elected pope at the Vatican , taking the name John Paul II . The election of a Polish pope had an electrifying effect on what was at that time one of the last idiosyncratically Catholic countries in Europe . When John Paul toured Poland in June 1979 , half a million people came to welcome him in Warsaw , and in the next eight days , about ten million Poles attended at least one of his numerous outdoor masses . Overnight , John Paul became the most important person in Poland , leaving the regime not so much opposed as ignored . However , John Paul did not call for rebellion ; instead , he encouraged the creation of an " alternative Poland " of social institutions independent of the government , so that when the next crisis came , the nation would present a united front . 
 = = = Polish emigration = = = 
 The government in exile in London , unrecognized since the end of World War II , ridiculed by the communists , to many Poles was of great symbolic importance . Under President Edward Raczyński it overcame years of internal squabbles , and , after the election of the Polish pope and at the time of the increasingly assertive Polish opposition , improved its image and standing . 
 The large Polish emigrant communities in North America , Western Europe , and elsewhere , were politically active and lent significant support to those struggling in the country . The staunchly anti @-@ communist American Polonia and other Poles felt grateful for the leadership of President Ronald Reagan . Of the Polish institutions in the West the most important were the Radio Free Europe , whose Polish section was run by Jan Nowak @-@ <unk> , and the monthly literary Kultura magazine in Paris , led by Jerzy Giedroyc and Juliusz <unk> . 
 = = Final decade of the Polish People 's Republic ( 1980 – 90 ) = = 
 = = = Failing economy and labor unrest of 1980 = = = 
 By 1980 , the authorities had no choice but to make another attempt to raise consumer prices to realistic levels , but they knew that doing so would likely spark another worker rebellion . Western bankers providing loans to the Polish government at a meeting at the Bank <unk> in Warsaw on 1 July 1980 made it clear that low prices of consumer goods could no longer be subsidized by the state . The government gave in and on 1 July announced a system of gradual but continuous price rises , particularly for meat . A wave of strikes and factory occupations began at once , with the biggest ones taking place in Lublin in July 1980 . 
 The strikes reached the politically sensitive Baltic Sea coast , with a sit @-@ down strike at the Lenin Shipyard in Gdańsk beginning on 14 August . Among the leaders of this strike were Anna Walentynowicz and Lech Wałęsa , a long @-@ fired shipyard electrician who headed the strike committee . A list of 21 demands was formulated by the Inter @-@ Enterprise Strike Committee on 17 August . The strike wave spread along the coast , closing the ports and bringing the economy to a halt . With the assistance of the activists from the KOR , and the support of many intellectuals ( an Expert Commission was established to aid with the negotiations ) , the workers occupying the various factories , mines and shipyards across Poland organized as a united front . They were not limiting their efforts to seeking economic improvements , but made and stuck to the crucial demand , an establishment of trade unions independent of government control . Among other issues raised were rights for the Church , the freeing of political prisoners and an improved health service . 
 The Party leadership was faced with a choice between repressions on a massive scale and an amicable agreement that would give the workers what they wanted , and thus quieten the aroused population . They chose the latter . On 31 August Wałęsa signed the Gdańsk Agreement with Mieczysław Jagielski , a member of the Party Politburo . The Agreement acknowledged the right of employees to associate in free trade unions , obliged the government to take steps to eliminate censorship , abolished weekend work , increased the minimum wage , improved and extended welfare and pensions , and increased autonomy of industrial enterprises , where a meaningful role was to be played by workers ' self @-@ management councils . The rule of the Party was significantly weakened ( to a " leading role in the state " , not society ) but nonetheless explicitly recognized , together with Poland 's international alliances . It was seen as necessary to prevent Soviet intervention by more moderate forces , including leading intelligentsia advisers and the Catholic hierarchy . The fact that all these economic concessions were completely unaffordable escaped attention in the wave of national euphoria that swept the country . In addition to the Gdańsk Agreement , similar documents were signed at other centers of strike activity , in Szczecin ( Szczecin Agreement ) , Jastrzębie @-@ Zdrój , and at Katowice Steelworks . The period that started afterwards is often called the first part of the " Polish carnival " – with the second one taking place in the late 1980s . 
 = = = Solidarity = = = 
 The Gdańsk Agreement , an aftermath of the August 1980 labor strike , was an important milestone . It led to a national gathering of independent union representatives ( <unk> Organizing Committees , <unk> ) on 17 September 1980 in Gdańsk and the formation of the trade union " Solidarity " ( Polish Solidarność ) , founded on that day and led by Lech Wałęsa . The ideas of the independent union movement spread rapidly throughout Poland ; Solidarity structures were formed in most places of employment and in all regions . Having been able to overcome the regime 's efforts to thwart or derail its activities and status , Solidarity was finally registered in court as a national labor union in November 1980 . Early in 1981 , a network of union organizations at the enterprise @-@ level was established ; it included the country 's main industrial complexes such as the Lenin Steelworks in Kraków and the Silesian mines . 
 Initially , in the KOR 's tradition , Solidarity was an ostensibly non @-@ political movement aiming at reconstruction of civil society . Suddenly thrust into legal existence and prominence in 1980 , Solidarity and the Polish opposition in general lacked a constructive program or consensus regarding further developments . In 1981 , Solidarity accepted the necessity of a political role and helped form a broad anti @-@ ruling system social movement , dominated by the working class and with members ranging from people associated with the Catholic Church to non @-@ communist leftists . The union was backed by intellectual dissidents , including the KOR , and adhered to a policy of nonviolent resistance . According to Karol Modzelewski , the Solidarity of 1980 – 81 was permeated by the idea of brotherhood between intelligentsia and workers . In the areas of ideology and politics , Solidarity followed the lead of its associated opposition intellectuals . 
 The activity of Solidarity , although concerned with trade union matters ( such as replacing the nomenklatura @-@ run system with worker self @-@ management in enterprise @-@ level decision making ) , was widely regarded as the first step towards dismantling the regime 's dominance over social institutions , professional organizations and community associations . Because of conditions specific to state socialist society , Solidarity soon lost its labor focus and became a universalist movement that emphasized civic rights and open society . Removing the ruling formation or breaking the dependence on the Soviet Union was not on the agenda . Using strikes and other tactics , the union sought to block government policies . The aims of the original , so @-@ called First Solidarity ( 1980 – 81 ) , were to reform socialism , not to introduce industrial private ownership or promote capitalism in general . Solidarity was an egalitarian and collectivist movement . It did not postulate any re @-@ privatization of state @-@ owned or small rural property , as such concepts were beyond the <unk> horizon of Polish society . Solidarity was socialist and social justice was its goal . The First Solidarity upheaval could be viewed also as working people revolting against the emerging capitalist features of the economic order that diminished their role in Gierek @-@ led society , combined with the " anti @-@ politics " approach ( building civil society " without reference to both state and market " ) embraced at that time by their allied intellectual leaders . People of decidedly anticommunist or anti @-@ PZPR orientations constituted a relatively small minority within the First Solidarity organization , which accommodated one million communist party members among its ranks . Apart from workers , both individual farmers and students created their own independent organizations : Rural Solidarity and Independent Students ' Union . They were formally recognized by the authorities only after strike actions conducted by activists of both movements in January 1981 . 
 In September 1980 , in the aftermath of the labor agreements , First Secretary Gierek was removed from office and replaced as Party leader by Stanisław Kania . Kania made promises of the sort that Gomułka and Gierek had made when each came power . But whatever goodwill the new leader gained , it lasted for an even shorter period than it had been the case in 1956 and 1971 , because there was no way that the regime could have kept the promises it had made at Gdańsk , even if it wanted to . The authorities were still trapped by the contradiction : if they followed economic necessity , they would generate political instability . GNP fell in 1979 by 2 % , in 1980 by 8 % and in 1981 by 15 – 20 % . 
 At the communist summit in December 1980 in Moscow Kania argued with Leonid Brezhnev and other Warsaw Pact leaders , who pressed for an immediate military intervention in Poland . Kania and Minister of Defense Wojciech Jaruzelski declared their determination to fight the " counterrevolution " in Poland on their own . In regard to Solidarity , they felt , there was still a chance for its healthy , working class current to prevail , not the KOR @-@ instigated anti @-@ socialist , troublemaking elements . President Jimmy Carter and President @-@ elect Ronald Reagan made urgent phone calls to Brezhnev and the intervention was postponed . In the meantime Solidarity , not quite aware of the looming danger , did its revolutionary work , practicing democracy in the union movement and pushing for sovereign society in a number of ways . The autonomous labor unions , united under the Solidarity banner , strove to " recapture public life from the monopoly control of the Party " . On 16 December 1980 , a monument dedicated to the memory of the victims of the 1970 protests on the coast was officially unveiled in Gdańsk in a ceremony that marked the high point in the ascent of Solidarity . 
 Among the mass protests that occurred at that time were the winter 1981 general strike in Bielsko @-@ Biała , the nationwide warning strike in the spring of that year and hunger demonstrations in summer . The warning strike took place in the aftermath of the Bydgoszcz events ( March 1981 ) , during which the authorities resorted to violence to suppress Solidarity activists . The planned general strike was called off after Solidarity 's questionable deal with the government , but the negotiators worked under a threat of Soviet intervention . Wałęsa 's compromise prevented a confrontation with the regime or its foreign allies , at the price of the protest movement 's loss of some of its dynamics . During the months that followed Solidarity kept getting weaker and its popular support was no longer capable of mass determined action . 
 Minister Jaruzelski became also prime minister in February 1981 . In June , the Soviet Central Committee pressured the Polish Party for a leadership change , but Jaruzelski received strong support from the military members of the Polish Central Committee . The extraordinary IX Congress of the PZPR took place in July . Kania was reelected the Party 's first secretary , while the organization 's internal reformers suffered a defeat . 
 As the economic situation kept deteriorating and the regime avoided implementation of the agreed reforms , the government and Solidarity representatives met in early August to discuss the outstanding issues . The talks ended in disagreement . During a conference of Solidarity 's National Commission ( a central representative policy making body ) that followed , Modzelewski , Kuroń and others proposed a democratic transformation and practical arrangements by which the Union would take upon itself a major political role , participating in governing the country , accepting responsibility for the outcome and keeping social peace , thus relieving the ( still ) ruling Party of some of its burdens . Such a deal was seen as the only constructive way forward , but it would require government partners interested in a negotiated solution . 
 The existence of Solidarity and the political liberties that the movement brought paralyzed the authoritarian state and the state @-@ controlled economy . Everyday life was becoming increasingly unbearable and the public displayed sentiments of extreme volatility . The hostility of the nomenklatura toward Solidarity was rapidly increasing . 
 At the State Defense Committee meeting on September 13 ( the time of the Soviet Exercise <unk> @-@ 81 maneuvers and of renewed pressure on the Polish leadership ) , Kania was warned by the uniformed cadres that the progressing counterrevolution must be terminated by an imposition of martial law . The PZPR regional secretaries soon issued the same demands . Under the circumstances , in October First Secretary Kania stepped down and Prime Minister Jaruzelski became also the Party chief . 
 In September and October , the First Congress of Solidarity deliberated in Gdańsk . Wałęsa faced activist opposition and was barely elected chairman of the organization . The delegates passed a radical reform program in which the world " social " or " socialized " was repeated 150 times . The Congress issued a provocative call for workers in other East European countries to follow in Solidarity 's footsteps . Locally authorized , increasingly " political " strikes continued . They were characterized as " wildcats " by Wałęsa , who desperately tried to impose discipline from the center and reach an accord with the state , meeting General Jaruzelski and Catholic Primate Józef <unk> on 4 November . At the time of the regime 's re @-@ energized efforts to reduce Solidarity 's role , the Union had nearly ten million members — almost four times as many as the ruling Party . Militant mood was displayed and unrealistic demands made at the meeting of the partially represented National Commission on 3 December , but the proceedings were wiretapped by the authorities , who broadcast the recordings previously manipulated to their advantage . 
 For its part the government , not consulting Solidarity , adopted a plan of economic measures that could only be implemented by force and asked parliament for extraordinary authority . In early December , Jaruzelski was pressured by his generals and colonels for an immediate forceful action and their demands were repeated at the Politburo meeting on 10 December . On 11 and 12 December Solidarity 's National Commission declared 17 December the day of countrywide protest . Neither the exhausted but radicalized Solidarity nor the ruling establishment was willing or able to back down and , in the era of Brezhnev , there could be no peaceful resolution to the situation that developed . The Soviets now expressed a preference for the conflict to be resolved by the Polish authorities , but Poland , according to Karol Modzelewski , was lucky to avoid a carnage of foreign intervention . Others , including the historian Antoni Dudek , feel that there was no sufficient justification for the imposition of martial law that followed . 
 = = = <unk> of martial law = = = 
 On 13 December 1981 , claiming that the country was on the verge of economic and civil breakdown , and alleging a danger of Soviet intervention , General Wojciech Jaruzelski began a crack @-@ down on Solidarity . Martial law was declared , the free labor union was suspended and most of its leaders detained . Several thousand citizens were interned or imprisoned and much larger numbers were subjected to various forms of harassment . Polish state militia ( <unk> <unk> , the police ) and paramilitary riot police <unk> suppressed the strike action and demonstrations . Military forces entered industrial enterprises to clamp down on the independent union movement . A series of violent attacks included the pacification of Wujek Coal Mine during which 9 people were killed . The martial law offensive was directed primarily against workers and their Union ; they , rather than intelligentsia activists , were the object of the most brutal treatment . The authorities succeeded in imposing on members of Solidarity an individual and collective trauma , from which the broken mass movement would not be able to recover . The Catholic Church strove to exert on Solidarity a moderating influence both before and after the martial law . 
 Initially , the regime leadership intended to remold Solidarity into a compliant union , stripped of its intelligentsia advisers and compatible with the state socialist system . The failure to incite most ranking Solidarity leaders to collaborate , especially Wałęsa 's refusal to extend any cooperation along this course of action , resulted in the government adopting the goal of total liquidation of the union movement . 
 Strikes and protests followed , but were not nearly as widespread as those of August 1980 . The last mass street demonstrations that Solidarity was able to muster occurred on 31 August 1982 , the second anniversary of the Gdańsk agreements . The " Military Council of National Salvation " banned Solidarity officially on 8 October . Martial law was formally lifted in July 1983 , though many heightened controls on civil liberties and political life , as well as food rationing , remained in place throughout the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1980s . With all the restrictions , however , " the official cultural realm remained far more open than it was prior to 1980 " and " cultural policy continued to be the most open in all of Eastern Europe " . Among the concessions in the civil and political rights area granted by the troubled regime were the establishment of the Constitutional Tribunal in 1982 and of the Polish Ombudsman office in 1987 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s and even as late as 1987 , Solidarity was seen by many , including most of its activists , as likely a thing of the past . It persisted solely as a rather small underground organization , supported by various international institutions , from the Catholic Church to the Central Intelligence Agency . When most senior Solidarity figures were interned or otherwise neutralized by the authorities , Zbigniew Bujak , head of the Union 's Warsaw branch , remained in hiding and was the leader of the clandestine organization until his arrest in 1986 . But the post @-@ martial law general public showed signs of tiredness and disappointment , as it had become apparent that Solidarity was not a united front . 
 = = = " Market socialism " and systemic implosion = = = 
 During the chaotic years of Solidarity and martial law , Poland entered a decade of economic crisis more pronounced than in Gierek 's years . Work on the major unfinished projects that had begun in the 1970s drained the available investment outlays , little money was left for replacing obsolete production equipment and the manufactured goods were not competitive on the world market . Managerial ineffectiveness , bad organization of production and shortages of inputs and raw materials were among the factors that contributed to further deterioration of workers ' morale . 640 @,@ 000 people of productive age left the country between 1981 and 1988 . 
 The regime of General Jaruzelski unsuccessfully tried various expedients to improve the performance of the economy . To gather foreign currency , the government established in all Polish cities a chain of state @-@ run <unk> stores , where goods could only be bought with Western currency , as well as issued its own ersatz U.S. currency ( bony ) . The government allowed more small @-@ scale private enterprises to function , departing further from the ' socialist ' model of economy . Ideological considerations were abandoned and priority was given to pragmatic issues and moves . Searching for ways to improve the economy and conscious of its alienation from the industrial working class , the regime turned toward market reforms with an increasingly significant elite @-@ oriented liberal ( from the mid @-@ 1980s ) component . <unk> , formalized by a 1988 statute on economic activity , was a process that would continue past the mid @-@ 1990s . <unk> processes may have been initiated by Deputy Prime Minister Zdzisław Sadowski and the government of Zbigniew Messner , then developed further under Minister Mieczysław Wilczek ( author of the statute ) and Mieczysław Rakowski 's government . " Market socialism " was introduced , as the regime leaders actually lost their faith in the socialist system and even the nomenklatura managers were threatened by the declining economy . The enterprises were to be made independent , self @-@ financing and self @-@ managed , which included workers ' councils that were resistant to restructuring . Owners of private businesses did well in the final years of the People 's Republic and the number of such entities increased . Foreign investment was also encouraged , but limited <unk> failed to deliver an economic turnaround . The practice of centralized economic decision making had not been overcome , while the newly autonomous enterprises moved toward a rather spontaneous , chaotic partial privatization of dubious legality that included elements of kleptocracy and had a significant middle @-@ level nomenklatura component . On a more basic level , countless ordinary Poles took advantage of the changing attitudes and became involved in a great variety of income @-@ producing activities . 
 The deepening economic crisis caused a marked deterioration in quality of life of ordinary citizens and resulted in increasing political instability . Rationing and queuing became a way of life , with ration cards ( <unk> ) necessary to buy basic consumer staples such as milk and sugar . As Western institutions were no longer willing to extend credit policies to the de facto bankrupt Polish government , access to goods the Poles needed became even more restricted . Most of the available scarce resources of Western currency had to be used to pay the crushing rates on Poland 's foreign debt , which reached US $ 23 billion by 1980 and increased to US $ 40 billion under General Jaruzelski . The government , which controlled all official foreign trade , responded by continuing to maintain a highly artificial exchange rate with Western currencies . The exchange rate worsened distortions in the economy at all levels , resulting in a growing black market and the development of a shortage economy . The omnipresent and destructive underground economy was characterized by phenomena such as bribery , waiting lists , speculation , direct exchanges between enterprises and large percentages of personal incomes deriving from secondary activities . Societal degradation was accompanied by unprecedented deterioration in the areas of biological environment and physical and mental health , which included steadily increasing mortality rates . In the late 1980s , the PZPR feared another social explosion because of high inflation , depressed living standards and deepening public anger and frustration . The authorities themselves , facing an increasingly disorderly and unmanageable system , felt perplexed and powerless . 
 = = = Politics of the People 's Republic 's last years and the transition period = = = 
 = = = = Toward Round Table and semi @-@ free elections = = = = 
 In September 1986 , the government declared a general amnesty and began work on a number of meaningful reforms . Given the liberalized political environment , Wałęsa was urged to reconvene the National Commission from the time of First Solidarity , but he refused , preferring to deal with the circle of Solidarity 's Expert Commission advisers . A National Executive Commission , led by Wałęsa , was openly established in October 1987 . Other opposition structures such as the Fighting Solidarity , the Federation of Fighting Youth , the Freedom and Peace Movement ( Ruch <unk> i <unk> ) and the Orange Alternative " dwarf " movement founded by " Major " Waldemar <unk> began organizing street protests in form of colorful happenings that assembled thousands of participants . The liberal periodical Res Publica negotiated with the authorities its officially published release . In a political and economic referendum held in November 1987 , 67 % of the eligible voters participated and most of them approved the government @-@ proposed reforms , but a popular mandate was formally missed because of the unrealistically stringent passage requirements self @-@ imposed by the regime . 
 The ruling communist / military establishment slowly and gradually came to realize that a deal of some sort with the opposition would eventually be necessary and would have to include the leading Solidarity figures . Solidarity as such , a labor union representing workers ' interests , was unable to reassert itself after the martial law and later in the 1980s was practically destroyed , but preserved in the national consciousness as a myth that facilitated social acceptance of systemic changes previously deemed unthinkable . The Solidarity organization as a mass movement , and with it its dominant social democratic element ( supporters of democratic socialism ) , had been defeated . Solidarity 's name had continuously been used , but the opposition movement split to form rival groups of different political orientations . According to a new intellectual consensus , " democracy was grounded not in an active citizenry , as had been argued from the mid @-@ 1970s through 1981 , but in private property and a free market " . The current view no longer entailed broad political participation , emphasizing instead elite leadership and a capitalist economy . Solidarity became a symbolic entity , its activists openly assumed ideological " anti @-@ communist " positions and its leadership moved to the right . Solidarity was now represented by a small number of individuals , of whom Lech Wałęsa , Tadeusz Mazowiecki and Leszek Balcerowicz were about to assume particularly decisive roles . They were proponents of unfettered free market , strongly influenced by the American and West European financial and other interests . 
 Jaruzelski 's Poland depended on low @-@ cost deliveries of industrial staple commodities from the Soviet Union and meaningful Polish reforms , economic or political , were not feasible during the rule of the last three conservative Soviet general secretaries . The perestroika and glasnost policies of the Soviet Union 's new leader , Mikhail Gorbachev , were therefore a crucial factor in stimulating reform in Poland . Gorbachev essentially repudiated the Brezhnev Doctrine , which had stipulated that attempts by its Eastern European satellite states to abandon the communist bloc would be countered by the Soviet Union with force . The developments in the Soviet Union altered the international situation and provided a historical opportunity for independent reforms in Poland . The hardline stance of US President Ronald Reagan was also helpful . David Ost stressed the constructive influence of Gorbachev . With his support for Polish and Hungarian membership in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund and for the East European pluralistic evolution in general , the Soviet leader effectively pushed East Europe toward the West . 
 Nationwide strikes broke out in the spring and summer of 1988 . They were much weaker than the strikes of 1980 and were discontinued after the intervention by Wałęsa , who secured the regime 's commitment to begin negotiations with the opposition . The strikes were the last act of active political involvement of the working class in the history of People 's Poland and were led by young workers , not connected to Solidarity veterans and opposed to socially harmful consequences of the economic restructuring in progress at that time . According to the researcher Maciej <unk> , the political activity that followed was conducted exclusively by the elites . It was neither inspired by nor consulted with any mass social organization or movement , as the opposition leading circles freed themselves from their strong in the past commitment to the welfare of working people . No longer secure as undisputed leaders , Polish dissidents of the KOR @-@ Solidarity generations were eager to bargain with the weakened regime whose economic goals they now shared . 
 Both sides having been prompted by the new international situation and the recent strike wave in Poland , in September 1988 preliminary talks between government representatives and Solidarity leaders ensued in <unk> . Numerous meetings took place involving Wałęsa and the minister of internal affairs , General Czesław Kiszczak among others , at that time and in the following year , behind the scenes of the official negotiations conducted then . In November , Wałęsa debated on national TV Alfred <unk> , chief of the official trade unions . The encounter enhanced Wałęsa 's image . 
 During the PZPR 's plenary session of 16 – 18 January 1989 , General Jaruzelski and his ruling formation overcame the Central Committee 's resistance by threatening to resign and the communist party decided to allow re @-@ legalization of Solidarity and to approach its leaders for formal talks . From 6 February to 4 April , 94 sessions of talks between 13 working groups , which became known as the " Round Table Talks " ( Polish : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , resulted in political and economic compromise reforms . Jaruzelski , Prime Minister Mieczysław Rakowski and Wałęsa did not directly participate in the negotiations . The government side was represented by Czesław Kiszczak , Aleksander Kwaśniewski , Janusz <unk> and Stanisław <unk> , the Solidarity opposition by Tadeusz Mazowiecki , Bronisław <unk> , Jacek Kuroń , Zbigniew Bujak , Władysław Frasyniuk and Jarosław Kaczyński , among others . The talks resulted in the Round Table Agreement , by which political power was to be vested in a newly created bicameral legislature , and in a president who would be the chief executive . 
 By 4 April 1989 , numerous reforms and freedoms for the opposition were agreed . Solidarity , now in existence as the Solidarity Citizens ' Committee , was again to be legalized as a trade union and allowed to participate in semi @-@ free elections . This election had restrictions imposed , designed to keep the communists in power , since only 35 % of the seats in the Sejm , the key lower chamber of parliament , would be open to Solidarity candidates . The remaining 65 % were to be reserved for candidates from the PZPR and its allies ( the United People 's Party , the Alliance of Democrats and the PAX Association ) . Since the Round Table Agreement mandated only reform ( not replacement ) of " real socialism " in Poland , the communist party thought of the election as a way of neutralizing political conflict and staying in power , while gaining some legitimacy to carry out economic reforms . However , the negotiated social policy determinations , arrived at by economists and trade unionists during the Round Table talks , were quickly tossed out by both the Party and the opposition . 
 A systemic transformation happening sooner rather than later was made possible by the Polish legislative elections of 4 June 1989 , which coincided with the bloody crackdown on the Tiananmen Square protesters in China . When the results of the voting were released , a political earthquake followed . The victory of Solidarity surpassed all predictions . Solidarity candidates captured all the seats they were allowed to compete for in the Sejm , while in the newly established Senate they captured 99 out of the 100 available seats ( the other seat went to an independent , who later switched to Solidarity ) . At the same time , many prominent PZPR candidates failed to gain even the minimum number of votes required to capture the seats that were reserved for them . The communists suffered a catastrophic blow to their legitimacy . 
 = = = = Political transformation = = = = 
 The next few months were spent on political maneuvering . The increasingly insecure communists , who still had military and administrative control over the country , were appeased by a compromise in which Solidarity allowed General Jaruzelski to remain head of state . Jaruzelski barely won the vote in the National Assembly presidential election of 19 July 1989 , even though his name was the only one on the ballot . He won through an informally arranged abstention by a sufficient number of Solidarity MPs and his position was not strong . Jaruzelski resigned as first secretary of the PZPR on 29 July . 
 The Round Table deal basically allowed the PZPR to remain in power regardless of the election results , and the Party 's reshuffled leadership continued to rule . On 1 August , prices were freed because of the ongoing market reforms and hyperinflation resulted . The instantly increased economic hardship caused a new wave of strikes . The strikes were spontaneous , but the Solidarity leaders , no longer in agreement with the strikers ' economic demands , were able to emphasize the secondary political aspect of the strikes ( anger at the Party 's obstinacy ) and use them to pressure the regime for an expedited transfer of power . The new prime minister , General Kiszczak , who was appointed on 2 August 1989 , failed to gain enough support in the Sejm to form a government and resigned on 19 August . He was the last communist head of government in Poland . Although Jaruzelski tried to persuade Solidarity to join the PZPR in a " grand coalition " , Wałęsa refused . The two formerly subservient parties allied with the PZPR , prompted by the current strike pressure , were moving toward adopting independent courses and their added votes would give the opposition control of parliament . Under the circumstances , Jaruzelski had to come to terms with the prospect of new government being formed by political opposition . Solidarity elected representative Tadeusz Mazowiecki was appointed prime minister and confirmed by the Assembly on 24 August 1989 . The new government led by a non @-@ communist , the first of its kind in the Soviet Bloc , was sworn into office on 13 September . The communist party did not immediately relinquish all power , remaining in the coalition and retaining control of the ministries of foreign trade , defense , interior and transport . 
 Mazowiecki 's government , forced to deal quickly with galloping hyperinflation , soon adopted radical economic policies , proposed by Leszek Balcerowicz , which transformed Poland into a functioning market economy under an accelerated schedule . Many Polish state owned enterprises , undergoing privatization , turned out to be woefully unprepared for capitalist competition and the pace of their accommodation ( or attrition ) was rapid . The economic reform , a shock therapy accompanied by comprehensive neoliberal restructuring , was in reality an extension of the previous incremental " communist " policies of the 1970s and 1980s , which were now followed by a leap to greatly expanded integration with the global economy with little protection . Among the reform 's negative immediate effects were the economic recession and near @-@ paralysis of foreign trade . On longer @-@ term bases , the country experienced quickly rising unemployment and social inequities , as enterprises were liquidated and income was redistributed away from workers and farmers , in favor of the establishment and the entrepreneurial class . A collapse of Polish industry was among the detrimental consequences of fundamental and lasting importance . Labor unions underwent further marginalization ; Solidarity activity as a labor union , prioritized in the past , was now suppressed . On the positive side , inflation was brought under control , the currency stabilized , shortages were eliminated and significant foreign investment began . The shock therapy solutions were often dictated by Western consultants , of whom Jeffrey Sachs was best known but also most criticized . 
 The striking electoral victory of Solidarity candidates in the limited elections , and the subsequent formation of the first non @-@ communist government in the region in decades , encouraged many similar peaceful transitions from communist party rule in Central and Eastern Europe in the second half of 1989 . 
 In December 1989 , changes to the Polish constitution were made , officially eliminating the " socialist " order : Marxist references were removed and the name of the country was changed back to the Polish Republic . 
 Wałęsa , president of the Solidarity trade union , demanded early presidential elections acting against the advice of his traditional Solidarity allies , intellectuals who were now running the government . Under pressure from the continuing worker unrest Wałęsa declared himself a supporter of workers ' interests , allegedly threatened by those whom he identified as communists ( such as President Jaruzelski ) or elitist political liberals ( such as Prime Minister Mazowiecki ) . Wałęsa presented himself as a person of good conservative , Christian and nationalist credentials . 
 In 1990 , Jaruzelski resigned as Poland 's president and was succeeded by Wałęsa , who won the 1990 presidential elections . Lech Wałęsa 's inauguration as president took place on 22 December 1990 ; he accepted the prewar presidential insignia from the stepping down President @-@ in @-@ Exile Ryszard Kaczorowski , distancing himself from Wojciech Jaruzelski . Wałęsa defeated Mazowiecki and in the second round Stanisław <unk> , but under his presidency economic policy remained unchanged . 
 The communist Polish United Workers ' Party dissolved itself in 1990 and transformed into the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland . The Warsaw Pact was formally dissolved on 1 July 1991 ; the Soviet Union ceased to exist in December 1991 and the last post @-@ Soviet troops left Poland in September 1993 . On 27 October 1991 , the first entirely free Polish parliamentary elections since the 1920s took place . This completed Poland 's transition from a communist party rule to a Western @-@ style liberal democratic political system . 
 = Ridgedale Center = 
 Ridgedale Center , colloquially known as Ridgedale , is an enclosed shopping mall in Minnetonka , Minnesota , a western suburb of the Twin Cities . It is directly located off I @-@ 394 / US 12 between Ridgedale Drive and Plymouth Road ( Hennepin <unk> 61 ) . Ridgedale Center comprises 1 @,@ 105 @,@ 337 square feet ( 100 @,@ 000 m2 ) of <unk> retail space , and contains approximately 140 retail tenants . It is currently owned and operated by General Growth Properties and anchored by JCPenney , Macy 's , Nordstrom and Sears . 
 Built in 1974 , it was originally anchored by Dayton 's , Donaldson 's , JCPenney , and Sears , before the first two anchors merged with other companies . The mall has undergone several expansions and renovations throughout the years , including the recent addition of a Nordstrom department store in 2015 . Considered an " upscale shopping center " , Ridgedale includes various luxury brands such as Michael Kors , Swarovski , and Tumi Inc .. 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1974 – 86 : Grand opening = = = 
 Ridgedale Center was constructed on 81 @.@ 3 acres of land in 1974 by the Dayton – Hudson Corporation , becoming the Twin Cities ' fourth ' dale ' shopping center , following Southdale , Brookdale , and Rosedale . The original center comprised 1 @,@ 040 @,@ 000 square feet ( 97 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space , and was anchored by Dayton 's , Donaldson 's , JCPenney , and Sears , the former of which also developed the center . 
 Dayton 's announced plans in the early 1990 's to tear down their current location at Ridgedale , and replace it with a much larger location in the same mall ; these plans were also made at the other ' dale ' centers , like Southdale and Rosedale . However , these plans were eventually scrapped and never occurred . In 1996 , Dayton 's opened up a second anchor store at the center ; this new store focused on men 's clothing and furniture , while the original location changed focus and became centered on women 's and children 's clothing ; the two stores were differentiated by their new titles , " Men 's & Home Store " and " Women 's and Children 's Store " . 
 = = = 1987 – 2006 : Dayton 's , Marshall Field 's , and Macy 's = = = 
 In 1987 , Donaldson 's announced the discontinuation of their chain of stores , which would shut one of the mall 's original anchors . Instead , Donaldson 's merged with local department chain Carson Pirie Scott . The 128 @,@ 395 square feet ( 12 @,@ 000 m2 ) Carson Pirie Scott store would also eventually leave Ridgedale Center , in 1995 . Mervyn 's , a California @-@ based department store , announced interest in the former building , but never opened , despite opening locations at Pirie Scott 's former locations at Brookdale Center , Eden Prairie Center , and Rosedale Center . In 2001 , Dayton 's merged with Chicago @-@ based Marshall Field 's , which merged with Macy 's in 2006 . 
 = = = 2007 – present : Renovations and Nordstrom = = = 
 In early 2007 , Ridgedale underwent a multimillion @-@ dollar renovation to " freshen and brighten " the mall , with the use of " all @-@ new lighting , flooring , and paint . " The renovation also included the addition of new restrooms and seating areas . Completion of the renovation process occurred later that same year . The center was also briefly mentioned in the commercially successful 2007 film Juno . 
 In 2009 , Nordstrom announced plans to open a location at Ridgedale in 2011 ; however , these plans were later cancelled due to General Growth Properties , the mall 's owner , filing for bankruptcy . This announcement came with the closure of the Macy 's Men 's & Home Store . Later in 2013 , Nordstrom confirmed plans to open up a 140 @,@ 000 square feet ( 13 @,@ 000 m2 ) department store at Ridgedale by 2015 ; these plans allowed Macy 's current anchor of 202 @,@ 000 square feet ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) to grow into a larger , 286 @,@ 000 square feet ( 27 @,@ 000 m2 ) location . The current Macy 's Women 's & Children 's Store was expanded to provide additional space for the combination ; during this process , a major fire occurred at the construction site , delaying the construction by several weeks . 
 On June 4 , 2015 , deconstruction of the Men 's & Home Store occurred , to make way for the new Nordstrom store , plus an additional 85 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 900 m2 ) of <unk> space , presumably for upscale retail and dining options . This expansion was evaluated at $ 50 million , according to General Growth Properties . The Nordstrom location officially opened on October 2 , 2015 , followed by a grand opening ceremony . 
 = French battleship Paris = 
 Paris was the third ship of the Courbet @-@ class battleships , the first dreadnoughts built for the French Navy . She was completed before World War I as part of the 1911 naval building programme . She spent the war in the Mediterranean , spending most of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until her sister ship Jean Bart was torpedoed by the submarine U @-@ 12 on 21 December . She spent the rest of the war providing cover for the Otranto Barrage that blockaded the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the Adriatic Sea . 
 Paris supported French and Spanish troops in 1925 during the Third Rif War before becoming a school ship in 1931 . She was modernized in three separate refits between the wars even though she was not deemed to be a first @-@ class battleship . She remained in that role until the Battle of France , which began on 10 May 1940 , after which she was hastily rearmed . She supported Allied troops in the defence of Le Havre during June until she was damaged by a German bomb , but she took refuge later that month in England . As part of Operation Catapult , she was seized in Plymouth by British forces on 3 July . She was used as a depot ship and barracks ship there by the Royal and Polish Navies for the rest of the war . Returned to the French in July 1945 she was towed to Brest the following month and used as a depot ship until she was stricken on 21 December 1955 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Paris was 166 metres ( 544 ft 7 in ) long overall . She had a beam of 27 metres ( 88 ft 7 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 @.@ 04 metres ( 29 ft 8 in ) at the bow . She displaced 23 @,@ 475 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 100 long tons ) at standard load and 25 @,@ 579 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 180 long tons ) at full load . She proved to be rather wet in service as she was bow @-@ heavy because her superimposed turrets were close to the bow . 
 Paris had four propellers powered by four Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines which were rated at 28 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) . Twenty @-@ four Belleville water @-@ tube boilers provided steam for her turbines . These boilers were coal @-@ burning with auxiliary oil sprayers . She had a designed speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . She carried up to 2 @,@ 700 long tons ( 2 @,@ 700 t ) of coal and 906 long tons ( 921 t ) of oil and could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ; 4 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Paris 's main armament consisted of twelve 305 @-@ millimetre ( 12 in ) Mle 1910 45 @-@ calibre guns were mounted in six twin gun turrets , with two turrets superimposed fore and aft , and one on each flank of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defence she carried twenty @-@ two 138 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 4 in ) Mle 1910 guns , which were mounted in casemates . Four 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Modèle 1902 Hotchkiss guns were fitted , two on each beam . She was also armed with four 450 @-@ millimetre ( 18 in ) submerged Modèle 1909 torpedo tubes with twelve torpedoes . 
 Paris 's waterline armoured belt extended well below the waterline as the French were concerned about protection from underwater hits . Her main armour was also thinner than that of her British or German counterparts , but covered more area . It was 270 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick between the fore and aft turrets and tapered to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow and stern . It extended 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) below the normal waterline . Above the main belt was another belt , 180 mm thick , that covered the sides , and the secondary armament , up to the forecastle deck , 4 @.@ 5 metres ( 14 ft 9 in ) deep , between the fore and aft turrets . The conning tower had armour 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 290 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 4 in ) of armour on their faces , 250 millimetres ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on their sides and roofs 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Their barbettes had 280 millimetres ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) of armour . There was no anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead although there was a longitudinal bulkhead abreast the machinery spaces that was used either as a coal bunker or left as a void . 
 = = Career = = 
 Paris was built by the Forges et Chantiers de la Méditerranée shipyard in La Seyne . Her keel was laid down on 10 November 1911 and she was launched on 28 September 1912 . She was completed on 1 August 1914 , just in time for World War I. 
 After working up she was sent , along with her sisters , to the Mediterranean Sea . She spent most of the rest of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until U @-@ 12 hit Jean Bart on 21 December with a torpedo . This forced the battleships to fall back to either Malta or Bizerte to cover the Otranto Barrage . After the French occupied the neutral Greek island of Corfu in 1916 she moved forward to Corfu and Argostoli , but her activities were very limited as much of her crew was used to man anti @-@ submarine ships . Before the end of the war she was fitted with seven 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 in ) Mle 1897 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in single mounts . These guns were adaptions of the famous French Mle 97 75 @-@ mm field gun . 
 = = = Interwar years = = = 
 Paris was sent to Pula on 12 December 1918 to supervise the surrendered Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , where she remained until 25 March 1919 . She provided cover for Greek troops during the Occupation of İzmir ( Smyrna ) from May 1919 before returning to Toulon on 30 June . She received the first of her upgrades at Brest between 25 October 1922 and 25 November 1923 . This included replacing one set of boilers with oil @-@ fired boilers , increasing the maximum elevation of the main armament from 12 ° to 23 ° , removal of her bow armour to make her less bow @-@ heavy , the installation of a fire @-@ control director , with a 4 @.@ 57 metres ( 15 @.@ 0 ft ) rangefinder , and the exchange of her Mle 1897 AA guns for Mle 1918 guns . After her return to service she supported an amphibious landing at Al Hoceima by Spanish troops during the summer of 1925 after the <unk> attacked French Morocco during the Third Rif War . She destroyed coastal defence batteries there despite taking light damage from six hits and remained there until October as the flagship of the French forces . She was refitted again from 16 August 1927 to 15 January 1929 at Toulon and her fire @-@ control systems were comprehensively upgraded . A large cruiser @-@ type fire @-@ control director was added atop the foremast with a 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m coincidence rangefinder and a 3 @-@ metre ( 9 ft 10 in ) stereo rangefinder . The rangefinder above the conning tower was replaced by a duplex unit carrying two 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m rangefinders and another 4 @.@ 57 @-@ m rangefinder was added in an armoured hood next to the main mast . Two directors for the secondary guns were added on the navigation bridge , each with a 2 @-@ metre ( 6 ft 7 in ) coincidence rangefinder . A 8 @.@ 2 metres ( 26 ft 11 in ) rangefinder was added to the roof of ' B ' turret , the second one from the bow . Three 1 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 4 ft 11 in ) rangefinders were provided for her anti @-@ aircraft guns , one on top of the duplex unit on the conning tower , one on ' B ' turret and one in the aft superstructure . She resumed her role as flagship of the 2nd Division of the 1st Squadron of the Mediterranean Squadron until 1 October 1931 when she became a training ship . 
 Paris was overhauled again between 1 July 1934 and 21 May 1935 . Her boilers were overhauled , her main guns replaced and her Mle 1918 AA guns were exchanged for more modern Mle 1922 guns . They had a maximum depression of 10 ° and a maximum elevation of 90 ° . They fired a 5 @.@ 93 @-@ kilogram ( 13 @.@ 1 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 850 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) at a rate of fire of 8 – 18 rounds per minute and had a maximum effective ceiling of 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Paris and Courbet formed a Fifth Squadron at the beginning of the war . They were transferred to the Atlantic to continue their training duties without interference . Both ships were ordered restored to operational status on 21 May 1940 by Amiral Mord and they were given six Hotchkiss 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) twin machine gun mounts and two single 13 @.@ 2 @-@ mm Browning machine guns at Cherbourg . Paris was ordered to Le Havre on 6 June to provide gunfire support on the Somme front and covered the evacuation of the town by the Allies , although the lack of spotting aircraft meant that she was not particularly effective in that role . Instead she helped to defend the harbour of Le Havre against German aircraft until she was hit by a bomb on 11 June . She sailed for Cherbourg that night for temporary repairs despite taking on 300 long tons ( 305 t ) of water per hour . She was transferred to Brest on 14 June and carried 2 @,@ 800 men when that port was evacuated on 18 June . 
 In the wake of the Armistice , Paris was docked at Plymouth , England . On 3 July 1940 , as part of Operation Catapult , British forces forcibly boarded her and she was used by the British as a depot ship and as a barracks ship by the Polish Navy for the rest of the war . On 21 August 1945 , after the war had ended , Paris was towed to Brest where she continued in her role as a depot ship . She was sold for scrap on 21 December 1955 and broken up at La Seyne from June 1956 . 
 = Amelia Bence = 
 Amelia Bence ( née María Amelia Batvinik ; 13 November 1914 – 8 February 2016 ) was an Argentine film actress and one of the divas of the Golden Age of Argentine Cinema ( 1940 – 60 ) . 
 Born to Belarusian Jewish immigrants , Bence began her career at a young age , studying with Alfonsina Storni at the Lavardén Children 's Theater and with Mecha Quintana at the <unk> Nacional de Música y <unk> ( National Conservatory of Music and Speech ) . She made her film debut in 1933 , in only the second sound film of Argentina , Dancing , by Luis <unk> Barth . Bence 's acting in La guerra gaucha ( 1942 ) , one of the most important films in the history of Argentine cinema , gave her recognition and earned her leading role offers . She starred in films such as Los ojos más lindos del mundo ( 1943 ) , Todo un hombre , Camino del <unk> ( 1946 ) , A sangre fría ( 1947 ) , La otra y yo ( 1949 ) and Danza del fuego ( 1949 ) , garnering the Best Actress award from the Argentine Academy of Cinematography Arts and Sciences for Todo un hombre , A sangre fría and Danza del fuego . Bence also won the Silver Condor Award for Best Actress for <unk> ( 1946 ) , and her work was acknowledged with awards in Spain , Cuba , and the US throughout the 1940s and 1950s . 
 Bence married Spanish actor Alberto Closas in 1950 , and after their divorce was in a relationship with Osvaldo Cattone in the 1960s . Between 1952 and 1954 , Bence was contracted by Reforma Films to film two movies in Mexico and earned high praise for her starring role in Alfonsina ( 1957 ) , which was selected as the Argentine entry for the Berlin International Film Festival and won her an award from the Argentina Film Academy . She developed an extensive theater career in the 1960s , starring in works like " La dama del trébol " , " Así es la vida " , " Maribel y la extraña familia " and " El <unk> de Mary Duggan " . From 1973 to 1976 , she completed a long tour of Latin America and featured in " La valija " ( " The Suitcase " ) at the Gramercy Arts Theater in New York City , which earned her an Association of Latin Entertainment Critics ( ACE ) Award for Best Foreign Actress . Bence 's characterizations in " Doña Rosita , la soltera " ( 1975 ) and " La loba " ( 1982 ) in the United States and Peru were very successful . During the last stage of her career , she acted in several television productions , including series such as Romina , Bianca and Las 24 horas . In 1989 , she received the Silver Condor for Lifetime Achievement Award , and later won awards in the same category at the Podesta Awards in 1992 and by the National Endowment for the Arts in 1997 . Between 1996 and 2010 , she appeared in several theaters with her show " Alfonsina " , which combined music and poetry . After a career spanning eight decades in entertainment , she retired in 2010 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 María Amelia Batvinik was born on 13 November 1914 in Buenos Aires , the youngest of seven children to Belarusian Jewish immigrants , Jaime Batvinik from Minsk , and Ana <unk> from Pinsk . From an early age , she was drawn to acting and began performing alongside other neighborhood children in the courtyards of their homes . That was how she met Paulina <unk> , a neighbor , who suggested to Bence 's mother that the child be enrolled in the Lavardén Children 's Theater , operating in the Teatro Colón . At the age of five , she officially debuted , encouraged by the sisters Paulina and Berta <unk> , in poet Alfonsina Storni 's work , " Juanita " . Bence recalled that the performance was not without mishap , as she accidentally swallowed a postage stamp she was to place on an envelope ; she was distraught , but Storni praised the way she handled the situation . She completed her primary school studies at the Escuela General Roca , while simultaneously studying piano with her sister Esther at the <unk> Conservatory . From the age of ten , she worked as an elevator operator at Gath & Chaves . In her free time , she worked in an acting group led by Pedro Aleandro , the brother of Ben <unk> , where she participated in the play Las <unk> by Julio Sánchez Gardel . 
 Despite the opposition of her family to acting , Bence convinced her mother to let her continue studying . Because there was no vacancy in the National Conservatory of Performing Arts , she decided to learn classical dance with Mecha Quintana at the National Conservatory of Music and Speech , where she briefly attended classes . Quintana assigned her a part in a ballet at the Opera Theatre of Musical Comedy " Wunder Bar " ( 1933 ) , starring Armando and Enrique Discépolo . On one occasion , she filled @-@ in for the star when the performer had an illness during the performance run . 
 = = = Film and theater debuts = = = 
 Bence 's first film role was as an extra in a scene with Pedro <unk> in Argentina 's second sound film , Dancing ( 1933 ) , under the direction of Luis José <unk> Barth , who bestowed the stage name " Amelia Bence " on her . The film was a failure and did not have the same success as the first sound film ¡ Tango ! . The production had poor sound quality , audiences did not receive it well , and Bence was reluctant to include it in her filmography . She went back to the theater and began working under the direction of Enrique <unk> in his company at the Odéon Theater , performing in such works as " Tu boca , <unk> " , " Los <unk> <unk> " and " Baile en el Savoy " , which were musical comedies and vaudeville shows . In " Baile en el Savoy " , Bence replaced the star , Amanda Varela , who became ill and shared the stage with Florencio Parravicini . The play was one of her first successes , having over 100 performances . When its run ended at the Odéon , it was transferred to the Cine Monumental and re @-@ released for several more weeks . She and Parravicini also starred in " Ocho en <unk> " at the Corrientes Theater , but the reviews were scathing . El Mundo reported that " the show seemed unrehearsed " but praised Bence saying , " Newcomer ... , managing with grace and efficiency " . In " Conde de <unk> " , which had a short run due to Parravicini 's health , Bence was rated by the press as " demure , competent and pleasant " and in " De <unk> no se <unk> nadie " , which was directed by León Zárate , she appeared in 200 performances . 
 In 1937 , Bence took a more serious role in Luis <unk> 's drama La <unk> , in which she supported Tita <unk> and Santiago Arrieta . The performance earned Bence a contract with <unk> Ferrando at Pampa Film and three other film roles . After a long theatrical season with Luis Arata and inconsequential participation in El <unk> , she filmed La <unk> al <unk> with José Gola . Bence defined the film as " one of the best of our cinema ... A simple and profound story ... very intimate , full of sensitive details ... it was not understood by critics or the public at the time " . 
 In 1938 , Leopoldo Torres Ríos gave Bence her first starring role in film in Adiós Buenos Aires , where she played a showgirl " Luisita " living a bohemian life . In November 1938 , she attracted the attention of the public and press when she starred in the play Mujeres at the Smart Theatre , ( currently <unk> ) located on Avenida Corrientes . The play was written by American writer and actress Clare Boothe Luce and also starred Mecha Ortiz . In one of the scenes , Bence appeared bathing in a tub full of foam . She said : " I wore nylon mesh , it was very modest but , as was logical , it did not go unnoticed . I had a very big impact as a result of that scene ... so much so that , the Teatro Maipo ... made a parody of it " . The work was described as " original , fresh , and modern " , reaching 250 performances . It was revived at the Teatro Fénix de Flores . 
 = = = Recognition and " The Gaucho War " = = = 
 In the wake of her successful theatrical season , Bence filmed El <unk> ( 1939 ) in Tucumán Province , in which she played " <unk> " , a girl who falls in love with the character of Agustín <unk> , is accused of a crime and is rejected by her father . She won praise for her performance , and was hired to an exclusive three @-@ year contract by Miguel <unk> , who had just formed San Miguel Studios , which would soon become the largest studio in Argentina . Bence was hired to star opposite Tito <unk> in Antonio <unk> 's <unk> para las <unk> ( 1941 ) , a comedy adapted from the play " Las de <unk> " . That same year she starred in Carlos F. <unk> 's La casa de los <unk> , based on a novel by Hugo Wast , which won her the Premios Sur for Best Actress from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences of Argentina . 
 In early 1942 , Bence filmed El tercer <unk> , directed by Luis César <unk> and co @-@ starring Pedro López <unk> and Silvia Legrand . Though Bence was concerned about playing the mother of Legrand , who was only 13 years younger than she was , the film was a success and she won her the Silver Condor Award for Best Actress from the Argentine Film Critics Association for the performance . The recognition led to her appearance frequently on the covers of magazines , and to an offer to appear in what would become one of the most important films in the history of Argentine cinema , La guerra gaucha . The film starred Bence and Sebastián Chiola , Ángel Magaña , Enrique <unk> , and Francisco <unk> and is set at the turn of the nineteenth century in northern Argentina . It was shot on location in Salta Province and was based on the novel of the same name by writer Leopoldo <unk> . Scriptwriters <unk> Manzi and Ulises Petit de Murat , wove the disparate stories of the characters into an overview of the gauchos ' revolt against Spanish rule . The film , unlike Hollywood Westerns , neither portrayed colonization as progress , nor focused the action on the indigenous people , instead focusing on the patriotic pride of the gauchos . The film won seven awards and Bence won an award as best actress of the year from the City of Buenos Aires . It also earned her an offer from Paramount Pictures to come to the US and work in Hollywood , but she declined the offer . 
 = = = A successful film star = = = 
 After the success of La guerra gaucha , Bence received only starring roles . In 1943 , she agreed to work with Pedro López <unk> on Son <unk> de amor , a romantic story set at the time of the Spanish Civil War , in which she received an award for Best Actress from the Cuban Federation of Film and Theater Editors . In 1982 she donated the medal to a program raising funds to help the soldiers of the Falklands War . Later in 1943 , she starred in Los ojos más lindos del mundo , ( The Most Beautiful Eyes in the World ) . The title was a reference to the purplish green hue of Bence 's eyes and the title became associated with her , to the point that when she toured Chile in 1955 and 1964 , the press headlines read , " The most beautiful eyes in the world came here " . Her next film , Todo un hombre ( 1943 ) , was directed by Frenchman Pierre <unk> . In the final scene , Bence was replaced by a double because of the impossibility of postponing a trip to Brazil . She won the award for Best Actress from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for the film . The cover of the magazine Antena for December 1943 announced the upcoming release of Julio <unk> 's Nuestra Natacha , based on a play by Alejandro <unk> . The film was released in September 1944 , shortly after the presentation of her film 24 horas de la vida de una <unk> , in which she played the role of " Cecilia " , receiving good reviews in La Nación and Antena . 
 In 1946 , Bence starred with Mecha Ortiz in Camino del <unk> , a melodramatic , psychological thriller involving a love triangle . Despite their performances , the film was poorly received by the critics . San Miguel Studios next put all three of its stars , Mecha Ortiz , María Duval and Bence in one film , Las tres ratas ( 1946 ) , under the direction of Carlos <unk> , which fared much better with the public and critics . In the summer of 1944 , Bence met the actor Alberto Closas in Chile while filming María Rosa , who would become her husband . Both María Rosa and the other film made in Chile , <unk> ( 1946 ) ended up being delayed for release due to a dispute between Pampa Film , <unk> and San Miguel Studios . The legal dispute between the director Ernesto <unk> and the film companies took nearly two years to resolve . Despite the delay in release , the Association of Film Critics awarded Bence the Silver Condor Award for Best Actress , for a role which Hal Erickson in The New York Times describes as a " fiercely independent young woman " , comparing the film to a " Joan <unk> drama " . Her next film , El <unk> de Julia , featured Alberto Closas , with whom she had begun a relationship , and received mixed reviews . 
 In 1947 , Bence won the Writers Association award for Best Actress and the inaugural prize for the <unk> de <unk> in Madrid for her role as a wealthy but weak and vulnerable lady , mistreated by an evil nephew in Daniel Tinayre 's murder drama , A sangre fría . For her role in <unk> ' s La otra y yo ( 1949 ) , which co @-@ starred Enrique Álvarez Diosdado and Fernando Lamas , she dyed her hair blond to play two different characters — the film star " Dora Nelson " and the clothing designer " Matilde García " . It amused and surprised the public , as there is a scene where the two characters talk to each other in the same frame . La <unk> praised her acting and the magazine El Hogar reported that she " soared beyond the script and the director " . Bence again starred opposite Diosdado in Danza del fuego , in which played Elena Valdez , a successful concert pianist who died on her wedding night after falling out the window of her home , tortured and believing herself guilty of a crime . Her performance earned her the award for Best Actress in 1949 from both Writers Association and the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences of Argentina . 
 After marrying Closas in 1950 , they formed a theater company and dedicated themselves more frequently to theater performance . The premiere of " La estrella <unk> en el mar " , though marred by politics , was a success and continued playing to sold @-@ out houses . After the first presentation , a reporter from the magazine El Hogar gave rave reviews on the play and marriage of Bence to Closas . The reporter was contacted by first lady Eva Peron , who also demanded that the editor print a retraction and a public denial of what had been written . Bence stated in her autobiography , that from that moment she was " black listed " by the regime , although she was apolitical . In July , after the play reached 150 performances at the Odéon Theatre , the cast began a tour that started in the Coliseo Podestá of La Plata , where they played to sold @-@ out houses for ten days . As they continued with the tour , Bence and Closas worked on the play " Mi <unk> y su <unk> " , which they opened for the first time in Rosario and then took it to Buenos Aires , Rio <unk> , Mendoza , San Juan and Córdoba . The tour was cut short by the production of Mi <unk> está loca ( 1952 ) , an adaptation of the play " Florence est <unk> " . The screenplay was written by Carlos <unk> and Ariel <unk> and starred both Bence and Closas . 
 = = = Mid @-@ century = = = 
 Contracted to work for Reforma Films in Mexico , Bence 's first Mexican film was Siete Mujeres ( 1953 ) . She recalled that the filming was completely different than anything she had worked on before , as there was no possibility of retakes or selective editing to provide the best footage for the film . Siete <unk> , like Las tres <unk> ( 1954 ) , was never released in Argentina . After ten months , Bence returned to Argentina and ended her marriage to Closas . She attended the first Mar del Plata International Film Festival in 1954 , and then went with Mario <unk> and his production team to La Rioja , Spain to film El hombre que <unk> una muerte with Carlos Cores . 
 The play " Pesadilla " premiered in 1955 and involved a tour of Uruguay , Cordoba , Mendoza , Buenos Aires and Rosario , where they remained playing to a full house for two weeks . In the play , Bence played the character " Mary " and her performance received high praise in La Capital . Encouraged by Cecilio Madanes , she also opened " La dama del trébol " , a play that had been successful in Paris . However , soon after its premiere , the Revolución Libertadora or the 1955 coup d 'état that overthrew Juan Domingo Perón , occurred . Bence 's new partner , José María Fernández <unk> , had served as Eva Perón 's secretary and as Chairman of the Committee on Culture , director of the Teatro Nacional Cervantes , and director general of the Ministry of Culture , under the Perón regime . Fernández 's past led to threats at the theaters and demonstrations outside Bence 's hotel , which in turn led to cancellations by the Theater of the Chilean Society of Authors for " Pesadilla " , " La dama del trébol " , " Eran tres " ... and " la noche " . They also suspended the series " Mis <unk> " which Bence was performing on Radio <unk> with Luis <unk> . In 1956 , she filmed Dos <unk> under director Kurt Land , based on the play " Pesadilla " , in which she portrayed a prostitute . It was not released until 1958 during the government of Arturo Frondizi . 
 In 1957 , she opened the play <unk> para la <unk> at the Ateneo Theater and began filming her favorite film : Alfonsina ( 1957 ) by Kurt Land , based on the life of poetess Alfonsina Storni . Despite makeup tests , Bence decided to recreate it bare @-@ faced , without any alterations , depending only on her acting abilities . She won the award for Best Actress from the Argentina Film Academy and the film was chosen as the Argentine entry for the 1957 Berlin International Film Festival . Foreign press reviews praised her " interpretative restraint " and compared Bence to Austrian actress Paula <unk> . In the same year she had her first appearance on television playing in Teatro del <unk> on Canal 7 , in an episode which recreated <unk> para la <unk> based on the play by Agatha Christie . In 1957 , Bence became one of the pioneers of the café <unk> after the basement of the Santa Fe Galleries was remodeled to turn it into a theater . The presentation of the play " Asamblea de <unk> " , based on a piece by Aristophanes , generated a variety of controversial criticism . 
 Bence 's meeting in Europe with director José María <unk> led to her being cast in De <unk> a la <unk> ( 1959 ) , a crime drama which premiered at the Coliseum in Madrid , shortly before Bence returned to Buenos Aires . She won the Quixote prize for Best Foreign Actress for the role . Returning to Argentina , Bence was persuaded by Cecilio Madanes to perform in " Así es la vida " with the company of Luis Arata and Eva Franco . The newspaper La Prensa gave her good reviews and that led to its being brought by Canal 7 to television on the insistence of Mariano Perla . Simultaneously with her performance for Madanes , she opened the play Maribel y la extraña familia in the <unk> Theater , whose success led to performances in other cities such as Mar del Plata . The box office grossed 2 million pesos in the third month and 400 @,@ 000 in the fourth . 
 = = = Working abroad = = = 
 In 1962 , Bence joined an entourage including César Tiempo , Máximo <unk> , and Enrique Serrano and appeared at the International Film Festival of India , where she met Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru at an official reception for foreign artists . Back in Argentina , she accepted an offer to star in the Uruguayan television production of Maribel y la extraña familia and on Canal 9 in Buenos Aires , a production of Nuestra Natacha . Under the direction of Daniel Tinayre , she participated in the low @-@ budget film La <unk> no es un <unk> , intended to revive the national film industry . The film featured performances by Homero <unk> , Bárbara Mujica and Luis <unk> and others . In the first week , viewings exceeded 3 @,@ 000 spectators per day and the film spent seven weeks at the Cine Opera and eleven at the Trocadero Theater . In the film , Bence played a prostitute and La Nación reported that she and Luis <unk> 's performances shone . Shortly after , both were honored as the best Argentine artists of the year by Chilean journalists . 
 From October to December 1963 , she made a tour of Tucumán , Bahía Blanca , Córdoba , Mendoza , Rosario and Montevideo . By June 1964 , she had started a theatrical season in Chile with " Los millones de Orofino " , to critical acclaim . Directed by Enrique Carreras , Luis <unk> and Fernando Ayala , she starred with Tita <unk> and Ángel Magaña in La <unk> del <unk> , a film shot in episodes , where she played a wealthy spinster . Bence next received an offer to star in " El <unk> de Mary Duggan " under the direction of Tinayre ; however , she rejected the offer and was replaced by Malvina <unk> . In the second season <unk> quit the production and Bence finished the run . The actor Francisco <unk> , a member of the cast , died of cancer during the season . In 1968 , as part of the cast of Comedy of the Province of Buenos Aires , she debuted in La Plata and simultaneously , in Mar del Plata in the George Bernard Shaw classic , " <unk> " , directed by Milagros de la Vega . 
 At the end of 1968 , Bence decided to undertake a six @-@ month tour for the following year through Santiago , Bogotá , Cali , Medellín and <unk> . From Colombia , she went to Venezuela and debuted at the Municipal Theater of Caracas with four works : " <unk> " , " Un <unk> <unk> " , " Un dios <unk> en casa " and " Los <unk> " . Then she went on tour through the Dominican Republic , Puerto Rico and Miami , where she earned good reviews . When she returned from this long tour , she took a hiatus for several months and then agreed to do " Flor de cactus " with Juan Carlos <unk> at the Comedy Theater in Rosario . After its opening run , the project continued on tour through the countryside , in Paraná , Cordoba , Santa Fe and Tucumán . 
 In mid @-@ 1972 , she was invited by the Spanish Repertory Theater Company in New York to participate in a theater season at the Gramercy Arts Theater with " La valija " ( The Suitcase ) . Upon its release , The New York Post wrote : " Play with a hopeless character goes to the heart " . Bence performed on tour at Rosary College Theater at the University of Connecticut , Boston , Chicago and at the headquarters of the Organization of American States in Washington , DC , where her audience was 1 @,@ 200 spectators . When she performed through Florida and in Miami , Howard Thompson of The New York Times , titled his article , " Spanish Impact on Off Broadway " and continued , " Amelia Bence , an artist of strong mercurial quality and wonderfully expressive eyes , illuminates the scene and work ... She makes the role come alive , with eyes that tell the story of a tender woman , slightly naive and carefree . For her work , she won the Association of Latin Entertainment Critics ( ACE ) award for Best Foreign Actress during a dinner held at the Commodore Hotel in New York . Back in Argentina , she did " La valija " with Justo José Rojas and Aldo Cura in Santiago del Estero , Salta , Jujuy and Córdoba , touring for four months . In 1973 , she made her first color film , Adiós , Alejandra , after nearly four decades of making movies . Upon returning to the United States in September 1975 , she opened " Doña Rosita , la soltera " by Federico Garcia Lorca and personally met four @-@ time Oscar @-@ winning actress , Katharine Hepburn . At the request of the director , she took the show to Miami in September 1976 and stayed until early 1977 , when she went to Peru to open " La <unk> <unk> " at the <unk> Theater . 
 In the early 1980s , Bence participated frequently on television , part of the main casts of Dulce <unk> , Romina , Bianca and Las 24 horas . " La loba " , which she performed in 1982 in Peru was one of her most famous theatrical successes and also aired on Peruvian television , under the same name coordinated by her former partner Osvaldo Cattone . In 1985 , she starred in a Peruvian soap opera entitled La casa de <unk> , which increased her popularity and the audiences of " La loba " . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Bence 's career began to decline around 1986 , and she stopped receiving work proposals . The Argentina Actors Association said at the time that 86 % of their members were unemployed ; however , she was hired for one of the two lead roles in the 1987 production of " Solo 80 " . The play , by Colin Higgins was presented at the Blanca Podestá Theater on Corrientes Avenue , with Bence playing the character of Harold 's mother . The play received good reviews , but failed to attract an audience , and ended in February 1988 . Bence spent almost two years out of work and in 1989 traveled to Cuba to attend the International Festival of New Latin American Cinema , where she met Fidel Castro at a reception . Later that year , she was honored with the Silver Condor Award for Lifetime Achievement at the same ceremony where Sabina Olmos was honored . In 1992 , she also won the Pablo Podestá Prize for Lifetime achievement , along with <unk> Marshall and Margarita <unk> . 
 In 1990 , Bence was reunited with Closas to act in " Cartas de amor " . She then embarked on the longest road tour of her life and spent the next 21 months ( until November , 1992 ) touring " Esta noche <unk> de amor " in Buenos Aires , Rosario , Córdoba , Mendoza and Mar del Plata . In 1993 , she worked in television on a telenovela <unk> que <unk> <unk> , which starred Carolina <unk> and Raúl <unk> . She had a supporting role in the series Con alma de tango ( 1995 ) alongside Luisa <unk> and Gerardo Romano , which had an international run throughout Latin America and in some European countries such as Italy , Israel and Turkey . 
 In 1998 , Bence and Libertad Lamarque received a Golden Ángel " <unk> " Peco award from the Society of Distributors of Newspapers and Magazines . She was part of the cast of the Teatro de la Ribera in 1998 , playing in " Hoy <unk> Hoy " , which brought together veteran actors Elena Lucena and María Aurelia <unk> . After participating in " Sin <unk> " and " Alta <unk> " in the mid @-@ 1990s , she was hired in 1999 to do a play at the XIV International Festival of Hispanic Theater , but due to technical problems it was canceled . She persuaded Osvaldo Cattone to direct the play " <unk> " , in which she starred in 2002 in Lima . In 2003 , Bence ventured into children 's theater with the work " Amor invisible " with Gustavo Monje . The play combined magic , dance , music and theater , recreating a fairyland . She returned to television in 2004 joining Pablo Granados and <unk> Peña in the comic series No hay dos sin tres , for which she was nominated in 2005 for the category of " Special Participation in Fiction " for the Martín Fierro Awards . 
 In recent years , Bence has received many awards acknowledging her long career . In 2006 , she was honored by the Actors Social Work ( OSA ) and in 2007 , she received the inaugural <unk> Award for lifetime achievement from the <unk> Rocha Academy of Theater . She was given a certificate of recognition during the María Guerrero Awards ceremony in 2007 and in 2008 she received the Trinidad Guevara Achievement Award with Jorge Rivera López . In late 2009 , a tribute in her honor was held by the Northern Region of the Argentine Society of Writers , in which the Mayor of San Isidro presented a poetry anthology and designated the hall with Bence 's name . 
 For 14 years , before a fall which caused a hip fracture , Bence put on her one @-@ man @-@ show , " Alfonsina " . In April 2010 she fell and underwent surgery . In June 2011 , Bence was declared Outstanding Personality of Argentine Culture under an initiative of Deputy Juan Pablo <unk> . Soon after , with the help of Raul <unk> , she published her memoirs , La niña del umbral : Amelia Bence : <unk> ( Corregidor 2011 ) . In 2012 , El día que <unk> la historia , a documentary filmed in 2010 , was released . It was her first film in 40 years and was a film about the labor movement under the Perón regime . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Her first partner was Roberto Fernández <unk> , with whom she had a relationship from 1941 to 1944 : The relationship ended when Fernandez <unk> asked her to give up her career . Two years later , during the filming of Maria Rosa ( 1946 ) , she met the Spanish actor Alberto Closas , whom she married in 1950 . They formed an artistic partnership as well as being a married couple and worked on films and plays together . In 1953 , Bence returned from working abroad to discover Closas was having an affair , and decided to end the marriage . Bence maintained a good relationship with Closas for the rest of his life ; they even worked together again and she mourned his death in 1994 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1950s she had a brief romance with the writer José María Fernández <unk> , until his exile to Mexico in 1958 . From 1964 to 1970 , she remained in a relationship with Osvaldo Cattone , who was 19 years her junior . He directed her in " Doña Rosita , la soltera " and she worked with him in Peru on several occasions . Her last husband was " Charlie " Ortiz <unk> , whom she lived with from 1980 to 1982 . Up until suffering a serious hip fracture she exercised regularly , performing yoga , and maintained a very active life combined with a healthy diet . 
 Bence died on 8 February 2016 in Buenos Aires at the age of 101 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bence has left a film legacy stretching through eight decades . In 1973 , she was awarded the keys to the city of Miami during her season of " La valija " . In 1981 , the Pablo C. <unk> Hicken Museum of the Cinema designated the Pathé Chamber to her in recognition of her stature as " a first figure of national cinema " . In 1995 , the Senate of the Nation of Argentina awarded a cultural diploma for her contributions to the culture of Argentina and two years later , the National Endowment for the Arts granted her a lifetime achievement award . She was also made an honorary member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences of Argentina in 2007 . 
 During her career , she was described as " the face of Argentine film " , and through the years , many hailed her as having " the most beautiful eyes in the world . " Bence liked to tell a story that Paul Newman once recounted that he wore sunglasses to hide his eyes so he would be known for his acting . She agreed that the work was the more important legacy . In November 2010 , the journalist Daniel Gómez Rinaldi published a book entitled Amelia Bence : Los ojos más lindos del mundo , a biography of the actress . 
 I think I caught my dream . I wanted to be an actress and I was . And this dream will never end ... I am of a generation of actresses and actors who made themselves in an adventure of cinema and theater , that dreamt and created poets , madmen and bohemians . 
 = = Autobiography = = 
 Bence , Amelia ; <unk> , Raúl . La niña del umbral : Amelia Bence : <unk> Buenos Aires , Argentina : Corregidor ( 2011 ) ( in Spanish ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Cincinnati Musical Center half dollar = 
 The Cincinnati Musical Center half dollar or Cincinnati Music Center half dollar was a commemorative coin struck by the United States Bureau of the Mint in 1936 . Produced with the stated purpose of commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Cincinnati , Ohio , as a center of music , it was conceived by Thomas G. Melish , a coin enthusiast who controlled the group allowed to buy the entire issue from the government , and who resold the pieces at high prices . 
 Congress approved legislation for the coin on March 31 , 1936 , authorizing 15 @,@ 000 pieces to be struck at the three mints then in operation . Melish had hired sculptor Constance Ortmayer to design the coin , but the Commission of Fine Arts refused to recommend the designs . Members objected to the depiction of Stephen Foster on the obverse , finding no connection between Foster , who died in 1864 , and the supposed anniversary . Nevertheless , the designs were approved by the Bureau of the Mint , and 5 @,@ 000 sets from the three mints were issued and sold to Melish 's group , the only authorized purchaser . 
 Melish likely held back much of the issue for later resale , and with few pieces available , prices for the set spiked , rising to over five times the issue price . The value dropped somewhat when the boom in commemorative coins burst in late 1936 , but quickly recovered and the coins are valuable today . Melish has been assailed by numismatic writers for greed . 
 = = Inception = = 
 Sparked by low @-@ mintage issues which appreciated in value , the market for United States commemorative coins spiked in 1936 . Until 1954 , the entire mintage of such issues was sold by the government at face value to a group authorized by Congress , who then tried to sell the coins at a profit to the public . The new pieces then came on to the secondary market , and in early 1936 , all earlier commemoratives sold at a premium to their issue prices . The apparent easy profits to be made by purchasing and holding commemoratives attracted many to the coin collecting hobby , where they sought to purchase the new issues . Among the pieces , which had recently been struck and had appreciated in value was the 1935 Old Spanish Trail half dollar . This piece had been issued at the behest of L. W. Hoffecker , a Texas entrepreneur and coin dealer , who put aside a fifth of the 10 @,@ 000 mintage for himself , and sold them well into the 1940s , by which time he had served as president of the American Numismatic Association ( ANA ) . Congress authorized an explosion of commemorative coins in 1936 ; no fewer than 15 were issued for the first time . At the request of the groups authorized to purchase them , several coins minted in prior years were produced again , dated 1936 , senior among them the Oregon Trail Memorial half dollar , first struck in 1926 . 
 Thomas G. Melish , a coin collector and entrepreneur from Cincinnati , came up with an idea for a commemorative coin that he would control and profit from . Melish was a prominent businessman , who had inherited the <unk> Wire Company . He formed the Cincinnati Musical Center Commemorative Coin Association , and secured the introduction of House of Representatives Resolution ( H.R. ) <unk> on January 31 , 1936 . This bill would have provided for 10 @,@ 000 coins from the Philadelphia Mint , 2 @,@ 000 coins from Denver , and 3 @,@ 000 from the San Francisco Mint . Such a low mintage would have made the Denver coin a significant rarity , increasing Melish 's profit . On February 17 , the House Committee on Coinage , Weights and Measures recommended that it be amended to provide for a total of 15 @,@ 000 coins without dictating at what mint or mints they should be struck . That committee , in its report accompanying the bill , noted that the piece was " in commemoration of the fiftieth ( golden ) anniversary of Cincinnati , Ohio , as a center of music , and its contribution of the annual May festival to the art of music for the past 50 years . " Melish , through political influence , was able to retain the provision that they should be struck " at the mints " , allowing coinage at all three mints . This marked the last time that a coinage bill would pass Congress in the 1930s with that phrasing — later issues were limited to a single mint . 
 The bill passed Congress , and was signed by President Franklin Roosevelt on March 31 , 1936 . The pieces were to honor " the 50th anniversary of Cincinnati , Ohio , as a center of music , and its contribution to the art of music for the past 50 years " . Anthony Swiatek and Walter Breen , in their volume on commemorative coins , concluded that " pressure from the above @-@ named Association on Congress induced passage of the Act " . 
 = = Preparation and controversy = = 
 Melish engaged Constance Ortmayer to design the coin . Ortmayer later remembered , " I was recommended by them , someone came through Cincinnati ... they were just looking for somebody so they recommended me " . Ortmayer apparently prepared a design before the bill passed Congress , for Melish wrote to Assistant Director of the Mint Mary Margaret O 'Reilly on April 4 , 1936 , that the original " lacked distinction and artistic merit " and that Ortmayer would redesign the coin . He wrote again on May 7 , asking if Ortmayer 's new design was satisfactory . The models were submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts , charged since 1921 with advising on coin design , though the government was not bound to follow its recommendations . On May 13 , the chairman , Charles Moore , wrote to Mint Director Nellie Tayloe Ross , withholding approval . 
 Moore recited the stated purpose of the coin , to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Cincinnati as a center of music , then noted that the obverse depicted Stephen Foster , the composer and songwriter — who died in 1864 , whereas Cincinnati was not notable as a center of music until at least 1873 . " The Commission is at a loss to connect a fiftieth anniversary in 1936 with a movement that began in 1873 . " Foster did live in Cincinnati , Moore admitted , but only for a brief period while working as a bookkeeper , and his main contributions to American music came later , when he lived in Pittsburgh and in New York City . Further , the coin was to commemorate Cincinnati 's contributions to the art of music , and Foster " was an American troubadour , but to music as an art he made no contribution " . Moore felt that if anyone should be depicted , it should be Theodore Thomas , who conducted the Cincinnati May Festival from its beginning in 1873 and in 1878 became director of the Cincinnati College of Music . He stated that " Theodore Thomas was , artistically , the founder of Cincinnati as a musical center . His portrait should appear on any coin commemorative of Cincinnati ' as a center of music ' " . 
 On May 16 , The Cincinnati Enquirer reported that Thomas would appear on the coin , not Foster . The paper also reported the controversy before the Commission of Fine Arts , that Melish had travelled to Washington the previous day , and had announced he had no objection to the change . Also on May 16 , Melish telephoned Lee Lawrie , sculptor member of the Commission . Melish 's notes indicate that Moore 's objection was on behalf of Alice Roosevelt Longworth and the Longworth family , who had employed Thomas to lead the May Festival , and who wanted Thomas on the coin , although , as ( per Melish ) Lawrie put it , " Thomas looks like a walrus and would be a very hard head to make " . Melish was defiant , stating that he also knew Alice Longworth well , and Foster remained on the coin . Ortmayer remembered that the " boss " of the Bureau of the Mint ( presumably Ross ) objected to the reverse design , not liking the position of the goddess ' legs . Swiatek , in his later volume , averred that Melish 's association put pressure on the Department of the Treasury to approve Ortmayer 's design . 
 The Philadelphia Mint received the models from Ortmayer . On May 23 its superintendent , Edwin Dressel , sent O 'Reilly a memorandum from Chief Engraver John R. Sinnock , stating that the sculptor 's models were in too high relief , and suggesting that Ortmayer come to the mint to discuss the matter . A letter from O 'Reilly to Melish on June 18 reports that after some modification , Sinnock wrote that the coin was at the very limit of high relief that the mint could coin , and that dies for the Cincinnati piece were expected to be tested by coining trial strikes in early July . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse of the Cincinnati Musical Center half dollar displays a bust of Stephen Foster , facing to the viewer 's right , and below it , the words " <unk> <unk> AMERICA 'S <unk> " . This phrase was taken from a biography of Foster published earlier in the 1930s . The artist 's initials , " CO " , are to the left of Foster . The name of the country , and the denomination , appear near the rim . The reverse shows a kneeling figure , intended to be the goddess of music . In the upper left portion of the field , or background , is the date 1886 , in the lower right 1936 , and beneath the latter the mint mark ( unless struck at Philadelphia , which did not then use one ) . The goddess kneels on the mottos required by law to appear , and near the edge is " <unk> A MUSIC <unk> OF AMERICA " . 
 The design attracted comments from those interested in coins . Frank Duffield , editor of the ANA 's journal The Numismatist , noted in the October 1936 issue that the coin had been awaited with anticipation by hobbyists because of an announcement that it would bear the likeness of Foster , but " when it finally appeared many expressions of approval of the designs were heard and a few criticisms ... Foster deserved a better bust than the one the artist has given us ... the toy four @-@ string lyre [ the goddess ] holds in her hand is not in keeping with the times or the occasion ... After all these years , Music deserved something better . " Coin dealer B. Max Mehl , in his monograph on commemorative coins published in 1937 , agreed with the criticism of the reverse , " apparently this lyre must have been bought at a 5 ¢ and 10 ¢ Store as it seems to be only a toy " . 
 Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his 1971 volume on American coins and medals , Numismatic Art in America , criticized Ortmayer 's design : 
 The details and style of this coin perpetuate the slender lettering and weak surfaces of the John Sinnock school , as exemplified in the Philadelphia Sesquicentennial half dollar of 1926 . Surfaces are glazed or rubbed over , and the coin has a worn look ... Stephen Foster 's bust on the obverse is a distorted or compressed lump , and the " goddess of music " has much the same appeal of a dancer with cramps . 
 = = Release , distribution , and collecting = = 
 The mintage of 15 @,@ 000 was struck in July 1936 . At the Philadelphia and Denver mints , 5 @,@ 005 pieces were produced , and 5 @,@ 006 at San Francisco , with the excess from the even thousands held for inspection and testing at the 1937 meeting of the United States Assay Commission . The first 200 pieces from each mint were collected in sets of three , with a notarized letter from Melish testifying to what number coins they were . Several of these special sets were sent by Melish to government officials . 
 Melish had been fielding inquiries from collectors since Roosevelt signed the legislation , but from mid @-@ May , those who wrote received back only postcards stating the new issue was oversubscribed . The summer of 1936 was the peak of the commemorative coin boom , and Melish announced the new pieces would be sold in sets of three by mint mark for $ 7 @.@ 75 ( a high price at that time ) . Order blanks were sent to those who had written early , and soon these blanks were selling for $ 10 . Yet few collectors were successful in having their orders filled , with most having their payment returned as the coins had supposedly sold out . The sets quickly jumped in price to $ 40 . At this high level , many coins proved available . Numismatist Q. David Bowers stated that these were most likely surreptitiously sold by Melish and other insiders . Melish also allowed the issuers of the York County Tercentenary half dollar to purchase , at the original issue price , several sets — members of the public could order at most one set at that price . In return , he sought to purchase the other commemorative in quantities beyond the order limit . Nevertheless , when the Oregon Trail Memorial Association , issuer of the long @-@ lived half dollar honoring the trail , tried to purchase a set , Melish replied that they were sold out . 
 By December , the bottom had dropped out of the commemorative coin market , and dealers who had purchased quantities found themselves unable to dispose of them at a profit . By 1940 the coin sets were selling for $ 15 per set . They thereafter recovered , and by the early 1960s had reached $ 100 a set , and by 1975 $ 550 per set of three . At the height of the second commemorative coin boom in 1980 , they sold for $ 2 @,@ 250 a set . R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins , published in 2015 , lists the sets at between $ 875 and $ 2 @,@ 700 depending on condition . Individual coins are cataloged at about a third of the set prices . 
 The circumstances of the issuance were not clear at first : Mehl wrote that the coin was to honor the 50th anniversary of the " Cincinnati Musical Center " which was " founded in 1886 " and that " either through good distribution or a great demand , the sets did not go around to all those who wanted them " . Later numismatic writers have been harsh to Melish ; Swiatek deemed the coin issued because of " false claims " on its behalf . Kevin Flynn , in his volume on commemoratives , stated that the Cincinnati piece " was made for pure profit and greed " . Swiatek and Breen , in their 1988 book , suggest that Melish 's group " had only one idea in mind : enriching themselves by publicizing and distributing a limited issue which could be priced into orbit by speculators " . 
 With the success of the issue , Melish tried to get Congress to authorize 1937 @-@ dated pieces ; he was not successful . He had managed to get Congress to allow another commemorative under his control , the 1936 Cleveland Centennial half dollar . In 1942 , when the ANA held its annual convention in Cincinnati , Melish hosted a hospitality suite . Dubbed the " Pirate 's Den " , it featured paintings he had commissioned , depicting coin dealers and other numismatic personalities in piratical clothes . According to Bowers , " Overlooked was the fact that the greatest pirate of all was surely Melish himself , who undoubtedly treated many of his guests with money taken from them a few years earlier in the sale of Cincinnati sets ! " 
 = Kurt Welter = 
 Kurt Welter ( 25 February 1916 – 7 March 1949 ) was a German Luftwaffe fighter ace and the most successful Jet Expert of World War II . A flying ace or fighter ace is a military aviator credited with shooting down five or more enemy aircraft during aerial combat . He claimed a total of 63 aerial victories — that is , 63 aerial combat encounters resulting in the destruction of the enemy aircraft — achieved in 93 combat missions . He recorded 56 victories at night , including 33 Mosquitos , and scored more aerial victories from a jet fighter aircraft than anyone else in World War II and possibly in aviation history . However this score is a matter of controversy ; research of Royal Air Force losses suggests Welter may have <unk> . 
 Welter was born in Cologne @-@ Lindenthal ( Köln @-@ Lindenthal ) on 25 February 1916 . He joined the military service of the Luftwaffe in 1934 and was trained as a pilot . He showed a strong natural ability as a pilot and was subsequently selected for flight instructor training and served many years as a flight instructor . In 1943 Welter transferred to an operational night fighter unit flying contemporary piston engine fighter aircraft . On 18 October 1944 , after 40 combat missions , Welter was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . In early 1945 , Welter transferred to an experimental jet night fighter unit flying the Messerschmitt Me 262 . On 11 March 1945 he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves for 48 aerial victories . Welter survived the war and was killed in an accident at a railroad crossing on 7 March 1949 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Welter was born on 25 February 1916 in Cologne @-@ Lindenthal . Following schooling and completing a merchant apprenticeship , he joined the Luftwaffe on 1 October 1934 and was trained as a pilot . Because of his skill as a pilot he was trained as a flight instructor . During World War II , Welter was promoted to Feldwebel on 1 August 1940 and transferred to flight training school Flieger @-@ <unk> @-@ Regiment 63 and later on to the flight instructor school at Quedlinburg . Here Welter served as a flight instructor until 10 August 1943 when he was transferred to Blindflugschule 10 ( school for instrument flight training ) in Altenburg with the rank of Oberfeldwebel as a night fighter instructor . 
 On 2 September 1943 , Welter was transferred to 5 . Staffel / Jagdgeschwader 301 ( JG 301 ) , a night fighter squadron that experimented with the use of largely radar @-@ less single @-@ seat Fw 190A @-@ 5 and Fw 190A @-@ 6 fighter aircraft by night , often equipped with the FuG 350 Naxos device , used in the form of German night @-@ fighter operations without AI radar — due to <unk> interference from RAF Bomber Command aircraft — dubbed Wilde Sau ( wild boar ) . On his first Wilde Sau intercept mission against Allied bombers on the night of 22 September 1943 , Welter shot down two Allied four @-@ engine bombers . He shot down a further two on his third mission on the night of 3 October 1943 . By the beginning of April , he had accumulated 17 victories in only 15 missions . Subsequently on 10 May 1944 Welter was awarded the German Cross in Gold . Leutnant Welter was transferred to 5 . Staffel / Jagdgeschwader 300 ( JG 300 ) on 7 July 1944 . 
 In July , Welter claimed two United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) B @-@ 17 four @-@ engined bombers and three P @-@ 51 fighters , two of which claimed on 19 July between Munich and Memmingen , shot down by day . From 25 July 1944 , Welter served with 1 . Staffel / <unk> 10 ( <unk> 10 ) performing further Wilde Sau missions . He claimed four Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Lancaster four @-@ engine bombers shot down on the night of 29 August 1944 to record his 24th through 27th victories . 
 Welter transferred to 10 . / JG 300 on 4 September 1944 . 10 . Staffel / JG 300 was established to counter intrusions by RAF Mosquito twin @-@ engined bombers , flying specially optimized for speed Bf 109G @-@ 6 / AS fighters . In September , Welter claimed seven Mosquitos downed , including one by ramming . It is thought that during his service with 1 . / NJG 10 and 10 . / JG 300 , Welter recorded 12 victories in only 18 missions . On the night of 19 September 1944 , according to Hinchliffe , Welter may have shot down Wing Commander Guy Gibson who was leading a 300 @-@ bomber attack on Mönchengladbach and Rheydt . Gibson 's Mosquito crashed near Steenbergen in the Netherlands . Welter was the only German pilot to have claimed a Mosquito . The claim is unlikely . Welter submitted his victory claim north of Wittenberg in eastern Germany , some hundreds of miles away from the place Gibson 's Mosquito was found . Recent research suggests that his victim was Mosquito VI " <unk> " of No. 23 Squadron RAF which was shot down by Welter at 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) west of Bad <unk> , Holzminden . The crew , F / O. K. Eastwood and Navigator F / L. G.G. Rogers were both killed . Welter was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 18 October 1944 for 33 victories in just 40 missions . 
 = = = Flying the Messerschmitt Me 262 = = = 
 On 2 November 1944 , Welter was transferred to II . Gruppe / Nachtjagdgeschwader 11 ( NJG 11 ) , a reformation of his former unit . Here he was given command of a special Kommando subordinate to II . / NJG 11 , set up on 11 November 1944 at <unk> Rechlin 's southern <unk> airbase ( 2 November 1944 – 28 January 1945 ) , and dedicated to performing nocturnal interception with the Messerschmitt Me 262 jet fighter of RAF Mosquitos attacking the Berlin area . According to some sources , Oberleutnant Welter added a Lancaster to his growing list of Mosquitos on the night of 12 December 1944 , the first night victory by a jet fighter . Other sources state that his first aerial victory flying the Me 262 was claimed either on the night of 2 January 1945 or 5 January 1945 . On 28 January 1945 , the unit initially known as Sonderkommando Stamp , named after its founder Major Gerhard Stamp and then Sonderkommando Welter , was re @-@ designated 10 . Staffel / NJG 11 and transferred to the airfield at Burg near Magdeburg ( 28 January 1945 – 12 April 1945 ) . The unit was equipped with radar @-@ less Me 262 jet fighters , and tasked with intercepting Mosquito bomber aircraft of No.8 Group RAF in the Berlin area , with the aid of ground control and the searchlight defences , partially a Wilde Sau form of night combat . Welter had claimed three aerial victories while flying the Me 262 by early February 1945 . 
 Thereafter , Welter made a string of questionable air combat claims against Mosquito aircraft in the Berlin area – three on the night of 21 February 1945 ( no Mosquitoes lost ) , and another three on the night of 2 March 1945 ( one Mosquito damaged in aerial combat ) . 10 . / NJG 11 made further claims against Mosquito aircraft attacking Berlin on the nights of 21 March 1945 ( three claims ; one Mosquito lost ) , 23 March 1945 ( three claims ; one Mosquito lost , another damaged in aerial combat ) , 24 March 1945 ( two claims ; one Mosquito damaged in aerial combat ) , 27 March 1945 ( two claims ; two Mosquitos lost ) , 30 March 1945 ( four claims ; one Mosquito lost and another damaged in aerial combat ) , 2 April 1945 ( one claim ; one Mosquito lost ) , 3 April 1945 ( two claims ; one Mosquito lost and another damaged in aerial combat ) , and 19 April 1945 ( two claims , no Mosquitos lost ) . The last known aerial combat claim by Welter occurred on the night of 3 April 1945 , when a Mosquito of 139 Squadron , RAF , was shot down over Berlin . Welter was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 11 March 1945 for 48 victories . 
 = = = Controversy over aerial victories = = = 
 Much of the controversy surrounding Welter 's claims for success in nocturnal aerial combat with the Me 262 stems from a memorandum written by Welter on 29 May 1945 for his British captors . In this memorandum Welter stated that between December 1944 and the end of January 1945 , as the sole pilot of Kommando Welter , he flew seven Me 262 sorties and achieved three victories against Mosquito aircraft and two victories against Lancaster aircraft . Welter further stated that from the formation of 10 . / NJG 11 on 28 January 1945 to the end of the war , 10 . / NJG 11 flew around another 63 operational sorties and claimed a further 38 victories against Mosquito aircraft at night and five victories against Mosquito aircraft by day ; his share being 20 Mosquitos at night and two during the day . Thus , according to the memo , a total of 25 Mosquitoes and two Lancasters were claimed in aerial combat by Welter , flying the Me 262 with the Kommando / Staffel , while other pilots of the Staffel claimed a further 21 kills ( of which three were achieved with the two @-@ seater Me 262 ) . Official Luftwaffe documents show that by 4 April 1945 , 10 . / NJG 11 had claimed 34 aerial victories , of which only one was claimed in a two @-@ seater <unk> . Research of RAF records show that only a maximum of 15 Mosquitoes could have been possibly destroyed by Kommando Welter — 10 . / NJG 11 . 
 Officially Kurt Welter was credited with 63 victories in 93 missions , of which 56 victories were achieved at night and seven by day . Among his claimed 63 victories are up to 33 Mosquitos . Thus , there remains some controversy about the exact number of victories achieved while flying the Me 262 , with only three of the Mosquito kills coinciding with RAF records : Welter may have been guilty of overclaiming Welter survived the war and was employed at a sugar factory . He was killed on 7 March 1949 in Leck in Schleswig @-@ Holstein waiting at a level crossing , when logs falling from an improperly loaded passing train crushed his car . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Dienstauszeichnung 4th Class ( 1938 ) 
 Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ( 20 March 1944 ) 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe for night fighter pilots in Gold 
 German Cross in Gold on 10 May 1944 as Fahnenjunker @-@ Oberfeldwebel in the 5 . / JG 301 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 5 October 1943 ) 
 1st Class ( 28 October 1943 ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves 
 Knight 's Cross on 18 October 1944 as Leutnant and pilot in the 10 . / JG 300 
 <unk> Oak Leaves on 11 March 1945 as Oberleutnant and Staffelkapitän of the 10 . / NJG 10 
 = Indianapolis Museum of Art = 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art ( known colloquially as the IMA ) is an encyclopedic art museum located in Indianapolis , Indiana , United States . The museum , which underwent a $ 74 million expansion in 2005 , is located on a 152 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 62 km2 ) campus on the near northwest area outside downtown Indianapolis , northwest of Crown Hill Cemetery . 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art is the ninth oldest and eighth largest encyclopedic art museum in the United States . The permanent collection comprises over 54 @,@ 000 works , including African , American , Asian , and European pieces . Significant areas of the collection include : Neo @-@ Impressionist paintings ; Japanese paintings of the Edo period ; Chinese ceramics and bronzes ; paintings , sculptures , and prints by Paul Gauguin and the Pont @-@ Aven School ; a large number of works by J. M. W. Turner ; and a growing contemporary art collection . Other areas of emphasis include textiles and fashion arts as well as a recent focus on modern design . 
 In addition to its collections , the museum consists of 100 Acres : The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park ; Oldfields , a restored American Country Place era estate once owned by Josiah K. Lilly , Jr . ; and restored gardens and grounds originally designed by Percival Gallagher of the Olmsted Brothers firm . The IMA also owns the Miller House , a Mid @-@ Century modern home designed by Eero Saarinen and located in Columbus , Indiana . The museum 's holdings demonstrate the institution 's emphasis on the connections among art , design , and the natural environment . 
 Founded in 1883 by the Art Association of Indianapolis , the first permanent museum was opened in 1906 as part of the John Herron Art Institute . In 1969 , the Art Association of Indianapolis changed its name to the Indianapolis Museum of Art , and in 1970 the museum moved to its current location at Michigan Road and 38th Street north of downtown Indianapolis . Among the Art Association 's founders was May Wright Sewall ( 1844 – 1920 ) , known for her work in the women 's suffrage movement . Other supporters have included Booth Tarkington ( 1869 – 1946 ) , Eli Lilly ( 1885 – 1977 ) , Herman C. Krannert ( 1887 – 1972 ) , and Caroline Marmon Fesler ( 1878 – 1960 ) . The associated John Herron Art Institute was established with the help of notable Hoosier Group artists T. C. Steele and William Forsyth . 
 Dr. Charles L. Venable is the current Melvin and Bren Simon Director and CEO . The museum is widely recognized as innovative in its development of open source technologies , institutional transparency , and collaboration between museums . In 2008 , the IMA became the first fine art museum to be named an Energy Star partner due to its greening initiative and efforts to reduce energy consumption . In 2009 , the IMA was awarded the National Medal for Museum and Library Service for public service , specifically the museum 's free admission policy and educational programming . 
 = = History = = 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art was founded as the Art Association of Indianapolis , an open @-@ membership group led by the suffragist May Wright Sewall . Formed in 1883 , the organization aimed to inform the public about visual art and provide art education . The Art Association 's first exhibition , which opened November 7 , 1883 , contained 453 artworks from 137 artists . The death of wealthy Indianapolis resident John Herron in 1895 left a substantial bequest with the stipulation that the money be used for a gallery and a school with his name . The John Herron Art Institute opened in 1902 at the corner of 16th and Pennsylvania street . Emphasis on the Arts and Crafts movement grew throughout the early years of the school , with a focus on applied art . William Henry Fox was hired in 1905 as the Art Institute 's first director . From 1905 to 1910 , Fox managed both the museum and the school while constructing two new buildings on the 16th street site . 
 From the 1930s until the 1950s , the John Herron Art Institute placed an emphasis on professionalism and growth in collections . Wilbur Peat , director of the museum from 1929 until 1965 , acquired significant portions of the collection . Peat also made connections with benefactors such as Dr. George H. A. Clowes , Booth Tarkington , and Eli Lilly . Caroline Marmon Fesler , president of the Art Association of Indianapolis , gave a number of artworks in the 1940s , including 20th @-@ century modern artworks and Post @-@ Impressionist works by Cézanne , Van Gogh , and Seurat . After years of debate surrounding expansion and relocation of the museum and school , the great grandchildren of Eli Lilly , J.K. Lilly III and Ruth Lilly , donated the family estate , Oldfields , to the Art Association of Indianapolis in 1966 . One year later it was decided that the school would become a part of Indiana University 's Indianapolis campus in an effort to assist with accreditation . That same year it was confirmed that the museum would relocate to Oldfields , with the new Krannert Pavilion opening to the public in October 1970 . In 1969 , prior to moving to the new site , the Art Association of Indianapolis officially changed its name to the Indianapolis Museum of Art . 
 In 2008 , the museum changed its main entrance and address from 1200 West 38th Street to 4000 North Michigan Road . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 = = = Construction and renovation = = = 
 In 1960 , Art Association of Indianapolis board members began discussing the idea of placing the museum at the center of a new cultural campus . Inspired by University Circle in Cleveland , Ohio , board chairman Herman Krannert proposed building an " <unk> Area " that would combine a number of cultural institutions in a natural setting . The museum 's location on the grounds of Oldfields allowed architect Ambrose Madison Richardson to build on the idea of an acropolis while also utilizing the natural features of the site . Krannert Pavilion opened in 1970 as the first of four buildings located on the museum 's grounds . Following the opening of Krannert , the expansion continued with the Clowes Pavilion in 1972 , which housed the Clowes ' collection of Old Masters ' . Construction on the Showalter Pavilion and Sutphin Fountain was completed in 1973 . In 1986 Edward Larrabee Barnes was chosen to design the <unk> Pavilion , a new wing of the museum which housed the <unk> collection of African and South Pacific art . The pavilion opened in 1990 and increased the exhibition space to more than 80 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 400 m2 ) . The expansion aimed to provide clearer chronological continuity and a more coherent flow as visitors moved from one gallery to the next . 
 From the mid @-@ 1990s until 2005 the IMA focused on the next phase of development , the " New Vision " , or what became known as the " New IMA . " After four years of restoration , the Oldfields mansion reopened to the public in June 2002 and was designated a National Historic Landmark in 2003 . In 2005 the museum completed a three @-@ year , $ 74 million renovation and expansion project that added three new wings and 50 percent more gallery space to the building . In all , the construction added 164 @,@ 000 square feet ( 15 @,@ 200 m2 ) to the museum , in addition to the renovation of 90 @,@ 000 square feet ( 8 @,@ 400 m2 ) of existing space . Renovations included the <unk> and Clowes Pavilions , which house the museum 's European collection , as well as the addition of the Allen Whitehill Clowes Gallery . The expansion aimed to unify the building and campus while creating a more welcoming atmosphere for visitors . As one of three new wings and as a new entry to the building , the Efroymson Pavilion helped to transition visitors between the museum and the surrounding grounds . The Wood Gallery Pavilion added three levels of gallery space as well as a dining area and education suite , while the Deer Zink Pavilion added additional space for private and public events . The architectural focus on welcoming visitors coincided with a new advertising campaign that reached out to a broader , more diverse audience . 
 = = = Museum grounds = = = 
 The 152 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 62 km2 ) grounds of the IMA contain distinctive features that have been modified over time to create a greater connection between the museum building and its surroundings . The Oldfields estate has been described as a Gesamtkunstwerk , a unified work of art that combines the arts of landscape design , gardening , architecture , interior design , and decorative arts . In addition to the restored gardens and grounds of Oldfields , other notable areas of the grounds include the Sutphin Mall and Fountain , the wheelchair accessible Garden for Everyone , and a working greenhouse and shop . The IMA grounds are also home to 100 Acres : The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park , located behind the museum proper . Garden areas make use of existing features in the natural landscape and incorporate examples of public art , both historical and contemporary . 
 = = = 100 Acres : The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park = = = 
 June 20 , 2010 marked the official opening of a large @-@ scale outdoor project undertaken by the IMA . Formerly a gravel pit , 100 Acres : The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park now encompasses a diverse landscape , including wooded areas , wetlands , open fields , a lake and a series of hiking trails that guide visitors past site @-@ specific works of contemporary art . 100 Acres is one of the largest art parks in the country and is the only park to feature an ongoing commission of temporary works . The first eight artists selected to create site @-@ responsive pieces were Atelier Van <unk> , Kendall Buster , Alfredo <unk> , Jeppe Hein , Los <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Type A , and Andrea Zittel . These works , along with an LEED certified visitor center , are linked by a variety of walking trails . 
 = = = Historic properties = = = 
 = = = = Oldfields : Lilly House and gardens = = = = 
 Oldfields is a 26 @-@ acre ( 110 @,@ 000 m2 ) historic estate and house museum on the grounds of the Indianapolis Museum of Art . The gardens and grounds were restored by the museum in the 1990s . Together with the restoration of the mansion in 2002 , Oldfields is now a rare example of a surviving American Country Place Era estate . The estate was designated a U.S. National Historic Landmark in 2003 . Oldfields was built between 1910 and 1913 by architect Lewis Ketcham Davis for the family of Hugh <unk> Landon , who occupied the home from 1913 until 1932 when it was sold to J. K. Lilly , Jr . Lilly , the late Indianapolis businessman , collector , and philanthropist , renovated and expanded the estate throughout the 1930s and 1940s , updating interiors as well as adding a number of new buildings to the grounds . The 22 @-@ room mansion has undergone historic restoration and is currently interpreted to reflect the 1930s era when the Lilly family occupied the residence . In addition to the home 's significance as a representation of the American country house movement , Oldfields ' gardens and grounds are a rare example of a preserved estate landscape designed by Percival Gallagher of the Olmsted Brothers firm . 
 = = = = Miller House and gardens = = = = 
 The Miller House is a Mid @-@ Century modern home designed by Eero Saarinen and located in Columbus , Indiana . The residence was commissioned by American industrialist , philanthropist , and architecture patron J. Irwin Miller and his wife Xenia Simons Miller in 1953 . Design and construction on the Miller House took four years and was completed in 1957 . The home was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2000 . In 2009 , the home and gardens , along with many of the original furnishings , were donated to the Indianapolis Museum of Art by the Miller family . In addition to Eero Saarinen , the house and gardens showcases the work of leading 20th @-@ century figures such as interior designer Alexander Girard , landscape architect Dan Kiley , and principal design associate at the Saarinen office , Kevin Roche . 
 = = = = Westerley House and gardens = = = = 
 Located just south of the museum in the Golden Hill neighborhood , Westerley House is the former home of Dr. George H. A. Clowes and wife Edith , and their son , Allen Clowes . Designed by architect Frederick Wallick and built in 1922 , the four @-@ story home consists of 20 rooms as well as a carriage house , a greenhouse , and the surrounding grounds . Allen Clowes died in 2000 and bequeathed the estate to the museum , intending it to serve as an event space and the home for the IMA director . In 2006 the estate underwent a $ 2 @-@ million renovation , with a major gift of $ 800 @,@ 000 by the Allen Whitehill Clowes Foundation and an anonymous donor . Westerley House historically served as a venue for the Clowes family to showcase their fine art collection , which eventually became the foundation for the IMA 's early European collection . 
 = = Collections = = 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art has a permanent collection of over 54 @,@ 000 works that represent cultures from around the world and span over 5 @,@ 000 years . Areas of the collection include : European painting and sculpture ; American painting and sculpture ; prints , drawings , and photographs ; Asian art ; art of Africa , the South Pacific , and the Americas ; ancient art of the Mediterranean ; Design Arts ; textile and fashion arts ; and contemporary art . The museum holds a significant collection of Neo @-@ Impressionist paintings and prints , many of which were given in 1977 by local industrialist W. J. Holliday . Combined with the Neo @-@ Impressionist collection is the Samuel <unk> Collection of Gauguin and the School of Pont @-@ Aven , which includes highlights such as Bretons in a Ferryboat by Émile Bernard . The IMA also holds a large collection of works by <unk> Turner , containing highlights such as the 1820 watercolor , Rosslyn Castle . The collection , which was formed by a substantial donation by philanthropist Kurt <unk> in 1979 , includes over fifty watercolors , as well as oil paintings , prints , and etchings . 
 The European collection , which is organized into works before 1800 and works from 1800 – 1945 , includes highlights such as Aristotle by Jusepe de Ribera and The <unk> Player on the Cliff by Paul Gauguin . Rembrandt 's Self @-@ Portrait is part of the Clowes Fund Collection , which comprises a number of significant Old Masters pieces . Part of the Neo @-@ Impressionist collection , The Channel of Gravelines , Petit Fort Philippe by Georges Seurat was one of the first works to be donated by Caroline Marmon Fesler in the 1940s . Fesler would go on to donate a number of important works , including her bequest in 1961 of notable 20th @-@ century modernism pieces that included Pablo Picasso , Chagall , and Matisse . Pieces in the American collection represent American Impressionism and Modernism , including works by Georgia O 'Keeffe and George Inness . Significant pieces include Hotel Lobby ( 1943 ) by Edward Hopper and Boat Builders by Winslow Homer . 
 The museum has a substantial Asian art collection , with more than 5 @,@ 000 pieces spanning 4 @,@ 000 years . Most notable is the IMA 's acclaimed collection of Japanese Edo Period paintings , scrolls , and screens . Highlights include A Thousand Peaks and Myriad Ravines , a Ming Dynasty work by Wu Bin , and Buddhist , Daoist , and Confucian Patriarchs , an Edo period panel by Kano <unk> , in addition to a number of Chinese ceramics and bronzes that were donated by Eli Lilly in 1961 , such as a fine Shang bronze <unk> . The IMA 's collection is also made up of more than 2 @,@ 000 pieces of African art and artifacts , 1 @,@ 200 of which were donated by Harrison <unk> in 1989 . The IMA has expanded the collection to include both historical and contemporary objects from every major region of Africa , including Egypt . The museum is unique in its inclusive display of Islamic and ancient Egyptian works within the African gallery , rather than with Greek or Roman antiquities . Significant pieces include a female ancestor figure of the Senufo people and <unk> helmet mask for Oro association by master carver <unk> of Itu <unk> . 
 The museum 's textile and fashion art collection is made up of 7 @,@ 000 items , including 20th @-@ century , custom @-@ designed costumes by Givenchy , Chanel , and Balmain . The collection includes a number of the world 's fabric traditions , including African textiles donated by sisters Eliza and Sarah Niblack between 1916 and 1933 and a significant collection of Baluchi rugs . Based on the museum 's early history of collecting textiles , items range from couture to silks and antique laces spanning 500 years . Some notable pieces include an Imperial Russian court dress by designer Charles Frederick Worth and Bodhisattva of Wisdom ( <unk> ) , a Ming Dynasty silk panel . The museum 's Design Arts collection is made up of European and American pieces from the Renaissance to the present . The collection includes Eliel Saarinen 's sideboard designed in 1929 for The Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibition The Architect and the Industrial Arts : An Exhibition of Contemporary American Design and the Bubbles chaise longue designed by Frank Gehry in 1979 for the Experimental Edges Series . 
 In recent years the IMA has begun to focus on developing its contemporary art collection , which includes works such as Two White Dots in the Air by Alexander Calder and Light and Space III , a permanent installation by Robert Irwin located in the Pulliam Great Hall . Since 2007 the museum has featured site @-@ specific contemporary installations in the Efroymson Pavilion , rotating the temporary works every six months . The Efroymson Pavilion has featured works by artists such as William Lamson , Ball @-@ <unk> Studio , Orly <unk> , and Heather Rowe to name a few . Contemporary art is also featured in 100 Acres : The Virginia B. Fairbanks Art and Nature Park , which is unique in its inclusion of commissioned works by emerging mid @-@ career artists . Since 2007 , the IMA has committed to building a modern design collection that illustrates the artistic merits of utilitarian objects . The focus on international contemporary design , combined with the opening of the Miller House in 2011 , is expected to reposition the museum as an authority on design . 
 = = = Transparency = = = 
 The IMA 's collecting and deaccessioning practices have utilized technology to provide public access , openness , and transparency in museum operations . Unveiled in March 2009 , the museum 's online <unk> database lists every object being <unk> and links new acquisitions to the sold objects that provided funds for their purchase . The IMA has been praised for being the first among museums to openly share their deaccessioning practices and for including the ability to post public comments on entries in the searchable database . The IMA also developed the Association of Art Museum Director 's ( <unk> ) Object Registry , a database that helps museums more easily abide by the 1970 UNESCO ruling that prevents illicit trafficking of antiquities . Since 2003 , the IMA has systematically researched the provenance of artworks created before 1946 and acquired after 1932 . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The IMA 's conservation department was established in 1970 by the museum 's first full @-@ time conservator , Paul Spheeris , and quickly became known as a regional center for conservation . In 1978 the department began providing consulting services to regional institutions , taking on contracts from across the Midwest . An early high profile contract involved the preservation of 45 governors ' portraits over the course of 15 months . The 1979 exhibit , Portraits and Painters of the Governors of Indiana , was held at the IMA from January to March before the portraits were placed on permanent display at the Indiana Statehouse . Other major regional projects have included the conservation and restoration of the Thomas Hart Benton murals , first created for the Indiana Hall at the 1933 Chicago World 's Fair and now located at Indiana University , the <unk> Memorial Hospital murals , the Otto Stark and Clifton Wheeler murals in Indianapolis Public School 54 , and most recently the restoration of the May Wright Sewall Memorial Torches at Herron High School , the former site of the John Herron Art Institute . 
 Currently , the conservation department serves the needs of the museum through the expertise of specialists in paintings , textiles , works on paper , frames , and objects conservation . The department has grown in both size and staff throughout the years , with the most recent expansion occurring in 2007 . As of 2007 , the IMA owned one of the few computer @-@ based X @-@ ray units in the United States , continuing a trend in X @-@ ray technology that the department began in the 1970s . In 1980 , the department helped organize and establish the Midwest Regional Conservation Guild , which includes conservators and conservation scientists from Indiana , Ohio , Illinois , and Michigan . In the mid @-@ 1980s , the department received attention when head conservator Martin Radecki assisted local authorities in uncovering over two dozen forged T.C. Steele and William Forsythe paintings worth more than $ 200 @,@ 000 . The high profile forgery case led Radecki to organize an exhibit in 1989 , Is it Genuine ? Steele , Forsythe and <unk> in Indiana . The exhibit highlighted conservation techniques and examined how forgeries can be discovered . Another public presentation of conservation took place in 2007 with Sebastiano <unk> : The Science of Art , a Star Studio exhibit that allowed visitors to watch conservators as they worked on the 16th @-@ century altarpiece . The IMA 's Star Studio is an interactive gallery that enables visitors to learn , through the process of art @-@ making and observation , about the museum 's collections . 
 In February 2010 , the IMA shifted from current environmental control standards within their exhibition spaces , allowing temperature and humidity fluctuation of a few degrees on either side of the suggested standard . The IMA relinquished the standard after concluding that the majority of artworks could sustain a greater range of humidity , so permitting the museum to save on the cost of energy bills and reduce its carbon footprint . 
 = = = Conservation Science = = = 
 In October 2008 , the IMA announced a $ 2 @.@ 6 million grant from the Lilly Endowment to be used toward the creation of a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art conservation science lab . Through a grant from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation , Dr. Gregory Dale Smith , was hired in October 2009 to lead the lab as its senior conservation scientist . A main focus of the lab is researching the IMA 's collection , including couture fashion in the textile collection and objects made of synthetic materials in the design collection . Another focus is scientific research on materials found in the collections , such as resins and dyes on African art pieces and glazes on Asian ceramics . Through the addition of the lab , the IMA aims to establish itself as an internationally recognized conservation center and to increase its potential as a training and professional development resource in conservation science . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 In 1909 the Art Association campaigned for a major retrospective , the Augustus Saint @-@ Gaudens Memorial Exhibition , to be brought to Indianapolis . The exhibition , also referred to as the Saint @-@ Gaudens Memorial Exhibition of Statuary , attracted 56 @,@ 000 visitors during its three @-@ month run , well beyond the board 's goal of attracting 50 @,@ 000 visitors . A 1937 exhibition , Dutch Paintings of the Seventeenth Century , included loans from the Cincinnati Art Museum , the Metropolitan Museum of Art , and the Rijksmuseum Amsterdam . The six @-@ week exhibition presented 65 pieces , including several Rembrandts , and was considered the beginning of the museum 's rise to <unk> . 
 In 1977 , the IMA acquired a collection of Neo @-@ Impressionist paintings from Indianapolis industrialist W.J. Holliday , which was presented in an exhibition in 1983 titled The Aura of Neo @-@ Impressionism : The W.J. Holliday Collection . From 1986 to 1988 , the exhibit traveled to seven cities in the United States and made one stop in Europe at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam . Opening in the summer of 1987 to coincide with the Pan American Games , Art of the Fantastic : Latin America , 1920 – 1987 presented 125 works by artists from a variety of nations . Well @-@ known artists such as Frida Kahlo and Roberto Matta were featured , as well as artists who had never exhibited outside their native country . The show was the first large @-@ scale presentation of 20th @-@ century Latin American art in the United States in over 20 years and was the museum 's first contemporary exhibition to travel . 
 In 1992 , the IMA hosted the The William S. Paley Collection , a traveling exhibition organized by the Museum of Modern Art that included Impressionist , Post @-@ Impressionist , and modern pieces collected by the late CBS news chairman William S. Paley . The exhibit helped establish the IMA as a prominent museum venue in the Midwest and brought in a record @-@ setting 60 @,@ 837 visitors . In 2001 , the IMA collaborated with the Armory Museum in Moscow to organize Gifts to the Tsars , 1500 – 1700 : Treasures from the Kremlin . The show helped the IMA form partnerships with local arts organizations , gain international exposure , and attracted a record 70 @,@ 704 visitors . Another important exhibit to travel to the IMA was Roman Art from the Louvre , which attracted 106 @,@ 002 visitors during its 2008 run . The exhibition featured 184 mosaics , frescoes , statues , marble reliefs , and vessels loaned from the permanent collection of the Louvre in Paris , France . It was the largest collection ever loaned from the Louvre to date , and only stopped in three U.S. cities before returning to France . 
 In 2009 , Sacred Spain : Art and Belief in the Spanish World brought together 71 works of art from a wide variety of lenders , including Peru , Mexico , and the Prado in Spain . The exhibit was composed of a rare collection of pieces , many of which had never been on view in the United States . It featured paintings , sculpture , metalwork , and books by artists such as El Greco , Diego Velázquez , and Bartolomé Esteban Murillo . Andy Warhol Enterprises was displayed at the IMA from October , 2010 to January , 2011 and featured more than 150 works of art by Andy Warhol , as well as archival materials . The exhibition was the largest to illustrate Warhol 's fascination with money and feature consumerism as a central theme . Visitors were able to view the progression of Warhol 's career , from his beginnings as a commercial artist to his multimillion @-@ dollar empire . 
 = = = Traveling exhibitions = = = 
 European Design since 1985 : Shaping the New Century was displayed from March 8 to June 21 , 2009 and was the first major survey of contemporary European Design . The exhibition contained a collection of nearly 250 pieces by Western European industrial and decorative designers such as Philippe Starck , Marc Newson and Mathias Bengtsson . Three prominent modes of design emerged from 1985 – 2005 and could be seen in the exhibition : Geometric Minimal design , <unk> design and Neo @-@ Pop design . Among the themes addressed throughout the exhibition was the question of what makes something " art " and how to distinguish a museum quality piece in a world full of mass @-@ produced products . Rather than organizing the exhibition by designer or country , the pieces were organized based on the intellectual or philosophical precept under which they fell . After leaving the IMA , the exhibition traveled to the High Museum of Art in Atlanta and the Milwaukee Art Museum in Milwaukee . 
 Hard Truths : The Art of Thornton Dial , on display from February to September 2011 , includes over 70 large @-@ scale artworks and is the largest assemblage of Thornton Dial 's work ever mounted . The exhibition <unk> Dial as a relevant , contemporary artist rather than a folk artist or outsider artist as many have portrayed him in the past . The pieces on view in Hard Truths cover a range of social and political themes , many of which address rural life in the south and the treatment of African Americans . After departing Indianapolis , the exhibition is scheduled to travel to New Orleans , Charlotte , North Carolina and Atlanta . 
 = = = Venice Biennale = = = 
 In 2010 , the IMA was selected to be the commissioning organization for the United States pavilion at the Venice Biennale ( Biennale di Venezia ) . The IMA 's proposal to create an exhibition featuring the work of Puerto Rican artists Jennifer Allora and Guillermo Calzadilla was accepted by the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs at the U.S. State Department . Allora and Calzadilla were the first collaborative team to be exhibited at the Venice Biennale , and 2011 was the first time American artists from a Spanish @-@ speaking community were selected . Six new works of art will be developed by the pair , who often explore geopolitical themes through their work . The pieces they created for the 2011 U.S. Pavilion will formed an exhibition entitled Gloria and highlighted competitive institutions such as the Olympic Games , the military , and international commerce . Allora and Calzadilla also brought bring elements of performance into their multimedia pieces through the participation of Olympic athletes . Three of the six pieces , entitled Body in Flight ( Delta ) , Body in Flight ( American ) , and Track and Field , featured Olympians Dan O 'Brien , Chellsie Memmel , and David Durante . 
 = = Administration = = 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art is a 501 ( c ) ( 3 ) corporation which is governed by director and CEO Charles Venable , three vice chairmen , a treasurer , secretary , and 21 additional board members . The museums endowment consists of approximately 120 individual funds devoted to building operations , bond costs , personnel expenses , legal fees and other purposes . 
 = = = Mission = = = 
 The Indianapolis Museum of Art serves the creative interests of its communities by fostering exploration of art , design , and the natural environment . The IMA promotes these interests through the collection , presentation , interpretation and conservation of its artistic , historic , and environmental assets . 
 = = = Affiliates = = = 
 The IMA has relied on affiliates to support and raise awareness about the museum 's collections since the early 20th century . In 1919 the Friends of American Art was founded to support purchases for the Art Association of Indianapolis and Herron Museum . For two decades the Friends purchased 22 works of art for the collection , funded by members ' annual donations . The Alliance of the Indianapolis Museum of Art was founded in 1958 and planned lectures , black tie balls , and related activities in order to raise funds for the museum . Major gifts included a $ 350 @,@ 000 contribution in 1979 toward the $ 40 million centennial endowment campaign and a $ 500 @,@ 000 contribution toward the IMA 's 1990 expansion . By 2007 the Alliance had provided purchase funds for over 300 works of art . The Contemporary Art Society was formed in 1962 to acquire contemporary art for the museum 's permanent collection . In 1963 , the first major acquisition consisted of 65 works . The Horticultural Society was founded in 1972 to contribute to the care and education of the museum 's gardens and grounds , raising $ 65 @,@ 000 in 1989 toward the restoration of Oldfields ' gardens . In the late 1970s the Second Century Society and the Print and Drawing Society were both formed . The Second Century Society , later known as the IMA Council , was founded to celebrate donations of $ 1 @,@ 000 or more to the museum 's annual operating fund , attracting more than 200 contributors during its inaugural year . In 1979 , the Print and Drawing Society exhibited 70 artworks spanning 500 years in their first exhibit , The Print and Drawing Society Collections . By the late 1980s the museum had expanded its affiliate program to include the Decorative Arts Society , the Asian Arts Society , the Ethnographic Arts Society , and the Fashion Arts Society . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 After undergoing a sustainability initiative that reduced natural gas consumption by 48 percent and electricity consumption by 19 percent , the IMA became the first fine art museum to be named an Energy Star partner in 2008 . As of 2010 , the IMA was one of only 11 museums to receive this recognition by the Environmental Protection Agency . The museum instituted a " greening committee " to organize a variety of efforts to maintain environmental stewardship , a primary component of the institution 's mission . 
 In 2009 the IMA was awarded the National Medal for Museum and Library Service , one of 10 institutions to receive this annual distinction by the Institute of Museum and Library Services ( <unk> ) . The IMA was recognized for serving its community through a number of programs , including <unk> , a school program that serves 9 @,@ 000 local students a year . <unk> also cited the IMA 's free admission , greening and sustainability initiatives , efforts to reach virtual audiences , and improvements in accessibility throughout the museum . 
 = = Outreach = = 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The IMA 's educational initiatives include programming for the local community as well as online audiences . <unk> , an art @-@ viewing program that serves 9 @,@ 000 local students a year , uses Visual Thinking Strategy , an arts @-@ based curriculum that teaches critical thinking , communication skills , and visual literacy . The museum 's emphasis on online engagement has led to educational tools such as ArtBabble , a video portal for art museum content . Davis Lab , located within the museum next to the Pulliam Great Hall , is a space where visitors can virtually browse the museum 's collection and experiment with new technology . In addition to its focus on technology and school outreach , the museum provides classes , lectures , and film series , as well as ongoing tours of the collections , historic properties , and grounds . Other programming includes the Star Studio , a space for drop @-@ in art making where visitors , along with museum staff , carry out projects inspired by museum exhibitions . 
 From 1946 until 1981 , the Indianapolis Junior League provided volunteers and monetary support for the museum 's docent program . In 1981 , the museum began its own docent training program , which continues to serve a large number of volunteer docents through classes and training . As of 2009 over 500 individuals volunteer at the IMA . 
 = = = Accessibility = = = 
 Since the 1990s the IMA has continually improved accessibility for visitors ; the initiative was a contributing factor to the museum receiving the National Medal for Museum and Library Service in 2009 . The IMA provides captioning on videos produced by the museum , large print binders for exhibits , accessible seating and sign language interpretation in Tobias Theater , and wheelchair @-@ accessible trails in 100 Acres . The museum also maintains partnerships with the Indiana School for the Deaf and the Indiana School for the Blind . In 1993 the IMA opened the Garden for Everyone , a wheelchair @-@ accessible garden designed to emphasize multiple senses . The garden includes varieties of fragrant and textured plants as well as a number of sculptures , including La Hermana del Hombre <unk> by Pablo Serrano . 
 = = Initiatives = = 
 = = = IMA Lab = = = 
 In February 2010 , the IMA announced the launch of IMA Lab , a consulting service within the museum 's technology department . IMA Lab was designed to address museum @-@ specific technology needs not currently met by software vendors and to provide consulting services to museums and nonprofit organizations that want to use technology to help solve problems and meet objectives . IMA Lab projects include TAP , <unk> , and the IMA Dashboard . TAP is a mobile tour application for iPod Touch that presents visitors with content related to the IMA 's collection , such as artist interviews , text and audio files , and pictures . <unk> , for which IMA Lab is the technical lead , is a project that explores social tagging as a new way to describe collections and make them more accessible . 
 = = = ArtBabble = = = 
 In 2009 the IMA launched ArtBabble , an online art themed video website that features interviews and full @-@ length documentaries . ArtBabble serves as a repository for art related media content created by not only the IMA but other institutions . The Smithsonian American Art Museum , San Francisco Museum of Modern Art , Los Angeles County Museum of Art , San Diego Museum of Contemporary Art , and the New York Public Library are some of the 30 worldwide partners who contribute content . ArtBabble was a showcase project for the National Summit on Arts Journalism and was chosen " Best Overall " Best of the Web winner at Museums and the Web 2010 . 
 = = = IMA Art Services = = = 
 IMA Art Services is a consulting service focused around public art and modeled after the museum 's other consulting arm , IMA Lab . In January 2011 , IMA Art Services signed its first contract with the Indianapolis Airport Authority . With the $ 100 @,@ 000 , one @-@ year contract , the museum will manage the Indianapolis Airport Authority 's art collection , which includes 40 works currently on display in the passenger terminal of the Indianapolis International Airport . 
 = Typhoon Mary ( 1960 ) = 
 Typhoon Mary , also nicknamed " Bloody Mary " by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , was an extremely damaging storm that was part of the 1960 Pacific typhoon season . It began as a circulation in a trough in the South China Sea . A tropical depression formed on June 2 , as it was traveling clockwise . It became a tropical storm on the next day , and received the name Mary . It slowly moved across the sea , strengthening to a typhoon . Mary made landfall in Hong Kong on June 8 , and moved through Guangdong and Fujian . It reemerged back to the Pacific Ocean , and restrengthened into a typhoon temporarily . It then traveled east , weakening and becoming extratropical on June 12 . 
 Mary caused a significant amount of damage in Hong Kong and China . It was considered the worst storm to hit Hong Kong since the typhoon in 1937 . The storm destroyed weak shacks made by refugees from the mainland , leaving thousands homeless . There were multiple landslides , and most of the infrastructure were damaged . More than 400 small watercraft were either damaged or destroyed . In China , dikes and dams were damaged severely , multiple public buildings collapsed , and destroyed large swaths of farmland . Significant wind and rain was also reported in Taiwan . More than 1 @,@ 600 people died during the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In early June , a trough extended from Taiwan to the South China Sea , and a small circulation was found at the southwestern part of it . The Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) designated the system as a tropical depression on June 2 , with a pressure reading of 1 @,@ 000 hectopascals ( 30 inHg ) . JTWC reported it had winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) during that time . On the next day at 1200 UTC , JTWC began tracking the storm as a tropical depression . The system was upgraded to a tropical storm at 1800 UTC , with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , and was given the name Mary by the warning center . By 1800 UTC of June 4 , Mary slowly began turning northward near the Paracel Islands , and had intensified slightly to 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . 
 On June 5 , JMA recorded Mary 's lowest pressure reading at 980 hPa ( 29 inHg ) . Two days later , the storm had intensified to 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , and was traveling faster towards Hong Kong . On June 7 , at 0600 UTC , Mary quickly strengthened to a typhoon , with winds up to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Mary peaked at 0600 UTC on June 8 , just offshore of Hong Kong , with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , and JTWC estimated the pressure was 975 hPa ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . Twelve hours later , the storm made landfall on Hong Kong northwest of Kowloon . Inland , the typhoon slowly weakened to 90 km / h ( 55 mph ) by June 10 , back to a tropical storm . The system gained speed as it traveled through Guangdong and Fujian provinces . Mary soon reemerged back to the ocean later than day , began restrengthening , and was found to have 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) winds , recorded by the U.S. Navy . The storm briefly became a typhoon at 1800 UTC , and reconnaissance aircraft recorded winds just above typhoon strength , although the circulation did not have eyewalls . It was downgraded to a tropical storm on June 11 at 1200 UTC . 
 Another reconnaissance aircraft flew into Mary again at 2330 UTC , reporting that there was no eyewall in the storm and recorded winds up to 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Mary continued to weaken until June 12 , when JTWC and JMA declared the storm had become extratropical southeast of Tokyo . JMA continued to track the extratropical cyclone until it reached the International Date Line on June 18 . 
 = = Preparations , impact and aftermath = = 
 Before Mary made landfall , 80 freighters and liners arrived in Hong Kong to ride out the storm . In Okinawa , military personnel were evacuated to safe areas , and planes were all protected . Meanwhile , a joint military exercise by the South Korean and American Marines were delayed by one day due to the storm . 
 = = = Hong Kong = = = 
 Typhoon Mary was considered the worst storm to hit Hong Kong in 23 years . The typhoon arrived at the colony on June 8 , dropping 35 @.@ 9 centimetres ( 14 @.@ 12 in ) of rain in 24 hours . Average gusts were reported at 119 kilometres per hour ( 64 kn ) on Waglan Island , with 194 kilometres per hour ( 105 kn ) at times . At the Royal Observatory , the storm dropped 42 @.@ 7 cm ( 16 @.@ 83 in ) of rain . The mean winds blew southwesterly at 87 km / h ( 47 kn ) , exposing many small boats and villages . The No. 10 warning signal was issued by the Royal Observatory . However , according to the report written by the Observatory , the use of No. 10 warning signal was not strictly justified according to international procedures , since sustained surface winds of 119 km / h ( 64 kn ) were not observed . Across the colony , damage to roads , buildings , and communication were significant . Landslides , and other fallen debris blocked roads , and weak refugee shacks in the hills , made out of tin and tar paper , quickly collapsed . All stores and public transportation were shut down inside the city . The Customs reported that more than 50 fishing vessels capsized and sank in the anchorages during the typhoon . Two ocean freighters , the Malaya Fir and the Wan Fu , ran aground onto the Kai Tak Airstrip . Although the floods have caused extreme damage , it helped with the local shortage of water , with reservoirs gaining eleven million <unk> ( 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gal ) of water . 
 After the storm , 18 @,@ 000 refugees from Mainland China became homeless . The official count was 45 casualties , 11 missing , and 127 injured , with most casualties coming from refugees . Overall , 462 small watercraft were damaged or destroyed . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 In Mainland China , the typhoon brought heavy rain and wind into the provinces of Guangdong and Fujian . Dikes and dams were severely damaged by the storm , leading to severe flooding . Thousands of people were trying to reinforce these as the floodwaters continued to rise . Manpower was also used to gather ripened crops before the storm destroyed them . More than 4 @,@ 800 buildings were damaged , and over 540 @,@ 000 hectares ( 1 @,@ 330 @,@ 000 acres ) of land was affected by the storm . The total number of casualties was reportedly 1 @,@ 600 ; and 180 @,@ 000 cattle were reported killed . 
 Macau received a similar amount of rain as Hong Kong , which caused local flooding . The winds uprooted trees , blocking local streets . 
 About 260 kilometres ( 160 mi ) southeast of Hong Kong , the cargo ship Sheng Lee sank during the typhoon . Fifty @-@ four survivors were rescued and safely transported to the British colony by the Royal Navy frigate HMS Torquay , with help from Dutch ships , and the Republic of China Navy and Air Force . 
 Off the coast of Mainland China , in the Matsu Islands , many fishing boats were damaged by the heavy seas and the torrential rainfall . Three people were injured in the islands . In Taiwan , downtown Taipei received significant flooding , and some rice crops on the south part of the island were damaged . Although there were no reported deaths on the island , four fisherman offshore died . The nearby Okinawa Islands received winds around 105 kilometres per hour ( 65 mph ) . 
 = Neighborhoods ( Blink @-@ 182 album ) = 
 Neighborhoods is the sixth studio album by the American rock band Blink @-@ 182 , released September 27 , 2011 through DGC Records and Interscope Records . Their first album of new material in eight years ( the longest gap between albums to date ) , its recording followed the band 's breakup and later reconciliation . Due to conflicts within the trio , the band entered an " indefinite hiatus " in 2005 and the members explored various side @-@ projects . After two separate tragedies regarding the band and their entourage , the members of the band decided to reunite in late 2008 , with plans for a new album and tour . It is the first Blink @-@ 182 album produced by the band members without the help of an outside record producer , as well as the final album with Tom DeLonge before his departure in 2015 . 
 The band 's studio autonomy , tours , managers and personal projects stalled the recording process , which lasted from shortly after the band 's February 2009 reunion to July 2011 . The band developed Neighborhoods in separate studios and regrouped at various periods to record . The band 's numerous delays in the recording process resulted in the band canceling a European tour and the label setting a deadline for the album to be due . The trio wrote lyrics regarding such subjects as isolation , confusion and death . The band infused inspiration from each member 's various musical tastes to form a unique sound that recalled their separate upbringings , leading the trio to compare the album to separate neighborhoods . 
 Neighborhoods was released to mixed reviews from critics ; some felt it was a natural evolution from the band 's previous releases , while others found it stale and disjointed . The album debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 and " Up All Night " and " After Midnight " were released as singles , with both attracting modest success on Billboard 's Alternative Songs chart . Despite this , Neighborhoods did not sell as well as earlier releases and the band would depart from Interscope the following fall . The group would later look back on their comeback album with divided feelings ; DeLonge would admit that the recording methods perhaps created less unity within the group . 
 = = Background = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 announced on February 22 , 2005 that they would be going on an " indefinite hiatus " . The decision , in reality a break @-@ up of the group , stemmed from internal band tension , which had arisen in late 2004 during the band 's European tour . Guitarist and vocalist Tom DeLonge expressed his desire to take a half @-@ year respite from touring in order to spend more time with family . Bassist and vocalist Mark Hoppus and drummer Travis Barker were dismayed by his decision , which they felt was an overly long break . Following the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , DeLonge agreed to perform at Music for Relief 's Concert for South Asia , a benefit show to aid victims . Further arguments ensued during rehearsals , rooted in the band members ' increasing paranoia and bitterness toward one another . DeLonge felt his priorities were " mad different , " and the breakdown in communication led to heated exchanges , resulting in his exit from the group . During the hiatus , DeLonge formed space rock band Angels & Airwaves while Barker and Hoppus continued playing together in + 44 . Two events in late 2008 would lead to the band 's eventual reformation : the death of longtime producer Jerry Finn ( who suffered a cerebral hemorrhage ) and a near @-@ fatal plane crash involving Barker and collaborator DJ AM . 
 Immediately the two incidents raised rumors of a possible Blink @-@ 182 reunion . Hoppus was alerted about Barker 's accident by a phone call in the middle of the night and jumped on the next flight to the burn center . DeLonge learned of the crash via the TV news at an airport while waiting to board a flight . He landed and mailed a letter and two photographs to Barker : a photo of Blink aboard a submarine in the Middle East and another of himself and his two kids . " One was ' Do you remember who we were ? ' and the other was ' This is who I am now , ' " DeLonge said DeLonge also commented that , no matter what happened between himself and Barker in the past , " none of it matters when it comes down to somebody getting hurt . " Hoppus first spoke on the matter in a blog post in November 2008 , writing that he " hadn 't had it in him " to post , adding that " these past two months have been the hardest times I can remember . " He also revealed that he , DeLonge , and Barker had all spoken in the aftermath . Barker quashed reunion rumors in December , but noted that they had been getting along . 
 Talk of a reunion commenced weeks after the trio began speaking again . After a two @-@ hour phone conversation between DeLonge and Hoppus , an arrangement was made for the trio to meet up at Hoppus and Barker 's Los Angeles studio in October 2008 . DeLonge was the first to approach the subject of reuniting . The trio had , in Hoppus 's words , " two gnarly heart @-@ to @-@ hearts , " during which the three opened up . " Tom had just kind of come out to Los Angeles for the day , " recalled Hoppus , " I remember he said , ' So , what do you guys think ? Where are your heads at ? ' And I said , ' I think we should continue with what we 've been doing for the past 17 years . I think we should get back on the road and back in the studio and do what we love doing . ' " Eventually , the band appeared for the first time on stage together in nearly five years as presenters at the 51st Grammy Awards on February 8 , 2009 . The band 's official website was updated with a statement : " To put it simply , We 're back . We mean , really back . Picking up where we left off and then some . In the studio writing and recording a new album . Preparing to tour the world yet again . Friendships reformed . 17 years deep in our legacy . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band began recording demos of new material in 2009 . All three members brought song ideas that they worked on for years . As the band got back together , Barker said that the trio immediately " got inspired " by practicing their old songs and listening to them again , and they decided to record demos . There were four demos done , and only one was near completion , " Up All Night " . The trio wanted to release it as a single then , but quickly they realized that it was too ambitious to complete it before their reunion tour began in July . Sessions were stalled by the summer 2009 reunion tour , during which the band reconnected musically and emotionally . During the tour , Barker got the phone call that DJ AM had overdosed and died in New York , which heavily affected him . In addition to the tragedy regarding DJ AM , DeLonge was diagnosed with skin cancer the following year , but it eventually was cleared . The band did a large amount of writing before leaving on tour , but upon completion of the tour , they took time off to " take a couple of months and chill and do other stuff , " with intentions to regroup in 2010 . In June and July 2010 , the band spent time at their rehearsal spot , and their intention was to wrap up touring by September , and stay in the studio for the rest of the year until the album was finished . The album sessions were to be partially documented in The <unk> , which was scrapped in 2012 . 
 The recording and release of Neighborhoods was delayed multiple times . The recording 's delay was due to the way the band chose to work — in bits and pieces , alone and together , in a pair of California studios — in addition to each member 's busy schedules . The album was recorded at both DeLonge 's studio in San Diego and in Los Angeles by Hoppus and Barker . Recording in separate studios was DeLonge 's idea , and ideas were exchanged via e @-@ mail . Various engineers met up in person to trade files on hard drives . Although the three musicians were rarely in the same room while recording , opting to work on their parts individually , DeLonge asserted that the method of recording was a more efficient way of working considering the schedules , not due to a lack of unity within the band . In addition , Barker was releasing a solo record , DeLonge was involved in Angels & Airwaves , and Hoppus had to fly to New York City once a week to film his television show , Hoppus on Music . The record was the band 's first to be self @-@ produced , due to the death of long @-@ time producer Jerry Finn in 2008 . Not only did Finn helm their last three studio albums , but he served as an invaluable member of the band : part adviser , part impartial observer , he helped smooth out tensions and hone their sound . " I honestly still feel like he ’ s in the studio with us , because for me , personally , everything that was about recording and being in a studio , I learned from Jerry , " said Hoppus . Instead of a producer , each band member had their own dedicated sound engineer . DeLonge , who was against using a producer after self @-@ producing most of his Angels & Airwaves records , described the band situation as " very democratic , " noting that he learned during the recording process to " let go and be okay with not being able to control everything . " 
 Hoppus attributed the album 's delay to the band learning to work by themselves without Finn , and both DeLonge and Hoppus expressed frustration during the sessions at the band 's cabal of publicists , managers and attorneys ( which DeLonge described as " the absolute diarrhea of bureaucracy " ) . A result of the band 's split was each members hiring his own attorney , and , during the sessions of Neighborhoods , the band had four managers . Later , it was revealed that DeLonge and Hoppus would go months without direct communication , only speaking through their managers . Hoppus moved to London with his family late in the recording process , also complicating matters . Under pressure , the band released a statement in April that effectively rescheduled all European tour dates due to the album 's prolonged recording . The decision — a " hugely expensive " one — was protested by DeLonge but pushed forward by Barker , who felt the trio had made commitments to only tour with new material . The biggest argument of the recording process ensued , which resulted in Geffen Records setting a July 31 deadline for the record amid concerns about the volatility of the band , explaining there would be penalties if the album was not turned in on time . DeLonge joked that , " We 'll probably actually drive it to the ( Geffen ) president 's house at two in the morning and hand it through his bedroom window at the last possible minute . " The band , as a whole , only entered the studio for " one or two weeks " following the release of the statement in the spring , with only three days dedicated to writing . Recording lasted through May and into the summer , and by the time of the July 31 deadline , the record was near completion and finally completed over August . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music and lyrics = = = 
 Stylistically , Neighborhoods has been described as alternative rock and pop punk . Pre @-@ release , the album was described by the band as ambitious , weird , and expansive . The music of the album was inspired by each musician 's tastes : DeLonge 's contributions bear hints of arena and stadium rock , Barker infuses hip hop into his drum tracks , and Hoppus felt compelled by " weird indie rock . " Hoppus stated early on that a goal for the album was to try many new things , but to remain a catchy and " poppy " sensibility . The lyricism of the album was influenced by heavy events in each member 's lives during the latter part of the decade , elements considered dark by Hoppus . The band made sure to produce a few throwback songs recalling their sound in the " mid @-@ 90 's . " 
 Though DeLonge hoped to retain the angst present in the band 's past work , he wanted to " deliver it in a package that 's very modern , using instrumentations and formulas to launch you into different places with music that is not just three @-@ chord pop @-@ punk with riffs . " He later felt the album was not progressive as he had wished : " I 'm thinking , ' Why don 't we do this ? Why don 't we create these landscapes ? ' I think we should have been pushing ourselves , and trying to push the genre forward . " Likewise , Barker felt DeLonge wanted their music to be derivative of groups such as U2 or Coldplay , commenting , " For us , we were always like ' Blink is Blink , man . We want to sound like fucking Blink @-@ 182 . ' " 
 Hoppus wrote lyrics dealing with breakdowns in communication and trust and tackled with themes of isolation and confusion , but these lyrics were not specific to any of the band 's history . Hoppus struggled with writing upbeat , happy songs for the album and attributed to dark lyricism to the heavy events occurring shortly before the reunion . MTV News called Neighborhoods the " bleakest thing Blink have ever done , haunted by specters both real — depression , addiction , loss — and imagined , " noting the constant lyrical mention of death in many tracks . The album mixes the electronic flourishes of + 44 and the " laser @-@ light grandeur " of Angels & Airwaves into what MTV News called " a sound that recalls nothing so much as dark streets and black expanses , mostly of the suburban variety . " 
 = = = Packaging and title = = = 
 The title Neighborhoods evolved out of the trio discovering that each bring a very different aesthetic to the band , each like different neighborhoods in a city . " Everybody in the world thinks of something unique unto themselves when they hear the word ' Neighborhoods ' , " said Hoppus . " To some it is a big city , others a small town , others suburbia , everything . The world is wide , exciting and very different . That 's what Neighborhoods means to me . " The album artwork for the record was revealed on August 4 , 2011 , featuring the band name written atop a city skyline . The Neighborhoods sleeve contains many names close to the band , including Chloe ( DeLonge 's pet Labrador Retriever ) , Ava and Jon ( DeLonge 's daughter Ava Elizabeth and son Jonas Rocket ) , Jack ( Hoppus ' son ) , Landon , Alabama and Ati ( Barker 's son , daughter and step @-@ daughter , <unk> ) , G ! ( Mike Giant , designer of the cover ) , and lastly , a memorial to DJ AM . 
 = = Songs = = 
 " Ghost on the Dance Floor " opens the album , and is specifically about " hearing a song you shared with someone that 's passed . " The track resonated with Barker , who called DeLonge one night because the song affected him while listening to it , because of the death of DJ AM . " Natives " first arose from a tribal beat Barker created in the studio , and the songs title changed multiple times before settling on simplicity . " Up All Night " is the album 's oldest song , and dates to just after the band 's 2009 reunion , when they grouped together and produced demos . The band returned to it multiple times over the recording process , each time making it heavier than before . " After Midnight " was one of four new songs birthed from a last @-@ minute writing session after the band canceled their European tour . Barker 's favorite track ( and originally titled " Travis Beat " ) was written in separate studios but composed and recorded together . 
 " Snake Charmer " , initially titled " Genesis , " as a reference to the Book of Genesis , is based on the Biblical story of Adam and Eve . It pre @-@ dates the band ’ s reunion , and was a guitar riff DeLonge kept around to expand upon in the future . The song 's coda was composed by Barker and engineer Chris Holmes . Hoppus composed two versions of " Heart 's All Gone " , one fast and one slow , and ended up liking both , so the slower version serves as an interlude on the album 's deluxe edition . " Wishing Well " was solely created by DeLonge , and is what Hoppus describes as the epitome of the album : " It 's very catchy , but the lyrics are really , really dark and a little depressing . " " Kaleidoscope " arose when Hoppus woke up with the song 's opening lyrics in his head , which he expanded into a Descendents @-@ ish classic punk song . " The mentality behind it is being a slacker in 2011 , " Hoppus said . " The 20s and 30s malaise that is America right now . " It was also inspired by the album 's lengthy recording process and the transformation of the band . " This Is Home " was originally titled " Scars to Blame " , but changed considerably when Hoppus took the chorus and bridge and combined it with new lyrics written by DeLonge , morphing it into what he described as " an anthem for youthful abandon . " 
 " MH 4 @.@ 18 @.@ 2011 " was a working title for a song that was to be named " Hold On " , and represents a combination of Hoppus ' initials and the date he wrote the song . However , DeLonge convinced Hoppus to keep the original title because he thought it sounded cool , likening it to a virus . The song was inspired by one occasion in which Hoppus was idle at a stoplight when a helicopter flew over ahead , casting a large shadow . He began to think of war @-@ torn countries and impoverished areas in which circling helicopters are a " way of life , " and wrote the song to capture that mentality . " Love Is Dangerous " arose from a minimalist , electronic ballad , but gradually took on a heavier sound when combined with guitars . Hoppus described " Fighting the Gravity " as a " very strange song , " and highlighted its production : he ran a drum machine through his bass amp , and when the volume was turned up , it shook the entire building , causing a light fixture in the control room to start shaking . Hoppus and Holmes mic @-@ ed up the fixture , creating the rattling heard near the beginning . " Even If She Falls " is an upbeat , " catchy love song , " that Hoppus viewed as a positive note to end the record on . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Expectations for Neighborhoods were described by Alternative Press as " truly gigantic , both within the music industry and the record @-@ buying mainstream . " MTV News called Neighborhoods one of the most anticipated albums of 2010 when the album was scheduled for that year , and then again as one of the most anticipated rock albums of 2011 . Kerrang ! also called it one of the most anticipated releases of 2011 , and it was also featured on a list of Spin 's " 26 Fall Albums That Matter Most " . The album title and release date were officially announced in July 2011 . In preparation of the deluxe edition , the band compiled ten tracks as well as three extras . The deluxe edition tracks are sequenced differently from the standard version . " Up All Night " was released as the album 's lead single on July 14 , and the band began streaming another new song , " Heart 's All Gone " , through a dedicated website on August 4 . The second single from Neighborhoods , titled " After Midnight " premiered on BBC Radio 1 on September 6 , 2011 . The album leaked two weeks before its release , despite being under a very high level of security . Hoppus commented to NME that he was surprised it took so long to leak and was relieved rather than annoyed that it had , reading warm comments about the album online . 
 Blink @-@ 182 returned to Interscope Records to distribute the album , but found the music industry landscape dramatically different since the band 's last effort . " The label itself has no resources or capital to do what they used to , " DeLonge said in an interview with Billboard , " They just have you locked up on a contract . " Interscope , since the band 's break @-@ up , had greatly pared down its rock department , in contrast to other labels . Blink @-@ 182 broke up at a heightened popularity period for pop punk , but Neighborhoods was released in an era for the genre in which Billboard described as " lacking exciting mainstream representation , " in addition to falling sales for peer bands . The band approached sponsorships , song releases and social media incorporation during the rollout of Neighborhoods . Social media such as Facebook and Twitter were present throughout each stage of the album , which Hoppus believed allowed more direct access and control over the band 's music . Although <unk> , DeLonge 's revenue @-@ sharing online service , was not involved in the promotion of the record , the band 's personal business projects were integrated , such as Macbeth Footwear and Famous Stars and <unk> . Retailers such as Hot Topic and <unk> carried different @-@ colored vinyl editions of Neighborhoods that included MP3 download cards . The band partnered with AT & T in order to promote the album , appearing in a national spot for the HTC Status ; the band also partnered with Best Buy , which sold a uniquely colored HTC Status preloaded with the band 's music . Television ads through networks such as ESPN were explored the week of release . In addition , Hoppus and DeLonge appeared in a " film festival " for the fan montage video of " Up All Night " , honoring various Internet fans through tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek categories . " Wishing Well " was released November 21 , 2011 , as a promotional single to alternative radio . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 Neighborhoods debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with 151 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week . The album dropped to position 10 in its second week , and fell out of the top 20 soon afterward . The album also debuted at number one on both the magazine 's Alternative Albums and Top Rock Albums charts , number two on the Digital Albums chart , and number four on Tastemaker Albums . Internationally , the album performed best in Canada and Australia , where the album also debuted in the number two position . In New Zealand , the album peaked at number three , and the album debuted at number six on the UK Albums Chart and in Germany . 
 Despite this , sales were not as smooth as the group 's label , Interscope , had hoped , according to Billboard : " Despite the extended hiatus between albums , Neighborhoods failed to connect on the same scale as earlier releases . " As of May 2016 , it had sold 353 @,@ 000 units in the US . In the United Kingdom , the album went silver , certifying sales of 60 @,@ 000 units , and it was certified gold in Australia for sales of 35 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Neighborhoods received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 69 , based on 18 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews . " A pre @-@ release review from NME regarded Neighborhoods the band 's best album , calling it " bravely progressive " and noting the dark lyricism and random experimentation . Mike Diver of BBC Music described the album as " unexpectedly great , " and while agreeing the recording process gave some tracks a " dislocated feel , " he concluded that " Neighborhoods could easily have been a disaster – that it ’ s not , and actually a very successful endeavour , is worthy of substantial praise . " Chad Grischow of IGN called Neighborhoods a " startlingly great rock album " in which the band " hits an artistic growth spurt " , summarizing it as " the most mature , rewarding , and best album of their career . " James Montgomery of MTV News called the " long @-@ awaited , decidedly dark comeback album " a new transition for the band , calling Neighborhoods a " deep , dark , downright auto @-@ biographical effort . " AbsolutePunk staff writer Thomas Nassiff called Neighborhoods a " great record " while awarding a score of nine out of ten . He noted the album 's " bleak and dark " lyricism , while describing the album 's sound as containing elements of the trio 's various side @-@ projects , as well as a natural progression from their 2003 album . Nitsuh Abebe of New York Magazine deemed the record " one of those albums on which a group reunites as professionals and equals , each having gone off and collected his own interests via side projects , and then negotiates a sound that brings it all to bear : no @-@ nonsense modern rock , serious but unpretentious , ambitious but full of the same easy hooks as ever . " 
 Writing for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine remarked that Neighborhoods is " a different beast than any of the cheerfully snotty early Blink @-@ 182 albums , as the band picks up the gloomy thread left hanging on its eponymous 2003 album ... yet it 's far better to hear Blink @-@ 182 grapple with adolescent angst via the perspective of middle age than vainly attempting to re @-@ create their youth . Perhaps Blink could stand to sharpen their words but it 's better that they concentrated on their music , creating a fairly ridiculous yet mildly compelling prog @-@ punk spin on the suburbs here . " Tom Goodwyn of NME remarked that it finds the band " completely at ease with its past and confident enough to acknowledge their early work , with nods on the album to moments from their whole back catalogue . " British rock magazine Kerrang awarded Neighborhoods a " good " three out of five score in their review . Critic Mark Sutherland noted that while " the finished product is inevitably disjointed , Blink emerge as a surprisingly serious rock proposition . " He went on to add that , " While it occasionally sounds like Mark , Tom , and Travis are playing three different songs at once ( ' Kaleidoscope ' , ' After Midnight ' ) , the band are still capable of producing genuine moments of magnificence . " Scott Heisel of Alternative Press attributed the album 's flaws to the lack of an outside producer and the fact that only a few tracks were written and recorded as a group : " Blink @-@ 182 's members are still capable of writing good songs , but without a strong outside influence ( i.e. , a producer ) and no real desire or effort to consistently work in the same room with one another , the amount of truly transcendent , classic material is minimal . Ultimately , Neighborhoods is a slightly awkward entry in the band 's catalog that shows as much potential as it does flaws . " 
 Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly awarded the album a " B- " grade , opining that , " the peaks on Neighborhoods — their first disc in eight years — do little more than recall past triumphs . Outside of some latent goth leanings ( ' This Is Home ' ) and a gauzy detour ( ' Ghost on the Dance Floor ' ) , it 's mostly twitch @-@ crunch @-@ whine @-@ repeat . " Michael Brown of Drowned in Sound gave a mixed review , awarding the album a lukewarm five out of ten . He critiqued that , " Blink have the potential for much more than their past reputation may convey , but Neighborhoods is reminiscent of that first awkward conversation after a heated argument , as no @-@ one 's quite sure where to go next . " Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone gave the album three stars out of five , noting elements of sophistication , introspection , and darkness in the music and lyrics and commenting that " Some Clinton @-@ era pants @-@ dropping might 've been a fun nostalgia move . But those days are gone ; it 's their early @-@ 2010s nightmare as much as anyone else 's . " Kyle Ryan of The A.V. Club was critical of DeLonge 's vocals , saying that he " sounds flat as ever , and has a fondness for clunky lyrics " , concluding that " Although Blink @-@ 182 has long since left its past as a bare @-@ bones punk band behind , overwrought rock isn 't its forte , either . Neighborhoods finds a nice balance between the two , but it could still use a little less fussiness . " Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine considered it uninspired : " When they try to add relatively ambitious elements to the things they actually do well , Blink @-@ 182 is more successful . [ ... ] It 's admirable that Blink @-@ 182 tries to challenge themselves over the course of Neighborhoods , but their growing pains don 't make for a particularly good album or a welcome comeback . " Scott McLennan of The Boston Globe considered the album a step forward , summarizing , " Blink @-@ 182 again delivers a record with nothing outright awful and enough dynamite songs to pack a punch at future tours . " Mikael Wood of Spin called the album " surprisingly and refreshingly low @-@ key , " but its self @-@ examination " comparatively adrift " with the sound of their past . 
 = = Touring and aftermath = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 first began touring in support of Neighborhoods with the 10th Annual Honda Civic Tour in August 2011 . The 2011 tour marked the tenth anniversary of the tour , which Blink @-@ 182 headlined in its first incarnation . The trio headlined the 10th Annual Honda Civic Tour with My Chemical Romance , which ran from August to October 2011 , with additional dates scheduled in Canada with Rancid and Against Me ! . In 2012 the band embarked on a worldwide 20th Anniversary Tour . The band continued touring in 2012 with their 20th Anniversary Tour , where they performed the rescheduled European dates originally canceled in order to continue recording . They were scheduled to headline the Bamboozle 2012 Music Festival but cancelled when Barker had to undergo an operation for tonsilitis . The 20th Anniversary Tour extended into Australia for in 2013 as part of the Soundwave festival , as well as 4 sideshows along the east coast with punk acts The Vandals and Sharks . Barker , who still suffers a fear of flying , did not attend ; Brooks Wackerman , drummer of Bad Religion at the time , filled @-@ in for Barker 's position for the Australian tour . 
 The band has looked back on Neighborhoods more recently with a divided reaction . In 2012 , DeLonge would concede that the recording method , originally his idea , led to a loss of unity , noting that e @-@ mails dictated the majority of recording of the record , due to the hectic schedules of the band . " There 's some songs on there that I love , but for the most part it was disconnected , " Barker recalled . " It was like , ' You do this part in your studio , and then you 're gonna play on it and send it back to me . ' When we 're not in the studio together , you don 't have the opportunity to gel off each other . " In addition , Barker was still recovering from his 2008 plane crash , which made things difficult in the studio . " Dude , I was still healing , " he told Rolling Stone . " I had scabs all over my body and was , like , a bloody mess . It was just way too soon . " 
 In 2015 , following DeLonge 's departure , Barker claimed DeLonge " didn 't even care about [ Neighborhoods ] . He didn 't even listen to mixes or <unk> from that record . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hoppus , Tom DeLonge , and Travis Barker . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = Charles Read ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Marshal Sir Charles Frederick Read , KBE , CB , DFC , AFC ( 9 October 1918 – 17 September 2014 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He served as Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) from 1972 to 1975 . Born in Sydney , Read joined the RAAF in 1937 , and began his career flying biplane fighters . As a Beaufighter pilot , he led No. 31 Squadron and No. 77 Wing in the South West Pacific during World War II . His achievements earned him the Distinguished Flying Cross and a mention in despatches , and he finished the war an acting group captain . 
 Read 's post @-@ war commands included the Australian First Tactical Air Force , No. 24 ( Commonwealth ) Squadron RAF , Central Flying School and No. 82 ( Bomber ) Wing . He was awarded the Air Force Cross in 1960 . Following staff roles , Read took charge of RAAF Base Point Cook and the RAAF Academy in the mid @-@ 1960s , and later RAAF Base Richmond . In 1970 he was promoted to air vice marshal and became Deputy Chief of the Air Staff . He succeeded Air Marshal Sir Colin Hannah as CAS in March 1972 , when the latter cut short his term as head of the Air Force to become Governor of Queensland . Air Marshal Read retired from the military in March 1975 and was knighted the following year . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Born in Sydney on 9 October 1918 , Read was the son of an immigrant from Bristol , England . He was educated at Sydney Grammar School , where he completed his Leaving Certificate . After working as a clerk in a motoring firm , Read joined the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) as an air cadet on 21 July 1937 . He underwent instruction at No. 1 Flying Training School in Point Cook , Victoria , and gained his commission as a pilot officer in June 1938 . Over the next two years he flew with No. 3 Squadron and No. 22 Squadron , which were based at RAAF Station Richmond , New South Wales , and operated Hawker Demon biplanes . He was involved in experimental parachute drops with dummies near <unk> ; on one such test a fundamental flaw in the harness revealed itself when the dummy slipped clean from the chute , necessitating a redesign . By the time Australia declared war on 3 September 1939 , Read had been promoted to flying officer . He later recalled a flurry of activity on the day , but with little real purpose : " After all , we were pretty remote from Europe " . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Read was assigned to No. 30 Squadron flying Bristol Beaufighters after the unit was formed in March 1942 ; during this posting he reportedly flew a Beaufighter under the Sydney Harbour Bridge . Squadron Leader Read was subsequently given responsibility for raising No. 31 Squadron , also equipped with Beaufighters . After completing its initial training , the unit was deployed to Coomalie , Northern Territory , in October . Coming under the control of North @-@ Western Area Command , it went into action over Portuguese Timor the following month . By April 1943 , Read had been promoted wing commander . On 2 May , he led a low @-@ level sortie against Penfui airfield , a key base for Japanese raids on Darwin , during which he destroyed two enemy Mitsubishi Zero fighters on the ground with cannon . Read was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for the " courage and skill " he displayed during assaults on Japanese installations , pressed home in the face of severe anti @-@ aircraft fire . The citation was promulgated in the London Gazette on 2 July 1943 . 
 Returning to Australia , Read held command of No. 1 Service Flying Training School at Point Cook from October 1943 until the unit 's disbandment in September 1944 . He transferred back to the South West Pacific theatre later that year as Officer Commanding No. 77 Wing , which controlled three squadrons of Beaufighters . Read led Beaufighters of No. 31 Squadron into action during the Operation Oboe Six landings at Labuan on 10 June 1945 , and was the first RAAF pilot to land at the newly opened Tarakan airfield on 28 June . He was mentioned in despatches for the operational and administrative efficiency achieved by No. 77 Wing , and by the end of the war was an acting group captain on the headquarters staff of the Australian First Tactical Air Force at Morotai . He took over command of the formation following the end of hostilities , leading it into 1946 as its units were steadily disbanded . Read returned to Australia in early 1946 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Read married Betty Bradshaw on 1 June 1946 ; the couple had three sons . He was the inaugural commanding officer ( CO ) of the re @-@ formed No. 1 Flying Training School at RAAF Station Point Cook from November 1947 to September 1949 . During this time he was offered a permanent commission in the post @-@ war Air Force , with the provisional rank of squadron leader . Read was then promoted to substantive wing commander , and posted to England where he led No. 24 ( Commonwealth ) Squadron RAF from March to December 1950 . Returning from England in 1952 , he was made CO of Central Flying School at RAAF Base East Sale , Victoria , and went on to hold staff appointments at Headquarters Training Command from 1953 to 1957 . 
 As group captain , Read commanded No. 82 Wing at RAAF Base Amberley , Queensland , from February 1957 to July 1960 , flying English Electric Canberra jet bombers . He was awarded the Air Force Cross in the 1960 New Year Honours . Read then served as Director of Operational Requirements at the Department of Air in Canberra . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1964 New Year Honours for his work introducing aircraft and weapons systems into the Air Force , including two overseas missions for aircraft and equipment selection . In December 1964 he was promoted to air commodore , and the following year attended the Imperial Defence College in London . Read was made Officer Commanding RAAF Base Point Cook in January 1966 , simultaneously holding the appointment of Commandant of RAAF Academy . He then served as Officer Commanding RAAF Base Richmond from March 1968 to July 1969 . 
 Read was promoted air vice marshal and made Deputy Chief of the Air Staff ( DCAS ) in January 1970 . In 1962 , while Director of Operational Requirements , he had recommended the Boeing CH @-@ 47 Chinook helicopter for Australian service . As DCAS , after plans to acquire such a heavy @-@ lift capability had languished for eight years , Read was able to finally give the go @-@ ahead for their purchase . He led a team to the United States in May 1970 to review a proposal to lease two squadrons of McDonnell Douglas F @-@ 4E Phantoms to provide an interim strike force for the RAAF , pending delivery of the long @-@ delayed General Dynamics F @-@ 111C swing @-@ wing bomber . According to the official history of the post @-@ war Air Force , Read 's decision to take up the F @-@ 4E offer , over competing Hawker Siddeley Buccaneer and Grumman A @-@ 6 Intruder options , " delighted RAAF senior officers and aircrews " . 
 In March 1972 , Air Marshal Sir Colin Hannah resigned as CAS one year short of his planned three @-@ year term , to become Governor of Queensland . Read had not been consulted by Hannah prior to the latter 's departure , and was reputed to be somewhat reluctant to take over the CAS role . Nevertheless , he was promoted to air marshal and served a full three @-@ year tour as the Air Force 's senior officer . Read was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1972 Queen 's Birthday Honours . A highlight of his tenure as CAS was the belated entry into RAAF service of the F @-@ 111C with No. 82 Wing in June 1973 ; as well as being an advocate for building up Australia 's offensive strike capability , he had been a member of the 1963 mission led by Air Marshal Val Hancock to examine replacements for the Canberra , which led to the F @-@ 111 's acquisition . Read ordered the Officer Commanding No. 82 Wing , Group Captain Jake Newham , to operate the F @-@ 111 with great caution initially , well within limits , lest the controversial aircraft suffer greater damage to its reputation through early attrition . Read felt that " the nature of the office of CAS changed for the worse " towards the end of his term as the RAAF 's senior officer , as a plethora of committees sprang up in the wake of the Tange report on the defence force . In the words of historian Alan Stephens , " The seemingly interminable round of committee meetings which followed the Tange reorganisation made management very difficult , to the extent that Air Marshal Read often felt he was fighting against the system rather than working with it " . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Read retired from military life on 20 March 1975 and was succeeded by Air Marshal James Rowland , who later became Governor of New South Wales . Considered disdainful of bureaucracy and some of the trappings of high office , Read refused to sit for the traditional portrait painted of former Chiefs of the Air Staff . As CAS during the Whitlam Labor government , which was generally antipathetic to imperial knighthoods , he was not raised to Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) until the 1976 Queen 's Birthday Honours , after the Liberal Party under Malcolm Fraser had been returned to power . Originally from Vaucluse , in Sydney 's east , by 2010 Read was living in Safety Beach , on the New South Wales Mid North Coast . He died at <unk> and District Retirement Village on 17 September 2014 . 
 = German cruiser Karlsruhe = 
 Karlsruhe was a light cruiser , the second member of the Königsberg class , and was operated between 1929 and April 1940 , including service in World War II . She was operated by two German navies , the Reichsmarine and the Kriegsmarine . She had two sister ships , Königsberg and Köln . Karlsruhe was built by the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel ; she was laid down in July 1926 , launched in August 1927 , and commissioned into the Reichsmarine in November 1929 . She was armed with a main battery of nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns in three triple turrets and had a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) . 
 Like her sisters , Karlsruhe served as a training cruiser for naval cadets throughout the 1930s . During the Spanish Civil War , she joined the non @-@ intervention patrols off the Spanish coast . She was in the process of being modernized at the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , and so she was not ready for action until April 1940 , when she participated in Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway . She landed troops at Kristiansand , and while returning to Germany , she was attacked by the British submarine HMS Truant ; two torpedoes hit the ship and caused significant damage . Unable to return to port , Karlsruhe was scuttled by one of the escorting torpedo boats . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Karlsruhe was 174 meters ( 571 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 15 @.@ 2 m ( 50 ft ) and a maximum draft of 6 @.@ 28 m ( 20 @.@ 6 ft ) . She displaced 7 @,@ 700 long tons ( 7 @,@ 800 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of four steam turbines and a pair of 10 @-@ cylinder four @-@ stroke diesel engines . Steam for the turbines was provided by six Marine @-@ type double @-@ ended oil @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) and a range of approximately 5 @,@ 700 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 600 km ; 6 @,@ 600 mi ) at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . Karlsruhe had a crew of 21 officers and 493 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with nine 15 cm SK C / 25 guns mounted in three triple gun turrets . One was located forward , and two were placed in a superfiring pair aft . The rear gun turrets were offset to increase their arc of fire . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 080 rounds of ammunition , for 120 shells per gun . The ship was also equipped with two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in single mounts ; they had 400 rounds of ammunition each . Karlsruhe also carried four triple torpedo tube mounts located amidships ; they were supplied with twenty @-@ four 50 cm ( 20 in ) torpedoes . She was also capable of carrying 120 naval mines . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships and an armored belt that was 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The new cruiser was ordered as " Cruiser C " and given the temporary name Ersatz Medusa as a replacement for the old cruiser Medusa . Construction of Karlsruhe began on 27 July 1926 with her keel laying at the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Kiel . She was launched on 20 August 1927 , and she was commissioned into the Reichsmarine on 6 November 1929 . Karlsruhe completed sea trials in the Baltic Sea after entering service , after which she was assigned to training ship duty . In May 1930 , she departed on her first overseas training cruise , to Africa and South America . After returning to Germany , she was modernized late in the year ; her foremast was shortened , and her rear superstructure was slightly enlarged . Over the next five years , she embarked on four more world cruises for naval cadets , traveling as far as Japan . Between each cruise , she conducted exercises with the rest of the fleet in German waters . Günther Lütjens served as the ship 's commander from September 1934 to September 1935 . In 1935 , she had more modifications made , including the installation of a pole mast aft of the funnels , along with an aircraft catapult amidships with a crane to handle floatplanes . 
 On her last training cruise in 1936 , Karlsruhe was badly damaged by a tropical storm in the Pacific Ocean . Structural weaknesses in her mostly @-@ welded hull plating caused significant damage , and the cruiser was forced to put in to San Diego in April for repairs . There , her hull was repaired and strengthened , which increased her displacement and beam slightly . She returned to Germany in June 1936 , and immediately went into drydock for more permanent repairs and a major overhaul . During this period in dockyard hands , she had her two single @-@ mount 8 @.@ 8 cm anti @-@ aircraft guns replaced with three twin @-@ mounts . Fire control directors were also installed for these guns . After emerging from this refit , she conducted sea trials and then joined the non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War , though she only remained off Spain for a few months . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 After returning to Germany , she resumed training duties in the Baltic . She was withdrawn from service in May 1938 for a major modernization . The funnels were modified with raked caps and searchlight platforms on their sides . The ship 's 8 @.@ 8 cm guns were replaced with more powerful 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . Work lasted until November 1939 , shortly after the outbreak of World War II . She spent the next several months on trials and training maneuvers . On 4 January , Karlsruhe and the minelayer Schiff 23 were sent to intercept the Swedish steamer <unk> Oscar , which was transporting Polish refugees from Riga to Sweden . Karlsruhe caught the Swedish vessel , declared it a prize , and sent it and the 41 Poles aboard to Memel . She was not ready for combat operations by the start of Operation Weserübung , so she was used as a troop transport for the attack on Kristiansand . The attack force also included an E @-@ boat tender , four large torpedo boats , and several E @-@ boats . 
 The invasion force left Bremerhaven early on 8 April 1940 , bound for Kristiansand . When they arrived , a heavy fog obscured the city , making the passage of the fjord outside the harbor very dangerous . As a result , they had to wait until the following morning to begin the attack . As Karlsruhe entered the fjord , she came under heavy fire from the Norwegian coastal guns . The cruiser turned in the fjord to bring her full broadside into action ; the artillery duel lasted for about two hours before heavy fog again covered the port , forcing both sides to cease fire . The Norwegians surrendered an hour later , and the German ships landed their soldiers . 
 Karlsruhe then left Kristiansand with three of the torpedo boats as escorts . The British submarine HMS Truant was positioned outside the fjord , and when her crew spotted the German ships , she fired a spread of torpedoes . Karlsruhe zig @-@ zagged to evade the torpedoes , but two still hit the ship ; one struck her bow and the other hit amidships . They blasted large holes in the hull and allowed thousands of tons of water to flood the ship . The flooding disabled her engines and electricity generators , which cut off power to the pumps that were trying to keep pace with the progressively worsening flooding . With the pumps shut off , there was no hope to save Karlsruhe , and so her commander , Friedrich <unk> issued the order to abandon her two hours after the attack . The torpedo boat Greif took off her crew and fired two more torpedoes into the ship to ensure that she sank . 
 <unk> and his executive officer were both severely criticized for failing to take all possible steps to save Karlsruhe in a later investigation into the sinking . The report concluded that since the ship was still afloat after two hours , and two torpedoes were required to sink her , it might have been possible to take her under tow back to Kristiansand or another port . In addition , the forward pumps still had power , and so the flooding could have been slowed enough to permit a return to a safe harbor . 
 = South Africa at the 2012 Summer Paralympics = 
 South Africa competed at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London with a team of 62 athletes . 
 The South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee ( SASCOC ) , which is the National Paralympic Committee of South Africa , announced a team of 62 competitors for the 2012 Paralympics on 20 June 2012 . The team of 45 men and 17 women were accompanied by 45 managers , coaches and other support staff . SASCOC released the team 's schedule on 17 August 2012 . 
 In a surprise announcement in London on 8 September the South African Minister of Sport and Recreation <unk> <unk> said that Paralympic medal winners and their coaches would receive the same performance bonuses that their Olympic counterparts were promised . The amounts initially promised were significantly lower . The minister said the original plan was discriminatory . 
 = = Medallists = = 
 The following South African competitors won medals at the games . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 South African track and field athletes won a combined 17 medals at the Games , four gold , seven silver and six bronze . Sprinter Oscar Pistorius , who carried the nation 's flag at the opening ceremony , was the most successful South African athlete winning individual gold in the T44 400 metres , gold in the 4 × 100 metres relay T42 @-@ 46 , setting world records in both , and individual silver in the T44 200 metres . In the 200 metres event Pistorius set a new world record in his heat , but he was defeated in the final by Brazilian Alan Oliveira . After the race Pistorius raised an issue about the length of Oliveira 's blades , he later apologised for the timing of his remarks , but not the content of his complaint . The IPC confirmed the length of Oliveira ’ s blades were proportional to his body and legal , but expressed willingness to engage with Pistorius about the issue . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for preliminary rounds are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 AF 
 = African record 
 NR = 
 National record 
 SB 
 = Seasonal Best 
 PB = 
 Personal Best 
 N / A 
 = Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = 
 Athlete not required to compete in round 
 DNS = Did not start / Withdrawn 
 Men — track 
 Men — field 
 Women — track 
 Women — field 
 Management Team 
 Manager : Dion Bishop 
 Coaches : Suzanne Ferreira , Zelda Hansen , Hennie <unk> , Karin le Roux , Ampie Louw 
 Team assistant : Neels <unk> 
 Helper : <unk> du Preez . 
 = = Cycling = = 
 Key 
 DNF 
 = Did not finish 
 N / A = 
 Round not applicable for the event 
 = = = Road = = = 
 = = = Track = = = 
 Management team 
 Manager : Mike Burns 
 Coach : Ricky <unk> 
 Mechanic : Pieter Jansen . 
 = = Equestrian = = 
 A team of four represented South Africa in the equestrian competition , one man and three women , although Paralympic equestrian competition is not divided by gender . The competition consists of three dressage events , a championship test , a freestyle test and a team test . There are five competitor classes : Ia , Ib , II , III and IV , with Ia being the most and IV the least impaired . 
 Individual 
 Team 
 * Indicates the three best individual scores that count towards the team total . 
 Management team 
 Manager : Tracey Cumming 
 Coach : Chris <unk> 
 Vet : <unk> <unk> 
 Grooms : Enoch Cele , Anton <unk> , Elizabeth Newsome , Teri Smith 
 = = Rowing = = 
 Qualification Key : FA = Final A ( medal ) ; FB = Final B ( non @-@ medal ) ; R = Repechage 
 Management 
 Manager / coach : Marco <unk> 
 = = Swimming = = 
 Natalie du Toit , a veteran of three Paralympics and one Olympics , announced her retirement from competitive swimming after this event . South Africa 's first gold medal came from du Toit winning gold in the women 's 100 m butterfly S9 . 
 Key 
 Note – Ranks given for preliminary rounds are within the athlete 's heat only 
 Q 
 = Qualified for the next round 
 q = 
 Qualified for the next round as a fastest loser or by position without achieving the qualifying target 
 AF 
 = African record 
 NR = 
 National record 
 N / A 
 = Round not applicable for the event 
 Bye = 
 Athlete not required to compete in round 
 DNS = Did not start / Withdrawn 
 Men 
 Women 
 Management team 
 Manager : <unk> <unk> 
 Coach : <unk> Toros 
 Coach / tapper : Karin Hugo 
 Tapper / helper : <unk> Meyer 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 South Africa 's men 's wheelchair basketball team were in Group A with Australia , Italy , Spain , Turkey and the United States . Competing athletes are given an eight @-@ level @-@ score specific to wheelchair basketball , ranging from 0 @.@ 5 to 4 @.@ 5 with lower scores representing a higher degree of disability . The sum score of all players on the court cannot exceed 14 . 
 = = = Men 's tournament = = = 
 Group stage 
 11th / 12th place match 
 Management team 
 Manager : Willie <unk> 
 Coach : Patrick Fick 
 Assistant coach : <unk> <unk> 
 Technical coach : Franck Belen 
 = = Wheelchair tennis = = 
 Management team 
 Manager / coach : Holger <unk> 
 Assistant coach : <unk> <unk> . 
 = = General team management = = 
 The following people made @-@ up the team 's senior management : 
 Chef de Mission : Pieter Badenhorst 
 Project manager : <unk> Maharaj 
 Manager ( logistics ) : Clifford <unk> 
 Logistics : <unk> <unk> 
 Manager ( athletes services ) : Chantelle Jardim 
 Athlete services : Dumisani <unk> 
 Chief medical officer : Wayne <unk> 
 Chief physiotherapist : Grace Hughes 
 Doctor : Paul <unk> 
 <unk> : Given <unk> , Edwin <unk> , <unk> Davids , <unk> Edwards , Dan <unk> , <unk> <unk> 
 Classifier : <unk> van der <unk> 
 = The Nightmare = 
 The Nightmare is a 1781 oil painting by Anglo @-@ Swiss artist Henry Fuseli ( 1741 – 1825 ) . Since its creation , it has remained Fuseli 's best @-@ known work . With its first exhibition in 1782 at the Royal Academy of London , the image became famous ; an engraved version was widely distributed and the painting was parodied in political satire . Due to its fame , Fuseli painted at least three other versions of the painting . 
 Interpretations of The Nightmare have varied widely . The canvas seems to portray simultaneously a dreaming woman and the content of her nightmare . The incubus and the horse 's head refer to contemporary belief and folklore about nightmares , but have been ascribed more specific meanings by some theorists . Contemporary critics were taken aback by the overt sexuality of the painting , which has since been interpreted by some scholars as anticipating Jungian ideas about the unconscious . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 The Nightmare simultaneously offers both the image of a dream — by indicating the effect of the nightmare on the woman — and a dream image — in symbolically portraying the sleeping vision . It depicts a sleeping woman draped over the end of a bed with her head hanging down , exposing her long neck . She is surmounted by an incubus that peers out at the viewer . The sleeper seems lifeless , and , lying on her back , she takes a position believed to encourage nightmares . Her brilliant coloration is set against the darker reds , yellows , and ochres of the background ; Fuseli used a chiaroscuro effect to create strong contrasts between light and shade . The interior is contemporary and fashionable , and contains a small table on which rests a mirror , phial , and book . The room is hung with red velvet curtains which drape behind the bed . Emerging from a parting in the curtain is the head of a horse with bold , featureless eyes . 
 For contemporary viewers , The Nightmare invoked the relationship of the incubus and the horse ( mare ) to nightmares . The work was likely inspired by the waking dreams experienced by Fuseli and his contemporaries , who found that these experiences related to folkloric beliefs like the Germanic tales about demons and witches that possessed people who slept alone . In these stories , men were visited by horses or hags , giving rise to the terms " hag @-@ riding " and " mare @-@ riding " , and women were believed to engage in sex with the devil . The etymology of the word " nightmare " , however , does not relate to horses . Rather , the word is derived from <unk> , a Scandinavian mythological term referring to a spirit sent to torment or suffocate sleepers . The early meaning of " nightmare " included the sleeper 's experience of weight on the chest combined with sleep paralysis , dyspnea , or a feeling of dread . The painting incorporates a variety of imagery associated with these ideas , depicting a mare 's head and a demon crouched atop the woman . 
 Sleep and dreams were common subjects for the Zürich @-@ born Henry Fuseli , though The Nightmare is unique among his paintings for its lack of reference to literary or religious themes ( Fuseli was an ordained minister ) . His first known painting is Joseph Interpreting the Dreams of the Butler and Baker of Pharaoh ( 1768 ) , and later he produced The Shepherd 's Dream ( 1798 ) inspired by John Milton 's Paradise Lost , and Richard III Visited by Ghosts ( 1798 ) based on Shakespeare 's play . 
 Fuseli 's knowledge of art history was broad , allowing critics to propose sources for the painting 's elements in antique , classical , and Renaissance art . According to art critic Nicholas Powell , the woman 's pose may derive from the Vatican Ariadne , and the style of the incubus from figures at <unk> , an archaeological site in Sicily . A source for the woman in Giulio Romano 's The Dream of Hecuba at the Palazzo del Te has also been proposed . Powell links the horse to a woodcut by the German Renaissance artist Hans <unk> or to the marble Horse <unk> on Quirinal Hill , Rome . Fuseli may have added the horse as an afterthought , since a preliminary chalk sketch owned by his biographer did not include it . Its presence in the painting has been viewed as a visual pun on the word " nightmare " and a self @-@ conscious reference to folklore — the horse destabilises the painting 's conceit and contributes to its Gothic tone . 
 = = = Exhibition = = = 
 The painting was first shown at the Royal Academy of London in 1782 , where it " excited … an uncommon degree of interest " , according to Fuseli 's early biographer and friend John Knowles . 
 The painting is owned and currently on display at the Detroit Institute of Arts . 
 It remained well @-@ known decades later , and Fuseli painted other versions on the same theme . Fuseli sold the original for twenty guineas , and an inexpensive engraving by Thomas Burke circulated widely beginning in January 1783 , earning publisher John Raphael Smith more than 500 pounds . The engraving was underscored by a short poem by Erasmus Darwin , " Night @-@ Mare " : 
 Darwin included these lines and expanded upon them in his long poem The Loves of the Plants ( 1789 ) , for which Fuseli provided the frontispiece : 
 = = Interpretation and legacy = = 
 Contemporary critics often found the work scandalous due to its sexual themes . A few years before he painted The Nightmare , Fuseli had fallen passionately in love with a woman named Anna Landholdt in Zürich , while he was travelling from Rome to London . Landholdt was the niece of his friend , the Swiss <unk> Johann Kaspar Lavater . Fuseli wrote of his fantasies to Lavater in 1779 : 
 Last night I had her in bed with me — tossed my bedclothes hugger @-@ mugger — wound my hot and tight @-@ clasped hands about her — fused her body and soul together with my own — poured into her my spirit , breath and strength . Anyone who touches her now commits adultery and incest ! She is mine , and I am hers . And have her I will . … 
 Fuseli 's marriage proposal met with disapproval from the woman 's father , and in any case Fuseli 's love seems to have been unrequited — Landholdt married a family friend soon after . The Nightmare , then , can be seen as a personal portrayal of the erotic aspects of love lost . Art historian H. W. Janson suggests that the sleeping woman represents Landholdt and that the demon is Fuseli himself . <unk> this claim is an unfinished portrait of a girl on the back of the painting 's canvas , which may portray Landholdt . Anthropologist Charles Stewart , in his study of erotic dreams and nightmares , characterises the sleeping woman as " voluptuous , " and one scholar of the Gothic describes her as lying in a " sexually receptive position . " In Woman as Sex Object ( 1972 ) , Marcia Allentuck similarly argues that the painting 's intent is to show female orgasm . This is supported by Fuseli 's sexually overt and even pornographic private drawings ( e.g. , <unk> of Man with Two Women , 1770 – 78 ) . Fuseli 's painting has been considered representative of sublimated sexual instincts . Related interpretations of the painting view the incubus as a dream symbol of male libido , with the sexual act represented by the horse 's intrusion through the curtain . Fuseli himself provided no commentary on his painting . 
 The Royal Academy exhibition brought Fuseli and his painting enduring fame . The exhibition included Shakespeare @-@ themed works by Fuseli , which won him a commission to produce eight paintings for publisher John Boydell 's Shakespeare Gallery . One version of The Nightmare hung in the home of Fuseli 's close friend and publisher Joseph Johnson , gracing his weekly dinners for London thinkers and writers . The Nightmare was widely plagiarised , and parodies of it were commonly used for political caricature , by George Cruikshank , Thomas Rowlandson , and others . In these satirical scenes , the incubus afflicts subjects such as Napoleon Bonaparte , Louis XVIII , British politician Charles James Fox , and Prime Minister William Pitt . In another example , admiral Lord Nelson is the demon , and his mistress Emma , Lady Hamilton , the sleeper . While some observers have viewed the parodies as mocking Fuseli , it is more likely that The Nightmare was simply a vehicle for ridicule of the caricatured subject . The Danish painter , Nicolai Abraham <unk> , whom Fuseli had met in Rome , produced his own version of The Nightmare ( Danish : <unk> ) which develops on the eroticism of Fuseli 's work . <unk> 's painting shows two naked women asleep in the bed ; it is the woman in the foreground who is experiencing the nightmare and the incubus — which is crouched on the woman 's stomach , facing her parted legs — has its tail nestling between her exposed breasts . 
 Fuseli painted other versions of The Nightmare following the success of the first ; at least three other versions survive . The other important canvas was painted between 1790 and 1791 and is held at the Goethe Museum in Frankfurt . It is smaller than the original , and the woman 's head lies to the left ; a mirror opposes her on the right . The demon is looking at the woman rather than out of the picture , and it has pointed , catlike ears . The most significant difference in the remaining two versions is an erotic statuette of a couple on the table . 
 = = = Influence on literature = = = 
 The Nightmare likely influenced Mary Shelley in a scene from her famous Gothic novel Frankenstein , or , The Modern Prometheus ( 1818 ) . Shelley would have been familiar with the painting ; her parents , Mary Wollstonecraft and William Godwin , knew Fuseli . The iconic imagery associated with the Creature 's murder of the protagonist Victor 's wife seems to draw from the canvas : " She was there , lifeless and inanimate , thrown across the bed , her head hanging down , and her pale and distorted features half covered by hair . " The novel and Fuseli 's biography share a parallel theme : just as Fuseli 's incubus is infused with the artist 's emotions in seeing Landholdt marry another man , Shelley 's monster promises to get revenge on Victor on the night of his wedding . Like Frankenstein 's monster , Fuseli 's demon symbolically seeks to forestall a marriage . 
 Edgar Allan Poe may have evoked The Nightmare in his short story " The Fall of the House of Usher " ( 1839 ) . His narrator compares a painting hanging in Usher 's house to a Fuseli work , and reveals that an " irrepressible tremor gradually pervaded my frame ; and , at length , there sat upon my heart an incubus of utterly <unk> alarm " . Poe and Fuseli shared an interest in the subconscious ; Fuseli is often quoted as saying , " One of the most unexplored regions of art are dreams " . 
 Armin Greder references " The Nightmare " in his children 's book " The Island " ( 2007 ) in the second panel of the double page spread across pages 17 and 18 . 
 = = = In the twentieth and twenty @-@ first centuries = = = 
 Fuseli 's Nightmare reverberated with twentieth @-@ century psychological theorists . In 1926 , American writer Max Eastman paid a visit to Sigmund Freud and claimed to have seen a print of The Nightmare displayed next to Rembrandt 's The Anatomy Lesson in Freud 's Vienna apartment . Psychoanalyst and Freud biographer Ernest Jones chose another version of Fuseli 's painting as the frontispiece of his book On the Nightmare ( 1931 ) ; however , neither Freud nor Jones mentioned these paintings in their writings about dreams . Carl Jung included The Nightmare and other Fuseli works in his Man and His Symbols ( 1964 ) . 
 Tate Britain held an exhibition titled Gothic Nightmares : Fuseli , Blake and the Romantic Imagination between 15 February and 1 May 2006 , with Fuseli 's Nightmare as the central exhibit . The catalogue indicated the painting 's influence on films such as the original Frankenstein ( 1931 ) and The Marquise of O ( 1976 ) . Among modern artists , Balthus appears to have incorporated elements of The Nightmare in his work ( e.g. , The Room , 1952 – 54 ) . 
 Ken Russell 's Gothic ( film ) - 1986 features various interpretations of Nightmare as a central theme . 
 The 1993 Computer Game The 7th Guest features this painting in an animated form where the succubus repeatedly stabs the woman with a dagger while crouched on her stomach . 
 On 7 November 2011 Steve Bell produced a cartoon with Angela Merkel as the sleeper and Silvio Berlusconi as the monster . 
 The 2011 film The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn - Part 1 displays the painting in a sequence where Edward Cullen researches demon children on the Internet . 
 In Season 2 , episode 3 of the BBC television show The Fall ( aired November 27 , 2014 on BBC Two ) , Paul Spector sets a digital image of the painting as the wallpaper for DSI Stella Gibson 's laptop when he breaks into her room . A printed copy of the painting also appears in season 2 episode 4 ( aired December 4 , 2014 , on BBC Two ) , as evidence under investigation . 
 In season 7 , episode 35 of Carton Network 's " Adventure Time " ( aired May 26 , 2016 ) , the character Prince Gumball is portrayed as the woman in this painting . It is shown as imagery during a personal conversation with <unk> Butler . 
 = Symphony No. 8 ( Mahler ) = 
 The Symphony No. 8 in E @-@ flat major by Gustav Mahler is one of the largest @-@ scale choral works in the classical concert repertoire . Because it requires huge instrumental and vocal forces it is frequently called the " Symphony of a Thousand " , although the work is normally presented with far fewer than a thousand performers and the composer did not sanction that name . The work was composed in a single inspired burst , at Maiernigg in southern Austria in the summer of 1906 . The last of Mahler 's works that was premiered in his lifetime , the symphony was a critical and popular success when he conducted its first performance in Munich on 12 September 1910 . 
 The fusion of song and symphony had been a characteristic of Mahler 's early works . In his " middle " compositional period after 1901 , a change of direction led him to produce three purely instrumental symphonies . The Eighth , marking the end of the middle period , returns to a combination of orchestra and voice in a symphonic context . The structure of the work is unconventional ; instead of the normal framework of several movements , the piece is in two parts . Part I is based on the Latin text of a 9th @-@ century Christian hymn for Pentecost , Veni creator spiritus ( " Come , Creator Spirit " ) , and Part II is a setting of the words from the closing scene of Goethe 's Faust . The two parts are unified by a common idea , that of redemption through the power of love , a unity conveyed through shared musical themes . 
 Mahler had been convinced from the start of the work 's significance ; in renouncing the pessimism that had marked much of his music , he offered the Eighth as an expression of confidence in the eternal human spirit . In the period following the composer 's death , performances were comparatively rare . However , from the mid @-@ 20th century onwards the symphony has been heard regularly in concert halls all over the world , and has been recorded many times . While recognising its wide popularity , modern critics have divided opinions on the work ; Theodor W. Adorno , Robert Simpson and Jonathan Carr found its optimism unconvincing , and considered it artistically and musically inferior to Mahler 's other symphonies . Conversely , it has also been compared — by Deryck Cooke — to Beethoven 's Ninth Symphony as a defining human statement for its century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 By the summer of 1906 , Mahler had been director of the Vienna Hofoper for nine years . Throughout this time his practice was to leave Vienna at the close of the Hofoper season for a summer retreat , where he could devote himself to composition . Since 1899 this haven had been at Maiernigg , near the resort town of Maria Wörth in Carinthia , southern Austria , where Mahler built a villa overlooking the <unk> . In these restful surroundings Mahler completed his Fourth , Fifth , Sixth and Seventh symphonies , his Rückert songs and his song cycle Kindertotenlieder ( " Songs on the Death of Children " ) . 
 Until 1901 , Mahler 's compositions had been heavily influenced by the German folk @-@ poem collection Des Knaben Wunderhorn ( " The Youth 's Magic Horn " ) , which he had first encountered around 1887 . The music of Mahler 's many Wunderhorn settings is reflected in his Second , Third and Fourth symphonies , which all employ vocal as well as instrumental forces . From about 1901 , however , Mahler 's music underwent a change in character as he moved into the middle period of his compositional life . Here , the more austere poems of Friedrich Rückert replace the Wunderhorn collection as the primary influence ; the songs are less folk @-@ related , and no longer infiltrate the symphonies as extensively as before . During this period the Fifth , Sixth and Seventh Symphonies were written , all as purely instrumental works , portrayed by Mahler scholar Deryck Cooke as " more stern and forthright ... , more tautly symphonic , with a new granite @-@ like hardness of orchestration " . 
 Mahler arrived at Maiernigg in June 1906 with the draft manuscript of his Seventh Symphony ; he intended to spend time revising the orchestration until an idea for a new work should strike . The composer 's wife Alma Mahler , in her memoirs , says that for a fortnight Mahler was " haunted by the spectre of failing inspiration " ; Mahler 's recollection , however , is that on the first day of the vacation he was seized by the creative spirit , and plunged immediately into composition of the work that would become his Eighth Symphony . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Two notes in Mahler 's handwriting dating from June 1906 show that early schemes for the work , which he may not at first have intended as a fully choral symphony , were based on a four @-@ movement structure in which two " hymns " surround an instrumental core . These outlines show that Mahler had fixed on the idea of opening with the Latin hymn , but had not yet settled on the precise form of the rest . The first note is as follows : 
 Hymn : Veni Creator 
 Scherzo 
 Adagio : Caritas ( " Christian love " ) 
 Hymn : Die Geburt des Eros ( " The birth of Eros " ) 
 The second note includes musical sketches for the Veni creator movement , and two bars in B minor which are thought to relate to the Caritas . The four @-@ movement plan is retained in a slightly different form , still without specific indication of the extent of the choral element : 
 Veni creator 
 Caritas 
 <unk> mit dem <unk> ( " Christmas games with the child " ) 
 <unk> durch Eros . Hymne ( " Creation through Eros . Hymn " ) 
 From Mahler 's later comments on the symphony 's gestation , it is evident that the four @-@ movement plan was relatively short @-@ lived . He soon replaced the last three movements with a single section , essentially a dramatic cantata , based on the closing scenes of Goethe 's Faust , the depiction of an ideal of redemption through eternal womanhood ( das Ewige @-@ <unk> ) . Mahler had long nurtured an ambition to set the end of the Faust epic to music , " and to set it quite differently from other composers who have made it saccharine and feeble . " In comments recorded by his biographer Richard Specht , Mahler makes no mention of the original four @-@ movement plans . He told Specht that having chanced on the Veni creator hymn , he had a sudden vision of the complete work : " I saw the whole piece immediately before my eyes , and only needed to write it down as though it were being dictated to me . " 
 The work was written at a frantic pace — " in record time " , according to the musicologist Henry @-@ Louis de La Grange . It was completed in all its essentials by mid @-@ August , even though Mahler had to absent himself for a week to attend the Salzburg Festival . Mahler began composing the Veni creator hymn without waiting for the text to arrive from Vienna . When it did , according to Alma Mahler , " the complete text fitted the music exactly . Intuitively he had composed the music for the full strophes [ verses ] . " Although amendments and alterations were subsequently carried out to the score , there is very little manuscript evidence of the sweeping changes and rewriting that occurred with his earlier symphonies as they were prepared for performance . 
 With its use of vocal elements throughout , rather than in episodes at or near the end , the work was the first completely choral symphony to be written . Mahler had no doubts about the ground @-@ breaking nature of the symphony , calling it the grandest thing he had ever done , and maintaining that all his previous symphonies were merely preludes to it . " Try to imagine the whole universe beginning to ring and resound . There are no longer human voices , but planets and suns revolving . " It was his " gift to the nation ... a great joy @-@ bringer . " 
 = = = Instrumental and vocal forces = = = 
 = = = = Orchestra = = = = 
 The symphony is scored for a very large orchestra , in keeping with Mahler 's conception of the work as a " new symphonic universe " , a synthesis of symphony , cantata , oratorio , motet , and lied in a combination of styles . La Grange comments : " To give expression to his cosmic vision , it was ... necessary to go beyond all previously known limits and dimensions . " The orchestral forces required are , however , not as large as those deployed in Arnold Schoenberg 's oratorio <unk> @-@ Lieder , completed in 1911 . The string section is conventional in that it contains violins divided , violas , cellos , and double basses . The woodwind section for the Eighth includes two piccolos ( one doubling 5th flute ) , four flutes , four oboes , a cor anglais , three B @-@ flat clarinets , at least two E @-@ flat clarinets , a B @-@ flat bass clarinet , four bassoons and a contrabassoon . The brass section requires eight horns , four trumpets , four trombones , tuba and a " separately placed " ensemble of four trumpets ( the first of which may be doubled ) and three trombones . The percussion forces consist of timpani , cymbals , bass drum , <unk> , triangle and low @-@ pitched bells . Mahler also added a glockenspiel during the final rehearsals . Other instruments include an organ , a harmonium , a piano ( also added during the rehearsals ) , two harps ( although at least four are preferred ) , a celesta , and at least one mandolin ( but preferably several ) . Mahler recommended that in very large halls , the first player in each of the woodwind sections should be doubled and that numbers in the strings should also be augmented . 
 = = = = Choral and vocal forces = = = = 
 The choral and vocal forces consist of two SATB choirs , a children 's choir , and eight soloists : three soprano , two alto , tenor , baritone , and bass . In Part II the soloists are assigned to dramatic roles represented in Goethe 's text , as illustrated in the following table . 
 La Grange draws attention to the notably high tessitura for the sopranos , for soloists and for choral singers . He characterises the alto solos as brief and unremarkable ; however , the tenor solo role in Part II is both extensive and demanding , requiring on several occasions to be heard over the choruses . The wide melodic leaps in the Pater <unk> role present particular challenges to the bass soloist . 
 = = = Reception and performance history = = = 
 = = = = Premiere = = = = 
 Mahler made arrangements with the impresario Emil Gutmann for the symphony to be premiered in Munich in the autumn of 1910 . He soon regretted this involvement , writing of his fears that Gutmann would turn the performance into " a catastrophic Barnum and Bailey show " . Preparations began early in the year , with the selection of choirs from the choral societies of Munich , Leipzig and Vienna . The Munich <unk> @-@ <unk> provided 350 students for the children 's choir . Meanwhile , Bruno Walter , Mahler 's assistant at the Vienna Hofoper , was responsible for the recruitment and preparation of the eight soloists . Through the spring and summer these forces prepared in their home towns , before assembling in Munich early in September for three full days of final rehearsals under Mahler . His youthful assistant Otto Klemperer remarked later on the many small changes that Mahler made to the score during rehearsal : " He always wanted more clarity , more sound , more dynamic contrast . At one point during rehearsals he turned to us and said , ' If , after my death , something doesn 't sound right , then change it . You have not only a right but a duty to do so . ' " 
 For the premiere , fixed for 12 September , Gutmann had hired the newly built Neue Musik @-@ Festhalle , in the Munich International Exhibition grounds near <unk> ( now a branch of the Deutsches Museum ) . This vast hall had a capacity of 3 @,@ 200 ; to assist ticket sales and raise publicity , Gutmann devised the nickname " Symphony of a Thousand " , which has remained the symphony 's popular subtitle despite Mahler 's disapproval . Among the many distinguished figures present at the sold @-@ out premiere were the composers Richard Strauss , Camille Saint @-@ Saëns and Anton Webern ; the writers Thomas Mann and Arthur Schnitzler ; and the leading theatre director of the day , Max Reinhardt . Also in the audience was the 28 @-@ year @-@ old British conductor Leopold Stokowski , who six years later would lead the first United States performance of the symphony . 
 Up to this time , receptions of Mahler 's new symphonies had usually been disappointing . However , the Munich premiere of the Eighth Symphony was an unqualified triumph ; as the final chords died away there was a short pause before a huge outbreak of applause which lasted for twenty minutes . Back at his hotel Mahler received a letter from Thomas Mann , which referred to the composer as " the man who , as I believe , expresses the art of our time in its profoundest and most sacred form " . 
 The symphony 's duration at its first performance was recorded by the critic @-@ composer Julius Korngold as 85 minutes . This performance was the last time that Mahler conducted a premiere of one of his own works . Eight months after his Munich triumph , he died at the age of 50 . His remaining works — Das Lied von der Erde ( " The Song of the Earth " ) , his Ninth Symphony and the unfinished Tenth — were all premiered after his death . 
 = = = = Subsequent performances = = = = 
 On the day following the Munich premiere Mahler led the orchestra and choruses in a repeat performance . During the next three years , according to the calculations of Mahler 's friend Guido Adler the Eighth Symphony received a further 20 performances across Europe . These included the Dutch premiere , in Amsterdam under Willem Mengelberg on 12 March 1912 , and the first Prague performance , given on 20 March 1912 under Mahler 's former Vienna Hofoper colleague , Alexander von Zemlinsky . Vienna itself had to wait until 1918 before the symphony was heard there . In the US , Leopold Stokowski persuaded an initially reluctant board of the Philadelphia Orchestra to finance the American premiere , which took place on 2 March 1916 . The occasion was a great success ; the symphony was played several more times in Philadelphia before the orchestra and choruses travelled to New York , for a series of equally well @-@ received performances at the Metropolitan Opera House . 
 At the Amsterdam Mahler Festival in May 1920 , Mahler 's completed symphonies and his major song cycles were presented over nine concerts given by the Concertgebouw Orchestra and choruses , under Mengelberg 's direction . The music critic Samuel Langford , who attended the occasion , commented that " we do not leave Amsterdam greatly <unk> the diet of Mahler first and every other composer afterward , to which Mengelberg is training the music @-@ lovers of that city . " The Austrian music historian Oscar Bie , while impressed with the festival as a whole , wrote subsequently that the Eighth was " stronger in effect than in significance , and purer in its voices than in emotion " . Langford had commented on the British " not being very eager about Mahler " , and the Eighth Symphony was not performed in Britain until 15 April 1930 , when Sir Henry Wood presented it with the BBC Symphony Orchestra . The work was played again eight years later by the same forces ; among those present in the audience was the youthful composer Benjamin Britten . Impressed by the music , he nevertheless found the performance itself " execrable " . 
 The years after World War II saw a number of notable performances of the Eighth Symphony , including Sir Adrian Boult 's broadcast from the Royal Albert Hall on 10 February 1948 , the Japanese premiere under Kazuo Yamada in Tokyo in December 1949 , and the Australian premiere under Sir Eugene Goossens in 1951 . A Carnegie Hall performance under Stokowski in 1950 became the first complete recording of the symphony to be issued . After 1950 the increasing numbers of performances and recordings of the work signified its growing popularity , but not all critics were won over . Theodor W. Adorno found the piece weak , " a giant symbolic shell " ; this most affirmative work of Mahler 's is , in Adorno 's view , his least successful , musically and artistically inferior to his other symphonies . The composer @-@ critic Robert Simpson , usually a champion of Mahler , referred to Part II as " an ocean of shameless kitsch . " Mahler biographer Jonathan Carr finds much of the symphony " bland " , lacking the tension and resolution present in the composer 's other symphonies . Deryck Cooke , on the other hand , compares Mahler 's Eighth to Beethoven 's Choral ( Ninth ) Symphony . To Cooke , Mahler 's is " the Choral Symphony of the twentieth century : like Beethoven 's , but in a different way , it sets before us an ideal [ of redemption ] which we are as yet far from realising — even perhaps moving away from — but which we can hardly abandon without perishing " . 
 In the late 20th century and into the 21st , the Eighth was performed in all parts of the world . A succession of premieres in the Far East culminated in October 2002 in Beijing , when Long Yu led the China Philharmonic Orchestra in the first performance of the work in the People 's Republic of China . The Sydney Olympic Arts Festival in August 2000 opened with a performance of the Eighth by the Sydney Symphony Orchestra under its chief conductor Edo de Waart . The popularity of the work , and its heroic scale , meant that it was often used as a set piece on celebratory occasions ; on 15 March 2008 , Yoav <unk> led 200 instrumentalists and a choir of 800 in a performance in Quebec City , to mark the 400th anniversary of the city 's foundation . In London on 16 July 2010 the opening concert of the BBC Proms celebrated the 150th anniversary of Mahler 's birth with a performance of the Eighth , with Jiří Bělohlávek conducting the BBC Symphony Orchestra . This performance was its eighth in the history of the Proms . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Structure and form = = = 
 The Eighth Symphony 's two parts combine the sacred text of the 9th @-@ century Latin hymn Veni creator spiritus with the secular text from the closing passages from Goethe 's 19th @-@ century dramatic poem Faust . Despite the evident disparities within this juxtaposition , the work as a whole expresses a single idea , that of redemption through the power of love . The choice of these two texts was not arbitrary ; Goethe , a poet whom Mahler revered , believed that Veni creator embodied aspects of his own philosophy , and had translated it into German in 1820 . Once inspired by the Veni creator idea , Mahler soon saw the Faust poem as an ideal counterpart to the Latin hymn . The unity between the two parts of the symphony is established , musically , by the extent to which they share thematic material . In particular , the first notes of the Veni creator theme — E @-@ flat → B @-@ flat → A @-@ flat — dominate the climaxes to each part ; at the symphony 's culmination , Goethe 's glorification of " Eternal Womanhood " is set in the form of a religious chorale . The Veni creator theme is believed to be based on <unk> Tzur , a Jewish song sung at Hanukkah . 
 In composing his score , Mahler temporarily abandoned the more progressive tonal elements which had appeared in his most recent works . The symphony 's key is , for Mahler , unusually stable ; despite frequent diversions into other keys the music always returns to its central E @-@ flat major . This is the first of his works in which familiar fingerprints — birdsong , military marches , Austrian dances — are almost entirely absent . Although the vast choral and orchestral forces employed suggest a work of monumental sound , according to critic Michael Kennedy " the predominant expression is not of torrents of sound but of the contrasts of subtle tone @-@ colours and the luminous quality of the scoring " . 
 For Part I , most modern commentators accept the sonata @-@ form outline that was discerned by early analysts . The structure of Part II is more difficult to summarise , being an amalgam of many genres . Analysts , including Specht , Cooke and Paul Bekker , have identified Adagio , Scherzo and Finale " movements " within the overall scheme of Part II , though others , including La Grange and Donald Mitchell , find little to sustain this division . Musicologist <unk> Landmann has suggested that the formal scheme for Part II , after the orchestral introduction , is a sonata plan without the recapitulation , consisting of exposition , development and conclusion . 
 = = = Part I : Veni creator spiritus = = = 
 Mitchell describes Part I as resembling a giant motet , and argues that a key to its understanding is to read it as Mahler 's attempt to emulate the polyphony of Bach 's great motets , specifically Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied ( " Sing to the Lord a new song " ) . The symphony begins with a single tonic chord in E @-@ flat , sounded on the organ , before the entry of the massed choirs in a fortissimo invocation : " Veni , <unk> creator spiritus " . 
 The three note " creator " motif is immediately taken up by the trombones and then the trumpets in a marching theme that will be used as a unifying factor throughout the work . 
 After their first declamatory statement the two choirs engage in a sung dialogue , which ends with a short transition to an extended lyrical passage , " <unk> <unk> gratia " , a plea for divine grace . 
 Here , what Kennedy calls " the unmistakable presence of twentieth @-@ century Mahler " is felt as a solo soprano introduces a meditative theme . She is soon joined by other solo voices as the new theme is explored before the choirs return exuberantly , in an A @-@ flat episode in which the soloists compete with the choral masses . In the next section , " Infirma nostri corporis / <unk> firmans <unk> " ( " Our weak frames fortify with thine eternal strength " ) , the tonic key of E @-@ flat returns with a variation of the opening theme . The section is interrupted by a short orchestral interlude in which the low bells are sounded , adding a sombre touch to the music . This new , less secure mood is carried through when " Infirma nostri corporis " resumes , this time without the choruses , in a subdued D minor echo of the initial invocation . 
 At the end of this episode another transition precedes the " unforgettable surge in E major " , in which the entire body of choral forces declaims " Accende lumen <unk> " ( " Illuminate our senses " ) . 
 The first children 's chorus follows , in a joyful mood , as the music gathers force and pace . This is a passage of great complexity , in the form of a double fugue involving development of many of the preceding themes , with constant changes to the key signature . All forces combine again in the recapitulation of the " Veni creator " section in shortened form . A quieter passage of recapitulation leads to an orchestral coda before the children 's chorus announces the doxology " Gloria sit Patri Domino " ( " Glory be to God the Father " ) . 
 Thereafter the music moves swiftly and powerfully to its climax , in which an offstage brass ensemble bursts forth with the " Accende " theme while the main orchestra and choruses end on a triumphant rising scale . 
 = = = Part II : Closing scene from Goethe 's Faust = = = 
 The second part of the symphony follows the narrative of the final stages in Goethe 's poem — the journey of Faust 's soul , rescued from the clutches of Mephistopheles , on to its final ascent into heaven . Landmann 's proposed sonata structure for the movement is based on a division , after an orchestral prelude , into five sections which he identifies musically as an exposition , three development episodes , and a finale . The long orchestral prelude ( 166 bars ) is in E @-@ flat minor and , in the manner of an operatic overture , anticipates several of the themes which will be heard later in the movement . The exposition begins in near @-@ silence ; the scene depicted is that of a rocky , wooded mountainside , the dwelling place of <unk> whose utterances are heard in an atmospheric chorus complete with whispers and echoes . 
 A solemn baritone solo , the voice of Pater <unk> , ends warmly as the key changes to the major when the trumpets sound the " Accende " theme from Part I. This is followed by a demanding and dramatic aria for bass , the voice of Pater <unk> , who ends his tortured meditation by asking for God 's mercy on his thoughts and for enlightenment . The repeated chords in this section are reminiscent of Richard Wagner 's Parsifal . The mood lightens with the entry of the angels and blessed boys ( women 's and children 's choruses ) bearing the soul of Faust ; the music here is perhaps a relic of the " Christmas Games " scherzo envisioned in the abortive four @-@ movement draft plan . 
 The atmosphere is festive , with triumphant shouts of " Jauchzet auf ! " ( " Rejoice ! " ) before the exposition ends in a postlude which refers to the " Infirma nostri corporis " music from Part I. 
 The first phase of development begins as a women 's chorus of the younger angels invoke a " happy company of blessed children " who must bear Faust 's soul <unk> . The blessed boys receive the soul gladly ; their voices are joined by Doctor Marianus ( tenor ) , who accompanies their chorus before breaking into a rapturous E major paean to the Mater Gloriosa , " Queen and ruler of the world ! " . As the aria ends , the male voices in the chorus echo the soloist 's words to an orchestral background of viola tremolos , in a passage described by La Grange as " emotionally irresistible " . 
 In the second part of the development , the entry of the Mater Gloriosa is signalled in E major by a sustained harmonium chord , with harp arpeggios played over a pianissimo violin melody which La Grange labels the " love " theme . 
 Thereafter the key changes frequently as a chorus of penitent women petition the Mater for a hearing ; this is followed by the solo entreaties of Magna <unk> , Mulier <unk> and Maria Aegyptiaca . In these arias the " love " theme is further explored , and the " scherzo " theme associated with the first appearance of the angels returns . These two motifs predominate in the trio which follows , a request to the Mater on behalf of a fourth penitent , Faust 's lover once known as Gretchen , who has come to make her plea for the soul of Faust . After Gretchen 's entreaty , a solo of " limpid beauty " in Kennedy 's words , an atmosphere of hushed reverence descends . The Mater Gloriosa then sings her only two lines , in the symphony 's opening key of E @-@ flat major , permitting Gretchen to lead the soul of Faust into heaven . The final development episode is a hymn @-@ like tenor solo and chorus , in which Doctor Marianus calls on the penitents to " Gaze aloft " . 
 A short orchestral passage follows , scored for an eccentric chamber group consisting of piccolo , flute , harmonium , celesta , piano , harps and a string quartet . This acts as a transition to the finale , the Chorus <unk> , which begins in E @-@ flat major almost imperceptibly — Mahler 's notation here is Wie ein <unk> , " like a breath " . 
 The sound rises in a gradual crescendo , as the solo voices alternately join or contrast with the chorus . As the climax approaches , many themes are reprised : the love theme , Gretchen 's song , the Accende from Part I. Finally , as the chorus concludes with " The eternal feminine draws us on high " , the off @-@ stage brass re @-@ enters with a final salute on the Veni creator motif , to end the symphony with a triumphant flourish . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Only one autograph score of the Eighth Symphony is known to exist . Once the property of Alma Mahler , it is held by the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek in Munich . In 1906 Mahler signed a contract with the Viennese publishing firm Universal Edition ( UE ) , which thus became the main publisher of all his works . The full orchestral score of the Eighth Symphony was published by UE in 1912 . A Russian version , published in Moscow by <unk> <unk> Muzyka in 1976 , was republished in the United States by Dover Publications in 1989 , with an English text and notes . The International Gustav Mahler Society , founded in 1955 , has as its main objective the production of a complete critical edition of all of Mahler 's works . As of 2016 its critical edition of the Eighth remains a project for the future . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Sir Adrian Boult 's 1948 broadcast performance with the BBC Symphony Orchestra was recorded by the BBC , but not issued until 2009 when it was made available in MP3 form . The first issued recording of the complete symphony was Stokowski 's Carnegie Hall performance with the New York Philharmonic and combined New York choirs on 9 April 1950 . Nearly two years before , in July 1948 , the Hungarian @-@ born conductor Eugene Ormandy had recorded the " Veni creator spiritus " movement at the Hollywood Bowl . Since Stokowski 's version , at least 70 recordings of the symphony have been made by many of the world 's leading orchestras and singers , mostly during live performances . 
 = The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati = 
 " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " is the second episode of the seventh season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It was directed by Michael Watkins and written by lead actor David Duchovny and series creator Chris Carter . The installment explores the series ' overarching mythology and concludes a trilogy of episodes revolving around Fox Mulder 's ( Duchovny ) severe reaction to an alien artifact . Originally aired by the Fox network on November 14 , 1999 , " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " received a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 and was seen by 16 @.@ 15 million viewers . Initial reviews were mixed and the plot and dialogue attracted criticism . Later critics viewed the episode in a more positive light and several writers named it among the best in the series . 
 The X @-@ Files centers on Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) special agents Mulder and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , and the skeptical Scully was initially assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , Scully returns from Africa to discover Mulder in a coma induced by exposure to shards from an alien spaceship wreck . After Mulder disappears from the hospital , Scully joins former government employee Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) and her boss Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) to search for him . Meanwhile , in a dream , The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) offers Mulder a new life and a fresh start . After conferring with a vision of Scully , Mulder awakens from his coma and realizes his duty to prevent alien colonization . 
 Carter was interested in the possibility that extraterrestrials were involved in ancient mass extinctions on Earth and used these themes in the episode . Much of the episode was also inspired by Nikos Kazantzakis 's novel The Last Temptation of Christ , and a scene showing an operation on Mulder has been thematically compared to the Crucifixion of Jesus . For the dream sequences , casting director Rick Millikan brought back many actors and actresses who had been absent from the show for several years , including Jerry Hardin as Deep Throat , Rebecca Toolan as Teena Mulder , and Megan Leitch as Samantha Mulder . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the sixth season finale " Biogenesis " , FBI agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate a rock inscribed with Navajo writing found in Côte d 'Ivoire . While examining it in Washington , D.C. , Mulder hears ringing sounds and suffers several headaches . He turns to Agent Diana Fowley ( Mimi Rogers ) , his former love interest , for help before his mental health rapidly deteriorates and he is transferred to a psychiatric hospital . Meanwhile , Scully heads to New Mexico to ask a dying Albert Hosteen ( Floyd Red Crow Westerman ) to translate what is on the rock : he discovers that the item includes passages from the Bible , and a map of the human genome . 
 In the seventh season premiere " The Sixth Extinction " , Scully journeys to Côte d 'Ivoire and discovers an alien spaceship wreck . After Scully examines the shards , she begins to believe that they hold the key to all of life 's mysteries . Meanwhile , Mulder slips into a coma and Assistant Director Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) enlists the help of former Department of Defense agent Michael Kritschgau ( John Finn ) to determine what is wrong with Mulder . The two discover that while Mulder 's condition has made him unresponsive , it has given him telepathic powers . Scully , working in Africa , witnesses several strange events relating to the wreck before returning to Washington . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Teena Mulder ( Rebecca Toolan ) and The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) visit Mulder , who is paralyzed in a hospital . After administering a drug that cures his paralysis , The Smoking Man reveals himself to be Mulder 's father and takes him from the hospital . Meanwhile Kritschgau visits Scully and claims that Mulder 's contact with the shard of an alien spaceship has reawakened the extraterrestrial black oil with which he was infected three years previously ; because he is infected with the virus , Mulder is proof of alien life . Skinner , who has been looking for Mulder , tells Scully that Mulder 's mother signed him out of the hospital . The Smoking Man takes Mulder to an unfamiliar neighborhood ; inside a new home , he finds his former informant Deep Throat ( Jerry Hardin ) . Deep Throat claims to have faked his own death to escape the burden he was under by being a part of the Syndicate , and he suggests Mulder can now do the same . Mulder meets Fowley , and the two become intimate . 
 On the hospital security tapes , Scully sees Mulder 's mother talking to The Smoking Man but is unable to contact her . Scully receives a package containing a book on Native American beliefs , which describes how one man will prevent the impending apocalypse . Again visiting Kritschgau , she notices he has a stolen copy of her information on the alien spaceship . After he admits hacking her computer , she deletes the files from his laptop . 
 Mulder is reunited with his sister Samantha ( Megan Leitch ) in his new life . He marries Fowley and they have children . The years pass quickly ; he grows older and Fowley dies . Mulder is revealed to be dreaming everything : in reality he is in a government facility being tended to by doctors while The Smoking Man and Fowley watch . The Smoking Man is preparing to have portions of Mulder 's cranial tissue — which have been infected and activated because of the alien virus — implanted into himself . During the operation , The Smoking Man admits that he believes that Mulder has become an alien @-@ human hybrid , and that by taking Mulder 's genetic material he alone will survive the coming alien onslaught . 
 Mulder becomes an old man in his dream , accompanied by an ageless Smoking Man who tells him that Fowley , Deep Throat , Samantha and Scully have all died . The Smoking Man looks out the window , revealing an alien holocaust . Back in reality , Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) kills Kritschgau , burns his papers , and steals his laptop . Scully , having earlier been visited by the spirit of Albert Hosteen who convinces her to pray , awakens in her apartment to discover that someone has slipped a security card under her door . Using it , she enters the facility where Mulder is being held . In Mulder 's dream , Scully meets him at his bedside and convinces him to break with his imaginary life . In reality , Scully finds Mulder and the two escape the facility . A week later Scully meets Mulder at his apartment and tells him that Fowley was found murdered . Mulder confides that , during his ordeal , Scully served as his " touchstone " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " was written by Duchovny and The X @-@ Files ' creator , Chris Carter . This was Duchovny 's second on @-@ screen writing credit , after the sixth season episode " The Unnatural " . He had previously helped to plot stories ; he co @-@ developed the second season finale " Anasazi " with Carter , and received teleplay credits for the third season episodes " Avatar " and " Talitha Cumi " . Duchovny worked on the script for " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " while Carter wrote the season premiere , " The Sixth Extinction " . Carter added his remaining portions to Duchovny 's script after finishing his work on the previous episode . The tagline that appears in the opening credits for this episode is " Amor <unk> " . This is a Latin phrase referring to the " love of fate " , which is an important phrase and concept in the work of the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche . In the context of the episode , the subtitle has been interpreted by writer Charlton McIlwain in his book When Death Goes Pop : Death , Media & the <unk> of Community as a reference to the love of a predestined life , in this case , Mulder 's dream . In her book We Want to Believe , Amy Donaldson suggests the phrase means that Mulder must " love his suffering and passively accept it [ and ] actively embrace his journey ... and release his spirit to find new vigor . " 
 Mulder 's dream and decisions in " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " heavily allude to the actions of Jesus in Nikos Kazantzakis 's novel The Last Temptation of Christ . Duchovny , a fan of the book , found parallels between its central story and Mulder 's ordeal and incorporated many of the novel 's concepts into the episode . In The Last Temptation of Christ , Jesus is torn between his higher calling as the son of God and his desire towards his own humanity . Duchovny was drawn to the fact that Christ 's struggle in the novel was " not only godlike , but also profoundly human " and used this template for Mulder ; in the series , Mulder is destined towards greater things — in this case , stopping the on @-@ coming alien invasion — but he also desires to have a personal life . Duchovny noted that " Mulder is a guy who 's been given the same problem [ as Jesus ] . What I 'm doing is using the very human model of Christ " . Duchovny cautioned that he was not trying to make Mulder into a Christ @-@ like savior figure but rather " an everyman " . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz described the concept as a risk , but Duchovny felt this exploration of Mulder 's character was important to the series . 
 Several of the lines in the episode proved difficult for both fans and cast members to embrace . Fans did not readily accept that The Smoking Man was Mulder 's father . Davis , who portrayed The Smoking Man , noted that fans did not believe the revelation because " part of the mystique of it was that everybody had their own idea of what was going on . " The dialogue in the episode proved difficult for Anderson to present believably . She was troubled that her character was arguing against the existence of extraterrestrials , when in the previous episode her character had encountered an alien shipwreck . When she talked to Carter , she said that she did not " know if [ she could ] do this anymore " because her character was arguing against information that had been confirmed in the first two parts of the episode . Carter explained that there must be conflict between Mulder and Scully for the show 's " believer versus skeptic " dynamic to work properly . 
 The portions of the episode about the alien shard and Mulder 's telepathic abilities allude to the ancient astronaut theory , which proposes that intelligent extraterrestrial beings visited Earth and made contact with humans in antiquity or prehistory . Spotnitz was surprised that the show received few complaints , even though the " Biogenesis " / " The Sixth Extinction " / " Amor Fati " story arc heavily suggested that aliens developed the notions of God and religion . He praised the manner in which the show handled this subject , saying , " Often in the past , we 've done stuff where I was sure we would get angry letters . But we rarely do . And the reason is because of the way we handle things . In ' Amor Fati ' we treated the religious side [ of the story ] with respect . " Spotnitz later identified the combination of science and religion as " a conjunction of science and mysticism , of aliens and religion , that we 're starting to develop . It 's deliberate on our part , to help bring all the mythologies together into one story line . " The ancient astronaut themes were revisited in two season nine episodes : " Provenance " and " Providence " . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 When picking actors and actresses for the episode , casting director Rick Millikan interpreted the script as a flashback . Consequently , he brought back actors and actresses who had not appeared on the show for two or three years , including Hardin as Deep Throat , Rebecca Toolan as Teena Mulder , and Megan Leitch as Samantha Mulder . Hardin had last appeared in the fourth season episode " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " during a flashback sequence , and Toolan 's most recent role was in the second installment of the sixth season episode " Dreamland " . Likewise , Leitch — who portrayed Samantha as an adult — had acted in the second part of the fifth season opener " Redux " . Milikan and the producers encountered difficulties in casting the boy whom Mulder meets on the beach . Originally , they cast the son of series producer Paul Rabwin , but child labor laws dictated a limit on his daily working hours , so twin boys were cast to allow the scenes to be shot in a single day . 
 " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " is the series ' last episode to feature Mimi Rogers as Agent Fowley . After reading a copy of the script , Rogers realized her character was going to die before she reached the ending . The script included a large part for Fowley , which Rogers described as " by far the most [ she ] had to do in an episode . " She later explained , " It occurred to me [ while I was reading the script ] , uh oh , this is way too good . I have too much to do . They 're going to kill me . " 
 Davis was pleased with the episode ; he stated " For me the episode was terrific to play because they ended up making the Cigarette Smoking Man somewhat tougher . We have seen so much softness in him ; it was great to play that tough side . " He described the scene in which he was strapped to an operating table with Mulder as " totally uncomfortable " . He joked that " the only upside of that was that the author [ Duchovny ] was lying right beside me , feeling equally uncomfortable . I wonder if David would have written it that way if he had known what he would have to go through . " 
 The majority of the episode — like the rest of seasons six , seven , eight and nine — was filmed in Los Angeles , California . The housing community in Mulder 's dream was filmed in an " affluent section " between Malibu and Pacific Palisades , California . The scene in which The Smoking Man opens a window , revealing an alien armageddon , used a special set and a matte painting background . Various special effects , such as explosions , were filmed separately . The pieces were digitally combined to create the final scene . A scene in which Mulder watched himself age was filmed but cut for unknown reasons . 
 = = Themes = = 
 The episode portrays Mulder as a Christ @-@ like figure . As scientists experiment on him , he is placed on a cross @-@ like table , which has been interpreted to be symbolic of the cross to which Jesus was nailed . Mulder wears a metal ring around his head , similar to the biblical crown of thorns . Donaldson notes that The Smoking Man 's advice to Mulder to save himself echoes the bystanders who told Jesus to save himself from the cross . She draws parallels between Mulder 's status as the " savior " of the human race — because of his immunity from the alien infection — and Jesus , whom Christians venerate as humanity 's savior . 
 Donaldson , in her essay " The Last Temptation of Mulder " , writes that in Kazantzakis ' novel Jesus " represents what is the utmost human challenge , that of releasing the divinity within from its earthly confines . " In this way , the Jesus of The Last Temptation of Christ represents " utter humanity " and the " struggle between the spirit and the flesh " . Mulder is similarly challenged when he is enticed by The Smoking Man and overcomes temptation by giving up his dream life and embracing his destiny to stop the alien invasion . Several characters in the episode resemble those in the novel . For instance , Fowley is similar to Kazantzakis ' version of Mary Magdalene — both characters " thwart the mission " of the hero . Scully parallels Kazantzakis ' version of Judas Iscariot , as they both call the heroes out of their respective trances . 
 According to McIlwain , the episode represents the series ' ultimate " coalescence of science , religion , and metaphysics " . It is one of the few episodes in which Scully sets aside her empirical reasoning to save Mulder 's life . Scully , representing the more rational one " who must anchor herself in the certainty of scientific facts " , discovers the aliens shards and deduces that they hold the key to " every question that has ever been asked " . Mulder , on the other hand , represents the one who " seeks the truth among a realm of possibilities too fantastic and beyond the realm of scientific validity " and possesses the needed tool — his immunity — to solve the puzzle . The episode also explores the moral side of The Smoking Man and his affinity for evil . Kenneth Silber of Space.com notes that The Smoking Man 's " enticing blandishments confirm he is a highly dangerous foe , one whose Machiavellian creativity borders on the Satanic . " Timothy Dunn and Joseph J. Foy note in " Moral Musings on a Cigarette Smoking Man " that The Smoking Man 's evil deeds have little to do with his mission in the Syndicate , instead reflecting his desire for " completely gratuitous " evil . The two cite his line " Aren 't you expecting me to sprout vampire fangs ? " as evidence that The Smoking Man is aware of his crimes but casually shrugs them off . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on November 14 , 1999 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on Sky1 on March 26 , 2000 . In the U.S. , the episode was watched by 16 @.@ 15 million viewers and ranked as the 27th most @-@ watched episode of any series on network TV for the week ending November 14 . It earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 1 , with a 14 share . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the U.S. This means that roughly 10 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 14 percent of households watching television , were watching the episode . In the U.K. , " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " was seen by 840 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the channel 's third @-@ most watched program for that week after episodes of The Simpsons and Friends . On May 13 , 2003 , the episode was released on DVD as part of the complete seventh season . Two years later the episode was included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involving the alien colonists . 
 Initial reviews of the episode were mixed . After the episode aired , Silber was disappointed in its resolution , writing , " This episode adeptly combines surrealism and a sense of impending climax — only to sputter out in disappointment when nothing much gets resolved at the end . " He dismissed " Mulder 's one @-@ week recovery from his horrifying ordeal " as " facile and unconvincing " . He did write that Mulder 's dream provided " credible insight into the recesses of his troubled personality " . The X @-@ Files researcher and independent reviewer Sarah Stegall awarded the episode a three out of five score after the episode aired . She argued that , in the episode , Mulder " is not a martyr but a victim " which makes him " pitiable , not heroic " . Tom Kessenich , in his 2002 book Examinations : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , gave the episode a positive review , noting that the " Duchovny @-@ penned final scene is exquisite in showcasing the beauty and power of Mulder and Scully 's evolving relationship . " He deemed Mulder 's dream sequences " inspired television " and felt the episode left itself open to interpretation . In the October 2000 issue of Cinefantastique , writer Paula Vitaris gave the episode a mixed review , awarding it two stars out of four . She criticized the recycling of the " one partner lies comatose while the other runs around trying to find a cure " storyline , but she was more positive towards Mulder 's reverie , calling it visually " beautiful " . 
 Later reviews of the episode tended to see the installment in a more positive light . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their 2009 book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . They stated that the installment " kicks off the seventh season with great style " , becoming a " rallying cry for the last leg of the race " . The two enjoyed its " real passion " , which they felt mythology @-@ heavy episodes usually lacked . In 2012 , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club rated the episode a " B " , but criticized the writing , calling it " very purple prose " and Carter 's most " overwrought script since the glory days of ' The Blessing Way ' . " He was also critical of the " absolutely atrocious " make @-@ up used to transform Duchovny into an old man . Notwithstanding his negativity towards the writing , plot , and make @-@ up , VanDerWerff said that he truly " enjoy [ ed ] both halves of ' The Sixth Extinction ' all the same " despite calling it " entertainingly bad [ and ] ludicrously over @-@ the @-@ top " . He complimented the scene in which The Smoking Man looked out onto the alien apocalypse , deeming it a " pretty impressive TV effects accomplishment " . 
 Since its original airing , critics have listed " The Sixth Extinction II : Amor Fati " among the best X @-@ Files episodes . Kessenich named the entry thirteenth in his list of the top 25 The X @-@ Files episodes . Den of Geek writer Nina Sordi named the installment — as a trilogy with " Biogenesis " and " The Sixth Extinction " — the fifth best episode of the series , writing that , " it is evident that as [ The X @-@ Files ] progressed , the episodes surrounding those storylines and the breaking points Mulder and Scully endured push them further and further towards total , irreversible defeat . This is especially poignant when viewing this anxiety inducing trio of episodes . " Matt Champlin of The Post @-@ Standard named the episode the ninth best of the series . Monica S. Kuebler of Exclaim called " The Sixth Extinction " , along with " Biogenesis " and " Amor Fati " , one of the best episodes of the show 's " colonization " phase . Michael Liedtke and George Avalos , writing for the Contra Costa Times , stated that the final scene with Mulder and Scully was one of the most " tender moments " in which they did not kiss . Entertainment Weekly named the same scene one of 25 " Great TV ' I Love You 's ' " [ sic ] , declaring that it " left [ viewers ] with goosebumps " . 
 = St Ceidio 's Church , Rhodogeidio = 
 St Ceidio 's Church , Rhodogeidio is a rural 19th @-@ century church near Llannerch @-@ y @-@ medd , in Anglesey , north Wales . It was built using materials from the 14th @-@ century church that previously stood on the site , which has been used for Christian worship since some time in the 7th century . The present building , which contains an east window dating from the 14th century and a 15th @-@ century font , is no longer used for services , but has been looked after by local people . 
 It is a Grade II listed building , a national designation given to " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " , in particular because it is " unusual in being built closely to the form and detail of its Medieval predecessor . " Two 19th @-@ century writers thought that the church was in a " dreary spot " , but a 2006 guide to Anglesey churches describes it as being in a pleasant location with good views . 
 = = History and location = = 
 The church is dedicated to St Ceidio , a 6th @-@ century British saint who established a number of churches in Wales . Geraint Jones , writing a guide to Anglesey churches in 2006 , said that the site of the church dates from the 7th century , and the 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd wrote in her history of Anglesey that a church was thought to have been at this location since 630 . A 14th @-@ century church here was rebuilt in 1845 under the supervision of the then rector , Hugh Wynne Jones . The 19th @-@ century church reuses the foundations and materials of its predecessor . 
