 At one time , the church on this site was used as a chapel of ease to Llantrisant church . In the 15th century , St Mary 's Church , Rhodogeidio , was built to serve as a chapel of ease for St Ceidio 's . In 2006 , one author noted that St Ceidio 's had not been regularly used for some years , but restoration work had been carried out by local people . St Mary 's , which is about 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 25 km ) to the west , is no longer used for services either , but is in ruins . 
 St Ceidio 's is by the side of a road in the countryside about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the northwest of Llannerch @-@ y @-@ medd , and is set within a raised circular churchyard , known in Welsh as a llan . The area takes its name from the church : " <unk> " is thought to be an abbreviation of <unk> ( " defended mound " ) and " <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name ; i.e. , " the defended mound of Ceidio " . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 St Ceidio 's is constructed of rubble masonry , dressed with freestone . The roof is made of slate , and there is a stone 19th @-@ century bellcote at the west end . The roof trusses can be seen from the inside . Entrance is through a round @-@ headed doorway in the north wall at the west end . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales ) says that this doorway is from the 14th century , but a 2009 guide to the buildings of north @-@ west Wales says that it may date from the 17th century . Inside , there is no internal structural division between the nave and the chancel apart from a single step . There are four windows , all with clear leaded glass : the east window is the oldest , dating from the 14th century . It has a single light ( section of window ) with some tracery at the top and an external hoodmould . The two windows in the south wall and the window in the north wall date from the 19th century , and are set in rectangular frames ; the windows are topped with trefoils . 
 The pews and the elevated pulpit date from the 19th century . The church has some marble memorials on the walls , dating from the 18th century , and a 15th @-@ century octagonal font . A 1937 survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire noted a bier from 1746 , an oak communion table from about 1700 , and an inscribed Elizabethan silver cup . <unk> lamps are used to light the church , since there is no electricity connection . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II listed building – the lowest of the three grades of listing , designating " buildings of special interest , which warrant every effort being made to preserve them " . It was given this status on 12 May 1970 , and has been listed because it is a " simple mid @-@ 19th century church , unusual in being built closely to the form and detail of its Medieval predecessor . " Cadw , which is responsible for the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists , says that this means that St Ceidio 's retains " strong vernacular character . " 
 Angharad Llwyd , writing before St Ceidio 's was rebuilt , referred to it as a " small edifice " in a " dreary spot " . The 19th @-@ century writer Samuel Lewis , describing the rebuilt church , was more complimentary : " The expense of the re @-@ edification was very moderate ; the ancient foundations were preserved , the same stones were used , and though the present building is a much better one than the former , its style is strictly the same . " However , he too thought that the church was in a " dreary spot " . The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in 1851 . He said that the rebuilding of the church had been done " on the whole in a neat style " , with the inside " very fairly arranged " . 
 A 2009 guide to the buildings of the region says that it is a " tiny church in a raised llan in a hilltop circle of trees " , and calls this " the epitome of ancient siting " . The authors note that the east window is comparable to that in another Anglesey church , St <unk> 's Church , Tregaean ( a comparison also made in the Royal Commission 's 1937 report ) . A 2006 guide to the churches of Anglesey describes St Ceidio 's as standing " in a pleasant , quiet rural location " , with " good views in all directions " . 
 = Disco Demolition Night = 
 Disco Demolition Night was an ill @-@ fated baseball promotion that took place on July 12 , 1979 , at Comiskey Park in Chicago , Illinois . At the climax of the event , a crate filled with disco records was blown up on the field between games of the <unk> @-@ night doubleheader between the Chicago White Sox and the Detroit Tigers . Many of those in attendance had come to see the explosion rather than the games and rushed onto the field after the detonation . The playing field was damaged both by the explosion and by the rowdy fans to the point where the White Sox were required to forfeit the second game of the doubleheader to the Tigers . 
 In the late 1970s , dance @-@ oriented disco music was very popular in the United States , particularly after being featured in hit films such as Saturday Night Fever ( 1977 ) . Despite its popularity , disco sparked a backlash from rock music fans . This opposition was prominent enough that the White Sox , seeking to fill seats at Comiskey Park during a lackluster season , engaged Chicago shock jock and anti @-@ disco campaigner Steve Dahl for the promotion at the July 12 doubleheader . Dahl 's sponsoring radio station was 97 @.@ 9 WLUP @-@ FM , so attendees would pay 98 cents and bring a disco record ; between games , Dahl would destroy the collected vinyl in an explosion . 
 White Sox officials had hoped for a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 , about 5 @,@ 000 more than usual . Instead , at least 50 @,@ 000 people — including tens of thousands of Dahl 's adherents — packed the stadium , and thousands more continued to sneak in even after gates were closed . Many of the records were not collected by staff and were thrown like flying discs from the stands . After Dahl blew up the collected records , thousands of fans stormed the field and remained there until dispersed by riot police . The second game was initially postponed , but was forfeited to the Tigers the next day by order of American League president Lee MacPhail . Disco Demolition Night preceded , and may have helped precipitate , the decline of disco in late 1979 ; some scholars and disco artists have described the event as expressive of racism and homophobia while others have denied this connection . Disco Demolition Night remains well known as one of the most extreme promotions in major league history . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Musical = = = 
 The genre known as disco , named for its popularity in discotheques , evolved in the early 1970s in inner @-@ city New York clubs , where disc jockeys would play imported dance music to get the crowd moving . With roots in African @-@ American and Latin American music , and in gay culture , disco became mainstream by the mid @-@ 1970s . Even white artists associated with a much more sedate style of music had disco @-@ influenced hits , such as Barry Manilow with " Copacabana " . By 1977 , disco was very popular in the United States , especially after the release that year of the hit movie Saturday Night Fever . This film starred John Travolta and featured music by the Bee Gees — the fact that both actor and performers were white and presented a heterosexual image did much to make disco widely popular . As Al Coury , president of <unk> Records ( which had released the bestselling soundtrack album for the film ) put it , Saturday Night Fever " kind of took disco out of the closet . " 
 Despite disco 's popularity , there were many who disliked it . Some felt the music too mechanical — Time magazine deemed it a " diabolical thump @-@ and @-@ shriek " . Others hated the music for the lifestyle associated with it , feeling that in the disco scene , personal appearance and style of dress were overly important . The media , in discussing disco , emphasized its roots in gay culture . According to historian Gillian Frank , " by the time of the Disco Demolition in Comiskey Park , the media commonly emphasized that disco was gay and cultivated a widespread perception that disco was taking over " . Performers who cultivated a gay image , such as the Village People ( described by Rolling Stone as " the face of disco " ) did nothing to efface these perceptions , and fears that rock music would die at the hands of disco increased after disco albums dominated the 21st Grammy Awards in February 1979 . 
 In 1978 , New York 's WKTU @-@ FM , a low @-@ rated rock station , switched to disco and became the most popular station in the country ; this led other stations to try to emulate its success . In Chicago , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old Dahl was working as a disc jockey for local radio station WDAI when he was fired on Christmas Eve 1978 as part of the station 's switch from rock to disco ; Dahl was subsequently hired by rival album @-@ rock station WLUP , " The Loop " . Sensing an incipient anti @-@ disco backlash and playing off the publicity surrounding his firing ( he frequently mocked WDAI 's " Disco DAI " slogan on the air as " Disco DIE " ) , Dahl created a mock organization called " The Insane Coho Lips " , an anti @-@ disco army consisting of his listeners . According to Andy Behrens of ESPN , Dahl and his broadcast partner Garry Meier " organized the Cohos around a simple and surprisingly powerful idea : Disco Sucks " . 
 According to Dahl , in 1979 , the Cohos were locked in a war " dedicated to the eradication of the dreaded musical disease known as <unk> " . In the weeks leading up to Disco Demolition Night , Dahl promoted a number of anti @-@ disco public events , several of which became unruly . When a discotheque in Linwood , Indiana , switched from disco to rock in June , Dahl showed up , as did several thousand Cohos , and the police had to be called . Later that month , Dahl and several thousand Cohos occupied a teen disco in the Chicago suburbs . At the end of June , Dahl urged his listeners to throw marshmallows at a WDAI promotional van , which was at a shopping mall where a teen disco had been built . The Cohos chased the van and driver and cornered them in a nearby park , though the situation ended without violence . On July 1 , a near @-@ riot occurred in Hanover Park , Illinois , when hundreds of Cohos could not enter a sold @-@ out promotional event , and fights broke out . Some 50 police officers were needed to control the situation . When disco star Van McCoy died suddenly on July 6 , Dahl marked the occasion by destroying one of his records , " The Hustle " , on the air . 
 Dahl and Meier regularly mocked disco records on the radio . Dahl also recorded his own parody : " Do Ya Think I 'm Disco ? " , a satire of Rod Stewart 's disco @-@ oriented hit " Da Ya Think I 'm Sexy ? " This parody song presented discotheques as populated by effeminate men and frigid women . The lead character , named Tony like Travolta 's character in Saturday Night Fever , is unable to attract a woman until he abandons the disco scene , selling his three @-@ piece white suit at a garage sale and melting down his gold chains for a Led Zeppelin belt buckle . 
 A number of anti @-@ disco incidents took place elsewhere in the first half of 1979 , showing that " the Disco Demolition was not an isolated incident or an aberration " . In Seattle , hundreds of rock fans attacked a mobile dance floor , while in Portland , Oregon , a disc jockey destroyed a stack of disco records with a chainsaw as thousands looked on and cheered . In New York , a rock deejay played Donna Summer 's sexualized disco hit , " Hot Stuff " ; he received protests from his listeners . 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 Since the 1940s , Chicago White Sox owner Bill Veeck had been noted for using promotions to attract fan interest ; he stated " you can draw more people with a losing team plus bread and circuses than with a losing team and a long , still silence " . His son , Mike , was the promotions director for the White Sox in 1979 . Mike Veeck wrote in a letter to a fan before the season that team management intended to make sure that whether the White Sox won or lost , the fans would have fun . 
 On May 2 , 1979 , the Detroit Tigers – Chicago White Sox game at Comiskey Park was rained out . Officials rescheduled it as part of a <unk> @-@ night doubleheader on July 12 . Already scheduled for the evening of July 12 was a promotion aimed at teenagers , who could purchase tickets at half the regular price . 
 The White Sox had had a " Disco Night " at Comiskey Park in 1977 ; Mike Veeck , WLUP Sales Manager Jeff Schwartz , and WLUP Promotions Director Dave Logan discussed the possibility of an anti @-@ disco night promotion after Schwartz mentioned that the White Sox were looking to do a promotion with the station . The matter had also been brought up early in the 1979 season when Schwartz told Mike Veeck of Dahl and his plans to blow up a crate of disco records while live on the air from a shopping mall . During a meeting at WLUP , Dahl was asked if he would be interested in blowing up records at Comiskey Park on July 12 . Since the radio frequency of WLUP was 97 @.@ 9 , the promotion for " Disco Demolition Night " ( in addition to the offer for teenagers ) was that anyone who brought a disco record to the ballpark would be admitted for 98 cents . Dahl was to blow up the collected records between games of the doubleheader . 
 = = Event = = 
 In the weeks before the event Dahl invited his listeners to bring records they wanted to see destroyed to Comiskey Park . The disc jockey feared that the promotion would fail to draw people to the ballpark , and that he would be humiliated . The previous night 's attendance had been 15 @,@ 520 , and Comiskey Park had a capacity of 44 @,@ 492 . The White Sox were not having a good year , and were 40 – 46 going into the July 12 doubleheader . The White Sox and WLUP hoped for a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 people . Mike Veeck hired enough security for 35 @,@ 000 . 
 Owner Bill Veeck was concerned the promotion might turn into a disaster and checked himself out of the hospital , where he had been undergoing tests . The elder Veeck 's fears were substantiated when he saw the people walking towards the ballpark that afternoon ; many carried signs that described disco in profane terms . 
 The doubleheader sold out , leaving at least 20 @,@ 000 people outside the ballpark . Some were not content to remain there , leaping turnstiles , climbing fences , and entering through open windows . The attendance was officially reported as 47 @,@ 795 . Bill Veeck estimated that there were anywhere from 50 @,@ 000 to 55 @,@ 000 in the park — easily the largest crowd of his second stint as White Sox owner . The Chicago Police Department closed off @-@ ramps from the Dan Ryan Expressway near the stadium . Attendees were supposed to deposit their records into a large box , some 4 by 6 by 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 by 1 @.@ 8 by 1 @.@ 5 m ) tall ; once the box was overflowing , many people brought their discs to their seats . 
 The first game was to begin at 6 pm , with the second game to follow . Lorelei , a model who did public appearances for WLUP and who was very popular in Chicago that summer for her sexually provocative poses in the station 's advertisements , threw out the first pitch . As the first game began , Mike Veeck got word that thousands of people were trying to get into the park without tickets . He sent his security personnel to the stadium gates to keep the would @-@ be gate <unk> at bay . This left the field unattended , and fans began throwing the uncollected disco LPs and singles from the stands . Tigers outfielder Rusty Staub remembered that the records would slice through the air , and land sticking out of the ground . He urged teammates to wear batting helmets when playing their positions , " It wasn 't just one , it was many . Oh , God almighty , I 've never seen anything so dangerous in my life . " Attendees also threw firecrackers , empty liquor bottles , and lighters onto the field . The game was stopped several times because of the rain of foreign objects . Dozens of hand @-@ painted banners with such slogans as " Disco sucks " were hung from the ballpark 's seating decks . White Sox broadcaster Harry Caray could see groups of people , who were clearly music rather than baseball fans , wandering through the stadium . Others sat intently in their seats , awaiting the explosion . Mike Veeck later remembered an odor of marijuana in the grandstand and said of the attendees , " This is the Woodstock they never had . " The miasma permeated the press box , which both Caray and his broadcast partner , Jimmy Piersall , commented on over the air . The crowds outside the stadium threw records as well , or gathered them together and burned them in bonfires . Detroit won the first game , 4 – 1 . 
 = = Explosion = = 
 The first game ended at 8 : 16 pm ; at 8 : 40 Dahl , dressed in army fatigues and a helmet , emerged onto the playing surface together with Meier and Lorelei . They proceeded to center field where the vinyl @-@ filled box awaited , though they first did a lap of the field in a Jeep , showered ( according to Dahl , lovingly ) by his troops with firecrackers and beer . The large box containing the collected records had been rigged with explosives . Dahl and Meier warmed up the crowd , leading attendees in a chant of " disco sucks " . Lorelei recalled that the view from center field was surreal . On the mound , White Sox pitcher Ken <unk> , scheduled to start the second game , began to warm up . Other White Sox , in the dugout and wearing batting helmets , looked out upon the scene . Fans who felt events were getting out of control and who wished to leave the ballpark had difficulty doing so ; in an effort to deny the intruders entry , security had padlocked all but one gate . 
 Dahl told the crowd , 
 This is now officially the world 's largest anti @-@ disco rally ! Now listen — we took all the disco records you brought tonight , we got ' em in a giant box , and we 're gonna blow ' em up <unk> <unk> . 
 Dahl set off the explosives , destroying the records and tearing a large hole in the outfield grass . With most of the security personnel still watching the gates per Mike Veeck 's orders , there was almost no one guarding the playing surface . Immediately , the first of what would be thousands of attendees rushed onto the field , causing <unk> to flee the mound and join his teammates in a barricaded clubhouse . Between 5 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 people are estimated to have taken the field . Some climbed the foul poles , others set records on fire , or ripped up the grass . The batting cage was destroyed ; the bases were pulled up and stolen . Among those taking the field was 21 @-@ year @-@ old aspiring actor Michael Clarke Duncan ; during the melee , Duncan slid into third base , had a silver belt buckle stolen , and went home with a bat from the dugout . As Bill Veeck stood with a microphone near where home plate had been , begging people to return to the stands , a bonfire raged in center field . 
 Years later , Lorelei remembered that she had been waving to the crowd when she was grabbed by two of the bodyguards who had accompanied the Jeep and placed back in the vehicle . The party was unable to return to home plate because of the rowdy fans , so the Jeep was driven out of the stadium and through the surrounding streets , to the delight of the many Cohos outside the stadium who recognized the occupants . They were driven to the front of the stadium , ushered back inside , and taken up to the press room where they had spent most of the first game . 
 Caray unsuccessfully attempted to restore order via the public address system . The scoreboard , flashing " PLEASE RETURN TO YOUR <unk> " , was ignored as was the playing of " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " . Some of the attendees were dancing in circles around the burning vinyl shards . Dahl offered his help to get the rowdy fans to leave , but it was declined . 
 At 9 : 08 pm , Chicago police in full riot gear arrived to the applause of the baseball fans remaining in the stands . Those on the field hastily dispersed upon seeing the police . Thirty @-@ nine people were arrested for disorderly conduct ; estimates of injuries to those at the event range from none to over thirty . Bill Veeck wanted the teams to play the second game once order was restored . However , the field was so badly torn up that umpiring crew chief Dave Phillips felt that it was still unplayable even after White Sox groundskeepers spent an hour clearing away debris . Tigers manager Sparky Anderson refused to allow his players to take the field in any event due to safety concerns . Phillips called American League president Lee MacPhail , who postponed the second game to Sunday after hearing a report on conditions . Anderson , however , demanded that the game be forfeited to the Tigers . He argued that under baseball 's rules , a game can only be postponed due to an act of God , and that , as the home team , the White Sox were responsible for field conditions . The next day , MacPhail forfeited the second game to the Tigers 9 – 0 . In a ruling that largely upheld Anderson 's arguments , MacPhail stated that the White Sox had failed to provide acceptable playing conditions . 
 = = Reaction and aftermath = = 
 The day after , Dahl began his regular morning broadcast by reading the indignant headlines in the local papers . He mocked the coverage , " I think for the most part everything was wonderful . Some maniac Cohos got wild , went down on the field . Which you shouldn 't have done . Bad little Cohos . " Tigers manager Anderson stated of the events , " Beer and baseball go together , they have for years . But I think those kids were doing things other than beer . " Columnist David Israel of the Chicago Tribune commented on July 12 that he was not surprised by what had occurred , " It would have happened any place 50 @,@ 000 teenagers got together on a sultry summer night with beer and <unk> . " White Sox pitcher Rich Wortham , a Texan , suggested , " This wouldn 't have happened if they had country and western night . " 
 Although Bill Veeck took much of the public criticism for the fiasco , his son Mike suffered repercussions as the actual front @-@ office promoter behind it . Mike Veeck remained with the White Sox until late 1980 , when he resigned ; his father sold the team to Jerry Reinsdorf soon afterward . He was unable to find a job in baseball for several years , leading him to claim that he had been blackballed from the game . For several years , he worked for a jai @-@ <unk> fronton in Florida , battling alcoholism . As Mike Veeck related , " The second that first guy shimmied down the outfield wall , I knew my life was over ! " Mike Veeck has since become an owner of minor league baseball teams and in July 2014 the Charleston RiverDogs , of whom Veeck is president , held a promotion involving the destruction of Justin Bieber and Miley Cyrus merchandise . Dahl is still a radio personality in Chicago and also reaches his listeners through podcasting . 
 The popularity of disco declined significantly in late 1979 and 1980 . Many disco artists continued , but record companies began labeling their recordings as dance music . Dahl stated in a 2004 interview that disco was " probably on its way out . But I think it [ Disco Demolition Night ] hastened its demise " . According to Frank , " the Disco Demolition triggered a nationwide expression of anger against disco that caused disco to recede quickly from the American cultural landscape " . 
 Music critic Dave Marsh recalled his feelings after Disco Demolition Night , " It was your most paranoid fantasy about where the ethnic cleansing of the rock radio could ultimately lead . " Marsh , who wrote for Rolling Stone , was one of the few who at the time deemed the event an expression of bigotry , writing in a column , " white males , eighteen to thirty @-@ four are the most likely to see disco as the product of homosexuals , blacks , and Latins , and therefore they 're the most likely to respond to appeals to wipe out such threats to their security . It goes almost without saying that such appeals are racist and sexist , but broadcasting has never been an especially civil @-@ libertarian medium . " Nile Rodgers , producer and guitarist for the disco @-@ era group Chic , deemed the event akin to Nazi book burning . Gloria Gaynor , who had a huge disco hit with " I Will Survive " , stated , " I 've always believed it was an economic decision — an idea created by someone whose economic bottom line was being adversely affected by the popularity of disco music . So they got a mob mentality going . " 
 Historian J. Zeitz suggests that while " an obvious explanation for the Disco Demolition Night riot might center on the desire of white , working @-@ class baseball fans to strike out against an art form that they associated with African Americans , gays and lesbians , and Latinos " , he notes that that demographic group ( from which many of the July 12 participants came ) swung wildly in the 1980 presidential primaries and election , first supporting liberal Massachusetts Senator Edward M. Kennedy in the Democratic primary , then the conservative Republican nominee , former California governor Ronald Reagan , in the general election , both times opposing President Jimmy Carter . " Viewed in this light , Disco Demolition Night supports an altogether different interpretation of the 1970s as a decade that saw ordinary Americans gravitate to radical grassroots alternatives , both left and right , out of frustration with the political center . " Concerning the event , University of East London professor Tim Lawrence also proposes that , " Following the unexpected commercial success of Saturday Night Fever , major record companies had started to invest heavily in a sound that their white straight executive class did not care for , and when the overproduction of disco coincided with a deep recession , the homophobic ( and also in many respects sexist and racist ) ' disco sucks ' campaign culminated with a record burning rally that was staged at the home of the Chicago White Sox in July 1979 . " 
 Nevertheless , Harry Wayne Casey , singer for the disco act KC and the Sunshine Band , did not believe Disco Demolition Night itself was discriminatory , and stated his belief that Dahl was simply an idiot . Dahl himself rejects the notion that prejudice was his motivation for Disco Demolition Night . " The worst thing is people calling Disco Demolition homophobic or racist . It just wasn 't ... We weren 't thinking like that . " 
 In 2014 Dahl stated that the racist / homophobic view of Disco Demolition Night stemmed from a 1996 VH1 documentary , The Seventies , which presented it in that light ; Mark W. Anderson , in response , suggested that the event gave the participants an opportunity " to say they didn 't like ... who they saw as the potential victors in a cultural and demographic war ... its [ sic ] hard to believe few if any of those who organized the event didn 't see that underlying reality for what it was " . 
 The unplayed second game remains the last American League game to be forfeited . The last National League game to be forfeited was on August 10 , 1995 , when a baseball giveaway promotion at Dodger Stadium went awry , forcing the Los Angeles Dodgers to concede the game to the St. Louis Cardinals . According to baseball analyst Jeremiah Graves , " To this day Disco Demolition Night stands in infamy as one of the most ill @-@ advised promotions of all @-@ time , but arguably one of the most successful as 30 years later we 're all still talking about it . " 
 = = Game results = = 
 Game 1 : 
 Game 2 forfeited to Detroit , 9 – 0 . 
 = Battle of Khafji = 
 The Battle of Khafji was the first major ground engagement of the Gulf War . It took place in and around the Saudi Arabian city of Khafji , from 29 January to 1 February 1991 and marked the culmination of the Coalition 's air campaign over Kuwait and Iraq , which had begun on 17 January 1991 . 
 Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein , who had already tried and failed to draw Coalition troops into costly ground engagements by shelling Saudi positions and oil storage tanks and firing Scud surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles at Israel , ordered the invasion of Saudi Arabia from southern Kuwait . The 1st and 5th Mechanized Divisions and 3rd Armored Division were ordered to conduct a multi @-@ pronged invasion toward Khafji , engaging American , Saudi and Qatari forces along the coastline . These three divisions , which had been heavily damaged by Coalition aircraft in the preceding days , attacked on 29 January . Most of their attacks were repulsed by U.S. Marines as well as U.S. Army Rangers and Coalition aircraft , but one of the Iraqi columns occupied Khafji on the night of 29 – 30 January . Between 30 January and 1 February , two Saudi Arabian National Guard battalions and two Qatari tank companies attempted to retake control of the city , aided by Coalition aircraft and American artillery . By 1 February , the city had been recaptured at the cost of 43 Coalition servicemen dead and 52 wounded . Iraqi Army fatalities numbered between 60 and 300 , while an estimated 400 were captured as prisoners of war . 
 Although the invasion of Khafji was initially a propaganda victory for the Ba 'athist Iraqi government , it was swiftly recaptured by Saudi and Qatari ground forces . The battle serves as a modern demonstration that air power in a supporting role to ground forces can be of great assistance in halting and defeating a major ground operation . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 2 August 1990 , the Iraqi Army invaded and occupied the neighboring state of Kuwait . The invasion , which followed the inconclusive Iran – Iraq War and three decades of political conflict with Kuwait , offered Saddam Hussein the opportunity to distract political dissent at home and add Kuwait 's oil resources to Iraq 's own , a boon in a time of declining petroleum prices . 
 In response , the United Nations began to pass a series of resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait . Afraid that Saudi Arabia would be invaded next , the Saudi government requested immediate military aid . As a result , the United States began marshalling forces from a variety of nations , styled the Coalition , on the Arabian peninsula . Initially , Saddam Hussein attempted to deter Coalition military action by threatening Kuwait 's and Iraq 's petroleum production and export . In December 1990 , Iraq experimented with the use of explosives to destroy <unk> in the area of the Ahmadi loading complex , developing their capability to destroy Kuwait 's petroleum infrastructure on a large scale . On 16 January , Iraqi artillery destroyed an oil storage tank in Khafji , Saudi Arabia , and on 19 January the pumps at the Ahmadi loading complex were opened , pouring crude oil into the Persian Gulf . The oil flowed into the sea at a rate of 200 @,@ 000 barrels a day , becoming one of the worst ecological disasters to that date . 
 Despite these Iraqi threats , the Coalition launched a 38 @-@ day aerial campaign on 17 January 1991 . Flying an estimated 2 @,@ 000 sorties a day , Coalition aircraft rapidly crippled the Iraqi air defense systems and effectively destroyed the Iraqi Air Force , whose daily sortie rate plummeted from a prewar level of an estimated 200 per day to almost none by 17 January . On the third day of the campaign , many Iraqi pilots fled across the Iranian border in their aircraft rather than be destroyed . The air campaign also targeted command @-@ and @-@ control sites , bridges , railroads , and petroleum storage facilities . 
 Saddam Hussein , who is believed to have said , " The air force has never decided a war , " nevertheless worried that the air campaign would erode Iraq 's national morale . The Iraqi leader also believed that the United States would not be willing to lose many troops in action , and therefore sought to draw Coalition ground troops into a decisive battle . In an attempt to provoke a ground battle , he directed Iraqi forces to launch Scud missiles against Israel , while continuing to threaten the destruction of oilfields in Kuwait . These efforts were unsuccessful in provoking a large ground battle , so Saddam Hussein decided to launch a limited offensive into Saudi Arabia with the aim of inflicting heavy losses on the Coalition armies . 
 As the air campaign continued , the Coalition 's expectations of an Iraqi offensive decreased . As a result , the United States redeployed the XVIII Airborne Corps and the VII Corps 480 kilometers ( 300 mi ) to the west . The Coalition 's leadership believed that should an Iraqi force go on the offensive , it would be launched from the al @-@ <unk> oil fields , in Southern Kuwait . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The Iraqi Army had between 350 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 soldiers in theater , organized into 51 divisions , including eight Republican Guard divisions . Republican Guard units normally received the newest equipment ; for example , most of the estimated 1 @,@ 000 T @-@ 72 tanks in the Iraqi Army on the eve of the war were in Republican Guard divisions . The Iraqi Army in the Kuwaiti Theater of Operations ( <unk> ) also included nine heavy divisions , composed mostly of professional soldiers , but with weapons of a generally lesser grade than those issued to the Republican Guard . 
 Most non @-@ Republican Guard armored units had older tank designs , mainly the T @-@ 55 or its Chinese equivalents , the Type 59 and Type 69 . The remaining 34 divisions were composed of poorly trained conscripts . These divisions were deployed to channel the Coalition 's forces through a number of break points along the front , allowing the Iraqi Army 's heavy divisions and the Republican Guard units to isolate them and counterattack . However , the Iraqis left their western flank open , failing to account for tactics made possible by the Global Positioning System and other new technologies . 
 In Saudi Arabia , the Coalition originally deployed over 200 @,@ 000 soldiers , 750 aircraft and 1 @,@ 200 tanks . This quickly grew to 3 @,@ 600 tanks and over 600 @,@ 000 personnel , of whom over 500 @,@ 000 were from the United States . 
 = = = Iraqi forces = = = 
 <unk> for the offensive into Saudi Arabia was the Iraqi Third Corps , the 1st Mechanized Division from Fourth Corps and a number of commando units . Third Corps , commanded by Major General Salah <unk> Mahmoud ( who would also command the overall offensive ) , had 3rd Armored Division and 5th Mechanized Division , as well as a number of infantry divisions . Fourth Corps ' commander was Major General <unk> <unk> Zaki . The 3rd Armored Division had a number of T @-@ 72 tanks , the only non @-@ Republican Guard force to have them , while the other armored battalions had T @-@ 62s and T @-@ 55s , a few of which had an Iraqi appliqué armor similar to the Soviet bulging armor also known as " brow " laminate armor or <unk> . 
 During the battle of Khafji , these upgraded T @-@ 55s survived impacts from MILAN anti @-@ tank missiles . These divisions also had armored personnel vehicles such as the BMP @-@ 1 , scout vehicles such as the <unk> @-@ 2 , and several types of artillery . Also deployed along this portion of the front , though not chosen to participate in the invasion , were five infantry divisions that were under orders to remain in their defensive positions along the border . 
 U.S. Marine Corps reconnaissance estimated that the Iraqi Army had amassed around 60 @,@ 000 troops across the border , near the Kuwaiti town of <unk> , in as many as 5 or 6 divisions . Infantry divisions normally consisted of three brigades with an attached commando unit , although some infantry divisions could have up to eight brigades – however most infantry divisions along the border were understrength , primarily due to desertion . 
 Armored and mechanized divisions normally made use of three brigades , with each brigade having up to four combat battalions ; depending on the division type , these were generally a three to one mix , with either three mechanized battalions and one armored battalion , or vice versa . Given the size of the forces deployed across the border , it is thought that the Iraqi Army planned to continue the offensive , after the successful capture of Khafji , in order to seize the valuable oil fields at Dammam . 
 The attack would consist of a four @-@ prong offensive . The 1st Mechanized Division would pass through the 7th and 14th Infantry Divisions to protect the flank of the 3rd Armored Division , which would provide a blocking force west of Khafji while the 5th Mechanized Division took the town . The 1st Mechanized and 3rd Armored divisions would then retire to Kuwait , while the 5th Mechanized Division would wait until the Coalition launched a counteroffensive . The principal objectives were to inflict heavy casualties on the attacking Coalition soldiers and take prisoners of war , who Saddam Hussein theorized would be an excellent bargaining tool with the Coalition . 
 As the units moved to the Saudi border , many were attacked by Coalition aircraft . Around the Al @-@ Wafrah forest , about 1 @,@ 000 Iraqi armored fighting vehicles were attacked by Harrier aircraft with Rockeye cluster bombs . Another Iraqi convoy of armored vehicles was hit by A @-@ 10s , which destroyed the first and last vehicles , before systematically attacking the stranded remainders . Such air raids prevented the majority of the Iraqi troops deployed for the offensive from taking part in it . 
 = = = Coalition forces = = = 
 During the buildup of forces , the United States had built observation posts along the Kuwaiti @-@ Saudi border to gather intelligence on Iraqi forces . These were manned by United States Navy SEALs , Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance and Army Special Forces personnel . Observation post 8 was farthest to the east , on the coast , and another seven observation posts were positioned each 20 km ( 12 mi ) until the end of the " heel " , the geographic panhandle of southernmost Kuwait . Observation posts 8 and 7 overlooked the coastal highway that ran to Khafji , considered the most likely invasion route of the city . 1st Marine Division had three companies positioned at observation posts 4 , 5 and 6 ( Task Force Shepard ) , while the 2nd Marine Division 's 2nd Light Armored Infantry Battalion set up a screen between observation post 1 and the Al @-@ Wafrah oil fields . The U.S. Army 's 2nd Armored Division provided its 1st Tiger Brigade to give the Marines some much needed armored support . 
 The Saudis gave responsibility for the defense of Khafji to the 2nd Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade and a Qatari armored battalion , attached to Task Force Abu Bakr . The 5th Battalion of the 2nd Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade set up a screen north and west of Khafji , under observation post 7 . At the time , a Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade could have up to four motorized battalions , each with three line companies . The brigade had a nominal strength of an estimated 5 @,@ 000 soldiers . The Saudis also deployed the Tariq Task Force , composed of Saudi Arabian Marines and a battalion of Moroccan infantry . Two further task forces , Othman and Omar Task Forces , consisted of two Mechanized Ministry of Defense and Aviation Brigades , providing screens about 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of the border . The country 's main defenses were placed 20 km ( 12 mi ) south of the screen . 
 The majority of the Arab contingent was led by General Khaled bin Sultan . The forces around Khafji were organized into the Joint Forces Command @-@ East , while Joint Forces Command @-@ North defended the border between observation post 1 and the Kuwaiti @-@ Iraqi border . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On 27 January 1991 , Iraqi President Saddam Hussein met in Basra with the two Iraqi army corps commanders who would lead the operation , and Major General Salah Mahmoud told him that Khafji would be his by 30 January . During his return trip to Baghdad , Saddam Hussein 's convoy was attacked by Coalition aircraft ; the Iraqi leader escaped unscathed . 
 Throughout 28 January , the Coalition received a number of warnings suggesting an impending Iraqi offensive . The Coalition was flying two brand @-@ new E @-@ 8A Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System ( Joint STARS ) aircraft , which picked up the deployment and movement of Iraqi forces to the area opposite of Khafji . Observation posts 2 , 7 and 8 also detected heavy Iraqi reconnoitering along the border , and their small teams of air @-@ naval gunfire liaison Marines called in air and artillery strikes throughout the day . Lieutenant Colonel Richard Barry , commander of the forward headquarters of the 1st Surveillance , Reconnaissance and Intelligence Group , sent warnings about an impending attack to Central Command . <unk> leaders were too preoccupied with the air campaign to heed them however , and so the Iraqi operation came as a surprise . 
 = = = Beginning of Iraqi offensive : 29 January = = = 
 The Iraqi offensive began on the night of 29 January , when approximately 2 @,@ 000 soldiers in several hundred armored fighting vehicles moved south . The Gulf War 's first ground engagement was near observation post 4 , built on the Al @-@ Zabr police building . Elements of the Iraqi 6th Armored Brigade , ordered to take the heights above Al @-@ Zabr , engaged Coalition units at Al @-@ Zabr . At 20 : 00 hours , U.S. Marines at the observation post , who had noticed large groups of armored vehicles through their night vision devices , attempted to talk to battalion headquarters but received no response . Contact was not established until 20 : 30 hours , which prompted Task Force Shepard to respond to the threat . Coalition soldiers at observation post 4 opened fire on the Iraqi column , but this largely ineffective fire drew a heavy Iraqi response which forced the company to retire south , by order of its commanding officer . 
 To cover the withdrawal , the company 's platoon of LAV @-@ 25s and LAV @-@ <unk> ( anti @-@ tank variants ) moved to engage the Iraqi force . One of the anti @-@ tank vehicles opened fire , after receiving permission , at what it believed was an Iraqi tank . Instead , the missile destroyed a friendly LAV @-@ AT a few hundred meters in front of it . Despite this loss , the platoon continued forward and soon opened fire on the Iraqi tanks with the LAV @-@ 25s ' autocannons . The fire could not penetrate the tanks ' armor , but did damage their optics and prevented the tanks from fighting back effectively . 
 Soon thereafter , a number of A @-@ 10 ground @-@ attack aircraft arrived but found it difficult to pinpoint enemy targets and began dropping flares to illuminate the zone . One of these flares landed on a friendly vehicle , and although the vehicle radioed in its position , it was hit by an AGM @-@ 65 Maverick air @-@ to @-@ ground missile that killed the entire crew except for the driver . Following the incident , the company was withdrawn and the remaining vehicles reorganized into another nearby company . With observation post 4 cleared , the Iraqi 6th Armored Brigade withdrew over the border to Al @-@ Wafrah under heavy fire from Coalition aircraft . Coalition forces had lost 11 troops to friendly fire and none to enemy action . 
 While the events at observation post 4 were unfolding , the Iraqi 5th Mechanized Division crossed the Saudi border near observation post 1 . A Company of the 2nd Light Infantry Armored Battalion , which was screening the Iraqi unit , reported a column of 60 – 100 BMPs . The column was engaged by Coalition A @-@ 10s and Harrier jump jets . This was then followed by another column with an estimated 29 tanks . One of the column 's T @-@ 62 tanks was engaged by an anti @-@ tank missile and destroyed . Coalition air support , provided by A @-@ 10s and F @-@ 16s , engaged the Iraqi drive through observation post 1 and ultimately repulsed the attack back over the Kuwaiti border . Aircraft continued to engage the columns throughout the night , until the next morning . Another column of Iraqi tanks , approaching observation post 2 , were engaged by aircraft and also repulsed that night . 
 An additional Iraqi column crossed the Saudi border to the East , although still along the coast , towards the city of Khafji . These Iraqi tanks were screened by the 5th Mechanized Battalion of the 2nd Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade . This battalion withdrew when it came under heavy fire , as it had been ordered to not engage the Iraqi column . Elements of the 8th and 10th Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigades also conducted similar screening operations . Due to the order to not engage , the road to Khafji was left open . At one point , Iraqi T @-@ 55s of another column rolled up to the Saudi border , signaling that they intended to surrender . As they were approached by Saudi Arabian troops , they reversed their turrets and opened fire . This prompted air support from a nearby AC @-@ 130 , destroying 13 vehicles . 
 Nevertheless , the Iraqi advance towards Khafji continued on this sector , despite repeated attacks from an AC @-@ 130 . Attempts by the Saudi commanders to call in additional air strikes on the advancing Iraqi column failed when the requested heavy air support never arrived . Khafji was occupied by approximately 00 : 30 on 30 January , trapping two six @-@ man reconnaissance teams from the 1st Marine Division in the city . The teams occupied two apartment buildings in the southern sector of the city and called artillery fire on their position to persuade the Iraqis to call off a search of the area . Throughout the night , Coalition air support composed of helicopters and fixed @-@ wing aircraft continued to engage Iraqi tanks and artillery . 
 = = = Initial response : 30 January = = = 
 Distressed by the occupation of Khafji , Saudi commander General Khaled bin Sultan appealed to American General Norman Schwarzkopf for an immediate air campaign against Iraqi forces in and around the city . However this was turned down because the buildings will make it difficult for aircraft to spot targets without getting too close . It was instead decided that the city would be retaken by Arab ground forces . The task fell to the 2nd Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade 's 7th Battalion , composed of Saudi infantry and two Qatari tank companies attached to the task force . These were supported by U.S. Army Special Forces and Marine Reconnaissance personnel . 
 The force was put under the command of Saudi Lieutenant Colonel Matar , who moved out by 17 : 00 hours . The force met up with elements of the U.S. 3rd Marine Regiment , south of Khafji , and were ordered to directly attack the city . The engagement of that night was to be the first battle the Qatari Army had seen in its entire history . A platoon of Iraqi T @-@ 55s attacked a Qatari tank company south of the city , leading to the destruction of three T @-@ 55s by Qatari AMX @-@ 30s , and the capture of a fourth Iraqi tank . Lacking any coordinated artillery support , artillery fire was provided by the 10th Marine Regiment . 
 An initial attack on the city was called off after the Iraqi occupants opened up with heavy fire , prompting the Saudis to reinforce the 7th Battalion with two more companies from adjacent Saudi units . The attempt to retake the city had been preceded by a 15 @-@ minute preparatory fire from U.S. Marine artillery . However Iraqi fire did manage to destroy one Saudi V @-@ 150 armored personnel carrier . 
 Meanwhile , 2nd Saudi Arabian National Guard Brigade 's 5th Battalion moved north of Khafji to block Iraqi reinforcements attempting to reach the city . This unit was further bolstered by the 8th Ministry of Defense and Aviation Brigade , and heavily aided by Coalition air support . Although fear of friendly fire forced the 8th Ministry of Defense and Aviation Brigade to pull back the following morning , Coalition aircraft successfully hindered Iraqi attempts to move more soldiers down to Khafji and caused large numbers of Iraqi troops to surrender to Saudi forces . 
 That night , two U.S. Army heavy equipment transporters entered the city of Khafji , apparently lost , and were fired upon by Iraqi troops . Although one truck managed to turn around and escape , the two drivers of the second truck were wounded and captured . This led to a rescue mission organized by 3rd Battalion 3rd Marine Regiment , which sent a force of 30 men to extract the two wounded drivers . Although encountering no major opposition , they did not find the two drivers who had , by this time , been taken prisoner . The Marines did find a burnt out Qatari AMX @-@ 30 , with its dead crew . That same night , a U.S. Air Force AC @-@ 130 was shot down by an Iraqi surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) , killing the aircraft 's crew of 14 . 
 The interdiction on the part of Coalition aircraft and Saudi and Qatari ground forces was having an effect on the occupying Iraqi troops . Referring to Saddam Hussein 's naming of the ground engagement as the " mother of all battles " , Iraqi General Salah radioed in a request to withdraw , stating , " The mother was killing her children . " Since the beginning of the battle , Coalition aircraft had flown at least 350 sorties against Iraqi units in the area and on the night of 30 – 31 January , Coalition air support also began to attack units of the Iraqi Third Corps assembled on the Saudi border . 
 = = = Recapture of Khafji : 31 January – 1 February = = = 
 On 31 January , the effort to retake the city began anew . The attack was launched at 08 : 30 hours , and was met by inaccurate Iraqi fire which knocked @-@ out two Saudi V @-@ 150 wheeled vehicles . The 8th battalion of the Saudi brigade was ordered to deploy to the city by 10 : 00 hours , while 5th Battalion to the north engaged another column of Iraqi tanks attempting to reach the city . The latter engagement led to the destruction of around 13 Iraqi tanks and armored personnel carriers , and the capture of 6 more vehicles and 116 Iraqi soldiers , costing the Saudi battalion two dead and two wounded . The 8th Battalion engaged the city from the northeast , linking up with 7th Battalion . These units cleared the southern portion of the city , until 7th Battalion withdrew south to rest and rearm at 18 : 30 hours , while the 8th remained in Khafji . 
 The 8th continued clearing buildings and by the time the 7th had withdrawn to the south , the Saudis had lost approximately 18 dead and 50 wounded , as well as seven V @-@ 150 vehicles . Coalition aircraft continued to provide heavy support throughout the day and night . A veteran of the Iran @-@ Iraq War later mentioned that Coalition airpower " imposed more damage on his brigade in half an hour than it had sustained in eight years of fighting against the Iranians . " During the battle , an Iraqi amphibious force was sent to land on the coast and move into Khafji . As the boats made their way through the Persian Gulf towards Khafji , American and British aircraft caught the Iraqi boats in the open and largely destroyed the Iraqi amphibious force . 
 The Saudi and Qatari units renewed operations the following day . Two Iraqi companies , with about 20 armored vehicles , remained in the city and had not attempted to break out during the night . While the Saudi 8th Battalion continued operations in the southern portion of the city , the 7th Battalion began to clear the northern sector of the city . Iraqi resistance was sporadic and most Iraqi soldiers surrendered on sight ; as a result , the city was recaptured on 1 February 1991 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 During the battle , Coalition forces incurred 43 fatalities and 52 injured casualties . This included 25 Americans killed , 11 of them by friendly fire along with 14 airmen killed when their AC @-@ 130 was shot down by Iraqi SAMs . The Americans also had two soldiers wounded and another two soldiers were captured in Khafji . Saudi and Qatari casualties totaled 18 killed and 50 wounded . Two Qatari AMX @-@ 30s main battle tanks and between seven and ten lightly armored Saudi V @-@ 150s were knocked out . Most of the <unk> were knocked out by RPG @-@ 7 fire in close @-@ range fighting inside the town of Khafji , although one of the two that was a catastrophic kill was hit by a 100mm main gun round from a T @-@ 55 . Iraq listed its casualties as 71 dead , 148 wounded and 702 missing . U.S. sources present at the battle claim that 300 Iraqis lost their lives , and at least 90 vehicles were destroyed . Another source suggests that 60 Iraqi soldiers were killed and at least 400 taken prisoner , while no less than 80 armored vehicles were knocked out ; however these casualties are attributed to the fighting both inside and directly north of Khafji . Whatever the exact casualties , the majority of three Iraqi mechanized / armored divisions had been destroyed . The U.S. Army 's 2nd Armored Division 's 1st Tiger Brigade claims 181 destroyed or captured enemy tanks , 148 APCs , 40 artillery pieces , 27 AA emplacements , 263 Iraqi dead and 4 @,@ 051 captured after 100 hours of combat . 
 The Iraqi capture of Khafji was a major propaganda victory for Iraq : on 30 January Iraqi radio claimed that they had " expelled Americans from the Arab territory " . For many in the Arab world , the battle of Khafji was seen as an Iraqi victory , and Hussein made every possible effort to turn the battle into a political victory . On the other side , confidence within the United States Armed Forces in the abilities of the Saudi and Qatari armies increased as the battle progressed . After Khafji , the Coalition 's leadership began to sense that the Iraqi Army was a " hollow force " and it provided them with an impression of the degree of resistance they would face during the Coalition 's ground offensive that would begin later that month . The battle was also a major propaganda victory for Saudi Arabia , which had successfully defended its territory . 
 Despite the success of the engagements between 29 January and 1 February , the Coalition did not launch its main offensive into Kuwait and Iraq until the night of 24 – 25 February . The invasion of Iraq was completed about 48 hours later . The Battle of Khafji served as a modern example of the ability of air power to serve a supporting role to ground forces . It offered the Coalition an indication of the manner in which Operation Desert Storm would be fought , but also hinted at future friendly @-@ fire casualties which accounted for nearly half of the American dead . 
 = Marshalsea = 
 The Marshalsea ( 1373 – 1842 ) was a notorious prison in Southwark ( now London ) , just south of the River Thames . It housed a variety of prisoners over the centuries , including men accused of crimes at sea and political figures charged with sedition , but it became known , in particular , for its incarceration of the poorest of London 's debtors . Over half the population of England 's prisons in the 18th century were in jail because of debt . 
 Run privately for profit , as were all English prisons until the 19th century , the Marshalsea looked like an Oxbridge college and functioned as an extortion racket . Debtors in the 18th century who could afford the prison fees had access to a bar , shop and restaurant , and retained the crucial privilege of being allowed out during the day , which gave them a chance to earn money for their creditors . Everyone else was crammed into one of nine small rooms with dozens of others , possibly for years for the most modest of debts , which increased as unpaid prison fees accumulated . The poorest faced starvation and , if they crossed the jailers , torture with skullcaps and thumbscrews . A parliamentary committee reported in 1729 that 300 inmates had starved to death within a three @-@ month period , and that eight to ten were dying every 24 hours in the warmer weather . 
 The prison became known around the world in the 19th century through the writing of the English novelist Charles Dickens , whose father was sent there in 1824 , when Dickens was 12 , for a debt to a baker . Forced as a result to leave school to work in a factory , Dickens based several of his characters on his experience , most notably Amy Dorrit , whose father is in the Marshalsea for debts so complex no one can fathom how to get him out . 
 Much of the prison was demolished in the 1870s , though parts of it were used as shops and rooms into the 20th century . A local library now stands on the site . All that is left of the Marshalsea is the long brick wall that marked its southern boundary , the existence of what Dickens called " the crowding ghosts of many miserable years " recalled only by a plaque from the local council . " [ I ] t is gone now , " he wrote , " and the world is none the worse without it . " 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Etymology , Marshalsea Court = = = 
 Marshalsea or <unk> referred to the office of a marshal , derived from the Anglo @-@ French <unk> . Marshal originally meant farrier , from the Old Germanic <unk> ( horse ) and <unk> ( servant ) , later a title bestowed on those presiding over the courts of Medieval Europe . 
 Marshalsea was originally the name of the Marshalsea Court . The prison was built to hold prisoners brought before that court and the Court of the King 's Bench , to which Marshalsea rulings could be appealed . Also called the Court of the Verge , and the Court of the Marshalsea of the Household of the Kings of England , the Marshalsea court was a jurisdiction of the royal household that , from around 1290 , governed household members who lived within the verge , defined as within 12 miles ( 19 km ) of the king . 
 From 1530 to 1698 the verge was usually 12 miles around the Palace of Whitehall , the royal family 's main residence . But the Marshalsea was an ambulatory court that moved around the country with the king , dealing with trespass , contempt and debt , and increasingly it came to be used by people not connected to the royal household . 
 = = = Southwark = = = 
 Southwark was settled by the Romans around 43 CE . It served as an entry point into London from southern England , particularly along Watling Street , the Roman road from Canterbury ; this ran into what is now Southwark 's Borough High Street and from there north to old London Bridge . The area became known for its travellers and inns , including Geoffrey Chaucer 's Tabard Inn . The itinerant population brought with it poverty , prostitutes , bear baiting , theatres ( including Shakespeare 's Globe ) and prisons . In 1796 there were five prisons in Southwark – the Clink , King 's Bench , Borough <unk> , White Lion and the Marshalsea – compared to 18 in London as a whole . 
 = = = Prisons in England = = = 
 Until the 19th century imprisonment in England was not viewed as a punishment in itself , except for minor offences such as vagrancy . Prisons simply held people until their creditors had been paid or their fate decided by judges ; options included execution ( ended 1964 ) , flogging ( 1962 ) , the stocks ( 1872 ) , the pillory ( 1830 ) , the ducking stool ( 1817 ) , joining the military , or penal transportation to America or Australia ( 1867 ) . In 1774 there were just over 4 @,@ 000 prisoners in Britain , half of them debtors , out of a population of six million . ( In 2010 there were over 85 @,@ 000 prisoners in England and Wales out of a population of 56 million . ) 
 Eighteenth @-@ century prisons were effectively lodging houses . Poorly maintained and often filthy , they might consist of a couple of rooms in a cellar . Before the Gaols Act 1823 , then the Prisons Act of 1835 and 1877 , they were administered by the royal household , the aristocracy and the bishops , and run for profit by private individuals who bought the right to manage and make money from them . 
 Prisoners had to pay rent , feed and clothe themselves and , in the larger prisons , furnish their rooms . One man found not guilty at trial in 1669 was not released because he owed prison fees from his pre @-@ trial confinement , a position supported by the judge , Matthew Hale . <unk> sold food or let out space for others to open shops ; the Marshalsea contained several shops and small restaurants . 
 Prisoners with no money or external support faced starvation . If the prison did supply food to its non @-@ paying inmates , it was purchased with charitable donations — donations sometimes siphoned off by the jailers — usually bread and water with a small amount of meat , or something confiscated as unfit for human consumption . <unk> would load prisoners with fetters and other iron , then charge for their removal , known as " easement of irons " ( or " choice of irons " ) ; this became known as the " trade of chains . " 
 The prison reformer John Howard travelled around the country in the 1770s inspecting jails , and presented his research in The State of the Prisons in England and Wales ( 1777 ) . In a jail owned by the Bishop of Ely , Howard wrote , prisoners had ten years earlier been kept chained to the floor on their backs , with spiked collars round their necks and iron bars over their legs . The Duke of Portland had a one @-@ room cellar in Chesterfield that housed four prisoners , with no straw or heat , which had not been cleaned for months . Lord Arundel owned a jail in Penzance , where Howard found a debtor in a room 11 ft x 11 ft and 6 ft high , with a small window . The door of the room had not been opened for four weeks . 
 = = = Debt in England = = = 
 Before the Bankruptcy Act of 1869 , debtors in England were routinely imprisoned at the pleasure of their creditors . Around 10 @,@ 000 people in England and Wales were in prison for debt in 1641 , often for small amounts . In the 18th century debtors comprised over half the prison population : 945 of London 's 1 @,@ 500 prisoners in 1779 were debtors . Other European countries had legislation limiting imprisonment for debt to one year , but debtors in England were imprisoned until their creditors were satisfied . When the Fleet Prison closed in 1842 , two debtors were found to have been there for 30 years . 
 Prisoners would often take their families with them , which meant that entire communities sprang up inside the debtors ' jails . The community created its own economy , with jailers charging for room , food , drink and furniture , or selling concessions to others , and attorneys charging fees in fruitless efforts to get the debtors out . Prisoners ' families , including children , often had to find employment simply to cover the cost of the imprisonment . 
 Legislation began to address the problem from 1649 onwards , but it was slow to make a difference . Helen Small writes that , under George III ( 1760 – 1820 ) , new legislation prevented debts of under 40 shillings leading to jail ( £ 409 in 2014 ) , but even the smallest debt would exceed that once lawyers ' fees were added . Under the Insolvent Debtors Act 1813 , debtors could request release after 14 days by taking an oath that their assets did not exceed £ 20 , but if a creditor objected they had to stay inside . Even after years in prison , the debt remained to be paid . 
 = = First Marshalsea ( 1373 – 1811 ) = = 
 = = = Overview , sources = = = 
 The Marshalsea occupied two buildings on the same street in Southwark . The first dated back to the 14th century at what would now be 161 Borough High Street , between King Street and Mermaid Court . By the late 16th century the building was crumbling . In 1799 the government reported that it would be rebuilt 130 yards ( 119 m ) south on what is now 211 Borough High Street . 
 Measuring around 150 by 50 feet ( <unk> x 15m ) , with a turreted front lodge , the first Marshalsea was set slightly back from Borough High Street . There is no record of when it was built . Historian Jerry White writes that it existed by 1300 , but according to Ida Darlington , editor of the 1955 Survey of London , there is a mention of " the good men of the town of <unk> " being granted a licence in 1373 to build a house on Southwark 's High Street to hold prisoners appearing before the Marshalsea of the King 's household . Darlington writes that earlier mentions of a Marshalsea prison may refer to other prisons , one kept by the Knight Marshal at York and another at Canterbury . There is a reference to the Marshalsea prison in Southwark being set on fire in 1381 by Wat Tyler during the Peasants ' Revolt . 
 Most of the first Marshalsea , as with the second , was taken up by debtors ; in 1773 debtors within 12 miles of Westminster could be imprisoned there for a debt of 40 shillings . Jerry White writes that London 's poorest debtors were housed in the Marshalsea . Wealthier debtors arranged to be moved – regularly securing their removal from the Marshalsea by writ of habeas corpus – to the Fleet or the King 's Bench , both of which were more comfortable . The prison also held a small number of men being tried at the Old Bailey for crimes at sea . 
 The Marshalsea was technically under the control of the Knight Marshal , but was let out to others who ran it for profit . For example , in 1727 the Knight Marshal , Sir Philip Meadows , hired John Darby , a printer , as prison governor , who in turn leased it to William Acton , a butcher ( who was later tried for murdering three of its prisoners ) . Acton had previously worked as one of the prison 's turnkeys . He paid Darby £ 140 a year ( roughly £ 18 @,@ 780 ) for a seven @-@ year lease , giving him the right to act as resident warden and chief turnkey , and an additional £ 260 for the right to collect rent from the rooms , and sell food and drink . 
 Much of our information about the first Marshalsea is about the prison in the early 18th @-@ century , courtesy of three sources . John Baptist Grano ( 1692 – c . 1748 ) , one of George Frederick Handel 's trumpeters at the opera house in London 's Haymarket , was jailed there for a debt of £ 99 ( £ 12 @,@ 000 today ) , and kept a detailed diary , A Journal of My Life inside the Marshalsea , of his 458 @-@ day incarceration from 30 May 1728 until 23 September 1729 . The other two key sources are a 1729 report by a parliamentary committee , led by James Oglethorpe MP , on the state of the Fleet and the Marshalsea , and the subsequent murder trial that year of William Acton , the Marshalsea 's chief jailor . 
 = = = Master 's side = = = 
 By the 18th century , the prison had separate areas for its two classes of prisoner : the master 's side , which housed about 50 rooms for rent , and the common or poor side , consisting of nine small rooms , or wards , into which 300 people were confined from dusk until dawn . Room rents on the master 's side were ten shillings a week in 1728 , with most prisoners forced to share . John Baptist Grano paid 2s 6d ( two shillings and six pennies ) for a room with two beds on the master 's side , shared with three other prisoners : Daniel Blunt , a tailor who owed £ 9 , Benjamin Sandford , a <unk> from Bermondsey who owed £ 55 , and a Mr. Blundell , a jeweller . Women prisoners who could pay the fees were housed in the women 's quarters , known as the oak . The wives , daughters and lovers of male prisoners were allowed to live with them , if someone was paying their way . 
 Known as the castle by inmates , the prison had a turreted lodge at the entrance , with a side room called the pound , where new prisoners would wait until a room was found for them . The front lodge led to a courtyard known as the park . This had been divided in two by a long narrow wall , so that prisoners from the common side could not be seen by those on the master 's side , who preferred not to be distressed by the sight of abject poverty , especially when they might themselves be plunged into it at any moment . 
 There was a bar run by the governor 's wife , and a chandler 's shop run in 1728 by a Mr and Mrs Cary , both prisoners , which sold candles , soap and a little food . There was a coffee shop run in 1729 by a long @-@ term prisoner , Sarah Bradshaw , and a steak house called <unk> Doll 's run by another prisoner , Richard McDonnell , and his wife . There was also a tailor and a barber , and prisoners from the master 's side could hire prisoners from the common side to act as their servants . 
 The prison reformer John Howard visited the Marshalsea on 16 March 1774 . He reported that there was no infirmary , and that the practice of " garnish " was in place , whereby new prisoners were bullied into giving money to the older prisoners upon arrival . Five rooms on the master 's side were being let to a man who was not a prisoner ; he had set up a chandler 's shop in one of them , lived in two others with his family , and sublet two to prisoners . During Howard 's visit , the tap room , or beer room , had been let to a prisoner who was living " within the rules " or " within the liberty " of the King 's Bench prison ; this meant that he was a King 's Bench inmate who , for a fee , was allowed to live outside , within a certain radius of the prison . Although legislation prohibited jailers from having a pecuniary interest in the sale of alcohol within their prisons , it was a rule that was completely ignored . Howard reported that , in the summer of 1775 , 600 pots of beer were brought into the Marshalsea one Sunday from a public house , because the prisoners did not like the beer in the tap room . 
 = = = Common side = = = 
 Prisoners on the master 's side rarely ventured to the common side . John Baptist Grano went there just once , on 5 August 1728 , writing in his diary that , " I thought it would have kill 'd me . " There was no need for other prisoners to see it , John Ginger writes . It was enough that they knew it existed to keep the rental money , legal fees and other gratuities flowing from their families , fees that anywhere else would have seen them living in the lap of luxury , but which in the Marshalsea could be trusted merely to stave off disease and starvation . 
 By all accounts , living conditions in the common side were horrific . In 1639 prisoners complained that 23 women were being held in one room without space to lie down , leading to a revolt , with prisoners pulling down fences and attacking the guards with stones . Prisoners were regularly beaten with a " bull 's pizzle " ( a whip made from a bull 's penis ) , or tortured with thumbscrews and a skullcap , a vice for the head that weighed 12 lb ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) . 
 What often finished them off was being forced to lie in the strong room , a windowless shed near the main sewer , next to cadavers awaiting burial and piles of night soil . Dickens described it as " dreaded by even the most dauntless highwaymen and bearable only to toads and rats . " One apparently diabetic army officer who died in the strong room – he had been ejected from the common side because inmates had complained about the smell of his urine – had his face eaten by rats within hours of his death , according to a witness . 
 When William Acton ran the jail in the 1720s , the income from charities , collected to buy food for inmates on the common side , was directed instead to a group of trusted prisoners who policed the prison on Acton 's behalf . The same group swore during Acton 's trial in 1729 for murder that the strong room was the best room in the house . Ginger writes that Acton and his wife , who lived in a comfortable apartment near the lodge , knew they were sitting on a powder keg : " When each morning the smell of freshly baked bread filled ... the yard ... only brutal suppression could prevent the Common Side from erupting . " 
 = = = 1729 Gaols Committee = = = 
 The common side did erupt after a fashion in 1728 when Robert Castell , an architect and debtor in the Fleet prison , who had been living in lodgings outside the jail within the rules , was taken to a " sponging house " after refusing to pay a higher prison fee to the Fleet 's notorious warden , Thomas Bambridge . <unk> houses were private lodgings where prisoners were incarcerated before being taken to jail ; they acquired the name because they squeezed the prisoner 's last money out of him . When Castell arrived at the sponging house on 14 November he was forced to share space with a man who was dying of smallpox , and as a result became infected and died less than a month later . 
 Castell had a friend , James Oglethorpe , a Tory MP who years later founded the American colony of Georgia . Oglethorpe began to ask questions about the treatment of debtor prisoners , and a group of debtors , perhaps at Oglethorpe 's instigation , lodged a complaint about their treatment with the mayor of London and his aldermen , who interviewed the Fleet 's warden on 21 December 1728 . 
 In February 1729 the House of Commons appointed a parliamentary committee , the Gaols Committee , chaired by Oglethorpe , to examine conditions in the Fleet and Marshalsea . The committee visited the Fleet on 27 February and the Marshalsea on 25 March . William Hogarth accompanied the committee on its visit to the Fleet , sketching it , then painting it in oil ( left ) . The painting was commissioned by Sir Archibald Grant , MP for Aberdeenshire , standing third from the right . The man in irons is thought to be Jacob Mendez <unk> , a Portuguese prisoner . 
 The committee was shocked by the prisoners ' living conditions . In the Fleet they found Sir William Rich , a baronet , in irons . Unable to pay the prison fee , he had been burned with a red @-@ hot poker , hit with a stick and kept in a dungeon for ten days for having wounded the warden with a shoemaker 's knife . In the Marshalsea they found that prisoners on the common side were being routinely starved to death : 
 All the Support such poor Wretches have to subsist on , is an accidental Allowance of Pease , given once a week by a Gentleman , who conceals his Name , and about Thirty Pounds of Beef , provided by the voluntary Contribution of the Judge and Officers of the Marshalsea , on Monday , Wednesday , and Friday ; which is divided into very small Portions , of about an Ounce and a half , distributed with One @-@ Fourth @-@ part of an Half @-@ penny Loaf ... 
 When the miserable Wretch hath worn out the Charity of his Friends , and consumed the Money , which he hath raised upon his <unk> , and Bedding , and hath eat his last Allowance of Provisions , he usually in a few Days grows weak , for want of Food , with the symptoms of a <unk> Fever ; and when he is no longer able to stand , if he can raise 3d to pay the Fee of the common Nurse of the Prison , he obtains the Liberty of being carried into the Sick Ward , and lingers on for about a Month or two , by the assistance of the above @-@ mentioned Prison Portion of Provision , and then dies . 
 = = = Trial of William Acton = = = 
 As a result of the Gaols Committee 's inquiries , several key figures within the jails were tried for murder in August 1729 , including Thomas Bambridge of the Fleet and William Acton of the Marshalsea . Given the strongly worded report of the Gaols Committee , the trials were major public events . Ginger writes that , when the Prince of Wales 's bookseller presented his bill at the end of that year , two of the 41 volumes on it were accounts of William Acton 's trial . 
 = = = = Case of Thomas Bliss = = = = 
 The first case against Acton , before Mr. Baron Carter , was for the murder in 1726 of Thomas Bliss , a carpenter and debtor . Unable to pay the prison fees , Bliss had been left with so little to eat that he had tried to escape by throwing a rope over the wall , but his pursuers severed it and he fell 20 feet into the prison yard . Wanting to know who had supplied the rope , Acton beat him with a bull 's pizzle , stamped on his stomach , placed him in the hole ( a damp space under the stairs ) , then in the strong room . 
 Originally built to hold pirates , the strong room was just a few yards from the prison 's sewer . It was never cleaned , had no drain , no sunlight , no fresh air — the smell was described as " noisome " — and was full of rats and sometimes " several barrow <unk> of dung . " Several prisoners told the court that it contained no bed , so that prisoners had to lie on the damp floor , possibly next to corpses awaiting burial . But a group of favoured prisoners Acton had paid to police the jail told the hearing there was indeed a bed . One of them said he often chose to lie in there himself , because the strong room was so clean ; the " best room on the Common side of the jail , " said another . This despite the court 's having heard that one prisoner 's left side had mortified from lying on the wet floor , and that a rat had eaten the nose , ear , cheek and left eye of another . 
 Bliss was left in the strong room for three weeks wearing a skullcap ( a heavy vice for the head ) , thumb screws , iron collar , leg irons , and irons round his ankles called <unk> . One witness said the swelling in his legs was so bad that the irons on one side could no longer be seen for overflowing flesh . His wife , who was able to see him through a small hole in the door , testified that he was bleeding from the mouth and thumbs . He was given a small amount of food but the skullcap prevented him from chewing ; he had to ask another prisoner , Susannah Dodd , to chew his meat for him . He was eventually released from the prison , but his health deteriorated and he died in St. Thomas ’ s Hospital . 
 = = = = Other cases , acquittal = = = = 
 The court was told of three other cases . Captain John Bromfield , Robert Newton and James Thompson all died after similar treatment from Acton : a beating , followed by time in the hole or strong room , before being moved to the sick ward , where they were left to lie on the floor in leg irons . 
 So concerned was Acton for his reputation that he requested the indictments be read out in Latin , but his worries were misplaced . The government wanted an acquittal to protect the good name of the Knight Marshal , Sir Philip Meadows , who had hired John Darby as prison governor , who in turn had leased the prison to Acton . Acton 's favoured prisoners had testified on his behalf , introducing contradictory evidence that the trial judge stressed to the jury . A stream of witnesses spoke of his good character , including a judge , an MP , his butcher , brewer , confectioner and solicitor – his coal merchant thought Acton " improper for the post he was in from his too great compassion " – and he was found not guilty on all charges . The Gaols Committee had managed to draw attention to the plight of England 's prisoners , but reform had eluded them . 
 = = = Notable prisoners = = = 
 Though most of the prisoners in the Marshalsea were debtors , the prison was second in importance only to the Tower of London . From the 14th century onwards , minor political figures were held there instead of in the Tower , mostly for sedition . William Hepworth Dixon wrote in 1885 that it was full of " poets , pirates , parsons , plotters ; coiners , <unk> , defaulters , Jesuits ; vagabonds of every class who vexed the souls of men in power ... " 
 The Marshalsea became the main holding prison for Roman Catholics suspected of sedition during the Elizabethan era . Bishop Bonner , the last Roman Catholic Bishop of London , was imprisoned there in 1559 , supposedly for his own safety , until his death 10 years later . William Herle , a spy for Lord Burghley , Elizabeth I 's chief adviser , was held there in 1570 and 1571 . According to Robyn Adams , the prison leaked both physically and metaphorically . In correspondence about Marshalsea prisoners Herle suspected of involvement in a plot to kill the Queen , he wrote of a network within the prison for smuggling information out of it , which included hiding letters in holes in the crumbling brickwork for others to pick up . 
 Intellectuals regularly found themselves in the Marshalsea . The playwright Ben Jonson , a friend of Shakespeare , was jailed in 1597 for The Isle of Dogs , a play that was immediately suppressed , with no extant copies ; on 28 July that year the Privy Council was told it was a " lewd <unk> that was <unk> in one of the <unk> houses on the <unk> Side , <unk> very seditious and <unk> matter . " The poet Christopher Brooke was jailed in 1601 for helping 17 @-@ year @-@ old Ann More marry John Donne without her father 's consent . George Wither , the political satirist , wrote his poem " The Shepherd 's Hunting " in 1614 in the Marshalsea ; he was held for four months for libel over his Abuses <unk> and <unk> , 20 satires criticizing revenge , ambition and lust , one of them directed at the Lord Chancellor . 
 Nicholas Udall , vicar of Braintree and headmaster of Eton College , was sent there in 1541 for buggery and suspected theft , though his appointment in 1555 as headmaster of Westminster School suggests the episode did his name no lasting harm . When Sir John Eliot , Vice @-@ Admiral of Devon , was moved to the Marshalsea in 1632 from the Tower of London for questioning the right of the King to tax imports and exports , he described it as leaving his palace in London for his country house in Southwark . The jurist John Selden was jailed there in 1629 for his involvement in drafting the Petition of Right , a document limiting the actions of the King , regarded as seditious although it had been passed by Parliament . Colonel Thomas Culpeper ended up in the Marshalsea in 1685 or 1687 for striking the Duke of Devonshire , William Cavendish , on the ear . 
 = = Second Marshalsea ( 1811 – 1842 ) = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 When the prison reformer James Neild visited the first Marshalsea in December 1802 , just 34 debtors were living there , along with eight wives and seven children . Neild wrote that it was in " a most ruinous and insecure state , and the habitations of the debtors wretched in the extreme . " There had been riots in the prison in 1749 and 1768 . The government acknowledged in 1799 that it had fallen into a state of decay , and a decision was made to rebuild it 130 yards south ( 119 m ) , at 150 High Street ( now called Borough High Street ) , on the site of the White Lion prison , also known as the Borough Gaol . This was on the south side of Angel Court and Angel Alley , two narrow streets that no longer exist . 
 Costing £ 8 @,@ 000 to complete ( £ 523 @,@ 509 in 2013 ) , the new prison opened in 1811 with two sections , one for Admiralty prisoners under court martial , and one for debtors , with a shared chapel that had been part of the White Lion . 
 = = = Debtors = = = 
 Like the first Marshalsea , the second was notoriously cramped . In 1827 , 414 out of its 630 debtors were there for debts under £ 20 ; 1 @,@ 890 people in Southwark were imprisoned that year for a total debt of ₤ 16 @,@ 442 . 
 The debtors ' section consisted of a brick barracks , a yard measuring 177 × 56 ft ( 54 m x 17 m ) , a kitchen , a public room , and a tap room or snuggery , where debtors could drink as much beer as they wanted , at <unk> a pot in 1815 . <unk> reports that , by the early 19th century , most debtors spent only months in the prison ; on 19 April 1826 it held 105 debtors , 99 of whom had been there for less than six months and the other six for less than a year . 
 The barracks was less than 10 yards wide and 33 yards long ( 9 m x 30 m ) and was divided into eight houses , each with three floors , containing 56 rooms in all . Each floor had seven rooms facing the front and seven in the back . There were no internal hallways . The rooms were accessed directly from the outside via eight narrow wooden staircases , a fire hazard given that the stairs provided the sole exit and the houses were separated only by thin lathe and plaster partitions . 
 Women debtors were housed in rooms over the tap room . The rooms in the barracks ( the men 's rooms ) were 10 ft . 10 ins ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) square and 8 – 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 7 m ) high , with a window , wooden floors and a fireplace . Each housed two or three prisoners , and as the rooms were too small for two beds , prisoners had to share . Apart from the bed , prisoners were expected to provide their own furniture . The anonymous witness complained in 1833 : " 170 persons have been confined at one time within these walls , making an average of more than four persons in each room – which are not ten feet square ! ! ! I will leave the reader to imagine what the situation of men , thus confined , particularly in the summer months , must be . " 
 Much of the prison business was run by a debtors ' committee of nine prisoners and a chair ( a position held by Dickens ' father ) . The committee was responsible for imposing fines for rules violations , an obligation they met with enthusiasm . Debtors could be fined for theft ; throwing water or filth out of windows or into someone else 's room ; making noise after midnight ; cursing , fighting or singing obscene songs ; smoking in the beer room 8 – <unk> am or 12 – <unk> pm ; defacing the staircase ; <unk> the privy seats ; stealing newspapers or utensils from the snuggery ; urinating in the yard ; drawing water before it had boiled ; and criticizing the committee . 
 As dreadful as the Marshalsea was , it kept the creditors away . Debtors could even arrange to have themselves arrested by a business partner to enter the jail when it suited them . Historian Margot Finn writes that discharge could therefore be used as a punishment ; one debtor was thrown out in May 1801 for " making a Noise and disturbance in the prison . " 
 = = = <unk> and <unk> = = = 
 New prisoners were expected to pay garnish when they arrived , a donation to the prisoners ' committee . When the commissioners reported to parliament between 1815 and 1818 , male prisoners were paying five shillings and sixpence , increased to eight shillings and sixpence by the time the anonymous witness was writing in 1833 . Women were asked for a smaller sum . This allowed them to use the snuggery , where water could be boiled and meals cooked , and candles and newspapers obtained . Prisoners failing to pay were declared defaulters by the prison crier , had their names written up in the kitchen , and were sent to Coventry . 
 After paying garnish , prisoners were given a " chum ticket , " which told them which room was theirs and which prisoners they would be chumming with . They would often spend the first night in the infirmary until a room could be made ready , and sometimes three or four nights walking around the yard before a chum could be found , though they were already being charged for the room they did not have . 
 English professor Trey <unk> writes that the newest arrival was usually placed with the youngest prisoner who was living alone . A wealthier prisoner could pay his roommate to go away – " buy out the chum " – for half @-@ a @-@ crown a week in 1818 , while the outcast chum would sleep in the tap room or find another room to rent in the prison . The only prisoners not expected to pay <unk> were debtors who had declared themselves insolvent by swearing an oath that they had assets worth less than 40 shillings . If their creditors agreed , they could be released after 14 days , but if anyone objected , they remained confined to the poor side of the building , near the women 's side , receiving a small weekly allowance from the county and money from charity . 
 = = = Admiralty prisoners = = = 
 The Admiralty division housed a few prisoners under naval courts @-@ martial for mutiny , desertion , piracy , and what the deputy marshal preferred in 1815 to call " unnatural crimes . " Unlike other parts of the prison that had been built from scratch in 1811 , the Admiralty division – as well as the northern boundary wall , the <unk> and the chapel – had been part of the old Borough gaol and were considerably run down . The cells were so rotten they were barely able to confine the prisoners ; in 1817 one actually broke through his cell walls . The low boundary wall meant that Admiralty prisoners were often chained to bolts fixed to the floor in the infirmary . 
 They were supposed to have a separate yard to exercise in , so that criminals were not mixing with debtors , but in fact the prisoners mixed often and happily , according to Dickens . The parliamentary committee deplored this practice , arguing that Admiralty prisoners were characterized by an " entire absence of all control , " and were bound to have a bad effect on the debtors . The two groups would retreat to their own sections during inspections , Dickens wrote : 
 [ T ] he smugglers habitually consorted with the debtors ... except at certain constitutional moments when somebody came from some Office , to go through some form of overlooking something , which neither he nor anybody else knew anything about . On those truly British occasions , the smugglers , if any , made a feint of walking into the strong cells and the blind alley , while this somebody pretended to do his something ; and made a reality of walking out again as soon as he hadn 't done it – neatly epitomizing the administration of most of the public affairs , in our right little , tight little island . 
 = = = Women = = = 
 The presence of wives , lovers and daughters was taken for granted . Visitors could come and go freely , and even live with the prisoners , without being asked who they were . Female prisoners were allowed to mix freely with the men . Some of the rooms were let to prostitutes . The prison gates were closed from ten at night until eight the next morning , with a bell warning visitors half an hour before closing time , and an officer walking around the prison calling , " Strangers , women and children all out ! " 
 According to the anonymous eyewitness , women in the Marshalsea were in constant moral danger : " How often has female virtue been assailed in poverty ? Alas how often has it fallen , in consequence of a husband or a father having been a prisoner for debt ? " The prison doctor would visit every other day to attend to prisoners , and sometimes their children – to " protect his reputation , " according to a doctor testifying in 1815 to a parliamentary commission – but would not attend to their wives . This left women to give birth alone or with the help of other prisoners . The doctor told the commission he had helped just once with a birth , and then only as a matter of courtesy , because it was not included in his salary . 
 = = = Closure and abolition = = = 
 The Marshalsea was closed by an Act of Parliament in 1842 , and on 19 November that year the inmates were relocated to the Bethlem hospital if they were mentally ill , or to the King 's Bench Prison , at that point renamed the Queen 's Prison . On 31 December 1849 the Court of the Marshalsea of the Household of the Kings of England was abolished , and its power transferred to Her Majesty 's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster . 
 The buildings and land were auctioned off in July 1843 and purchased for £ 5 @,@ 100 by W. G. Hicks , an ironmonger . The property consisted of the keeper 's house , the canteen ( known as a <unk> house ) , the Admiralty section , the chapel , a three @-@ story brick building and eight brick houses , all closed off from Borough High Street by iron gates . Imprisonment for debt was finally outlawed in England in 1869 , except in cases of fraud or refusal to pay , and in the 1870s the Home Office demolished most of the prison buildings , though in 1955 parts of it were still in use by George Harding & Sons , hardware merchants . 
 Dickens visited what was left of the Marshalsea in May 1857 , just before he finished Little Dorrit . He wrote in the preface : 
 Some of my readers may have an interest in being informed whether or no any portions of the Marshalsea Prison are yet standing . I did not know , myself , until the sixth of this present month , when I went to look . I found the outer front courtyard , often mentioned in this story , metamorphosed into a butter shop ; and then I almost gave up every brick of the jail for lost . Wandering , however , down a certain adjacent " Angel Court , leading to Bermondsey , " I came to " Marshalsea Place : " the houses in which I recognised , not only as the great block of the former prison , but as preserving the rooms that arose in my mind 's eye when I became Little Dorrit 's biographer ... 
 A little further on , I found the older and smaller wall , which used to enclose the pent @-@ up inner prison where nobody was put , except for ceremony . But , whosoever goes into Marshalsea Place , turning out of Angel Court , leading to Bermondsey , will find his feet on the very paving @-@ stones of the extinct Marshalsea jail ; will see its narrow yard to the right and to the left , very little altered if at all , except that the walls were lowered when the place got free ; will look upon the rooms in which the debtors lived ; and will stand among the crowding ghosts of many miserable years . 
 = = = Location of the prison remains = = = 
 The building on the site of the prison houses Southwark Council 's John Harvard Library and Local Studies Library , at 211 Borough High Street , just north of the junction with Tabard Street . All that remains of the Marshalsea is the brick wall that marked the southern boundary of the prison , separating it from St George 's churchyard , now a small garden . It can be reached by underground on the Northern line to Borough tube station , or by train to London Bridge station . 
 The surviving wall runs along an alleyway that was part of the prison , now called Angel Place . The name Angel Place has led to confusion because there were two alleyways on the north side of the Marshalsea ( Angel Court and Angel Alley ) , the first of which Dickens refers to when giving directions to the prison remains in 1857 . See Richard Horwood 's 18th century map , which shows Angel Court / Angel Alley near the Borough Goal [ sic ] , marked by the number 2 . 
 The wall is marked on the garden side , on what would have been the external wall of the prison , by a plaque from the local council . There is also a paving stone with information about Dickens 's father . The Cuming Museum has one of the prison 's pumps and the Dickens House Museum one of its windows . 
 = Bert Olmstead = 
 Murray Albert Olmstead ( September 4 , 1926 – November 16 , 2015 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey left winger who played for the Montreal Canadiens , Chicago Black Hawks and Toronto Maple Leafs in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Olmstead began his career with the Black Hawks in 1949 . In December 1950 , he was traded to the Montreal Canadiens via Detroit . Olmstead had his best statistical years playing for Montreal , leading the league in assists in 1954 – 55 with 48 , and setting a league record for assists with 56 the following season . Olmstead was claimed in an Intra @-@ League Draft by Toronto Maple Leafs in 1958 , and played there until his retirement in 1962 . 
 In the 1967 – 68 season , Olmstead served as coach of the expansion Oakland Seals . Olmstead played in the Stanley Cup final in 11 of his 14 seasons in the NHL , winning it five times . He won it four times with Montreal , in 1953 , and from 1956 to 1958 , and once with Toronto , in 1962 , which was his last season . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1985 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Olmstead was born in Sceptre , Saskatchewan , a small village with a population of less than 200 , in southwestern Saskatchewan . In 1944 , at the age of 18 , he moved to Moose Jaw , Saskatchewan , to play junior hockey . In his first year , Olmstead and the Moose Jaw Canucks challenged for the Memorial Cup , after finishing the playoffs with a 15 – 1 record . They were unsuccessful in the series against the St. Michael 's Majors . Olmstead had 10 goals and eight assists in the 17 playoff games he played . He played another season in Moose Jaw , before being assigned to the Kansas City Pla @-@ Mors of the United States Hockey League ( USHL ) by the Chicago Black Hawks . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Chicago Black Hawks = = = 
 Olmstead played three full seasons for Kansas City , and part of another , later in 1950 , for the Milwaukee Sea Gulls . In the 1946 – 47 season , Olmstead joined the Pla @-@ Mors , finishing the season with 42 points in 60 games . In 1948 – 49 , the Canadiens , who had originally sponsored him and owned his rights , traded him to the Chicago Black Hawks . The same season , Olmstead made his NHL debut , called up after scoring 33 goals and 44 assists , for 77 points , in 52 games with the Pla @-@ Mors . He played nine games for the Black Hawks and collected two assists . Olmstead played the entire following season for the Black Hawks , appearing in 70 games and scoring 20 goals . 
 Olmstead split the 1950 – 51 season between four teams , playing for all but one of them . He began the season playing for the Black Hawks franchise , playing 15 games in the NHL and 12 in the USHL , for the Milwaukee Sea Gulls . On December 2 , 1950 , Olmstead , with Vic <unk> , was traded to the Detroit Red Wings , in exchange for Lee Fogolin and Steve Black . On December 19 , 1950 , 17 days after the trade to Detroit , he was traded again , without ever suiting up for the Red Wings , to Montreal , for Leo Gravelle . Olmstead would never leave the NHL until his retirement in 1962 , playing 39 games that season on a line with Maurice Richard and Elmer Lach , scoring 38 points . Olmstead also appeared in 11 playoff games , collecting six points , as the Canadiens lost the best @-@ of @-@ seven Stanley Cup finals to the Toronto Maple Leafs in five games . 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens = = = 
 Olmstead and the Canadiens appeared in the Stanley Cup finals again in the 1951 – 52 season , losing to the Detroit Red Wings ; after recording 35 points in 69 regular season games , Olmstead was limited to an assist in 11 playoff games . In his third season with the Canadiens , Olmstead won the Stanley Cup for the first time . Earning 45 points in 69 games , he was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team . On the last game of the season , Olmstead bodychecked Gordie Howe , stopping him from tying Maurice Richard 's record of 50 goals in a season . Olmstead played all the 70 games in the next two seasons , scoring 52 and 58 points in the 1953 – 54 and 1954 – 55 seasons , respectively . The Canadiens lost to the Red Wings once more in the Stanley Cup finals , in both seasons . In the 1954 – 55 season , Olmstead led the league in assists , with 48 , as Montreal lost another Stanley Cup Final to Detroit . 
 The 1955 – 56 season saw the start of Montreal 's five consecutive Stanley Cup championships . In that season , Olmstead played on a line with Jean Beliveau and Bernie " Boom Boom " Geoffrion . He set a record for assists , with 56 , and also scored eight points in game , recording four goals and four assists , tying Rocket Richard 's record . This record would be broken in 1976 by Darryl Sittler , who scored six goals and four assists , for ten points . As well as winning the Stanley Cup , Olmstead was again named to the Second All @-@ Star Team . 
 Olmstead won two more Stanley Cups in the 1956 – 57 and 1957 – 58 seasons . After the conclusion of the 1957 – 58 seasons , doctors informed him that he had no strength left in his knees , and that he should contemplate retirement . As a result of this prognosis , the Canadiens left Olmstead unprotected in the Intra @-@ League Draft , and he was claimed by Billy Reay , the head coach of the Canadiens ' chief rival , the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 Early in the 1958 – 59 season , Punch Imlach , the assistant general manager of the Leafs , fired Reay , installed himself as head coach , and appointed Olmstead as the playing assistant coach . This meant that while Imlach coached the team during games , Olmstead was in charge of the practices ; however , Olmstead only lasted three months as assistant coach , resigning to devote more time to improving his play . The same season , the Leafs went on a long winning streak in order to qualify for the playoffs , but they lost to the Canadiens in the finals . After losing in the Finals the next season , and falling short of the Finals the next season , Olmstead won his fifth and final Stanley Cup in 1962 , missing two months of the season with a broken shoulder , and being limited to only four out of the 12 playoff games . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following his fifth Stanley Cup win , with Toronto , the New York Rangers claimed Olmstead in the Intra @-@ League Draft on June 4 , 1962 . This came as a surprise to Olmstead , who refused to report to the team . The Canadiens offered to acquire him from the Rangers , within a month ; Olmstead demanded an immediate trade . Since no deal came , he retired at the age of 35 . During his 14 @-@ year NHL career , Olmstead scored 181 goals and 421 assists , for 602 points ; in the playoffs , he collected 59 points , in 115 games . In his 14 seasons , Olmstead appeared in the Stanley Cup final 11 times . He won five times , four of them with the Montreal Canadiens , and once with the Toronto Maple Leafs . 
 After retiring from playing , Olmstead attempted coaching . In the 1965 – 66 season , Olmstead coached the Vancouver Canucks , of the WHL ; he finished with a 33 – 35 – 4 record , for a <unk> winning percentage . In the 1967 – 68 season , Olmstead coached the expansion Oakland Seals , in the NHL . Olmstead did not last the full season , stepping aside after 64 games , having only won 11 games , with a .297 winning percentage . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Known as " Dirty Bertie " because of his physical playing style , Olmstead was a power forward , making hard hits and winning battles in the corners . He was not a very good skater , and thus he had to compromise with his bodychecking . Olmstead was not regularly involved in fights , but in the ones he participated , the majority were started with his hits . 
 Olmstead was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1985 . Olmstead , with his wife Nora , visited the town of Okotoks , Alberta on August 13 , 2005 , with the Stanley Cup . He had previously declined to spend a day with it , believing that it was being given to much older winners only because of the lockout . Olmstead also noted , at the end of the day , that he was happy to have the Stanley Cup again . Olmstead died at his home in High River , Alberta on November 16 , 2015 , due to complications from a stroke . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Coaching record = = 
 = The Daily Show = 
 The Daily Show ( also known as The Daily Show with Jon Stewart from 1999 until 2015 , and The Daily Show with Trevor Noah as of 2015 ) is an American news satire and talk show television program , which airs each Monday through Thursday on Comedy Central and on The Comedy Network in Canada . 
 The half @-@ hour @-@ long show premiered on July 21 , 1996 , and was hosted by Craig Kilborn until December 17 , 1998 . Jon Stewart then took over as the host from January 11 , 1999 until August 6 , 2015 , making the show more strongly focused on politics and the national media , in contrast with the pop culture focus during Kilborn 's tenure . Stewart was succeeded by Trevor Noah , whose tenure premiered on September 28 , 2015 . The Daily Show is the longest @-@ running program on Comedy Central ( counting all three tenures ) , and has won 23 Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 Describing itself as a fake news program , The Daily Show draws its comedy and satire from recent news stories , political figures , media organizations , and often uses self @-@ referential humor as well . During Stewart 's tenure , the show typically opened with a long monologue , relating to recent headlines and frequently featured exchanges with one or more Daily Show correspondents , who adopted absurd or humorously exaggerated takes on current events against Stewart 's straight man persona . The final segment was devoted to a celebrity interview , with guests ranging from actors and musicians to nonfiction authors and political figures . 
 The program is popular among young audiences , with organizations such as the Pew Research Center suggesting that 74 % of regular viewers are between 18 and 49 , and that 10 % of the audience watch the show for its news headlines , 2 % for in @-@ depth reporting , and 43 % for entertainment , compared with 64 % who watch CNN for the news headlines . Critics have chastised Stewart for not conducting sufficiently hard @-@ hitting interviews with his political guests , some of whom he may have lampooned in previous segments . Stewart and other Daily Show writers have responded to such criticism by saying that they do not have any journalistic responsibility and that as comedians their only duty is to provide entertainment . Stewart 's appearance on the CNN show Crossfire picked up this debate , where he chastised the CNN production and hosts for not conducting informative and current interviews on a news network . 
 = = Format = = 
 = = = Opening segment = = = 
 Each episode begins with announcer Drew Birns announcing the date and the introduction , " From Comedy Central 's World News Headquarters in New York , this is The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , " later changing to reflect Trevor Noah as the new host . Previously , the introduction was " This is The Daily Show , the most important television program , ever . " The host then opens the show with a monologue drawing from current news stories and issues . Previously , the show had divided its news commentary into sections known as " Headlines " , " Other News " , and " This Just In " ; these titles were dropped from regular use on October 28 , 2002 and were last used on March 6 , 2003 . 
 = = = Correspondent segments = = = 
 The monologue segment is often followed by a segment featuring an exchange with a correspondent — typically introduced as the show 's " senior " specialist in the subject at hand — either at the anchor desk with the host or reporting from a false location in front of a greenscreen showing stock footage . Their stated areas of expertise vary depending on the news story that is being discussed , and can range from relatively general ( such as Senior Political Analyst ) to absurdly specific ( such as Senior Casual Racism Correspondent ) . The cast of correspondents is quite diverse , and many often sarcastically portray extreme stereotypes of themselves to poke fun at a news story , such as " Senior Latino Correspondent " or " Senior Youth Correspondent " . They typically present absurd or humorously exaggerated takes on current events against the host 's straight man . 
 While correspondents stated to be reporting abroad are usually performing in @-@ studio in front of a greenscreen background , on rare occasions , cast members have recorded pieces on location . For instance , during the week of August 20 , 2007 , the show aired a series of segments called " Operation Silent Thunder : The Daily Show in Iraq " in which correspondent Rob Riggle reported from Iraq . In August 2008 , Riggle traveled to China for a series of segments titled " Rob Riggle : Chasing the Dragon " , which focused on the 2008 Beijing Olympics . Additionally , Jason Jones traveled to Iran in early June 2009 to report on the Iranian elections , and John Oliver traveled to South Africa for the series of segments " Into Africa " to report on the 2010 FIFA World Cup . In March 2012 , John Oliver traveled to Gabon , on the west African coast , to report on the <unk> government 's decision to donate $ 2 million to UNESCO after the United States cut its funding for UNESCO earlier that year . 
 Correspondent segments feature a rotating supporting cast , and involve the show 's members traveling to different locations to file comedic reports on current news stories and conduct interviews with people related to the featured issue . Topics have varied widely ; during the early years of the show they tended toward character @-@ driven human interest stories such as Bigfoot enthusiasts . Since Stewart began hosting in 1999 , the focus of the show has become more political and the field pieces have come to more closely reflect current issues and debates . Under Kilborn and the early years of Stewart , most interviewees were either unaware or not entirely aware of the comedic nature of The Daily Show . However , since the show began to gain popularity — particularly following its coverage of the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections — most of the subjects now interviewed are aware of the comedic element . 
 = = = Recurring segments = = = 
 Some segments have recurred periodically , such as " Back in Black " with Lewis Black , " This Week in God " and " Are You Prepared ? ! ? " with Samantha Bee , " <unk> " with Demetri Martin , " Wilmore @-@ Oliver Investigates " with John Oliver and Larry Wilmore , " You 're Welcome " and more recently " Money Talks " with John Hodgman . Since the 2003 invasion of Iraq , a common segment of the show has been dubbed " Mess O ' <unk> " , focusing on the United States ' policies in the Middle East , especially Iraq . Elections in the United States were a prominent focus in the show 's " Indecision " coverage throughout Stewart 's time as host . ( The title " <unk> " is a parody of NBC News ' " Decision " segment . ) During the 2000 , 2004 , and 2008 elections , the show went on the road to record week @-@ long specials from the cities hosting the Democratic and Republican National Conventions . For the 2006 U.S. midterm elections , a week of episodes was recorded in the contested state of Ohio . The " Indecision " coverage of the 2000 , 2004 , 2006 , 2008 , and 2010 elections all culminated in live Election Night specials . On March 1 , 2011 , Stewart aired the first installment of Indecision 2012 . On September 19 , 2012 , Stewart opened with a segment called " Chaos On <unk> * t Mountain " in which he blasted Fox News for its coverage of a leaked video of Mitt Romney talking about 47 percent of Americans who don ’ t pay income taxes . 
 With Noah as host , one new recurring segment has been " What the Actual Fact " , with correspondent Desi <unk> examining statements made by presidential candidates at the debates . 
 = = = Celebrity interviews = = = 
 In the show 's third act , the host conducts an interview with a celebrity guest . Guests come from a wide range of cultural sources , and include actors , musicians , authors , athletes , pundits and political figures . Since Stewart became host , the show 's guest list has tended away from celebrities and more towards non @-@ fiction authors and political pundits , as well as many prominent elected officials . While in the show 's earlier years it struggled to book high @-@ profile politicians — in 1999 , for an Indecision 2000 segment , Steve Carell struggled to talk his way off Republican candidate John McCain 's press overflow bus and onto the Straight Talk Express — it has since risen in popularity , particularly following the show 's coverage of the 2000 and 2004 elections . In 2006 , Rolling Stone described The Daily Show under Stewart as " the hot destination for anyone who wants to sell books or seem hip , from presidential candidates to military dictators " , while Newsweek calls it " the coolest pit stop on television " . 
 Prominent political guests have included U.S. President Barack Obama , Vice President Joe Biden , former Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton , former British Prime Ministers Tony Blair and Gordon Brown , former Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf , Liberian President Ellen Johnson <unk> , Bolivian President Evo Morales , Jordanian King Abdullah II , and former Mexican President Vicente Fox . The show has played host to former and current members of the Administration and Cabinet as well as members of Congress . Numerous presidential candidates have appeared on the show during their campaigns , including John McCain , John Kerry and Barack Obama . 
 = = = Closing segment = = = 
 In a closing segment , there is a brief segue to the closing credits in the form of the host introducing " Your Moment of Zen " , a humorous piece of video footage without commentary that has been part of the show 's wrap @-@ up since the series began in 1996 . The segment often relates to a story covered earlier in the episode , but occasionally is merely a humorous or ridiculous clip . Occasionally , the segment is used as a tribute to someone who has died . 
 In October 2005 , following The Colbert Report 's premiere , a new feature ( sometimes referred to as the toss ) was added to the closing segment in which Stewart would have a short exchange with " our good friend , Stephen Colbert at The Colbert Report " , which aired immediately after . The two would have a scripted comedic exchange via split @-@ screen from their respective sets . In 2007 , the " toss " was cut back to twice per week , and by 2009 was once a week before gradually being phased out . It was used on the 2014 mid @-@ term election night and again just before the final episode of The Colbert Report on December 18 , 2014 , and returned upon the premiere of The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore . Stewart then regularly tossed to Wilmore at the end of his Monday night episodes . 
 = = Studio = = 
 The host sits at his desk on the elevated island stage in the style of a traditional news show . The show relocated from its original New York studio in late @-@ 1998 to NEP Studio 54 in New York City 's Hell 's Kitchen neighborhood , where it remained until 2005 , when the studio was claimed by The Colbert Report . On July 11 , 2005 , the show premiered in its new studio , NEP Studio 52 , at 733 11th Avenue , a few blocks west of its former location . The set of the new studio was given a sleeker , more formal look , including a backdrop of three large projection screens . The traditional guests ' couch , which had been a part of the set since the show 's premiere , was done away with in favor of simple upright chairs . The change was initially not well @-@ received , spawning a backlash among some fans and prompting a " Bring Back the Couch " campaign . The campaign was mentioned on subsequent shows by Stewart and supported by Daily Show contributor Bob <unk> . The couch was eventually featured in a sweepstakes in which the winner received the couch , round @-@ trip tickets to New York , tickets to the show , and a small sum of money . 
 On April 9 , 2007 the show debuted a new set . The projection screens were revamped ( with one large screen behind Stewart , while the smaller one behind the interview subject remained the same ) , a large , global map directly behind Stewart , a more open studio floor , and a J @-@ shaped desk supported at one end by a globe . The intro was also updated ; the graphics , display names , dates , and logos were all changed . 
 = = Production = = 
 The show 's writers begin each day with a morning meeting where they review material that researchers have gathered from major newspapers , the Associated Press , cable news television channels and websites , and discuss headline material for the lead news segment . Throughout the morning they work on writing deadline pieces inspired by recent news , as well as longer @-@ term projects . By lunchtime , Stewart — who describes his role as that of a managing editor — has begun to review headline jokes . The script is submitted by 3 pm , and at 4 : 15 there is a rehearsal . An hour is left for rewrites before a 6 pm taping in front of a live studio audience . While the studio capacity is limited , tickets to attend tapings are free and can be obtained if requested far enough in advance . 
 The Daily Show typically tapes four new episodes a week , Monday through Thursday , forty @-@ two weeks a year . The show is broadcast at 11 PM Eastern / 10 PM Central , a time when local television stations show their news reports and about half an hour before most other late @-@ night comedy programs begin to go on the air . The program is rerun several times the next day , including a 7 : 30 PM Eastern / 6 : 30 PM Central prime time broadcast . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Craig Kilborn 's tenure ( 1996 – 98 ) = = = 
 The Daily Show was created by Lizz Winstead and Madeleine Smithberg and premiered on Comedy Central on July 22 , 1996 , having been marketed as a replacement for Politically Incorrect ( a successful Comedy Central program that had moved to ABC earlier that year ) . Aiming to parody conventional newscasts , it featured a comedic monologue of the day 's headlines from anchor Craig Kilborn ( a well @-@ known co @-@ anchor of ESPN 's SportsCenter ) , as well as mockumentary style on @-@ location reports , in @-@ studio segments and debates from regular correspondents Winstead , Brian Unger , Beth Littleford , and A. Whitney Brown . 
 = = = = Common segments = = = = 
 Common segments included " This Day in Hasselhoff History " and " Last Weekend 's Top @-@ Grossing Films , Converted into Lira " , in parody of entertainment news shows and their tendency to lead out to commercials with trivia such as celebrity birthdays . Another commercial lead @-@ out featured Winstead 's parents , on her answering machine , reading that day 's " Final Jeopardy ! " question and answer . In each show , Kilborn would conduct celebrity interviews , ending with a segment called " Five Questions " in which the guest was made to answer a series of questions that were typically a combination of obscure fact and subjective opinion . These are highlighted in a 1998 book titled The Daily Show : Five Questions , which contains transcripts of Kilborn 's best interviews . Each episode concluded with a segment called " Your Moment of Zen " that showed random video clips of humorous and sometimes morbid interest such as visitors at a Chinese zoo feeding baby chickens to the alligators . Originally the show was recorded without a studio audience , featuring only the laughter of its own off @-@ camera staff members . A studio audience was incorporated into the show for its second season , and has remained since . 
 = = = = Differences between Kilborn 's version and Stewart 's version = = = = 
 The show was much less politically focused than it later became under Jon Stewart , having what Stephen Colbert described as a local news feel and involving more character @-@ driven humor as opposed to news @-@ driven humor . Winstead recalls that when the show was first launched there was constant debate regarding what the show 's focus should be . While she wanted a more news @-@ driven focus , the network was concerned that this would not appeal to viewers and pushed for " a little more of a hybrid of entertainment and politics " . The show was slammed by some reviewers as being too mean @-@ spirited , particularly towards the interview subjects of field pieces ; a criticism acknowledged by some of the show 's cast . Describing his time as a correspondent under Kilborn , Colbert says , " You wanted to take your soul off , put it on a wire hanger , and leave it in the closet before you got on the plane to do one of these pieces . " One reviewer from The New York Times criticized the show for being too cruel and for lacking a central editorial vision or ideology , describing it as " bereft of an ideological or artistic center ... precocious but empty . " 
 = = = = Craig Kilborn 's departure = = = = 
 There were reports of backstage friction between Kilborn and some of the female staff , particularly the show 's co @-@ creator Lizz Winstead . Winstead had not been involved in the hiring of Kilborn , and disagreed with him over what direction the show should take . " I spent eight months developing and staffing a show and seeking a tone with producers and writers . Somebody else put him in place . There were bound to be problems . I viewed the show as content @-@ driven ; he viewed it as host @-@ driven , " she said . In a 1997 Esquire magazine interview , Kilborn made a sexually explicit joke about Winstead . Comedy Central responded by suspending Kilborn without pay for one week , and Winstead quit soon after . 
 In 1998 , Kilborn left The Daily Show in order to replace Tom Snyder on CBS 's The Late Late Show . He claimed the " Five Questions " interview segment as intellectual property , disallowing any future Daily Show hosts from using it in their interviews . Correspondents Brian Unger and A. Whitney Brown left the show shortly before him , but the majority of the show 's crew and writing staff stayed on . Kilborn 's last show as host aired on December 17 , 1998 , ending a 386 episode tenure . Reruns were shown until Jon Stewart 's debut four weeks later . Kilborn made a short appearance on Jon Stewart 's final edition of the Daily Show saying " I knew you were going to run this thing into the ground . " 
 = = = Jon Stewart 's tenure ( 1999 – 2015 ) = = = 
 = = = = Shift in content = = = = 
 Comedian Jon Stewart took over as host of the show , which was retitled The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , on January 11 , 1999 . Stewart had previously hosted Short Attention Span Theater on Comedy Central , two shows on MTV ( You Wrote It , You Watch It and an eponymous talk show ) , as well as a syndicated late @-@ night talk show , and had been cast in films and television . In taking over hosting from Kilborn , Stewart retained much of the same staff and on @-@ air talent , allowing many pieces to transition without much trouble , while other features like " God Stuff " , with John Bloom presenting an assortment of actual clips from various televangelists , and " Backfire " , an in @-@ studio debate between Brian Unger and A. Whitney Brown , evolved into the similar pieces of " This Week in God " and Stephen Colbert and Steve Carell 's " Even <unk> " . Since the change , a number of new features have been , and continue to be , developed . The ending segment " Your Moment of Zen " , previously consisting of a random selection of humorous videos , was diversified to sometimes include recaps or extended versions of news clips shown earlier in the show . The show 's theme music , " Dog on Fire " by Bob Mould , was re @-@ recorded by They Might Be Giants shortly after Stewart joined the show . 
 Stewart served not only as host but also as a writer and executive producer of the series . Instrumental in shaping the voice of the show under Stewart was former editor of The Onion Ben Karlin who , along with fellow Onion contributor David <unk> , joined the staff in 1999 as head writer and was later promoted to executive producer . Their experience in writing for the satirical newspaper , which uses fake stories to mock real print journalism and current events , would influence the comedic direction of the show ; Stewart recalls the hiring of Karlin as the point at which things " [ started ] to take shape " . Describing his approach to the show , Karlin said , " The main thing , for me , is seeing hypocrisy . People who know better saying things that you know they don 't believe . " 
 Under Stewart and Karlin The Daily Show developed a markedly different style , bringing a sharper political focus to the humor than the show previously exhibited . Then @-@ correspondent Stephen Colbert recalls that Stewart specifically asked him to have a political viewpoint , and to allow his passion for issues to carry through into his comedy . Colbert says that whereas under Kilborn the focus was on " human interest @-@ y " pieces , with Stewart as host the show 's content became more " issues and news driven " , particularly after the beginning of the 2000 election campaign with which the show dealt in its " Indecision 2000 " coverage . Stewart himself describes the show 's coverage of the 2000 election recount as the point at which the show found its editorial voice . " That 's when I think we tapped into the emotional angle of the news for us and found our editorial footing , " he says . Following the September 11th attacks , The Daily Show went off the air for nine days . Upon its return , Stewart opened the show with a somber monologue , that , according to Jeremy Gillick and <unk> <unk> , addressed both the absurdity and importance of his role as a comedian . Commented Stewart : 
 They said to get back to work , and there were no jobs available for a man in the fetal position . . . . We sit in the back and we throw <unk> – never forgetting the fact that it is a luxury in this country that allows us to do that . . . . The view from my apartment was the World Trade Center . Now it 's gone . They attacked it . This symbol of American ingenuity and strength and labor and imagination and commerce and it is gone . But you know what the view is now ? The Statue of Liberty . The view from the south of Manhattan is now the Statue of Liberty . You can 't beat that . 
 Gillick and <unk> point to the September 11 attacks and the beginning of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq as the point at which Jon Stewart emerged as a trusted national figure . Robert Thompson , the director of the Bleier Center for Television and Popular Culture at Syracuse University , recalled of this period , " When all the news guys were walking on eggshells , Jon was hammering those questions about <unk> . " 
 = = = = <unk> the role of the correspondent = = = = 
 During Stewart 's tenure , the role of the correspondent has broadened to encompass not only field segments but also frequent in @-@ studio exchanges . Under Kilborn , Colbert says that his work as a correspondent initially involved " character driven [ field ] pieces — like , you know , guys who believe in Bigfoot . " However , as the focus of the show has become more news @-@ driven , correspondents have increasingly been used in studio pieces , either as experts discussing issues at the anchor desk or as field journalists reporting from false locations in front of a green screen . Colbert says that this change has allowed correspondents to be more involved with the show , as it has permitted them to work more closely with the host and writers . 
 = = = = Popularity and critical respect = = = = 
 The show 's 2000 and 2004 election coverage , combined with a new satirical edge , helped to catapult Stewart and The Daily Show to new levels of popularity and critical respect . Since Stewart became host , the show has won 23 Primetime Emmy Awards and two Peabody Awards , and its ratings have steadily increased . In 2003 , the show was averaging nearly a million viewers , an increase of nearly threefold since the show 's inception as Comedy Central became available in more households . By September 2008 , the show averaged nearly two million viewers per night . Senator Barack Obama 's interview on October 29 , 2008 , pulled in 3 @.@ 6 million viewers . 
 = = = = In the political spectrum = = = = 
 The move towards greater involvement in political issues and the increasing popularity of the show in certain key demographics have led to examinations of where the views of the show fit in the political spectrum . Adam Clymer , among many others , has argued that The Daily Show is more critical of Republicans than Democrats . Stewart , who voted Democratic in the 2004 presidential election , says that the show does have a more liberal point of view , but that it is not " a liberal organization " with a political agenda and its duty first and foremost is to be funny . He acknowledges that the show is not necessarily an " equal opportunity offender " , explaining that Republicans tended to provide more comedic fodder because " I think we consider those with power and influence targets and those without it , not . " In an interview in 2005 , when asked how he responded to critics claiming that The Daily Show is overly liberal , Stephen Colbert , also a self @-@ proclaimed Democrat , said in an interview during the Bush Administration , when the Republicans held a majority in the House and Senate : " We are liberal , but Jon 's very respectful of the Republican guests , and , listen , if liberals were in power it would be easier to attack them , but Republicans have the executive , legislative and judicial branches , so making fun of Democrats is like kicking a child , so it 's just not worth it . " 
 Stewart is critical of Democratic politicians for being weak , timid , or ineffective . He said in an interview with Larry King , prior to the 2006 elections , " I honestly don 't feel that [ the Democrats ] make an impact . They have forty @-@ nine percent of the vote and three percent of the power . At a certain point you go , ' Guys , pick up your game . ' " He has targeted them for failing to effectively stand on some issues , such as the war in Iraq , describing them as " incompetent " and " unable ... to locate their asses , even when presented with two hands and a special ass map . " 
 Karlin , then the show 's executive producer , said in a 2004 interview that while there is a collective sensibility among the staff which , " when filtered through Jon and the correspondents , feels uniform , " the principal goal of the show is comedy . " If you have a legitimately funny joke in support of the notion that gay people are an affront to God , we 'll put that motherfucker on ! " 
 On November 17 , 2009 , Vice President Joe Biden appeared on the show , making him the first sitting vice president to do so . On October 27 , 2010 , President Barack Obama became the first sitting U.S. president to be interviewed on the show , wherein Obama commented he " loved " the show . Obama took issue with Stewart 's suggestion that his health care program was " timid . " 
 After the United States Senate failed to pass and the media failed to cover the James Zadroga 9 / 11 Health and Compensation Act , which would provide health monitoring and financial aid to sick first responders of the September 11 attacks , Stewart dedicated the entire December 16 , 2010 , broadcast to the issue . During the next week , a revived version of the bill gained new life , with the potential of being passed before the winter recess . Stewart was praised by both politicians and affected first responders for the bill 's passage . According to Syracuse University professor of television , radio and film Robert J. Thompson , " Without him , it 's unlikely it would 've passed . I don 't think Brian Williams , Katie Couric or Diane Sawyer would 've been allowed to do this . " 
 = = = = Writers ' strike = = = = 
 Due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , the show went on hiatus on November 5 , 2007 . Although the strike continued until February 2008 , the show returned to air on January 7 , 2008 , without its staff of writers . In solidarity with the writers , the show was referred to as A Daily Show with Jon Stewart rather than The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , until the end of the strike . As a member of the Writers Guild of America , Stewart was barred from writing any material for the show himself which he or his writers would ordinarily write . As a result , Stewart and the correspondents largely ad @-@ libbed the show around planned topics . In an effort to fill time while keeping to these restrictions , the show aired or re @-@ aired some previously recorded segments , and Stewart engaged in a briefly recurring mock feud with fellow late @-@ night hosts Stephen Colbert and Conan O 'Brien . The strike officially ended on February 12 , 2008 , with the show 's writers returning to work the following day , at which point the title of The Daily Show was restored . 
 = = = = Stewart 's absence in 2013 = = = = 
 Starting in June 2013 Jon Stewart took a twelve @-@ week break to direct Rosewater , a drama about a journalist jailed by Iran for four months . John Oliver replaced Stewart at the anchor desk for two months , to be followed by one month of reruns . Oliver received positive reviews for his hosting , leading to his departure from the show in December 2013 for his own show Last Week Tonight with John Oliver , which debuted April 27 , 2014 on HBO . 
 = = = = Jon Stewart 's departure = = = = 
 On February 10 , 2015 , Stewart announced that he would be leaving the show later in the year . Comedy Central indicated in a statement that The Daily Show would continue without Stewart , saying it would " endure for years to come " . 
 On June 25 , 2015 , Comedy Central announced that to lead up to Stewart 's final episode , it would hold " Your Month of Zen " — an online marathon streaming every episode of Stewart 's tenure from June 26 to August 6 , 2015 . 
 On August 6 , 2015 , Stewart 's final episode aired as an hour @-@ long special in three segments . The first featured a reunion of a majority of the correspondents and contributors from throughout the show 's history as well as a pre @-@ recorded " anti @-@ tribute " ( mocking Stewart ) from various frequent guests and " friends " of the show . The second segment featured a pre @-@ recorded tour of the Daily Show production facility and studio introducing all of the show 's staff and crew . The final segment featured a short farewell speech from Stewart followed by the final " Moment of Zen " ( being ' his own ' moment of zen ) : a performance of " Land of Hope and Dreams " and " Born to Run " by Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band . 
 = = = Trevor Noah 's tenure ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 On March 30 , 2015 , it was announced that Trevor Noah would replace Stewart as host of The Daily Show . Stewart 's last show was on August 6 , 2015 . Trevor Noah 's first show was on September 28 , 2015 with comedian Kevin Hart as his first guest . Noah 's premiere episode was simulcast by Viacom on Comedy Central , Nick @-@ at @-@ Nite , Spike , MTV , MTV2 , mtvU , VH1 , VH1 Classic , BET , Centric , CMT , TV Land , and Logo TV . 
 On December 8 , 2015 , former host Jon Stewart returned to The Daily Show for the first time in an extended length show to return attention to extending the James Zadroga 9 / 11 Health and Compensation Act , otherwise referred to as 9 / 11 First Responders Bill , which Stewart enumerated had been blocked by Paul Ryan and Mitch McConnell for political reasons . In January 2016 , The Daily Show utilizes a modified version of the show 's theme , composed by Timbaland and King Logan . 
 In addition to changes in the tone of the show , Noah has also implemented stylistic changes to the show , with an updated set , new graphics and his monologue often taking place while standing in front of a screen , as opposed to sitting at the desk . 
 = = Correspondents , contributors , and staff = = 
 The show 's correspondents have two principal roles : experts with satirical senior titles that Stewart interviews about certain issues , or hosts of field reporting segments which often involve humorous commentary and interviews relating to a current issue . The current team of correspondents collectively known as " The Best F # @ king News Team Ever " includes Ronny Chieng , Jordan Klepper , Desi <unk> , Hasan Minhaj , and Roy Wood , Jr . Contributors such as Lewis Black and Kristen Schaal appear on a less frequent basis , often with their own unique recurring segment . Ben Karlin says that the on @-@ air talent contribute in many ways to the material they perform , playing an integral role in the creation of their field pieces as well as being involved with their scripted studio segments , either taking part early on in the writing process or adding improvised material during the rehearsal . 
 The show has featured a number of well @-@ known comedians throughout its run and is notable for boosting the careers of several of these . Scott <unk> , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of The Onion , describes it as a key launching pad for comedic talent , saying that " I don 't know if there 's a better show you could put on your resume right now . " Steve Carell , who was a correspondent between 1999 and 2005 before moving on to a movie career and starring television role in The Office , credits Stewart and The Daily Show with his success . In 2005 , the show 's longest @-@ serving correspondent , Stephen Colbert , became the host of the spin @-@ off The Colbert Report , earning critical and popular acclaim . Colbert would host the program until he was chosen to replace David Letterman as host of CBS 's Late Show in 2015 . Ed Helms , a former correspondent from 2002 to 2006 , also starred on NBC 's The Office and was a main character in the 2009 hit The Hangover . After filling in as host during Stewart 's two @-@ month absence in 2014 , John Oliver went on to host his own show on HBO , Last Week Tonight with John Oliver . In 2016 , former correspondent Samantha Bee launched her own late @-@ night talk show Full Frontal with Samantha Bee . Jason Jones , another former correspondent , serves as executive producer for the show . 
 In June 2010 , actress @-@ comedian Olivia Munn began a tryout period on the show as a correspondent . Her credentials were questioned by <unk> Carmon of the website Jezebel , who suggested that Munn was better known as a sex symbol than as a comedian . Carmon 's column was denounced by Munn and the Daily Show 's female writers , producers , and correspondents , 32 of whom posted a rebuttal on the show 's website in which they asserted that the description of the Daily Show office given by the Jezebel piece was not accurate . Munn appeared as a Daily Show correspondent in a total of 16 episodes , from June 2010 to September 2011 . 
 Wyatt Cenac had a tumultuous tenure on the show , revealing in a July 2015 interview on WTF with Marc Maron , that his departure from The Daily Show stemmed in part from a heated argument he had with Jon Stewart over a June 2011 Daily Show bit about Republican Presidential candidate Herman Cain . 
 In March 2015 , it was announced that Jason Jones would be leaving to produce a show on TBS that he and his wife Samantha Bee wrote . Bee departed The Daily Show on April 30 , 2015 , and they created together Full Frontal with Samantha Bee . 
 Behind the scenes , Adam <unk> has been credited with finding key television footage and sound bites . 
 = = = Guest hosts = = = 
 Samantha Bee and Jason Jones , 1 episode ( October 7 , 2014 ) 
 Steve Carell , 7 episodes ( February 21 , 2001 , Mar. 27 – 29 , 2001 , Apr 2 & 4 , 2001 , and May 1 , 2001 ) 
 Stephen Colbert , 11 episodes ( January 24 , 2001 , Feb 20 & 22 , 2001 , Mar. 26 – 27 , 2001 , Apr 3 & 5 , 2001 , May 2 – 3 , 2001 , March 6 , 2003 , and July 6 , 2004 ) 
 Rob Corddry , 1 episode ( February 9 , 2006 ) 
 Vance DeGeneres , 2 episodes ( Feb. 26 – 27 , 2001 ) 
 John Oliver , 33 episodes ( June 10 , 2013 to August 15 , 2013 , and November 13 , 2014 ) 
 Mo Rocca , 1 episode ( February 27 , 2001 ) 
 Nancy Walls , 2 episodes ( February 21 , 2001 and March 29 , 2001 ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 Television ratings from 2008 show that the program generally drew 1 @.@ 45 to 1 @.@ 6 million viewers nightly , a high figure for cable television . By the end of 2013 The Daily Show 's ratings hit 2 @.@ 5 million viewers nightly . In demographic terms , the viewership is skewed to a relatively young and well @-@ educated audience compared to traditional news shows . A 2004 Nielsen Media Research study commissioned by Comedy Central put the median age at 35 . During the 2004 U.S. presidential election , the show received more male viewers in the 18- to 34 @-@ year @-@ old age demographic than Nightline , Meet the Press , Hannity & Colmes and all of the evening news broadcasts . Because of this , commentators such as Howard Dean and Ted Koppel posit that Stewart serves as a real source of news for young people , regardless of his intentions . 
 The show 's writers reject the idea that The Daily Show has become a source of news for young people . Stewart argues that Americans are living in an " age of information osmosis " in which it is close to impossible to gain one 's news from any single source , and says that his show succeeds comedically because the viewers already have some knowledge about current events . " Our show would not be valuable to people who didn 't understand the news because it wouldn 't make sense , " he argues . " We make assumptions about your level of knowledge that ... if we were your only source of news , you would just watch our show and think , ' I don 't know what 's happening . ' " 
 A 2006 study published by Indiana University tried to compare the substantive amount of information of The Daily Show against prime time network news broadcasts , and concluded that when it comes to substance , there is little difference between The Daily Show and other news outlets . The study contended that , since both programs are more focused on the nature of " infotainment " and ratings than on the dissemination of information , both are broadly equal in terms of the amount of substantial news coverage they offer . 
 As the lines between comedy show and news show have blurred , Jon Stewart has come under pressure in some circles to engage in more serious journalism . Tucker Carlson and Daily Show co @-@ creator Lizz Winstead have chastised Stewart for criticizing politicians and <unk> in his solo segments and then , in interviews with the same people , rarely taking them to task face @-@ to @-@ face . In 2004 , Winstead expressed a desire for Stewart to ask harder satirical questions , saying , " When you are interviewing a Richard Perle or a Kissinger , if you give them a pass , then you become what you are satirizing . You have a war criminal sitting on your couch — to just let him be a war criminal sitting on your couch means you are having to respect some kind of boundary . " She has argued that The Daily Show 's success and access to the youth vote should allow Stewart to press political guests harder without fearing that they will not return to the show . In 2010 , Winstead had changed her views , commenting that since 2004 , Stewart did some of the hardest @-@ hitting interviews on TV . Stewart said in 2003 that he does not think of himself as a social or media critic and rejects the idea that he has any journalistic role as an interviewer . 
 During Stewart 's appearance on CNN 's Crossfire , Stewart criticized that show and said that it was " hurting America " by sensationalizing debates and enabling political spin . When co @-@ host Carlson argued that Stewart himself had not asked John Kerry substantial questions when Kerry appeared on The Daily Show , Stewart countered that it was not his job to give hard @-@ hitting interviews and that a " fake news " comedy program should not be held to the same standards as real journalism . " You 're on CNN ! " Stewart said , " The show that leads into me is puppets making crank phone calls ! What is wrong with you ? " Media critic Dan Kennedy says that Stewart came off as disingenuous in this exchange because " you can 't interview Bill Clinton , Richard Clarke , Bill O 'Reilly , Bob Dole , etc . , etc . , and still say you 're just a comedian . " 
 A 2004 study into the effect of The Daily Show on viewers ' attitudes found that participants had a more negative opinion of both President Bush and then Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry . Participants also expressed more cynical views of the electoral system and news media . Political scientists Jody Baumgartner and Jonathan Morris , who conducted the study , state that it is not clear how such cynicism would affect the political behavior of the show 's viewers . While disillusionment and negative perceptions of the presidential candidates could discourage watchers from voting , Baumgartner and Morris say it is also possible that discontent could prompt greater involvement and that by following the show , viewers may potentially become more engaged and informed voters , with a broader political knowledge . 
 Rachel <unk> , who has also conducted an academic study of The Daily Show , disputes the findings of Baumgartner and Morris . <unk> argues that the study measured cynicism in overly broad terms , and that it would be extremely hard to find a causal link between viewing The Daily Show and thinking or acting in a particular way . Bloggers such as Marty Kaplan of The Huffington Post argue that so long as Stewart 's comedy is grounded in truth , responsibility for increased cynicism belongs to the political and media figures themselves , not the comedian who satirizes them . 
 Stewart himself says that he does not perceive his show as cynical . " It 's so interesting to me that people talk about late @-@ night comedy being cynical , " he says . " What 's more cynical than forming an ideological news network like Fox and calling it ' fair and balanced ' ? What we do , I almost think , is adorable in its idealism . " Stewart has said that he does not take any joy in the failings of American government , despite the comedic fodder they provide . " We 're not the guys at the craps table betting against the line , " he said on Larry King Live . " If government suddenly became inspiring ... we would be the happiest people in the world to turn our attention to idiots like , you know , media people , no offense . " 
 In July 2009 , Time magazine held an online poll entitled " Now that Walter Cronkite has passed on , who is America 's most trusted newscaster ? " Jon Stewart won with 44 % of the vote , 15 points ahead of Brian Williams in second place with 29 % . Stewart downplayed the results on the show stating " It was an Internet poll and I was the ' None of the above ' option " . 
 In December 2013 , TV Guide ranked Jon Stewart 's run on the show at # 53 on its list of the 60 Best Series of All Time . 
 = = = Effectiveness as a news source = = = 
 In late 2004 , the National Annenberg Election Survey at the University of Pennsylvania ran a study of American television viewers and found that fans of The Daily Show had a more accurate idea of the facts behind the 2004 presidential election than most others , including those who primarily got their news through the national network evening newscasts and through reading newspapers . However , in a 2004 campaign survey conducted by the Pew Research Center those who cited comedy shows such as The Daily Show as a source for news were among the least informed on campaign events and key aspects of the candidates ' backgrounds while those who cited the Internet , National Public Radio , and news magazines were the most informed . Even when age and education were taken into account , the people who learned about the campaigns through the Internet were still found to be the most informed , while those who learned from comedy shows were the least informed . 
 In a survey released by the Pew Research Center in April 2007 , viewers who watch both The Colbert Report and The Daily Show tend to be more knowledgeable about news than audiences of other news sources . Approximately 54 % of The Colbert Report and The Daily Show viewers scored in the high knowledge range , followed by Jim Lehrer 's program at 53 % and Bill O 'Reilly 's program at 51 % , significantly higher than the 34 % of network morning show viewers . The survey shows that changing news formats have not made much difference on how much the public knows about national and international affairs , but adds that there is no clear connection between news formats and what audiences know . The Project for Excellence in Journalism released a content analysis report suggesting that The Daily Show comes close to providing the complete daily news . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Under host Jon Stewart , The Daily Show rose to critical acclaim . It has received two Peabody Awards for its coverage of the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections . Between 2001 and 2015 , it has been awarded 21 Primetime Emmy Awards in the categories of Outstanding Variety , Music , or Comedy Series ( winner for 10 consecutive years from 2003 to 2012 ) and Outstanding Writing for a Variety , Music , or Comedy Program , and a further seven nominations . The show has also been honored by GLAAD , the Television Critics Association , and the Satellite Awards . America ( The Book ) : A Citizen 's Guide to Democracy Inaction , the 2004 bestseller written by Stewart and the writing staff of The Daily Show , was recognized by Publishers Weekly as its " Book of the Year " , and its abridged audiobook edition received the 2005 Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album . In September 2010 , Time magazine selected the series as one of " The 100 Best TV Shows of All @-@ TIME " . 
 = = Global editions = = 
 The Daily Show airs on various networks worldwide ; in addition , an edited version of the show called The Daily Show : Global Edition is produced each week specifically for overseas audiences . It has been airing outside of the U.S. on CNN International and other overseas networks since September 2002 . This edition runs for half an hour and contains a selection of segments including one guest interview from the preceding week 's shows , usually from the Monday or Tuesday episode . Stewart provides an exclusive introductory monologue in front of an audience , usually about the week 's prevalent international news story , and closing comments without an audience present . When aired on CNN International , the broadcast is prefaced by a written disclaimer : " The show you are about to watch is a news parody . Its stories are not fact checked . Its reporters are not journalists . And its opinions are not fully thought through . " 
 Between 2001 and 2006 , Westwood One broadcast small , ninety @-@ second portions of the show to various radio stations across America . 
 In Canada , The Daily Show is aired on The Comedy Network ( a cable channel similar to Comedy Central ) , in simulcast with the Comedy Central airing , as well as on the CTV broadcast network at 12 : 05 a.m. local time , following late local newscasts . 
 In the United Kingdom and Ireland , the digital television channel More4 used to broadcast episodes of The Daily Show Tuesday through Friday evenings with the Global Edition , which is uncensored , airs on Mondays ; regular episodes air the evening following their U.S. airing . More4 was the first international broadcaster to syndicate entire Daily Show episodes , though they made edits to the program due to content , language , length or commercial references . The program was also available to watch via the internet video on demand service 4oD . However , the ' toss ' to The Colbert Report was usually included even though it was aired on FX , another channel . In addition , the placement of commercial breaks followed the UK format , with one break midway through the show rather than several short breaks at various points . When The Daily Show was on hiatus , either re @-@ runs or alternative content were aired . Since January 2011 , only the Global Edition is broadcast . In July 2012 Comedy Central announced that The Daily Show would be shown on Comedy Central Extra in the same format as previously on More4 , with episodes shown 24 hours after airing in the U.S. The show aired on the channel from July 2012 to April 2015 . 
 The Global Edition of the week of July 20 , 2011 was not aired in the UK as it included a segment mocking Rupert Murdoch 's appearance before the House of Commons Culture , Media and Sport Committee in relation to the News International phone hacking scandal . Parliamentary rules ban parliamentary proceedings from being broadcast in a satirical context . Stewart dedicated a segment of the show on August 2 , 2011 to lampooning the censorship of the episode in Britain . In May that year , The Daily Show mocked the ban on using footage of the Royal Wedding in a satirical context with an animated video that showed Paddington Bear , Gollum and Adolf Hitler as guests at the wedding , and depicted its attendants engaging in various forms of violent and sexual behavior . Stewart later discussed the ban with guest Keira Knightley . 
 The Daily Show is aired in India on Comedy Central India . 
 The Daily Show is aired on Australian Pay TV channel , The Comedy Channel , weeknights at 6 : 30pm . Free @-@ to @-@ air digital channel ABC2 began broadcasting the show without commercial breaks in March 2010 , but discontinued in January 2011 when The Comedy Channel obtained exclusive rights ; episodes were also available on the network 's online service ABC iView shortly after airing . The Comedy Channel ( as well as ABC2 during 2010 ) air the show together with The Colbert Report , and both air the Global Edition on Mondays and the regular edition Tuesday through Friday . The Global Edition was previously shown weekend late nights on SBS before moving to Network TEN . 
 In Portugal , it airs with no commercial breaks . 
 In North Africa and the Middle East , the Daily Show has been broadcast since 2008 on Showtime Arabia . The regular as well as the Global Edition episodes can currently be seen on OSN First HD , which also broadcasts The Colbert Report . However episodes are often edited if they contain topics deemed inappropriate for the region . 
 Episodes of the U.S. version are also available online the next day at Comedy Central 's official Daily Show website , although this service is not available in all countries . However , clips for UK and Ireland viewers became available on the UK Comedy Central website in December 2011 . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 = = = The Colbert Report = = = 
 A spin @-@ off , The Colbert Report , was announced in early May 2005 . The show starred former correspondent Stephen Colbert , and served as Comedy Central 's answer to the programs of media pundits such as Bill O 'Reilly . Colbert , Stewart , and Ben Karlin developed the idea for the show based on a series of faux television commercials that had been created for an earlier Daily Show segment . They pitched the concept to Comedy Central chief Doug Herzog , who agreed to run the show for eight weeks without first creating a pilot . The Colbert Report premiered on October 17 , 2005 and aired following The Daily Show for nine years . Initial ratings satisfied Comedy Central and less than three weeks after its debut the show was renewed for a year . The Colbert Report was produced by Jon Stewart 's production company , Busboy Productions . 
 In 2014 it was announced that Colbert would leave Comedy Central to host The Late Show with Stephen Colbert on CBS in 2015 , following the retirement of David Letterman . The final episode of The Colbert Report aired on December 18 , 2014 . 
 = = = The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore = = = 
 On May 9 , 2014 it was announced that contributor Larry Wilmore was selected to host a late @-@ night talk show on Comedy Central , to replace The Colbert Report following Colbert 's departure from the network . The show is titled The Nightly Show with Larry Wilmore and is produced by Busboy Productions . It premiered on January 19 , 2015 , and airs Mondays through Thursdays at 11 : 30 PM ( EST ) following The Daily Show . 
 = = = The Daily Show : Nederlandse <unk> = = = 
 A local spin @-@ off of the show called The Daily Show : Nederlandse <unk> ( The Daily Show : Dutch Edition ) premiered on the Dutch Comedy Central on January 31 , 2011 . The program is similar to the original , except with Dutch news and a Dutch view on international news . The show is hosted by comedian Jan @-@ Jaap van der Wal , who was a team captain on Dit was het <unk> , the Dutch edition of Have I Got News For You . The first episode featured a guest appearance by Jon Stewart ( recorded at the New York studio ) , who gave his official blessing for the show . This is also the first and still only franchise of The Daily Show . The ' Dutch Edition ' didn 't make it past the test run of 12 episodes due to lack of viewers . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 America ( The Book ) : A Citizen 's Guide to Democracy Inaction , published in 2004 , is a book written by Jon Stewart and other writers of The Daily Show that parodies and satirizes American politics and worldview . 
 Earth ( The Book ) : A Visitor 's Guide to the Human Race , published in 2010 , is a book written by Jon Stewart and other writers of The Daily Show and is similar in style to America ( The Book ) , but focuses on planet and human culture instead of the history of America . 
 = = Unofficial versions = = 
 The Daily Show ’ s satirical format has inspired international versions unaffiliated with Comedy Central . The Persian @-@ language satire program <unk> was directly inspired by The Daily Show with the hosts even making a guest appearance on the January 20 , 2011 , episode of The Daily Show . In Germany , the <unk> @-@ Show has aired on ZDF since 2009 . The name is derived from the main ZDF news program <unk> . In Egypt , the show Al <unk> is modeled after The Daily Show as well . Host Bassem Youssef even imitates Jon Stewart 's mannerisms , such as using his mug as a comedic prop . In Iraq , <unk> Show is a reduced version ( with no celebrity interviews ) and is hosted by the Iraqi journalist / comedian Ahmad Al @-@ Basheer ; commenting and criticizing local political issues . In Israel , the Daily Show was one of the main inspirations for <unk> <unk> , a popular Israeli satire . During the 2009 Portuguese legislative election campaign , Portuguese comedy group Gato <unk> hosted Gato <unk> <unk> os <unk> , a satirical news show modeled after The Daily Show ’ s election coverage segments , which attracted immediate public attention after securing the key political candidates as guests . In Croatia , <unk> <unk> , a short @-@ lived satirical program heavily inspired by The Daily Show ran for six episodes in 2016 , before being controversially cancelled by the newly appointed conservative administration of the Croatian Radiotelevision . 
 = History of the National Hockey League ( 1992 – present ) = 
 The National Hockey League ( NHL ) has endured a tumultuous period of history in recent years . It has grown from 22 teams in 1992 to 30 today as the league expanded across the United States . Repeated labour conflicts interrupted play in 1992 , 1994 – 95 , 2004 – 05 and 2012 – 13 ; the second lockout caused the entire 2004 – 05 NHL season to be canceled , the first time in North American history that a sports league has canceled an entire season in a labour dispute . Five franchises have relocated during this time : the Minnesota North Stars became the Dallas Stars ( 1993 ) , the Quebec Nordiques became the Colorado Avalanche ( 1995 ) , the Winnipeg Jets became the Phoenix Coyotes ( 1996 ) , the Hartford Whalers became the Carolina Hurricanes ( 1997 ) , and the Atlanta Thrashers became the second franchise known as the Winnipeg Jets ( 2011 ) . The Coyotes would later rebrand themselves as the Arizona Coyotes following the 2013 – 14 season . 
 In 1993 , the Montreal Canadiens celebrated the Stanley Cup 's 100th anniversary with their 24th championship . They remain the last Canadian team to capture the trophy . The 1994 New York Rangers broke the Curse of 1940 , winning their first title in 54 years . The renaissance of the Original Six would continue as the Detroit Red Wings ( Stanley Cup winners in 1997 , 1998 , 2002 and 2008 ) , Chicago Blackhawks ( winners in 2010 , 2013 and 2015 ) and Boston Bruins ( winners in 2011 ) broke lengthy Cup droughts of 42 , 49 and 39 seasons , respectively . Meanwhile , the NHL 's southern expansion , often maligned by Canadians and fans in the Northeastern United States , has led to championships by the Dallas Stars , Tampa Bay Lightning , Carolina Hurricanes and Anaheim Ducks in the last decade , with the Los Angeles Kings following suit . 
 Manon Rheaume became the first female player in the NHL when she suited up for the Lightning in a 1992 pre @-@ season game . Wayne Gretzky passed Gordie Howe as the NHL 's all @-@ time leading scorer in 1994 when he scored his 802nd career goal . Mario Lemieux overcame Hodgkin 's lymphoma to finish his NHL career with more than 1 @,@ 700 points and two championships , and now owns the Pittsburgh Penguins . Today 's NHL is led by arguably its two biggest young stars : Sidney Crosby of the Pittsburgh Penguins and Alexander Ovechkin of the Washington Capitals . 
 The Canada Cup gave way to the World Cup of Hockey in 1996 , while NHL players first competed in the 1998 Winter Olympics . To promote itself worldwide , the NHL played regular season games in Japan in 1996 , and throughout Europe since 2007 . The league played its first outdoor regular season game between the Canadiens and the host Edmonton Oilers in 2003 and which led to the creation of three series of outdoor games : the Heritage Classic , Winter Classic and Stadium Series . 
 Increased use of defence @-@ focused systems contributed to decreased scoring in the late 1990s , leading some to argue that the NHL 's talent pool had been diluted by the 1990 expansion plan . The league has attempted several times to alter its rules to increase scoring . It began awarding teams a single point for losing in overtime in 1999 , hoping to reduce the number of tie games . In 2005 , ties were eliminated altogether as the penalty shootout was introduced to ensure that all games have a winner . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the 1990s began , players were uneasy with the closeness between National Hockey League Players Association ( NHLPA ) executive director Alan Eagleson and the teams ' owners . As a result , Eagleson stepped down in December 1991 , and was replaced by Bob Goodenow . Four years later , the Federal Bureau of Investigation indicted Eagleson on charges of racketeering , fraud , embezzlement , kickbacks and obstruction of justice over allegations that he stole millions of dollars from the NHLPA . Eagleson pleaded guilty in 1998 in a plea bargain and was fined US $ 1 million and sentenced to 18 months in prison . He subsequently resigned from the Hockey Hall of Fame . 
 Four months after replacing Eagleson , Goodenow and the NHLPA launched the first NHL strike on April 1 , 1992 . It lasted ten days and resulted in the players receiving larger playoff bonuses , increased control over the licensing of their likenesses and improved rights to free agency . It also led the owners to dismiss league president John Ziegler and replace him on an interim basis with Gil Stein . Goodenow called the strike a major moment , stating " I don 't think the owners took the players seriously and it wasn 't until the strike that they understood the players were serious . " As part of the deal , the league also agreed to have each team play two games per season for the following two years in neutral site locations , partially to help gauge markets for potential expansion . 
 Desiring a fresh start , the owners replaced Stein with Gary Bettman in February 1993 . Formerly a senior vice president of the National Basketball Association , Bettman replaced the position of president with that of commissioner . He was given the task of selling the game to the American market , ending labor unrest , completing expansion plans , and modernizing the league . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 The Tampa Bay Lightning and Ottawa Senators joined the league in 1992 – 93 as part of the owners ' 1990 plan to expand the NHL to 28 teams within a decade . The Lightning made NHL history when goaltender Manon Rheaume played a period of an exhibition game for them on September 23 , 1992 . Rheaume became the first woman to play in an NHL game . She also became the first woman to sign a professional hockey contract , doing so with the Lightning 's farm team , the Atlanta Knights . One year later , the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and Florida Panthers began play as the NHL 's 25th and 26th franchises . They were established as part of the NHL 's attempt to regain a U.S. network television presence by expanding into southern North America . The league expected that bringing in Blockbuster Video 's Wayne Huizenga to own the Panthers , and The Walt Disney Company to own the Mighty Ducks would raise its profile . The NHL 's southward push continued in 1993 when the Minnesota North Stars moved to Dallas , Texas to become the Dallas Stars . 
 The NHL celebrated the 100th anniversary of the Stanley Cup in 1993 . That year 's finals featured Patrick Roy and the Montreal Canadiens against Wayne Gretzky and the Los Angeles Kings . After losing the first game , the Canadiens rallied from a late deficit to win game two in overtime after the Kings ' Marty McSorley was penalized for using an illegal stick . Montreal scored on the power play , sending the game into overtime . Montreal won games three and four in overtime en route to winning the series in five games . The Canadiens won an NHL @-@ record ten consecutive overtime games in the 1993 playoffs . 
 The New York Rangers ended their " Curse of 1940 " after 54 years by winning the 1994 Stanley Cup in seven games over the Vancouver Canucks . The Rangers ' championship was the last hurrah for the great Edmonton Oilers dynasty of the 1980s , as there were seven ex @-@ Oilers on the team , including Mark Messier , who became the first ( and to this date , the only ) player to win Stanley Cups as the captain for two franchises , having captained the Oilers to the last of their five Stanley Cups in 1990 . The Rangers ' victory also resulted in the first Russian names to be engraved on the Stanley Cup : Alexei Kovalev , Alexander <unk> , Sergei <unk> , and Sergei Zubov . The global audience of 285 million in 120 countries that watched the Rangers ' victory included a huge European audience , including those watching across the former Soviet Union . This Stanley Cup win was the highest @-@ rated single CBC Sports program in history to that point . 
 = = = 1994 – 95 lockout = = = 
 Four months later , the players were locked out by the owners due to the lack of a Collective Bargaining Agreement ( CBA ) . The 1994 – 95 NHL lockout lasted 104 days and resulted in the season 's being shortened from a planned 84 games to 48 . The owners wanted to control salary growth and insisted on a salary cap , changes to free agency and salary arbitration . The union instead proposed a luxury tax system that would penalize teams that spent above a set figure on player salaries . The negotiations were at times bitter , as defenceman Chris Chelios famously issued a veiled threat against Bettman , suggesting that he should be " worried about [ his ] family and [ his ] well @-@ being " , because " some crazed fans , or even a player [ ... ] might take matters into their own hands and figure they get Bettman out of the way . " 
 The lockout entered its fourth month in January 1995 and approached a deadline that would have canceled the season when the two sides agreed to an 11th @-@ hour deal . The owners failed to achieve a full salary cap , but the union agreed to a cap on rookie contracts , changes to the arbitration system and restrictive rules for free agency that would not grant a player the unrestricted right to choose where he played until age 31 . The deal was initially seen as a victory for the owners . 
 The agreement was not enough to save two teams in Canada 's smallest NHL markets . The revenue disparity between large and small market teams , exacerbated by the falling value of the Canadian dollar , led the Winnipeg Jets to relocate to Phoenix , Arizona in 1996 , becoming the Coyotes one year after the Quebec Nordiques moved to Denver , Colorado to become the Colorado Avalanche . Hoping to prevent other teams from leaving Canada , and citing the cost of doing business in American dollars while taking revenue in Canadian dollars , the NHL set up a currency assistance plan to support the remaining small market Canadian teams in 1996 . The Hartford Whalers became the third former World Hockey Association team to relocate in 1997 , moving to Raleigh , North Carolina , to become the Carolina Hurricanes . 
 = = Dead puck era = = 
 Following the 1994 – 95 lockout , the NHL entered a prolonged period of offensive decline . Throughout the 1980s , 7 @.@ 6 goals were scored per game on average . That figure had dropped below six goals per game by the 1994 – 95 season , and to 5 @.@ 19 by 1998 – 99 . There have been many arguments put forth as to what caused this decline . A common claim is that the drop in offence was due to dilution of talent caused by 1990s expansion , a position former player Brett Hull endorsed . Increased use of the neutral zone trap and similar defensive systems were also blamed . The New Jersey Devils have often been criticized for popularizing the trap , using it to win the Stanley Cup in 1995 . This period has been called the dead puck era . 
 The Canada Cup gave way to the World Cup of Hockey in 1996 , an NHL @-@ sanctioned eight team international tournament featuring the top professionals in the world . The inaugural tournament saw the United States upset the favored Canadians in a three @-@ game final . That same year , the Avalanche won their first Stanley Cup in their first season in Denver , sweeping the Florida Panthers . One year later , the Detroit Red Wings ended a 42 @-@ year drought , capturing their first Stanley Cup since 1955 . The team 's celebration was cut short , as defenseman Vladimir Konstantinov and team masseur Sergei <unk> were seriously injured when their limousine crashed six days following the victory . The Red Wings dedicated the 1997 – 98 season to the two . Upon repeating as champions in 1998 , they brought Konstantinov , who had suffered severe brain damage in the crash , out in a wheelchair to celebrate with the team on the ice . 
 The NHL added four expansion teams to increase the total number of clubs to 30 . Continuing its expansion into the southern United States , the Nashville Predators joined the league in 1998 , followed by the Atlanta Thrashers in 1999 . The Minnesota Wild and Columbus Blue Jackets then began play in 2000 . 
 On April 16 , 1999 , Wayne Gretzky played his final NHL game , retiring as the league 's all @-@ time scoring leader and holding 61 NHL records . His number , 99 , was retired league @-@ wide the following season . The usual three @-@ year waiting period between a player 's retirement and his induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame was waived , and he was inducted in 1999 . 
 For marketing reasons , the NHL agreed to participate in the Winter Olympics starting in 1998 . NHL players first competed at the Nagano Games . Led by goaltender Dominik Hasek , the tournament was won by the Czech Republic . Hasek , who finished the tournament with a 0 @.@ 97 goals @-@ against average and a <unk> save percentage over six games , was the leading goaltender of the 1990s . His run of consecutive Vezina Trophies from 1994 to 1999 was interrupted only once , in 1996 by Jim Carey of the Washington Capitals . Hasek won another Vezina Trophy in 2001 , and two consecutive Lester B. Pearson and Hart Trophies in 1997 and 1998 . 
 The Panthers ' trip to the Stanley Cup final in 1996 began a trend in which southern @-@ based teams frequently appeared in the championship round . The Dallas Stars won the 1999 Stanley Cup over the Buffalo Sabres in controversial fashion : Brett Hull scored the Cup @-@ winning goal in overtime of game six despite arguments that his foot was in the goal crease , which under the rules at the time would have disallowed the goal . The Stars returned to the finals in 2000 , falling to the New Jersey Devils . The Hurricanes first played in the finals in 2002 , losing to the Red Wings , while the Mighty Ducks reached the final in 2003 , falling to the Devils . In 2004 , the Tampa Bay Lightning defeated the Calgary Flames to win the Cup . The Lightning win in 2004 was seen as the end to the Devils / Avalanche / Red Wings Stanley Cup era , as all three teams won a combined 8 Stanley Cups between 1995 and 2003 . 
 The Edmonton Oilers hosted the NHL 's first regular season outdoor hockey game , the Heritage Classic , on November 22 , 2003 . The game against the Canadiens was held at Commonwealth Stadium before a then @-@ record crowd of 57 @,@ 167 fans who endured temperatures as low as − 19 ° C ( − 2 ° F ) . 
 = = = Mario Lemieux = = = 
 When they selected him as the first overall draft pick in 1984 , the Pittsburgh Penguins hoped that Mario Lemieux would improve the team 's fortunes on the ice , and increase interest in the team in the Pittsburgh market . Lemieux , who had scored 133 goals in his final season of junior hockey , recorded his first NHL goal in his first game on his first career shot against the Boston Bruins . On December 31 , 1988 , Lemieux scored five goals , one in each of the five different ways possible : even strength , on the power play , short handed , on a penalty shot and into an empty net , a feat no player in league history has duplicated . 
 Injuries and illness plagued Lemieux throughout his career . He played only 26 regular season games in 1990 – 91 after surgery to repair a herniated disc in his back , but returned in time to score 44 points in the playoffs in leading the Penguins to their first Stanley Cup . Lemieux continued to struggle with back trouble the next season , though he still won the scoring title , and his second consecutive playoff MVP award in leading the Penguins to their second championship in 1992 . In 1993 , he was diagnosed with cancer . Lemieux endured 22 radiation treatments in 30 days to treat non @-@ Hodgkin lymphoma . Only 12 hours after his final treatment , Lemieux returned to the Penguins , scoring a goal in his first game back . A second surgery on his back cost Lemieux most of the 1993 – 94 season , and the entire 1994 – 95 campaign . As a result of his injuries , Lemieux retired in 1997 . He was immediately inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame ; the three @-@ year waiting period was waived by the Hall . 
 Inspired by his son Austin 's desire to see him play , Lemieux returned to the NHL in 2000 – 01 , earning an assist on a Jaromir Jagr goal 33 @-@ seconds into his return , and scoring one himself in the 2nd period . He also became the first player @-@ owner in NHL history ; he had bought the Penguins in the summer of 1999 to save them from bankruptcy . Lemieux finished the season with 35 goals and 76 points in 43 games . Lemieux continued to battle injuries , missing the majority of the first @-@ half of the 2001 – 02 season , however he returned to action in time to captain Team Canada to its first gold medal in 50 @-@ years at the 2002 Winter Olympics . Injuries again forced his retirement , as Lemieux finally ended his career on January 24 , 2006 with 690 goals and 1 @,@ 723 points in 915 games . Despite his injuries , it has been argued that Lemieux was the greatest player in NHL history . Hall of Famer Bobby Orr said that Lemieux was the most skilled player he had ever seen , while Mike Gartner said that if he had remained healthy , Lemieux would have scored 1 @,@ 000 goals . 
 = = 2004 – 05 lockout = = 
 By 2004 , the owners were claiming that player salaries had grown much faster than revenues , and that the league as a whole lost over US $ 300 million in 2002 – 03 . Upon the expiry of the collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) , Gary Bettman announced that the players were again locked out to start the 2004 – 05 season . As with the 1994 – 95 lockout , the owners were demanding a salary cap , which the players were unwilling to consider until the season was on the verge of being lost . The players , for their part , offered a 24 % salary rollback to keep the free @-@ market system that was already in place . On February 16 , 2005 , after a series of last minute offers failed , Bettman announced the cancellation of the entire season , making the NHL first major North American league to cancel an entire season because of a labor stoppage . 
 The season 's cancellation led union president Trevor Linden and senior director Ted Saskin to take charge of negotiations from executive director Bob Goodenow . By early July , the two sides had agreed to a new CBA . The deal featured a hard salary cap , linked to a fixed percentage of league revenues , a 24 % rollback on salaries , and unrestricted free agency beginning after seven years of service . 
 The loss of the 2004 – 05 season led the NHL to institute a special lottery to determine the order of the 2005 draft , as there were no standings to base a drafting order from . The Pittsburgh Penguins won the lottery , and selected Sidney Crosby , a highly prized prospect whose arrival to the NHL had been greatly anticipated . Crosby and the Washington Capitals ' Alex Ovechkin , the 2004 first overall pick , were expected to become the faces of the NHL as the league entered a new era . Ovechkin was named the Calder Memorial Trophy winner as rookie of the year in 2005 – 06 , while Crosby 's presence helped Pittsburgh 's attendance increase by 33 % , over 4 @,@ 000 fans per game . 
 = = Recent years = = 
 In the 2005 – 06 season , Ovechkin and Crosby began their careers . In their first three seasons , they each won both the Art Ross and Hart trophies ; Crosby captured both in 2007 and Ovechkin in 2008 . The 2006 Stanley Cup Finals was the first time that franchises that originally played in the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) met in the Stanley Cup Final , as the Oilers lost a seven @-@ game series to the Hurricanes . The following season , the Senators lost the finals in five games to the Ducks . The three @-@ year streak of Canadian teams in the finals was halted in the 2007 – 08 season , when the Red Wings defeated the Penguins for their fourth Stanley Cup in 11 years . The Penguins returned the favor in the 2009 Stanley Cup Finals , winning in Game 7 for their third Stanley Cup , most by any post @-@ 1967 expansion team . 
 The first half of the 2010s was dominated by either the Chicago Blackhawks or the Los Angeles Kings . The Blackhawks , whose last Cup win was in 1961 , won three Stanley Cups in 2010 , 2013 and 2015 , while the Kings , who have not won a Cup since entering the league in 1967 , won their first two Cups in 2012 and 2014 , the former of which made them the first and only eighth @-@ seed to win the Cup . The only team other than the Blackhawks or the Kings to win the Cup during this period were the Boston Bruins , who won the Cup in 2011 , their first since 1972 . The Bruins and Blackhawks also met in the first all @-@ Original Six final since 1979 , which took place in 2013 . 
 The success of the Heritage Classic led the NHL to schedule more outdoor games . The Sabres hosted the 2008 NHL Winter Classic on New Year 's Day 2008 , losing to the Pittsburgh Penguins in a shootout before a crowd of 71 @,@ 217 at Ralph Wilson Stadium . The second Winter Classic was held January 1 , 2009 at Wrigley Field in Chicago between the Blackhawks and Red Wings . On January 1 , 2010 at Fenway Park in Boston the third Winter Classic was held with the Bruins defeating the Philadelphia Flyers 2 @-@ 1 in overtime . The following year the Winter Classic was held in Pittsburgh 's Heinz Field , with the Washington Capitals beating the Penguins 3 @-@ 1 , and on January 2 , 2012 ( January 1 of that year was a Sunday ) , the New York Rangers defeated the Flyers 3 @-@ 2 at Philadelphia 's Citizens Bank Park . For the 2013 – 14 season , six outdoor games are scheduled in five cities , beginning with the 2014 NHL Winter Classic at Detroit 's Michigan Stadium , and then the 2014 NHL Stadium Series at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles , Yankee Stadium in New York City , and Soldier Field in Chicago , before concluding with the 2014 NHL Heritage Classic at Vancouver 's BC Place . To date , a total of 15 games have been played outdoors since 2003 , with three more scheduled during the 2015 – 16 season . 
 Intending to promote the game worldwide , the league sent the San Jose Sharks and Calgary Flames to begin the 1998 – 99 season with two games in Tokyo , Japan . Since 2007 , the NHL has been sending teams to Europe to start each season . The Los Angeles Kings met the Ducks at the O2 Arena in London , England to start the 2007 – 08 season . A year later , four teams were sent to Prague , Czech Republic and Stockholm , Sweden . One of those teams , the Rangers , also participated in the inaugural Victoria Cup , defeating the Kontinental Hockey League 's Metallurg Magnitogorsk 4 – 3 in a single game . Another four teams opened the 2009 – 10 season in Stockholm and Helsinki , Finland . In 2010 , Vancouver hosted the Winter Olympics , the first time an NHL city has hosted the event since the league began participating . The NHL 's participation in future games remains in doubt , as it had expressed a desire not to participate in the 2014 games in Sochi , Russia . However , the NHL players did ultimately participate in those games . The players strongly favour continued participation in the Olympics . The third World Cup of Hockey is expected to take place in 2011 , seven years after the 2004 tournament . 
 Due to the 2010 Olympics , the Canucks underwent the longest road trip in NHL history , with 14 games over 6 weeks , from January 27 to March 13 , 2010 , to allow General Motors Place to be used for ice hockey during the Winter Games . It marked the first time that an NHL @-@ sized rink was used during the Winter Olympics . GM Place was " Canada Hockey Place " during the games , as the IOC prohibits advertising , including corporate sponsorship , within Olympic venues . 
 Despite these successes after the lockout , a couple of teams still had financial difficulties . The Phoenix Coyotes eventually filed for bankruptcy in May 2009 after incurring several hundred million dollars of losses . The league then took control over the team later that year in order to stabilize the club 's operations , with the hopes of eventually reselling it to a new owner who would be committed to stay in the Phoenix market . Meanwhile , the City of Glendale , Arizona , home of the team 's Jobing.com Arena , financially kept the team afloat , paying $ 25 million to the NHL to cover the club 's losses for the 2010 – 11 season , and another $ 25 million for the 2011 – 12 season . The league eventually sold the team in 2013 to Renaissance Sports & Entertainment ( RS & E ) , a group of Canadian investors . 
 After also suffering financial losses and ownership struggles , the Atlanta Thrashers were eventually sold to True North Sports and Entertainment in 2011 , who then relocated the team to Winnipeg , a stark reversal of the league 's attempts to expand into the southern United States . Initially replacing the Thrashers in the Eastern Conference 's Southeast Division , as part of a realignment to four divisions , the Jets were moved to the Western Conference 's Central Division before the 2013 – 14 season . The Detroit Red Wings and Columbus Blue Jackets were then assigned to the Eastern Conference 's Atlantic and Metropolitan divisions , respectively . 
 = = = 2012 – 13 lockout = = = 
 The NHL again entered lockout in 2012 , cancelling the first 526 games , about 43 % of the season , until at least December 30 , 2012 . Just after 5 am on January 6 , 2013 , after approximately 16 continuous hours of negotiating , the NHL and the player 's union reached a tentative deal on a new collective bargaining agreement to end the lockout . The first games of the season were held on January 19 . 
 = = Rules and innovations = = 
 Hoping to reduce the number of tie games during the regular season , the NHL decided that beginning in the 1999 – 2000 season , in any game tied after regulation time , both teams would be guaranteed one point , while the team that won in overtime would earn a second point . The theory was that rather than playing conservatively to earn a point for a tie , teams would press for the extra point for the overtime win . In the 2005 – 06 season the NHL eliminated tie games altogether , as the shootout was introduced to decide all regular season games tied after the five @-@ minute overtime period . The shootout has proven controversial ; critics have called it a gimmick , and expressed fierce opposition to any suggestion of using it to decide playoff games , though the league has not pushed for this to happen . It has also been argued that teams are playing it safe , taking no chances in regulation in order to bring the game to overtime , where they are each guaranteed a point . The shootout also has many supporters , among them Phoenix head coach Dave Tippett , who stated that many fans enjoy it . 
 The shootout was one of several rule changes made in 2005 as the league attempted to increase offence following the lockout . The two @-@ line pass rule was eliminated , allowing teams to pass from their defensive zone to anywhere in the neutral zone . Previously , such passes could only be made to their own half of the neutral zone . The rule was intended to encourage long breakout passes and create more breakaways . Teams that commit an icing infraction are no longer allowed to make a line change before a faceoff , and goaltenders are now prohibited from playing the puck in the end @-@ zone corners behind the goal line . They are allowed to play the puck directly behind the net , within the trapezoid marked by diagonal lines from the goal line to the end boards . 
 One of the most controversial changes was the league 's zero @-@ tolerance policy on obstruction penalties . The league hoped that the game could be opened up if it cracked down on " clutching and grabbing " . The tighter regulations have met with complaints about the legitimacy of some calls , that players are diving to draw penalties , and that officials are not calling enough penalties . 
 The changes initially led to a sharp increase in scoring . Teams combined to score 6 @.@ 1 goals per game in 2005 – 06 , more than a goal per game higher than in the 2003 – 04 season . This represented the highest single @-@ season increase in offence since 1929 – 30 . However , scoring has rapidly declined since , approaching pre @-@ lockout totals in 2007 – 08 . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = Edmund FitzAlan , 9th Earl of Arundel = 
 Edmund FitzAlan , 9th Earl of Arundel ( 1 May 1285 – 17 November 1326 ) was an English nobleman prominent in the conflict between Edward II and his barons . His father , Richard FitzAlan , 8th Earl of Arundel , died on 9 March 1301 , while Edmund was still a minor . He therefore became a ward of John de Warenne , Earl of Surrey , and married Warenne 's granddaughter Alice . In 1306 he was styled Earl of Arundel , and served under Edward I in the Scottish Wars , for which he was richly rewarded . 
 After Edward I 's death , Arundel became part of the opposition to the new king Edward II , and his favourite Piers Gaveston . In 1311 he was one of the so @-@ called Lords Ordainers who assumed control of government from the king . Together with Thomas , Earl of Lancaster , he was responsible for the death of Gaveston in 1312 . From this point on , however , his relationship to the king became more friendly . This was to a large extent due to his association with the king 's new favourite Hugh Despenser the Younger , whose daughter was married to Arundel 's son . Arundel supported the king in suppressing rebellions by Roger Mortimer and other Marcher Lords , and eventually also Thomas of Lancaster . For this he was awarded with land and offices . 
 His fortune changed , however , when the country was invaded in 1326 by Mortimer , who had made common cause with the king 's wife , Queen Isabella . Immediately after the capture of Edward II , the queen , Edward III 's regent , ordered Arundel executed , his title forfeit and his property confiscated . Arundel 's son and heir Richard only recovered the title and lands in 1331 , after Edward III had taken power from the regency of Isabella and Mortimer . In the 1390s , a cult emerged around the late earl . He was venerated as a martyr , though he was never canonised . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Edmund FitzAlan was born in the Castle of Marlborough , in Wiltshire , on 1 May 1285 . He was the son of Richard FitzAlan , 8th Earl of Arundel , and his wife , Alice of Saluzzo , daughter of Thomas I of Saluzzo in Italy . Richard had been in opposition to the king during the political crisis of 1295 , and as a result he had incurred great debts and had parts of his land confiscated . When Richard died in 09 / 03 / 1301 , Edmund 's wardship was given to John de Warenne , Earl of Surrey . Warenne 's only son , William , had died in 1286 , so his daughter Alice was now heir apparent to the Warenne earldom . Alice was offered in marriage to Edmund , who for unknown reasons initially refused her . By 1305 he had changed his mind , however , and the two were married . 
 In April 1306 , shortly before turning twenty @-@ one , Edmund was granted possession of his father 's title and land . On 22 May 1306 , he was knighted by Edward I , along with the young Prince Edward – the future Edward II . The knighting was done in expectation of military service the Scottish Wars , and after the campaign was over , Arundel was richly rewarded . Edward I pardoned the young earl a debt of £ 4 @,@ 234 . This flow of patronage continued after the death of Edward I in 1307 ; in 1308 Edward II returned the hundred of <unk> to Arundel , an honour that Edward I had confiscated from Edmund 's father . There were also official honours in the early years of Edward II 's reign . At the new king 's coronation on 25 February 1308 , Arundel officiated as chief butler ( or <unk> ) , a hereditary office of the earls of Arundel . 
 = = Opposition to Edward II = = 
 Though the reign of Edward II was initially harmonious , he soon met with opposition from several of his earls and prelates . At the source of the discontent was the king 's relationship with the young Gascon knight Piers Gaveston , who had been exiled by Edward I , but was recalled immediately upon Edward II 's accession . Edward 's favouritism towards the upstart Gaveston was an offence to the established nobility , and his elevation to the earldom of Cornwall was particularly offensive to the established nobility . A group of magnates led by Henry de Lacy , Earl of Lincoln , forced Gaveston into exile in 1308 . By 1309 , however , Edward had reconciled himself with the opposition , and Gaveston was allowed to return . 
 Arundel joined the opposition at an early point , and did not attend the Stamford parliament in July 1309 , where Gaveston 's return was negotiated . After Gaveston returned , his behaviour became even more offensive , and opposition towards him grew . In addition to this , there was great discontent with Edward II 's failure to follow up his father 's Scottish campaigns . On 16 March 1310 , the king had to agree to the appointment of a committee known as the Lords Ordainers , who were to be in charge of the reform of the royal government . Arundel was one of eight earls among the twenty @-@ one Ordainers . 
 The Ordainers once more sent Gaveston into exile in 1311 , but by 1312 he was back . Now the king 's favourite was officially an outlaw , and Arundel was among the earls who swore to hunt him down . The leader of the opposition – after Lincoln 's death the year before – was now Thomas , Earl of Lancaster . In June 1312 Gaveston was captured , tried before Lancaster , Arundel and the earls of Warwick and Hereford , and executed . A reconciliation was achieved between the king and the offending magnates , and Arundel and the others received pardons , but animosity prevailed . In 1314 Arundel was among the magnates who refused to assist Edward in a campaign against the Scottish , resulting in the disastrous English defeat at the Battle of Bannockburn . 
 = = Return to loyalty = = 
 Around the time of Bannockburn , however , Arundel 's loyalty began to shift back towards the king . Edward 's rapprochement towards the earl had in fact started earlier , when on 2 November 1313 , the king pardoned Arundel 's royal debts . The most significant factor in this process though , was the marriage alliance between Arundel and the king 's new favourites , the Despensers . Hugh Despenser the Younger and his father Hugh Despenser the elder were gradually taking over control of the government , and using their power to enrich themselves . While this alienated most of the nobility , Arundel 's situation was different . At some point in 1314 – 1315 , his son Richard was betrothed to Isabel , daughter of Hugh Despenser the Younger . Now that he found himself back in royal favour , Arundel started receiving rewards in the form of official appointments . In 1317 he was appointed Warden of the Marches of Scotland , and in August 1318 , he helped negotiate the Treaty of Leake , which temporarily reconciled the king with Thomas of Lancaster . 
 With Arundel 's change of allegiance came a conflict of interest . In August 1321 , a demand was made to the king that Hugh Despenser and his father , Hugh Despenser the elder , be sent into exile . The king , facing a rebellion in the Welsh Marches , had no choice but to assent . Arundel voted for the expulsion , but later he claimed that he did so under compulsion , and also supported their recall in December . Arundel had suffered personally from the rebellion , when Roger Mortimer seized his castle of Clun . Early in 1322 , Arundel joined King Edward in a campaign against the Mortimer family . The opposition soon crumbled , and the king decided to move against Thomas of Lancaster , who had been supporting the marcher rebellion all along . Lancaster was defeated at the Battle of Boroughbridge in March , and executed . 
 In the aftermath of the rebellion , the Despensers enriched themselves on the forfeited estates of the rebels , and Hugh Despenser the elder was created Earl of Winchester in May 1322 . Also Arundel , who was now one of the king 's principal supporters , was richly rewarded . After the capture of Roger Mortimer in 1322 , he received the forfeited Mortimer lordship of Chirk in Wales . He was also trusted with important offices : he became Chief Justiciar of North and South Wales in 1323 , and in 1325 he was made Warden of the Welsh Marches , responsible for the array in Wales . He also extended his influence through marriage alliances ; in 1325 he secured marriages between two of his daughters and the sons and heirs of two of Lancaster 's main allies : the deceased earls of Hereford and Warwick . 
 = = Final years and death = = 
 In 1323 , Roger Mortimer , who had been held in captivity in the Tower of London , escaped and fled to France . Two years later , Queen Isabella travelled to Paris on an embassy to the French king . Here , Isabella and Mortimer developed a plan to invade England and replace Edward II on the throne with his son , the young Prince Edward , who was in the company of Isabella . Isabella and Mortimer landed in England on 24 September 1326 , and due to the virulent resentment against the Despenser regime , few came to the king 's aid . Arundel initially escaped the invading force in the company of the king , but was later dispatched to his estates in Shropshire to gather troops . At Shrewsbury he was captured by his old enemy John Charlton of Powys , and brought to Queen Isabella at Hereford . On 17 November – the day after Edward II had been taken captive – Arundel was executed , allegedly on the instigation of Mortimer . According to a chronicle account , the use of a blunt sword was ordered , and the executioner needed 22 strokes to sever the earl 's head from his body . 
 Arundel 's body was initially interred at the Franciscan church in Hereford . It had been his wish , however , to be buried at the family 's traditional resting place of <unk> Abbey in Shropshire , and this is where he was finally buried . Though he was never canonised , a cult emerged around the late earl in the 1390s , associating him with the 9th @-@ century martyr king St Edmund . This veneration may have been inspired by a similar cult around his grandson , Richard FitzAlan , 11th Earl of Arundel , who was executed by Richard II in 1397 . 
 Arundel was attainted at his execution ; his estates were forfeited to the crown , and large parts of these were appropriated by Isabella and Mortimer . The castle and honour of Arundel was briefly held by Edward II 's half @-@ brother Edmund , Earl of Kent , who was executed on 3 September 1330 . Edmund FitzAlan 's son , Richard , failed in an attempted rebellion against the crown in June 1330 , and had to flee to France . In October the same year , the guardianship of Isabella and Mortimer was supplanted by the personal rule of King Edward III . This allowed Richard to return and reclaim his inheritance , and on 8 February 1331 , he was fully restored to his father 's lands , and created Earl of Arundel . 
 = = Issue = = 
 Edmund and Alice had at least seven children : 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Manor Farm , Ruislip = 
 Manor Farm is a 22 @-@ acre ( 8 @.@ 9 ha ) historic site in Ruislip , Greater London . It incorporates a medieval farm complex , with a main old barn dating from the 13th century and a farm house from the 16th . Nearby are the remains of a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle believed to date from shortly after the Norman conquest of England . Original groundwork on the site has been dated to the 9th century . 
 Ownership of the site passed to the King 's College , Cambridge in the 15th century , with whom it remained until 1931 . At this point Manor Farm was included in the sale of Park Wood as a gift to the people of Ruislip . The Great Barn and Little Barn were recognised by a member of the Royal Society of Arts in 1930 as in need of conservation . The site continued as a working farm until 1933 . 
 Throughout 2007 and 2008 , the site was restored with National Lottery funding , and has become a heritage area for the London Borough of Hillingdon . Manor Farm is within the Ruislip Village Conservation Area . Events are regularly held within the 13th @-@ century Great Barn and around the rest of the site . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 What remains of the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle can be seen today in part of the moat and bank on the site . Today , the moat on the site is a scheduled monument , believed to have been extended to create an oval area upon which a wooden castle covering 350 foot ( 110 m ) by 200 foot ( 61 m ) was built , presumably for the landowner , Ernulf de Hesdin . He was given control of the manor of Ruislip shortly after the Norman conquest , in recognition of his loyalty to William the Conqueror . The castle is believed to have been built between 1066 and 1087 , but does not appear in the 1086 Domesday Book and so could have been demolished or changed significantly . It may never have been finished . 
 Ruislip parish was owned by the Benedictine Bec Abbey of Normandy between 1096 and 1404 during which time the prior built a home for himself on the site , surrounded by a moat . During the 16th century , the remains of the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey site were used as the gardens of the Manor Farm House when it was built . In 1888 the moat extension was filled in by Henry James Ewer , who farmed on the site . The moat 's shape and the presence of traces of a fortified building have allowed this part of the site to be dated to the 11th century . However , the castle is believed to have been built around 1066 then either demolished or changed significantly as it does not appear as a castle in Domesday Book . 
 The farm buildings date back to the 13th century with the Great Barn the most prominent . The barn is the second largest such structure in Middlesex after another in Harmondsworth . The Great Barn is constructed of English oak from the nearby Ruislip Woods . It was built to a design known as an aisled barn , whereby smaller out @-@ shoots run alongside the main supports underneath one main roof . 
 = = = Ownership = = = 
 Studies by English Heritage have found that the site originally functioned not only as the manorial court hall for Ruislip , but also as a working farm . The main building was built over two existing structures , possibly to accommodate the new lessee of the manor , Robert Drury , a former Speaker of the House of Commons . The study concluded this was most likely achieved by a team of masons and carpenters . Manor Farm was also known as Ruislip Court until the 19th century . 
 In 1451 , ownership of the farm passed with the rest of Ruislip to King 's College , Cambridge who remain titular Lords of the Manor . King 's completed two surveys of the manor during their ownership , in 1565 and 1750 . 
 The Farm House was built from locally produced bricks , tiles and timber in the 16th century , and served as the manorial court until 1925 when the last court was held . Work in the 18th and 19th centuries saw the windows and doorways replaced , while an extended kitchen was installed . The kitchen extension was replaced in 1958 as part of a general refurbishment of the house . 
 Manor Farm and Park Wood were nearly demolished in the early 1900s to make way for a new development planned in partnership with King 's College and the Ruislip @-@ Northwood Urban District Council . A town planning competition was won by A & J Soutar from Wandsworth , who suggested a symmetrical design across the parish which would have seen a total of 7 @,@ 642 new homes built . St. Martin 's church would have been the only example of historical architecture left in Ruislip . An outline map of the new development proposal was made public on 30 November 1910 with few objections . A Local Board inquiry followed on 17 February 1911 which required negotiations with landowners to allow for a full planning scheme to be compiled . This was presented in February 1913 with an adaptation of the original Soutars plan and received approval from the Local Government Board in September 1914 . Three roads with residential housing , Manor Way , Windmill Way and Park Way were completed before the outbreak of the First World War when all construction work was halted . It was not resumed until 1919 , though the plan was substantially scaled back as work slowed throughout the next decade . 
 The protection of Manor Farm and the local woods from redevelopment was eventually confirmed in January 1930 , after a visit by a member of the Royal Society of Arts to choose buildings that should be conserved . The Great Barn and Little Barn were selected , along with the old Post Office , the Old Bell public house and the Priest 's House of the local church . The woods , part of the centre of the manor of Ruislip along with Ruislip village square , were included when King 's College sold the land to the district in February 1931 . Park Wood was sold for £ 28 @,@ 100 with Manor Farm and the old Post Office included as a gift to the people of Ruislip . King 's had wished to also present the wood as a gift but was required by the University and College 's Act to receive payment as it was the trustee of the land . Middlesex County Council contributed 75 % of the cost as the urban district council argued that many of those who would make use of the land would be recreational day trippers from outside the district . Under a 999 @-@ year lease , the council agreed to maintain the wood and ensure no new buildings were constructed without the permission of the county council . An area of the wood to the south was not included in the lease agreement and three residential roads were later constructed on it . 
 In 1932 , the two cart sheds on either side of the lane leading into the farm were removed . That year , Councillor T. R. Parker purchased a plot of land on the site from King 's College . Manor Farm continued as a working farm until the following year , when the local council began to sell off much of the land surrounding the buildings for housing developments . Councillor Parker presented his land to the Ruislip Village Trust as the site of a future public hall , and the Trust passed it to the urban district council in 1964 stipulating that that would be the sole use . The council obliged and the Winston Churchill Hall was built in 1965 . 
 A smaller barn built in the 16th century , the Little Barn , was converted to a library and opened on 2 November 1937 . The original <unk> was destroyed by fire in 1979 and was rebuilt as an exhibition centre . An archaeological excavation was carried out by the Museum of London Archaeological Service in 1997 around the Farm House . This discovered the remains of the old priory were beneath the house , as this had been the bailey , surrounded by the motte . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The site was refurbished with funding from the Heritage Lottery Fund in April 2007 with the work completed in June the following year . This included the renovation of the Grade II listed Manor Farm library as part of a borough @-@ wide programme by the London Borough of Hillingdon . The Duck Pond Market began in the Great Barn in December 2008 , following the refurbishment , and runs once a month . Winston Churchill Hall , not included in the original restoration work , received a £ 370 @,@ 000 grant from Hillingdon Council in March 2011 to enable its refurbishment . 
 = = = Comparable structures = = = 
 Other moated medieval farm complexes survive in the nearby area at Headstone Manor and ( without a surviving moat ) at Pinner Park . Traces of a moat survived at Harmondsworth Great Barn until 1968 . 
 = The Cartridge Family = 
 " The Cartridge Family " is the fifth episode of The Simpsons ' ninth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 2 , 1997 . It was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Pete Michels . In the episode , Homer purchases a gun to protect his family , of which Marge disapproves . Homer begins to show extremely careless gun usage causing Marge to leave him when she catches Bart using the gun without their permission . The episode was intended to show guns in a neutral way , and faced some problems with the censors because of the subject matter . Critical reaction was mostly positive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons attend a soccer match between Mexico and Portugal . When the game starts , the crowd begins to lose interest and a violent football riot ensues . After the riot spreads throughout the town , Marge fears for the family and tells Homer to pay for a Home Security System . Finding out that the system will cost $ 500 , Homer decides to save money by buying a firearm instead . After the five @-@ day waiting period , Homer surprises Marge with his new revolver from a local gun store . Marge is horrified and demands that he get rid of the gun at once . Homer persuades Marge to come with him to the local National Rifle Association meeting to try to get her to change her mind , but after the meeting , she remains unconvinced . 
 Marge reveals just how uncomfortable with the gun she is , and begs Homer to get rid of it . Homer promises to do so , but instead hides it in the vegetable crisper . Later , Bart and Milhouse discover the loaded firearm and play with it in the kitchen . Marge steps into the kitchen just in time to stop them , and berates Homer for breaking his promise , by giving Homer an ultimatum . 
 After this , she promptly leaves with some suitcases and the children and checks into a motel . That night , Homer hosts an NRA meeting at his house but the other members are far from impressed by his reckless gun usage and he is kicked out of the association . Realizing what his behavior has cost him , Homer goes to the motel where Marge and the children are spending the night , meaning to reconcile . 
 Homer and Marge make up , after Homer explains he has finally gotten rid of the gun . While leaving , Snake arrives to rob the desk clerk . Homer pulls out his gun and Marge is angry with him for lying again , but while he tries to apologize , Snake snatches the gun . The other NRA members arrive and foil Snake . Homer finally says he does not trust himself and asks Marge to throw the gun away herself . However , just as Marge is about to throw away the gun , she sees a reflection of herself holding it and decides to keep it . 
 = = Production = = 
 This was the first episode to air which was executive produced by Mike Scully . Sam Simon pitched an episode for one of the first seasons which saw Homer getting a gun and nobody wanting him to have it . The episode concluded with Homer foiling a robbery and stating that although guns bring destruction , it worked for him . However , this episode was pitched by Scully for either season seven or eight , before being used for season nine . This provided the basic outline , and John Swartzwelder wrote the script . A lot of lines in the episode put guns in a positive light , as the staff felt that they could not just make an episode about how bad they were . Several of the staff , including Swartzwelder , are " pro gun " , although others , such as Matt Groening , are completely against them . The episode was designed to be non @-@ biased and to portray each side of the argument equally . Scully noted that if there is any message in the episode it is that a man like Homer should not own a gun . The censors were nervous about some of the episode 's subject matter , such as Homer pointing the gun in Marge 's face , and Bart aiming the gun at Milhouse with the apple in his mouth , but ultimately let it go . 
 The opening sequence where soccer is portrayed as the most boring sport imaginable was intended to show that soccer was more boring on television than live , but both Michels and Groening enjoy the game . The referee at the game is a caricature of the janitor at Film Roman , who supplied director Pete Michels with every piece of soccer information he needed to design the episode . Pelé also makes an appearance at the match , although he is voiced by Hank Azaria . 
 The episode closes with music from The Avengers . After the music had been recorded , Scully felt that it did not suit the ending and so wished to change it to something else . However , it was too late in production to get the full orchestra back to do a recording , and union rules meant that previous recordings could not be reused . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The chalkboard gag references the Richard Gere gerbil urban legend . 
 The gun shop is based on the shop that the Los Angeles Police Department went to during the North Hollywood bank robbery to acquire more ammunition . The title of this episode is a play on the name of 1970s television series The Partridge Family . The end music is the theme to the 1960s series The Avengers , and the song playing when Homer is sitting and watching things go by while he is waiting five days for his gun is " The Waiting " by Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers . Petty rarely lets his music be used on television , but being a fan of The Simpsons , he allowed them to use it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " The Cartridge Family " finished 26th in ratings for the week of October 27 – November 2 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 3 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . 
 The episode received several positive reviews , being included in the Herald Sun 's list of the top twenty The Simpsons episodes . It was also named the fifth best episode in the show 's history in an article by The Florida Times @-@ Union . The Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette also praised the episode , calling The Simpsons " the only sitcom in memory to treat gun control with any fairness " . 
 On the other hand , the episode has been criticized by several outlets . The staff received several complaints from the NRA about the portrayal of the organization in the episode , despite the fact that the Springfield NRA revokes Homer 's membership for his irresponsible behavior . Ian Jones and Steve Williams criticized the episode , calling it " a messy , unfocused lampooning of gun culture " . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , found that it was " one of the most politically unambiguous episodes ever " , but that " [ it ] is very dull and the plot isn 't sustainable " . 
 The episode was not initially aired on the United Kingdom satellite channel Sky1 due to scenes of flagrant gun misuse , yet was aired several times on BBC Two in an earlier evening timeslot . The episode was also included on the Too Hot for TV VHS and DVD , along with " Treehouse of Horror IX " , " Natural Born Kissers " , and " Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy " . 
 = You Only Move Twice = 
 " You Only Move Twice " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 3 , 1996 . The episode , based on a story idea by Greg Daniels , has three major concepts : the family moves to a new town ; Homer gets a friendly , sympathetic boss ; and that boss , unbeknownst to Homer , is a supervillain . Bart , Lisa , and Marge each have individual secondary storylines . It was directed by Mike B. Anderson and written by John Swartzwelder . 
 The episode title is a reference to the James Bond film You Only Live Twice , and many elements of the episode parody the Bond films , with a character modeled after Bond making a cameo appearance . Setting the second and third acts in a new town , Cypress Creek , required the animators to create entirely new layouts and background designs . Albert Brooks , in his fourth Simpsons appearance , guest stars as the voice of Hank Scorpio , who is one of the most popular one @-@ time characters on The Simpsons . The episode was very well received by critics and IGN named " You Only Move Twice " the best episode of the eighth season and Albert Brooks as one of the best guest stars in the history of the show . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Waylon Smithers is offered a job at the Globex Corporation . When he refuses , the offer is passed down to Homer , the next @-@ longest @-@ employed individual at the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant . He informs his family that the new job pays better and provides free health @-@ care for the family , but involves moving to Cypress Creek . The Simpson family originally opposes the move , but after they watch a promotional video about the planned community , they agree that it is much better than Springfield . Abandoning their house , the Simpsons pack up and leave town . 
 Shortly after the Simpsons arrive at their new house in Cypress Creek , they meet Homer 's new boss , Hank Scorpio , who is very amiable and seems like the perfect boss . After giving Homer a tour of the company , Scorpio tells him that his job is to motivate the employees in the nuclear division . Meanwhile , Bart starts school , but he finds that his new class is far above the standards of Springfield Elementary . When his teacher discovers that Bart cannot read cursive writing , he places him in a remedial class , much to Bart 's shock . Lisa goes for a nature walk and discovers that she is allergic to all of the plants around Cypress Creek . Marge tries to go about her daily chores , but the house does everything automatically . This ends up depressing her to the point where Marge starts drinking a glass of wine to cope with her depression . However , Homer does an excellent job motivating his team in the nuclear division , and productivity increases by 2 % thanks to his skills , which makes his family very proud of him . 
 Despite his success , Homer notices after a few days that his team members are starting to get overworked . He decides that the solution is to get them hammocks and visits Scorpio to ask where he can purchase some . Scorpio begins to tell Homer of " the Hammock district " , but he is interrupted by some urgent business . It turns out that Scorpio is a criminal mastermind formulating a plot ( known as Project Arcturus ) to take over the East Coast with a doomsday device , as he turns to a screen and threatens the United Nations Security Council by declaring that he has got hold of the doomsday device and that they have 72 hours to meet his demand of gold . To prove his intent , he blows up the 59th Street Bridge . Despite being in the same room , Homer appears oblivious to Scorpio 's nefarious plan as he was looking outside the window . 
 Another time was when Homer was in Globex Headquarters trying to get something from a vending machine , Scorpio has managed to capture a secret agent named Mr. Bont , who is attempting to stop him in his tracks . Scorpio intends to have Bont killed with a laser , but Bont uses a coin to free himself from his restraints before attempting to flee . However , Homer , who is unaware of events and believes that Bont is a ' loafer ' , easily knocks him down , allowing Scorpio 's soldiers to shoot the agent . A proud Scorpio happily thanks Homer for a job well done . 
 At dinner , Homer proudly tells of his successes at work , but discovers that his family hates Cypress Creek because of their current problems and want to go back to Springfield . At first , Homer is opposed to this , saying that he has been doing a great job for the first time in his life , but nobody else is happy . Dejected , Homer decides to visit Scorpio back at Globex Headquarters . His visit coincides with an assault by the U.S. military , but Homer still remains oblivious to what is taking place . He finds Scorpio , explains the situation , and asks what to do . Scorpio advises Homer that he should do what is best for his family , asking him only to kill someone on the way out . As Homer dejectedly walks away , Scorpio straps on a flamethrower and attacks the remaining U.S. troops , making them flee . 
 The next day , the family returns to Springfield , as Scorpio succeeds in his plot and seizes control of the East Coast . Homer , who previously confided to Scorpio his dream of owning the Dallas Cowboys , expresses disappointment when he instead discovers the Denver Broncos practicing ineptly on his front lawn as a present from his former boss . 
 = = Production = = 
 The original concept for the episode came from a story idea by Greg Daniels and the writing staff came up with three major concepts . The first involves the Simpson family moving out of Springfield , which the writers initially hoped would fool the audience into thinking it was a permanent move . As a result , they tried to work in as many characters as they could during the first act of the episode to make it seem that the family really was leaving . The second involved Homer getting a new job for an employee @-@ friendly boss in comparison to the tyrannical Mr. Burns . The third was that Homer 's new boss would be a supervillain resembling Ernst Stavro Blofeld . This element was meant to be in the background and Homer would be ignorant to it . 
 The writers sought to give every family member their own story . The writing staff spent some time arguing over whether to include in the episode the depressing idea of Marge becoming an alcoholic . There was originally another involving Grampa Simpson , wherein he is left behind in Springfield and receives recorded greeting phone calls . The plot went on for four sequences , all of which were cut from the episode for time constraints but later included in the DVD release . Cypress Creek was called " Emerald Caverns " during most of production , but the name was changed because the writers felt that " Cypress Creek " had more of a " Silicon Valley " feel . 
 The show 's writers did not worry too much about perfecting Scorpio 's lines because they knew Brooks would rewrite or ad lib new ones . Entire parts of Scorpio 's dialogue , such as his hammock speech , are Brooks 's lines and not the writers ' . Dan Castellaneta described how , after he prepared something for Homer to say in response to Brooks 's new Scorpio lines , Brooks would deliver totally different lines in the next take . Josh Weinstein said Homer 's reactions are exactly like someone talking to Albert Brooks . In all , his recordings amounted to over two hours in length . Brooks voiced the character Russ Cargill in The Simpsons Movie and for " about a week " , he was to reprise the role of Scorpio , but the staff felt that creating a new character was a better idea . 
 The animators needed to design completely new sets for the episode . Christian Roman , John Reiss , and Mike Anderson storyboarded the episode . In the original animatic , Santa 's Little Helper and Snowball II were not present , so the animators went back and added them , even though they are not a part of the story . It is a common misconception that Scorpio 's design was modeled after Richard Branson , which it was not . The final design , which underwent an overhaul , was hailed by the writers as " the perfect madman " . All of the students in Bart 's remedial class were initially given hair modeled on Ralph Wiggum 's , but the staff felt that the children looked " kinda troubled " , so their designs were altered . 
 The man whom Homer tackles , Mr. Bont , was initially supposed to just be James Bond , but Fox , concerned about a lawsuit , would not let them use it . The writers went with " Bont " because they felt it was the most similar name that they could legally use . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The final scene at Globex contains several references to action and James Bond films . The episode title and many references are from the Bond film You Only Live Twice , as well as an allusion to A View to a Kill . A character modeled after Sean Connery 's Bond is tackled by Homer and killed after a parody of the laser scene from Goldfinger . Mrs. Goodthighs from the 1967 James Bond parody Casino Royale makes an appearance in the episode and can be seen attacking a character modeled after U.S. Army general Norman Schwarzkopf . 
 The sign at the elementary school displays " http : / / <unk> " . Weinstein called it " one of the show 's most obviously dated jokes " because the idea of a school having its own website was almost a novelty in 1996 . 
 The song at the end of the show , written by Ken Keeler , is a parody of various Bond themes . Keeler originally wrote it to be three seconds longer and sound more like the Goldfinger theme , but the final version was shorter and the lyrics were sped up . The writers wanted the song to be sung by Shirley Bassey , who sang several Bond themes , but they could not get her to record the part . 
 At the start of the episode Smithers is singing " I work for Monty Burns " to the tune of Guys and Dolls . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hank Scorpio is arguably the most popular Albert Brooks @-@ voiced character . In 2006 , Albert Brooks was named the best Simpsons guest star by IGN , who cited Scorpio as his best role . The Phoenix.com compiled their own list , placing Brooks in the first position . In his book Planet Simpson , author Chris Turner says Brooks is second only to Phil Hartman among Simpsons guest stars and that " Brooks brings hilarious satirical <unk> to Scorpio 's paradoxical nature " . He also writes that the delivery of Scorpio 's final line seals Brooks 's place in Simpsons history . The Simpson family 's new street address , <unk> Maple Systems Road , is writer Ken Keeler 's favorite street name in the show . 
 IGN also named the episode the best of the eighth season , saying the episode " is a wonderful example of slowly building up the comedy [ ... ] it 's impossible to fathom this one not being very high up on any list of the best Simpsons episodes of all time . " Robert Canning gave the episode a " Masterful " score of ten out of ten , saying the episode " may well be the greatest Simpsons episode of all time . In my book , it 's at least tied , " with " Marge vs. the Monorail " . Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , called it " a tremendous episode " saying it had " some really good moments , most of them involving Bart , Lisa , and Marge 's loathing for Cypress Creek . The remedial kids are fab ( especially Warren ) and Lisa 's second chipmunk encounter is inspired . Scorpio is a good character , especially his Christopher Walken @-@ esque killing spree . " They also stated that the owl grabbing the chipmunk during Lisa 's trip to the forest is one of the all @-@ time greatest sight gags in the show 's history . Chris Turner would also say that the remedial boy Gordy 's line may be " the broadest parody of a Canadian accent in the history of American pop culture " . Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star included " You Only Move Twice " on his list of the best episodes of The Simpsons . In his review of The Complete Eighth Season DVD set , Raul <unk> described it as one of the " most clever episodes the series has ever given us . " 
 In its original broadcast , " You Only Move Twice " finished 50th in ratings for the week of October 28 – November 3 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 2 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files . 
 = New Jersey Route 7 = 
 Route 7 is a state highway in the northern part of New Jersey in the United States . It has two sections , an east – west alignment running from U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck in Jersey City to Route 21 in Belleville , and a north – south alignment running from the Newark / Belleville to the Nutley / Clifton border . The New Jersey Department of Transportation lists Route 7 as a single north – south highway with a small gap between the alignments . The entire highway has a combined length of 9 @.@ 46 mi ( 15 @.@ 22 km ) . 
 The southern section of Route 7 , which runs from Jersey City to Belleville , passes through industrial areas , the New Jersey Meadowlands , Arlington Memorial Park , and some residential and business areas . West of the interchange with County Route 508 in Kearny , Route 7 is the Belleville Turnpike , a historic road created in 1759 . The northern section of Route 7 runs north through residential and business areas of Belleville and Nutley into Clifton , where it turns west and crosses back into Nutley , briefly turning to the north to come to its northern terminus . A portion of the route in Nutley is municipally maintained while the portion within Clifton is maintained by Passaic County . The two separate sections of Route 7 are linked by County Route 506 ( Rutgers Street ) in Belleville , which is signed as Route 7 despite the fact it is not officially part of the route . 
 Route 7 was established in 1927 to run from Jersey City to Paterson , replacing Pre @-@ 1927 Route 11 between Belleville and Paterson . The routing was amended in 1929 to head to Route 3 in Wallington and was extended north to Route 6 ( now U.S. Route 46 ) in East Paterson in 1949 . In 1953 , the route was modified to follow its current alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Southern section = = = 
 The first section of Route 7 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 @-@ 9 Truck and County Route 645 ( Charlotte Avenue ) in Jersey City , Hudson County , heading to the west on a four @-@ lane highway that is signed east – west . The route crosses the Hackensack River on the Wittpenn Bridge into Kearny . Route 7 interchanges with County Route 659 ( Fish House Road ) and widens to a six @-@ lane divided highway . The route than passes by industrial areas and a railroad yard and then interchanges with County Route 508 . Past this interchange , Route 7 becomes the four @-@ lane , divided Belleville Turnpike , with the eastern end of the Newark Turnpike running in the division between the two sides of Route 7 . It then becomes an undivided two @-@ lane road , heading northwest , narrowing to two lanes before it passes through the New Jersey Meadowlands , under the mainline of the New Jersey Turnpike ( Interstate 95 ) and then the western spur of the New Jersey Turnpike a short distance later . 
 Route 7 continues northwest , widens , with a painted media , as it passes through two large cemeteries on the border of Hudson County ( Kearny ) to the south and Bergen County ( North Arlington ) to the north , though the route itself is signed north – south along that border . 
 After an intersection with Schuyler Avenue ( which runs as Hudson County Route 507 to the south of Route 7 and Bergen County Route 130 to the north of Route 7 ) , the road turns NNW , narrowing again to two lanes undivided . In this portion of the route , it had a concurrency with County Route 507 ( both Bergen and Hudson counties ) . It keeps this configuration for about a half mile , as it still runs along the Kearny / North Arlington border . At that point , it meets the southern terminus of State Route 17 ( Ridge Road ) and the northern terminus of Hudson County Route 697 ( Kearny Avenue ) . 
 Past this intersection , County Route 507 turns away from Route 7 , becoming concurrent with Route 17 @.@ by heading north on River Road , while Route 7 continues along <unk> Turnpike for another half mile , Route 7 continues another half mile west , crossing the Passaic River on a lift bridge , known as the Belleville Turnpike Bridge or Rutgers Street Bridge , into Belleville , Essex County , where the local street name changes from Belleville Turnpike to Rutgers Street . The first section of Route 7 ends at an intersection with Main Street underneath Route 21 . 
 = = = Gap in the route = = = 
 The intersection of Main St and Rutgers Street in Belleville forms the end of one section of Route 7 ( signed north , directionally west ) . Rutgers Street is named for Colonel Henry Rutgers , an American Revolutionary War hero and benefactor of what is now Rutgers University . For its entire length , Rutgers carries Essex County Route 506 , which ends , like Rutgers Street itself , at the Rutgers Street Bridge . 
 Prior to turning onto Rutgers Street , CR @-@ 506 runs along Washington Street concurrent with the northern section of Route 7 . Though the northern section of Route 7 begins a few blocks south , it is not readily recognized ( minimal signing ) . As CR @-@ 506 runs concurrently with it here , and then turns down Rutgers for the short distance that bridges the gap between the two Route 7 sections , Rutgers / 506 is often viewed as if it continues Route 7 , while the short portion of the northern section that lies south of Rutgers is sometimes seen as a spur , even though it is part of the main route . 
 Rutgers ' identity has become so closely aligned with Route 7 , that though it is not officially part of Route 7 , Rutgers , from Washington Avenue to Main Street , is signed as if it is part of Route 7 . 
 = = = Northern section = = = 
 The second section of Route 7 , designated a north – south road , heads north on Washington Avenue from the Second River crossing on the Newark / Belleville border , passing through a business district . The route intersects County Route 506 ( Belleville Avenue ) , and that county route then forms a concurrency with Route 7 along the next block of Washington Avenue , to the intersection with Rutgers Street . At that point , County Route 506 heads to the east , ending at the intersection of Main Street , Rutgers Street , and bridge to Belleville ( which is also the other section of Route 7 ) . 
 Route 7 is not signed on Washington Avenue between the Second River bridge and Rutgers Street , except on some overhead signs suspended from traffic signals . 
 From the Rutgers Street intersection , Route 7 continues along Washington Avenue for about a mile and a half before reaching Nutley , still continuing on Washington Avenue into Nutley . At the intersection with County Route 646 ( Park Avenue ) , Route 7 turns into a municipally maintained road and enters a more residential area . Upon intersecting County Route 606 ( Kingsland Road ) , Route 7 crosses into Clifton , Passaic County and heads to the west on county @-@ maintained Kingsland Street signed east – west . Kingsland , carrying Route 7 , crosses back into Nutley , regaining state maintenance . When <unk> becomes County Route 644 at the intersection with Cathedral Avenue , Route 7 turns north from Kingsland onto Cathedral Avenue and comes to its terminus at Orange St in Nutley . However , signage continues to indicate Route 7 up to the terminus of Cathedral Avenue at interchange with Route 3 at the intersection of Cathedral Avenue , Passaic Avenue , and Ward Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 The Belleville Turnpike , which is the majority of the southern portion of Route 7 , was created in 1759 as a turnpike made out of cedar logs . This road was chartered in 1808 . It served as a part of the Underground Railroad route for escaped slaves to get to Jersey City . 
 The northern segment of Route 7 was originally a part of Pre @-@ 1927 Route 11 , which was legislated in 1917 to run from Newark to Paterson . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 7 was designated to run from Jersey City to Paterson , replacing Pre @-@ 1927 Route 11 between Belleville and Paterson . 
 In 1929 , the routing was amended to run from Route 25 ( now U.S. Route 1 / 9 Truck ) in Jersey City to Route 3 in Wallington . Route 7 was extended north in 1949 to continue to Route 6 ( now U.S. Route 46 ) in East Paterson ( now Elmwood Park ) . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 7 was legislated onto its current alignment , with the northern terminus moved to the Nutley / Clifton border . The route was also realigned to head south on Washington Avenue between the Newark border and Rutgers Street in Belleville on what was Route <unk> , a remnant of Pre @-@ 1927 Route 11 , making Route 7 discontinuous . County Route 506 used to follow the southern portion of Route 7 but has been truncated to the intersection with Routes 7 and 21 in Belleville . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = = Southern section = = = 
 = = = Northern section = = = 
 = The King of Fighters ' 94 = 
 The King of Fighters ' 94 ( officially abbreviated KOF ' 94 ) is a fighting game released by SNK for the Neo Geo @-@ based arcade system in 1994 , as the inaugural game in The King of Fighters series . The game was soon also released for the Neo Geo home console systems , including a Neo @-@ Geo CD version . In 2008 , KOF ' 94 was one of sixteen games included in SNK Arcade Classics Vol . 1 for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable and Wii . 
 KOF ' 94 is a crossover featuring characters from SNK 's previous fighting game properties Fatal Fury and Art of Fighting . It also includes revised versions of characters from their pre @-@ Neo Geo games Ikari Warriors and Psycho Soldier , as well as original characters created specifically for the game . The plot features the creation of a new King of Fighters tournament created by the criminal Rugal Bernstein . 
 SNK developed KOF ' 94 with the initial idea of using several games from the company in order to attract gamers who played these games . The characters ' designs , as well as its innovative gameplay system based on using teams of three members , were both well received . The success of the game allowed SNK to produce a long collection of sequels in The King of Fighters series . 
 In 2004 , to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the series , SNK released a remake titled The King of Fighters ' 94 Re @-@ Bout . It features the original game and a new version with higher resolution graphics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The basic gameplay system of KOF ' 94 is similar to SNK 's previous games like the Fatal Fury series , Art of Fighting and Samurai Shodown . The game uses a four attack button configuration similar to Fatal Fury 2 and Fatal Fury Special , that consists of light punch , light kick , strong punch and strong kick . Like in Fatal Fury 2 , specialized techniques are performed by pressing buttons in combination , allowing the player to dodge an opponent 's attack or to launch a character 's powerful knockdown attack . As with most other fighting games , each character has a set of basic , unique , and special moves that can be performed by the player with a specific series of joystick and button inputs . 
 Each player has a power gauge at the bottom of the screen which charges when the character is blocking or taking attacks . It can also be filled manually , although it leaves the character vulnerable to an attack , by pressing and holding three buttons at the same time . Once the power gauge is filled , the player 's basic attacks become stronger for a short period . When the characters are in this state , their players can also perform the character 's Super Move , which immediately consumes the entire power gauge . The players can also access their character 's Super Move when the life gauge is 75 % empty and flashing red like in Fatal Fury 2 . Use of taunt moves can reduce the opponent 's power gauge , slow down their manual charging , and stop them reaching the maximum level . 
 Notably , KOF ' 94 innovated the genre by replacing a traditional round @-@ based format used in preceding fighting games with a format consisting of 3 @-@ on @-@ 3 team based matches dubbed the Team Battle System . Instead of choosing a single character , the player selects from one of eight available teams , each consisting of three members . Before each match , the players choose the order in which each of their team member enters the battle . When the match begins , the members chosen to go first on their respective teams will fight . When one character is defeated , the following member of the same team will take his or her place , while the character on the other team will have a small portion of their life restored ( if energy was lost during the previous round ) . If a character is losing a match against the opponent , then the player can call one of the remaining teammates standing on the sidelines to jump in and perform a support attack . The match ends when all three members of either team lose . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The rich and notorious arms and drug trafficker , as well as a skilled and ruthless fighter , Rugal Bernstein has become bored with the lack of competition , so he decides to host a new King of Fighters tournament . He has his secretary travel to eight destinations around the world to invite fighters to compete in his new tournament . Unlike the previous KOF tournaments depicted in the Fatal Fury series , the new King of Fighters is a team tournament , with eight teams of three , each representing a different nationality . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Most characters come from other SNK games , such as Team Italy , which is composed of the three player characters from the original Fatal Fury ( Terry Bogard , Andy Bogard and Joe Higashi ) . The leading duo from Art of Fighting , Ryo Sakazaki and Robert Garcia , are featured with their mentor and Ryo 's father , Takuma Sakazaki , who make up Team Mexico . Team Korea includes Kim <unk> from Fatal Fury 2 as the leader of two convicts he is trying to reform ( Chang Koehan and Choi <unk> ) . Team England is a mix of female fighters from Fatal Fury 2 ( Mai Shiranui ) and the Art of Fighting series ( Yuri Sakazaki and King ) . 
 The two heroes from Psycho Soldier ( Athena <unk> and Sie <unk> ) form Team China along with their mentor , Chin <unk> . Team Brazil composes of Ikari Warriors characters Ralf Jones and Clark Still , as well as their commanding officer , <unk> . The game also features two teams composed entirely of original characters : Team Japan , including Kyo Kusanagi , Benimaru Nikaido and Goro Daimon ; and Team USA composed of Heavy D ! , Lucky Glauber and Brian Battler . 
 = = Development = = 
 According to an interview with veteran designers of The King of Fighters series , the prototype version of the game was a side @-@ scrolling beat ' em up , titled Survivor . It would only use core characters from the Art of Fighting and Fatal Fury series , specifically allowing players to play Robert Garcia and Terry Bogard for location testing . However , the idea was eventually abandoned . Since SNK were attached to the idea of the two @-@ series crossover , they eventually agreed to make their idea into a fighting game . Characters from Ikari Warriors and Psycho Soldier were also added to the roster . The concept of a three @-@ man team was one of the ideas kept from the side @-@ scrolling version . The title " The King of Fighters " was re @-@ used from the subtitle of the first Fatal Fury game , Fatal Fury : King of Fighters . 
 The King of Fighters series director Toyohisa Tanabe asserted that the Art of Fighting and Fatal Fury fighters were added specifically for adults , and the newer KOF characters were aimed to appeal to younger and newer audiences . Characters such as Benimaru Nikaido and Chang Koehan were added to have an off @-@ beat variety to the cast , which he has previously deemed to be too serious . SNK artist <unk> Yamasaki commented that although the lead programmer thought the game would not sell well , he believed it would eventually become popular . Ten people arrived at the first location test , but larger numbers came to subsequent tests . The SNK staff also had troubles with advertising the game due to a lack of money and some of their ads were noted to be of a poor quality . 
 Designers wanted a new , " snazzy " lead character who would easily fight Fatal Fury and Art of Fighting characters . He was named Kyo Kusanagi in order to relate him with the Yamata no Orochi legend . The boss character , Rugal Bernstein , was developed to be " the mightiest ( most violent ) and most evil boss character ever " . The game was developed to have a " Fugitive Team " composed of Chang , Choi , and an unknown criminal , but Kim <unk> was placed in their team . The English Team was composed of King from Art of Fighting along with Billy Kane and Big Bear from the first and second Fatal Fury games . Designers had several problems with Big Bear concerning capacity and the Art of Fighting staff insisted on adding Yuri Sakazaki to KOF . Yuri replaced Billy Kane , and later Mai Shiranui took Big Bear 's place to form the England Team ( later known as Women Fighters in the following games ) . 
 Most of the characters from other games were meant to have some of their moves changed or removed in order to balance them with KOF 's new characters . However , designers focused in adjusting the imbalance of certain characters without removing any move . In the end , creators of the series noted that the Art of Fighting characters were the strongest ones in the game . Nevertheless , other characters such as Terry and Andy Bogard became the ones who got the designers ' utmost attention and were given new moves . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Neo Geo systems = = = 
 The King of Fighters ' 94 was released in Japanese arcades on August 25 , 1994 . Home versions of the game were released later that same year for the Neo Geo ROM cartridge based system on October 1 and for the Neo Geo CD on November 2 . In 2012 , KOF ' 94 was announced to be included in the set of twenty pre @-@ loaded games being shipped with SNK Playmore 's new handheld game console Neo @-@ Geo X , but it was ultimately replaced by The King of Fighters ' 95 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 On November 6 , 2007 , the Neo Geo version was made available for download on the Wii 's Virtual Console download service , for a price of 900 Wii Points . The North American and European versions followed on November 23 , 2007 and January 7 , 2008 , respectively . In 2008 , an emulation of the game is included in the compilations SNK Arcade Classics Vol . 1 and The King of Fighters Collection : The Orochi Saga , both released for the PlayStation 2 , PlayStation Portable and Wii . It was also released by Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Portable on December 21 , 2010 , as one of the first games in the <unk> Station line @-@ up . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 A remake , titled The King of Fighters ' 94 Re @-@ Bout , was released for the PlayStation 2 in Japan only on December 28 , 2004 , commemorating the tenth anniversary of the franchise . Re @-@ Bout features the original 1994 game and an enhanced version featuring higher resolution graphics , a Team Edit option feature similar to the later KOF games , the ability to play as Saisyu Kusanagi and Rugal Bernstein , arranged music , new stages and an online versus mode . SNK Playmore commented that they received negative fan feedback regarding the game 's simple upscaling and smoothing of character sprites , so they decided to create brand new high resolution sprites for the following games in the series . 
 A North American version was meant to released for the Xbox . It was actually completed and was even reviewed by some publications , but was then canceled on March 23 , 2006 for an undisclosed reason . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 The game received a variety of licensed media released in Japan in 1994 – 1995 : 
 The original soundtrack The King of Fighters ' 94 ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) and the arranged soundtrack The King of Fighters ' 94 Arrange Sound Trax ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , both released by Pony Canyon . 
 The art book The King of Fighters ' 94 ( GMC @-@ 2 ) published as part of the Gamest Mook series by <unk> . 
 The Laser Disc audio and video release The King of Fighters ' 94 ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) by Pony Canyon LD . 
 Several manga published in the Gamest Comics collection by <unk> : 
 A yonkoma manga by various artists , titled The King of Fighters ' 94 4 @-@ Koma <unk> ( ISBN 4 @-@ 88199 @-@ 150 @-@ 7 ) . 
 A selection of illustrations and short strips by various artists , titled The King of Fighters ' 94 Comic Anthology ( ISBN 4 @-@ 88199 @-@ 196 @-@ 5 ) . 
 Ryo <unk> 's six @-@ volume adaptation series titled The King of Fighters ' 94 Gaiden ( beginning with ISBN 4 @-@ 88199 @-@ 168 @-@ X ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game was well received , with reviews generally praising the deep combat system and the matching up of fighters from different SNK franchises , though the inability to choose team lineups in Team Battle Mode was a near @-@ universal complaint among critics . 
 A reviewer for Next Generation argued that King of Fighters ' 94 was a particularly worthwhile arcade game , since the three @-@ character teams meant the player would effectively get three lives for each credit , providing a high value per quarter at a time when most arcade games were much more expensive than they had been in the past . Reviewing the Neo Geo home version , GamePro remarked that the character selection is massive , but very unbalanced , and that most of the new characters are " goofy looking " and underpowered compared to the other fighters . They nonetheless concluded that " The King of Fighters is the very best non @-@ Shodown game available for the Neo Geo , and it 's one of the most playable fighting games ever " , citing enjoyable gameplay additions such as the dodge move and juggle combos . 
 In a review of the Virtual Console release , Lucas M. Thomas of IGN praised KOF ' 94 for its graphics , including fluid animation and vibrant colors , but concluded that buyers might be better off waiting for the improved sequels to arrive on the Virtual Console . According to IGN 's Jeremy Dunham , the game " was essentially a cross between Fatal Fury and Art of Fighting , " with a faster control response . He added commented that the creation of three @-@ on @-@ three battles was an advanced feature for a game from 1994 and the idea of ' borrowing ' characters from other games from the company was also innovative . Reviewing the Virtual Console release , Dan Whitehead of Eurogamer identified the use of characters from multiple franchises and the Team Battle Mode as the most distinctive points . He concluded the game to be " a solid , technical fighting game that , like most SNK outings , skews more towards the hardcore player than the casual punching aficionado . " According to Kyle Knight of Allgame , the graphics and sounds , while better than most games of the time , were subpar by SNK standards . He concluded The King of Fighters ' 94 is " a very good fighting game , but it lacks some refinements that would have made it great . " 
 Electronic Gaming Monthly gave KOF ' 94 its Game of the Year awards in the categories " Best Fighting Game " and " Best Neo @-@ Geo Game " of 1994 ; additionally , Mai Shiranui was awarded the title of " Hottest Game Babe " of the year . In Japan , the game was awarded the title of " Best Game of 1994 " in the Eighth Annual Grand Prize by the arcade magazine Gamest , also placing first in the categories of " Best Competitive Fighting Game " and " Best Direction " , fifth in " Best Graphics " , and third in " Best <unk> " ( several characters from the game were also featured in their list of 1994 's top 50 , including Athena at # 3 , Kyo at # 4 , Yuri at # 7 , King at # 8 and Mai at # 10 ) . 
 The game was acclaimed in a number of retrospective articles and top lists by several publications . G4 noted that The King of Fighters ' 94 was regarded by some fans as the " Street Fighter beater " and was unique due to its team system . Maximum similarly called it " the first beat @-@ em @-@ up to offer more than the Street Fighter series " and said that the game " helped spearhead the SNK renaissance " . 1UP.com lauded the game for its large and well @-@ balanced cast of characters , calling it " a hell of a cast in 1994 " . In 2010 , UGO.com listed it among the Top 25 Fighting Games of All Time , while GamePlayBook ranked it as the seventh best 2D fighting game ever made . Complex writers ranked it as the eighth best fighting game of all time in 2011 , as well as the eleventh all @-@ time best SNK fighting game in 2012 , commenting that " the unique team selection and elimination style matches of the series made their origin in this great ' 90s fighter . " 
 = Mackensen @-@ class battlecruiser = 
 The Mackensen class was the last class of battlecruisers to be built by Germany in World War I. The design initially called for seven ships , but three of them were redesigned as the Ersatz Yorck class . Of the four ships of the Mackensen class , Mackensen , Graf Spee , and Prinz Eitel Friedrich were launched , and Fürst Bismarck was not — but none were completed , after wartime shipbuilding priorities were redirected towards U @-@ boat — and the ships were broken up in the early 1920s . The lead ship of the class was named for August von Mackensen , a prominent military commander during the war . In response to the Mackensen @-@ class ships , the British Royal Navy laid down the Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers , all but one of which would eventually be cancelled ; the sole survivor , HMS Hood , was completed after the end of the war . 
 The design of the Mackensens was a much improved version of the previous Derfflinger class . The most significant improvement was a new , more powerful 35 cm ( 14 in ) gun , compared to the 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) gun of the earlier ships . The Mackensen @-@ class ships also featured more powerful engines that gave the ships a higher top speed and a significantly greater cruising range . The Mackensen design provided the basis for the subsequent Ersatz Yorck class , armed with 38 cm ( 15 in ) main @-@ battery guns , after the Battle of Jutland in 1916 made the need for the larger guns clear . 
 = = Design = = 
 The fourth and final Naval Law , passed in 1912 , governed the building program of the German navy during World War I. The Imperial Naval Office ( Reichsmarineamt ) decided the Navy should construct one battleship and one battlecruiser every year between 1913 and 1917 , with an additional unit of both types in 1913 and 1916 . Design work on the new class began in 1912 , with construction intended to begin in the 1914 budget year . The question about the main battery for the new battlecruisers was the most pressing ; the previous Derfflinger class was armed with 30 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns , though some consideration had been given to redesigning the last two ships — SMS Lützow and Hindenburg — with 35 cm ( 14 in ) guns . 
 The 35 cm guns were of course heavier than the 30 @.@ 5 cm guns , but there were problems with enlarging the new ships to accommodate the heavier armament . The Imperial dry docks were deep enough only for ships with a draft of 9 m ( 30 ft ) , and simply accepting an increased displacement on the same hull as the Derfflinger class would entail a reduction in speed . This meant that an increase in displacement would necessitate a longer and wider hull to keep any increases in draft minimal and avoid reducing the speed . The constraints on enlarging the hull were compounded by restrictions on width imposed by the locks of the canal in Wilhelmshaven . As a result , Großadmiral ( Grand Admiral ) Alfred von Tirpitz , the head of the RMA , prohibited a design displacement greater than 30 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 29 @,@ 526 long tons ) . 
 The initial design was approved on 30 September 1912 , though the heads of the General Navy Department — Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Günther von Krosigk and Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Reinhard Scheer — and the Weapons Department head , Vizeadmiral Gerhard Gerdes , had to submit any revisions they deemed were necessary . The design staff suggested using triple or even quadruple gun turrets to keep the displacement under the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ ton limit . Another suggested alternative was to use six 38 cm ( 15 in ) guns in twin turrets , one forward and two aft ; Wilhelm II accepted that design on 2 May 1913 , though Admiral Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander in chief of the High Seas Fleet , preferred the 30 @.@ 5 cm gun of the Derfflinger @-@ class ships . As a compromise , the new battlecruisers were to be armed with eight 35 cm ( 13 @.@ 8 inch ) guns . 
 The question of whether the new ships should be powered entirely by oil @-@ fired boilers was less controversial . The design staff was generally in agreement with the standard practice of using coal @-@ fired boilers for two @-@ thirds of the power plant , with the remainder being oil @-@ fired boilers . Coal @-@ fired boilers were preferred because the coal , stored in the sides of the ship , provided additional protection , particularly for the battlecruisers , which carried less armor than their battleship counterparts . The finalized design was approved on 23 May 1914 . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Mackensen @-@ class ships were 223 m ( 731 ft 8 in ) long and had a beam of 30 @.@ 4 m ( 99 ft 9 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 3 m ( 30 ft 6 in ) forward and 8 @.@ 4 m ( 27 ft 7 in ) aft . The ships were designed to displace 31 @,@ 000 t ( 30 @,@ 510 long tons ) on a standard load , and up to 35 @,@ 300 t ( 34 @,@ 742 long tons ) fully laden . The Mackensens ' hulls were composed of longitudinal steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted . This was the same type of construction as in the preceding Derfflinger @-@ class battlecruisers , and was intended to save weight compared to the traditional method of construction , which incorporated both longitudinal and transverse frames . The ships ' hulls contained 18 watertight compartments and a double bottom that ran for 92 percent of the length of the hull . This was significantly greater than the older Derfflinger @-@ class ships , which had a double bottom for only 65 percent of the length of the hull . 
 Experience with previous battlecruiser designs led to the adoption of a continuous upper deck , which raised the level of the deck aft . This was necessary because the aft decks of earlier designs were usually awash when steaming at high speed , even in calm seas . The ships were also equipped with a bulbous bow to reduce drag on the hull , the first time the feature was used in the German Navy . The ships as designed required a crew of 46 officers and 1 @,@ 140 enlisted sailors . Service as a squadron flagship would increase that number by an additional 14 officers and 62 sailors . The vessels carried a number of small boats , including two picket boats , one barge , two launches , two cutters , and three yawls . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Mackensen class were equipped with four sets of marine @-@ type turbine engines , each of which drove a three @-@ bladed screw propeller that was 4 @.@ 2 m ( 13 ft 9 in ) in diameter . The turbines mounted in Fürst Bismarck were equipped with Föttinger fluid transmission , while those on the other three ships were two sets of direct @-@ coupled turbines with geared transmissions . The ships had 24 coal @-@ fired marine @-@ type single ended boilers and eight oil @-@ fired marine @-@ type boilers . The power plants were designed to provide 88 @,@ 769 shaft horsepower ( 66 @,@ 195 kW ) and 295 revolutions per minute . Maximum speed was rated at 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . The ships were equipped with a pair of rudders mounted side by side , as opposed to the tandem rudders used on the Derfflinger @-@ class ships . 
 The ships ' turbines were equipped with Föttinger gears , which significantly improved performance at cruising speeds and provided a corresponding increase in range of about 20 percent . The vessels were designed to store 800 t ( 790 long tons ) of coal and 250 t ( 250 long tons ) of oil in purpose @-@ built storage spaces ; the hull areas between the torpedo bulkhead and the outer wall of the ship were used to store additional fuel . Maximum fuel capacity was 4 @,@ 000 t ( 3 @,@ 900 long tons ) of coal and 2 @,@ 000 t ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) of oil . This was estimated to give a range of up to about 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a cruising speed of 14 kn ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . Electrical power on the vessels was provided by eight diesel generators that put out 2 @,@ 320 kilowatts at 220 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Mackensens were equipped with a main battery of eight new 35 cm SK L / 45 guns in four twin gun turrets . The turrets were mounted in superfiring pairs fore and aft of the main superstructure . The guns were placed in Drh LC / 1914 mountings , which could elevate to 20 degrees and depress to − 5 degrees . The guns were supplied with a total of 720 armor @-@ piercing shells , or 90 per gun . The weapons were designed to fire 600 kg ( 1 @,@ 323 lb ) shells at a rate of fire of around 2 @.@ 5 shots per minute . The shells were fired with a muzzle velocity of 820 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . As with other heavy German guns , these weapons used a fore propellant charge in a silk bag with a main charge in a brass case . These guns could hit targets out to a maximum distance of 23 @,@ 300 m ( 25 @,@ 500 yd ) . 
 The ships ' secondary battery consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns mounted in armored casemates along the central superstructure . Each gun was supplied with 160 rounds , and had a maximum range of 13 @,@ 500 m ( 44 @,@ 300 ft ) , though this was later extended to 16 @,@ 800 m ( 55 @,@ 100 ft ) . The guns had a sustained rate of fire of 7 rounds per minute . The shells were 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 99 @.@ 8 lb ) , and were loaded with a 13 @.@ 7 kg ( 31 @.@ 2 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . The guns fired at a muzzle velocity of 835 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) . The guns were expected to fire around 1 @,@ 400 shells before they needed to be replaced . 
 The ships were also armed with eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 45 in ) L / 45 Flak guns in single pedestal mounts . Four were arranged around the rear superfiring main battery turret and the other four around the forward conning tower . The Flak guns were emplaced in MPL C / 13 mountings , which allowed depression to − 10 degrees and elevation to 70 degrees . These guns fired 9 kg ( 19 @.@ 8 lb ) shells , and had an effective ceiling of 9 @,@ 150 m ( 30 @,@ 020 ft ) at 70 degrees . 
 As was standard for warships of the period , the Mackensens were equipped with submerged torpedo tubes . There were five 60 cm ( 24 in ) tubes : one in the bow , and two on each flank of the ship . The torpedoes were the H8 type , which were 9 m ( 30 ft ) long and carried a 210 kg ( 463 lb ) Hexanite warhead . The torpedoes had a range of 8 @,@ 000 m ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) when set at a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) ; at a reduced speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) , the range increased significantly to 15 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Mackensen @-@ class ships were protected with Krupp cemented steel armor , as was the standard for German warships of the period . Specific figures for the arrangement of the armor layout have not survived , but according to naval historian Erich Gröner " The outfit of Krupp armour was similar to that of the [ preceding ] Derfflinger class " . The figures listed here are those for the Derfflinger class . They had an armor belt of 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thickness in the central citadel of the ship , where the most important parts of the vessel were located . This included the ammunition magazines and the machinery spaces . The belt was reduced in less critical areas , to 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) forward and 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) aft . The belt tapered down to 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) at the bow , though the stern was not protected by armor at all . A 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) torpedo bulkhead ran the length of the hull , several meters behind the main belt . The main armored deck ranged in thickness from 30 mm in less important areas to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in the sections that covered the more critical areas of the ship . 
 The forward conning tower was protected with heavy armor : the sides were 300 mm thick and the roof was 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) . The rear conning tower was less well armored ; its sides were only 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) , and the roof was covered with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plate . The main battery gun turrets were also heavily armored : the turret sides were 270 mm ( 11 in ) and the roofs were 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) . The 15 cm guns had 150 mm worth of armor plating in the casemates ; the guns themselves had 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) shields to protect their crews from shell splinters . 
 = = Construction and cancellation = = 
 Seven ships were originally planned in the class : Mackensen , Graf Spee , Prinz Eitel Friedrich , Ersatz A , and three other vessels . The last three ships were redesigned as the Ersatz Yorck class , leaving four ships to be built to the Mackensen design . The first two ships were ordered on 14 August 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I. Mackensen was funded through the 1914 budget , while funding for Graf Spee came from the war budget . Mackensen — ordered under the provisional name Ersatz Victoria Louise , as a replacement for the old protected cruiser Victoria Louise — was named after Generalfeldmarschall ( Field Marshal ) August von Mackensen . The ship was laid down on 30 January 1915 at Blohm & Voss in Hamburg , under construction number 240 . She was launched on 21 April 1917 ; at the small launching ceremony , Generaloberst ( Colonel General ) Josias von Heeringen gave the speech and the ship was christened by Mackensen 's wife . Construction was halted about 15 months before she would have been completed . The British mistakenly believed the ship to have been completed , and so they included the ship on the list of vessels to be interned at Scapa Flow instead of the fleet flagship Baden . Mackensen was stricken from the German navy , according to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , on 17 November 1919 . She was sold for scrap and eventually broken up in 1922 at Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 Graf Spee was named for Vice Admiral Maximilian von Spee , the commander of the German East Asia Squadron ; he was killed when his squadron was annihilated at the Battle of the Falkland Islands in 1914 . Graf Spee was laid down on 30 November 1915 in the Schichau yards in Danzig ( now Gdańsk , Poland ) , under the provisional name Ersatz Blücher , to replace the large armored cruiser Blücher that had been sunk at the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 . She was launched on 15 September 1917 . At the launching ceremony , Großadmiral Prince Heinrich gave the speech and Spee 's widow Margarete christened the ship . Construction stopped about 12 months away from completion ; Graf Spee was the furthest along of all four ships when work was halted . She too was struck on 17 November 1919 ; on 28 October 1921 the unfinished hull was sold for 4 @.@ 4 million Marks and broken up in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 Prinz Eitel Friedrich , ordered as Ersatz Freya ( a replacement for SMS Freya ) was named for one of Kaiser Wilhelm II 's sons , Eitel Friedrich . She was laid down on 1 May 1915 at Blohm & Voss under construction number 241 . She was 21 months away from completion when she was launched to clear the slip on 13 March 1920 and was broken up at Hamburg in 1921 . At the launching ceremony , dockyard workers named the ship Noske , after Reichswehr Minister Gustav Noske . Ersatz A , which might have been named Fürst Bismarck for the famous German chancellor Otto von Bismarck , was laid down on 3 November 1915 at the Wilhelmshaven Imperial Shipyard under construction number 25 . She was about 26 months from completion when work ended . She was never launched ; instead , the vessel was broken up on the slip in 1922 . 
 Experience at the Battle of Jutland led the RMA to conclude that ships with 38 cm guns , heavier armor , and a higher top speed were necessary . The Mackensen design was used as the basis for the Ersatz @-@ Yorck class , which incorporated the larger guns and more armor for the main battery turrets and barbettes . More powerful engines were unavailable to compensate for the extra weight , so the designers were forced to accept a reduced speed . Nevertheless , like the Mackensens , the three ships ordered under the Ersatz @-@ Yorck design were never completed . In response , the British ordered the four Admiral @-@ class battlecruisers , though the British designed the class under the mistaken impression that the Mackensen class would be armed with 38 @.@ 6 cm ( 15 @.@ 2 in ) guns and would be capable of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) . Three of the four Admiral @-@ class ships were cancelled ; only HMS Hood was completed after the end of the war . 
 The primary reason construction halted on the four ships was the shifting of construction materials and manpower from capital ships to U @-@ boats in the last two years of the war . The RMA filed a report dated 1 February 1918 stating that capital ship construction had ground to a halt primarily for this reason . 
 = Nemesis ( Stargate SG @-@ 1 ) = 
 " Nemesis " is the last episode from season 3 of the science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 . Written by Robert C. Cooper and directed by Martin Wood , the episode first aired in the United Kingdom on Sky One on February 11 , 2000 , and had its American premiere on Showtime on March 8 , 2000 . The episode sets up the Replicators as a new major enemy , ending in a cliffhanger that is resumed in the season 4 premiere " Small Victories " . 
 " Nemesis " was the first SG @-@ 1 episode to be filmed entirely on 35 mm film before the series switched from 16 mm film to 35 mm film for all purposes in season 4 . A visual effects milestone for the series , the episode was nominated for an Emmy Award in the " Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series " category , and won a Leo Award for " Best Overall Sound in a Dramatic Series " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The SG @-@ 1 team gets leave time as Daniel Jackson ( Michael Shanks ) had his appendix removed . Just after Major Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) declines Colonel O 'Neill 's ( Richard Dean Anderson ) invitation to go fishing , O 'Neill is beamed aboard the cloaked Asgard ship <unk> orbiting Earth . Encountering bug @-@ like robots , O 'Neill learns from the dying Asgard , Thor , that the creatures are called Replicators . They ingest the ship 's alloys in order to self @-@ replicate and will eventually land on Earth in the search of more raw material . O 'Neill contacts Stargate Command with a request to beam up explosives , however , General Hammond ( Don S. Davis ) also sends along Carter and Teal 'c ( Christopher Judge ) against O 'Neill 's wishes . An Earth shuttle may be sent to pick them up later . 
 SG @-@ 1 plan to steer the vessel towards Earth to vaporize it during atmospheric reentry . Because the Replicators prevent SG @-@ 1 from retaking the bridge , Carter and Thor suggest placing an elementary <unk> @-@ enhanced bomb on the deceleration drive . When Teal 'c leaves the spaceship to place the bomb on the outside of the hull , his <unk> blows , however , Carter manages to beam him back on board . Thor , whose vitals crash at this moment , is put into a stasis pod to preserve his life . 
 While SG @-@ 1 waits for the right time to detonate the bomb , they must devise a plan to get off the ship . They eventually beam Stargate Command 's Stargate on @-@ board and intend to travel to the planet <unk> @-@ 234 before returning home using Earth 's secondary gate ( " Touchstone " ) . After Teal 'c has dialed the gate manually , O 'Neill detonates the bomb , crashing the ship in the Pacific Ocean . The last shot of the episode shows a Replicator crawling on remains of the sinking spaceship . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season 3 finale " Nemesis " was written by Robert C. Cooper and directed by Martin Wood . After the first three seasons of Stargate SG @-@ 1 had been filmed on 16 mm film ( although scenes involving visual effects had always been shot on 35 mm film for various technical reasons ) , " Nemesis " was the first episode filmed entirely on 35 mm film . Stargate SG @-@ 1 switched to 35 mm film for all purposes at the beginning of season 4 . The visual effects team used the episode to experiment with the design of the Replicators , a new recurring enemy to whom the character Thor had first alluded in the early season 3 episode " Fair Game " . " Nemesis " featured more visual effects than any previous episode , but was excelled by the season 4 premiere , " Small Victories " , which showed the best computer @-@ generated shots of " Nemesis " in its " Previously on " segment . Visual effects supervisor James Tichenor considered the few episodes with big visual effects budgets the most likely works to contain visual cues that impress Academy of Television Arts & Sciences ( Emmy Awards ) voters . Tichenor claimed that effective visual effects do not call attention to themselves and instead rely on the actors ' reactions to nonexistent things . 
 Daniel Jackson 's appendicitis reflected Michael Shanks ' real @-@ world condition at the end of season 3 . During the last shooting day of " Crystal Skull " , Shanks suffered an appendicitis attack , which he had first misinterpreted as food poisoning from the Thanksgiving dinner . While Robert C. Cooper desperately tried to rewrite the script of " Nemesis " , producer Brad Wright contrived elaborate storylines to reduce Shanks ' involvement in the episode . Cooper eventually decided to use a common health issue to explain Daniel 's absence from the episode 's action scenes . Shanks appeared in four scenes set at Stargate Command , although he also provided the voice of the Asgard Thor in post @-@ production . Although much of Daniel 's and O 'Neill 's exchange in the infirmary was improvised , critic Jo Storm speculated in his book Approaching The Possible that Daniel 's question in the infirmary bed to O 'Neill ( " Did you get a haircut ? " ) may reflect the actors ' hairstyles which had significantly changed since the season 2 finale ; the lines may have been added to appease the many viewers who had commented on the characters ' new looks on the online boards . " Nemesis " was the last episode before actor Christopher Judge started sporting a small blond beard for several episodes in season 4 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Nemesis " first aired in the United Kingdom on Sky One on February 11 , 2000 , and had its American premiere on Showtime on March 8 , 2000 . In Germany , " Nemesis " was held back from season 3 and aired as the first hour of the season 4 premiere . Airing in American broadcast syndication during the 2001 May sweeps , " Nemesis " had a 2 @.@ 7 / 2 @.@ 8 household rating , which helped Stargate SG @-@ 1 's placement as second among first @-@ run entertainment hours ( a second airing after a premiere on an American subscription channel is not regarded as an off @-@ network rerun ) and placed fifth overall in the U.S. syndication market . " Nemesis " was nominated for an Emmy in the " Outstanding Special Visual Effects " category in 2000 , but lost to the X @-@ Files episode " First Person Shooter " ; the other competitors were Star Trek : Voyager episodes " Life Line " and " The Haunting of Deck Twelve " , and the X @-@ Files episode " Rush " . " Nemesis " won a Leo Award for " Best Overall Sound In A Dramatic Series " in 2000 . 
 Jo Storm wrote that the " cleverly disguised action mini @-@ arc " gives insight into the imperfection of the Asgard and that the " foreign , creepy " Replicators are " conquerors who make the Goa 'uld look nice by comparison " . He felt that the episode had " all the classic elements of fiction " , and lauded Robert C. Cooper 's storytelling idea to take the Stargate from the SGC and Don S. Davis 's following " best nonspeaking moment " . In Storm 's mind , the visual effects were well @-@ placed and did not overthrow the story , but he wondered about the " ubiquitous Sam / Jack interest " . If not interpreted as " flirtatiousness " , Carter could be " truly touched at being let into the ' inner circle ' of [ O 'Neill 's ] life , and finally being ' one of the guys ' " . 
 = Forest Whitaker = 
 Forest Steven Whitaker III ( born July 15 , 1961 ) is an American actor , director , and producer . 
 He has earned a reputation for intensive character study work for films such as Bird , Platoon , Ghost Dog : The Way of the Samurai and Lee Daniels ' The Butler , for his work in independent films and for his recurring role as LAPD Internal Affairs Lieutenant Jon Kavanaugh on the Emmy Award @-@ winning television series The Shield . He is set to portray Saw <unk> in the Star Wars spin @-@ off film , Rogue One : A Star Wars Story . 
 Whitaker won the Academy Award , British Academy Film Award , Golden Globe Award , National Board of Review Award , Screen Actors Guild Award , and various critics groups awards for his performance as Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in the 2006 film The Last King of Scotland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Whitaker was born July 15 , 1961 , in Longview , Texas . His family moved to Carson , California when he was four . His father , Forest Steven Jr . , was an insurance salesman . Forest 's mother , Laura Francis ( née Smith ) , was a special education teacher who put herself through college and earned two master 's degrees while raising her children . Whitaker has two younger brothers , Kenn and Damon , and an older sister , Deborah . 
 His first role as an actor was the lead in Dylan Thomas ' play , Under Milk Wood . 
 Whitaker then attended Cal Poly Pomona on a football scholarship , but due to a debilitating back injury , he changed his major to music ( voice ) . He toured England with the Cal Poly Chamber Singers in 1980 . While still at Cal Poly , he briefly changed his major to drama . He was accepted to the Music Conservatory at the University of Southern California to study opera as a tenor , and subsequently was accepted into the University 's Drama Conservatory . He graduated from USC in 1982 . He also earned a scholarship to the Berkeley , California branch of the Drama Studio London . Whitaker also pursued a degree in The Core of Conflict : Studies in Peace and Reconciliation at New York University 's Gallatin School of Individualized Study . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Film work = = = 
 Whitaker has a long history of working with well @-@ regarded film directors and fellow actors , as well as working in direct @-@ to @-@ video films alongside novice actors such as Lil Wayne , Maggie Grace and 50 Cent . In his first onscreen performance of note , he had a supporting role playing a high school football player in the 1982 film version of Cameron Crowe 's coming @-@ of @-@ age teen @-@ retrospective , Fast Times at Ridgemont High . He co @-@ starred and interacted alongside Judge Reinhold , Phoebe Cates , Sean Penn and Robert Romanus . In 1986 , he appeared in Martin Scorsese 's film , The Color of Money ( with Paul Newman and Tom Cruise ) , and in Oliver Stone 's Platoon . The following year , he co @-@ starred with Robin Williams in the comedy Good Morning , Vietnam . 
 In 1988 , Whitaker played in the film Bloodsport alongside Jean @-@ Claude Van Damme and he had his first lead role starring as musician Charlie " Bird " Parker in the Clint Eastwood @-@ directed film , Bird . To prepare himself for the part , he sequestered himself in a loft with only a bed , couch , and saxophone , having also conducted extensive research and taken alto sax lessons . His performance , which has been called " transcendent , " earned him the Best Actor award at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and a Golden Globe nomination . Whitaker continued to work with a number of well @-@ known directors throughout the 1990s . He starred in the 1990 film Downtown with Anthony Edwards and Penelope Ann Miller . Neil Jordan cast him in the pivotal role of " Jody " , a captive British soldier in his 1992 film , The Crying Game where Whitaker used an English accent . Todd McCarthy , of Variety , described Whitaker 's performance as " big @-@ hearted , " " hugely emotional , " and " simply terrific . " In 1994 , he was a member of the cast that won the first ever National Board of Review Award for Best Acting by an Ensemble for Robert Altman 's film , <unk> @-@ à @-@ Porter . He gave a " characteristically emotional performance " in Wayne Wang and Paul Auster 's 1995 film , Smoke . 
 Whitaker played a serene , pigeon @-@ raising , bushido @-@ following , mob hit man in Ghost Dog : The Way of the Samurai , a 1999 film written and directed by Jim Jarmusch . Many consider this to have been a " definitive role " for Whitaker . In a manner similar to his preparation for Bird , he again immersed himself in his character 's world — he studied Eastern philosophy and meditated for long hours " to hone his inner spiritual hitman . " Jarmusch has told interviewers that he developed the title character with Whitaker in mind ; the New York Times review of the film observed that " [ I ] t 's hard to think of another actor who could play a cold @-@ blooded killer with such warmth and humanity . " 
 Whitaker next appeared in what has been called one of the worst films ever made , the 2000 production of Battlefield Earth , based on the novel of the same name by L. Ron Hubbard . The film was widely criticized as a notorious commercial and critical disaster . However , Whitaker 's performance was lauded by the film 's director , Roger Christian , who commented that , " Everybody 's going to be very surprised " by Whitaker , who " found this huge voice and laugh . " Battlefield Earth won seven Razzie Awards ; Whitaker was nominated for Worst Supporting Actor , but lost to his co @-@ star , Barry Pepper . Whitaker later expressed his regret for participating in the film . 
 In 2001 , Whitaker had a small , uncredited role in the Wong Kar @-@ wai @-@ directed The Follow , one of five short films produced by BMW that year to promote its cars . He co @-@ starred in Joel Schumacher 's 2002 thriller , Phone Booth , with Kiefer Sutherland and Colin Farrell . That year , he also co @-@ starred with Jodie Foster in Panic Room . His performance as the film 's " bad guy " was described as " a subtle chemistry of aggression and empathy . " 
 Whitaker 's 2006 portrayal of Idi Amin in the film , The Last King of Scotland earned him positive reviews by critics as well as multiple awards and honors . To portray the dictator , Whitaker gained 50 pounds , learned to play the accordion , and immersed himself in research . He read books about Amin , watched news and documentary footage featuring Amin , and spent time in Uganda meeting with Amin 's friends , relatives , generals , and victims ; he also learned Swahili and mastered Amin 's East African accent . His performance earned him the Academy Award for Best Actor , making him the fourth African @-@ American actor in history to do so , joining the ranks of Sidney Poitier , Denzel Washington , and Jamie Foxx . For that same role , he was also recognized with the British Academy Film Award , Golden Globe Award , National Board of Review Award , Screen Actors Guild Award , and accolades from the Broadcast Film Critics Association , London Film Critics ’ Circle Award , Los Angeles Film Critics Association , National Society of Film Critics , and New York Film Critics Circle among others . 
 In 2007 , Whitaker played Dr. James Farmer Sr. in The Great Debaters , for which he received an Image Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actor . In 2008 , Whitaker appeared in three films , first as a business man known only as Happiness , who likes butterflies , in the film The Air I Breathe . He also portrayed a rogue police captain in Street Kings , and a heroic tourist in Vantage Point . 
 In 2013 , after languishing in several limited releases and independent features such as Freelancers and Pawn , Whitaker has enjoyed a bit of career resurgence , having played the lead role in Lee Daniels ' The Butler , which has become one of his greatest critical and commercial successes to date . 
 Whitaker also starred in the film Black Nativity , alongside Jennifer Hudson , Angela Bassett , and Jacob Latimore . He also co @-@ starred with Arnold Schwarzenegger in 2013 's The Last Stand , playing an FBI agent chasing an escaped drug cartel leader . 
 Whitaker has been confirmed as a castmember in the upcoming Star Wars anthology film Rogue One . 
 = = = Television work = = = 
 After completing several films in the early 1980s , Whitaker gained additional roles in multiple television shows . On the series , Diff 'rent Strokes , he played a bully in the 1985 episode " Bully for Arnold " . That same year , Whitaker also played the part of a comic book salesman in the Amazing Stories episode " Gather Ye Acorns " . He appeared in the first and second parts of North and South in 1985 and 1986 . Throughout the 1990s , Whitaker mainly had roles in television films which aired on HBO , including Criminal Justice , The Enemy Within , and Witness Protection . 
 From 2002 to 2003 , Whitaker was the host and narrator of 44 new episodes of the Rod Serling classic , The Twilight Zone , which lasted one season on UPN . After working in several film roles , he returned to television in 2006 when he joined the cast of FX 's police serial The Shield , as Lieutenant Jon Kavanaugh , who was determined to prove that the lead character , Vic Mackey , is a dirty cop . As opposed to his previous character work , Whitaker stated that he merely had to draw on his childhood years growing up in South Central Los Angeles for the role . He received rave reviews for his performance — Variety called it a " crackling @-@ good guest stint " — and he reprised the role in the show 's 2007 season . 
 In the fall of 2006 , Whitaker started a multi @-@ episode story arc on ER as Curtis Ames , a man who comes into the ER with a cough , but quickly faces the long @-@ term consequences of a paralyzing stroke ; he sues , then takes out his anger on Dr. Luka Kovač , who he blames for the strokes . Whitaker received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for his performance in the series . Also in 2006 , Whitaker appeared in T.I. ' s music video " Live in the Sky " alongside Jamie Foxx . 
 Whitaker was cast in the Criminal Minds spin @-@ off , Criminal Minds : Suspect Behavior , that was subsequently cancelled by CBS on May 17 , 2011 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 Whitaker made his Broadway debut in 2016 in a revival of Eugene O 'Neill 's play Hughie at the Booth Theatre , directed by Michael Grandage . 
 = = = Producing and directing = = = 
 Whitaker branched out into producing and directing in the 1990s . He co @-@ produced and co @-@ starred in A Rage in Harlem in 1991 . He made his directorial debut with a grim film about inner @-@ city gun violence , <unk> , for HBO in 1993 . In 1995 , he directed his first theatrical feature , Waiting to Exhale , which was based on the Terry McMillan novel of the same name . Roger Ebert observed that the tone of the film resembled Whitaker 's own acting style : " measured , serene , confident . " Whitaker also directed co @-@ star Whitney Houston 's music video of the movie 's theme song , " Exhale ( Shoop Shoop ) " . 
 Whitaker continued his directing career with the 1998 romantic comedy , Hope Floats , starring Sandra Bullock and Harry Connick , Jr . He directed Katie Holmes in the romantic comedy , First Daughter in 2004 while also serving as executive producer ; he had previously co @-@ starred with Holmes in Phone Booth in 2002 . He had previously gained experience as the executive producer of several made @-@ for @-@ television movies , most notably the 2002 Emmy @-@ award winning Door to Door , starring William H. Macy . He produced these projects through his production company , Spirit Dance Entertainment , which he shut down in 2005 to concentrate on his acting career . 
 Whitaker and his partner Nina Yang Bongiovi produced the film Fruitvale Station , which won the Grand Jury Prize and the Audience Award for U.S. dramatic film at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival , as well as Repentance ( 2014 ) and Dope ( 2015 ) . 
 = = = JuntoBox Films = = = 
 Whitaker plays an active role as co @-@ chair of JuntoBox Films since his initial involvement as co @-@ chair with the collaborative film studio starting in March 2012 . JuntoBox was developed as a social @-@ media platform for filmmakers and fans to share ideas to create films and then collaborate to make them . Since Whitaker joined as co @-@ chair , five projects have been greenlit for production . 
 = = Honors = = 
 In addition to the numerous awards Whitaker won for his performance in The Last King of Scotland , he has also received several other honors . In September 2006 , the 10th Annual Hollywood Film Festival presented him with its " Hollywood Actor of the Year Award , " calling him " one of Hollywood 's most accomplished actors . " He was honored at the Santa Barbara International Film Festival 2007 , where he received the American Riviera Award . 
 Previously , in 2005 , the Deauville ( France ) Festival of American Film paid tribute to him . On April 16 , 2007 , Whitaker was the recipient of the <unk> star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the motion pictures industry at <unk> Hollywood Boulevard . He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from Xavier University of Louisiana in 2009 at the 82nd Commencement Ceremony . He received the honorary degree of Doctor of Humane Letters from California State University , Dominguez Hills on May 16 , 2015 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1996 , Whitaker married actress Keisha Nash , whom he met on the set of Blown Away . The <unk> have four children : two daughters together ( Sonnet and True ) , and his son ( Sergio Hyatt ) and her daughter ( Autumn ) from previous relationships . On Inside the Actors Studio , Whitaker said that a genetic test indicated he was of Igbo descent through his patrilineal line , and of Akan descent through his matrilineal line . 
 Whitaker studies yoga and has a black belt in <unk> . He also trains in the Filipino martial art of Kali , under Dan Inosanto . Inosanto is best known for having been a student of the late Bruce Lee and has trained actors such as Denzel Washington and Brandon Lee . 
 Whitaker 's left eye ptosis has been called " intriguing " by some critics and " gives him a lazy , contemplative look . " Whitaker has explained that the condition is hereditary and that he has considered having surgery to correct it , not for cosmetic reasons but because it affects his vision . 
 = = Activism = = 
 = = = Charity work = = = 
 Whitaker , who is a vegetarian , recorded a public service announcement with his daughter , True , promoting vegetarianism on behalf of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) . He is also a supporter and public advocate for Hope North , a boarding school and vocational training center in northern Uganda for escaped child soldiers , orphans , and other young victims of the country 's civil war . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 In politics , Whitaker supported and spoke on behalf of Senator Barack Obama in his 2008 presidential campaign . On April 6 , 2009 , he was given a chieftaincy title in Imo State , Nigeria . Whitaker , who was named a chief among the Igbo community of <unk> , was given the title <unk> of <unk> , which means A Brother in a Foreign Land . 
 Whitaker was inducted as a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for Peace and Reconciliation , in a ceremony at UNESCO headquarters on June 21 , 2011 . As Goodwill Ambassador , Whitaker works with UNESCO to support and develop initiatives that empower youths and keep them from entering or remaining in cycles of violence . At the induction ceremony , U.S. Ambassador to UNESCO David Killion described Whitaker as a " perfect choice as a Goodwill Ambassador ... He has exemplified compassion in every area of his life , with humility and grace . He does this because it 's the right thing to do . " 
 In 2010 , Whitaker received the Artist Citizen of the World Award ( France ) . 
 In May 2011 , Whitaker co @-@ founded the International Institute for Peace ( IIP ) at Rutgers University in Newark , New Jersey . Launched during the international Newark Peace Education Summit , IIP ’ s mission is to develop programs and strategic partnerships to address cutting @-@ edge issues such as increasing citizen security through community @-@ building ; the role of women and spiritual and religious leaders in peace @-@ building ; the impact of climate change ; and the reduction of poverty . IIP operates under the auspices of UNESCO as a Category 2 Center . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Glass Joe = 
 Glass Joe ( <unk> ・ <unk> , <unk> Jō ) is a fictional French boxer from Nintendo 's Punch @-@ Out ! ! video game series . He first appeared in the arcade game Punch @-@ Out ! ! in 1984 and three years later in the NES game of the same name . His most recent appearance was in the Wii installment of Punch @-@ Out ! ! . He was originally designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and was revised by Makoto Wada for the NES game . He is voiced by Christian Bernard in the Wii game . 
 He is the player 's first opponent in all of his roles and is famous for his weakness and cowardice . These elements are considered by critics to be stereotypes of French people . These characteristics were emphasized by the developer of the Wii game which included cutscenes which depict Glass Joe in French settings . Glass Joe is considered one of the most well @-@ known characters in the Punch @-@ Out ! ! series and a Nintendo icon . His name has been used to describe poor performance by sportspeople and teams . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Glass Joe is a 38 @-@ year @-@ old French flyweight boxer who hails from Paris . He stands at 177 @.@ 8 centimeters ( 5 ' 10 ' ' ) and weighs in at 49 @.@ 9 kilograms ( 110 lbs . ) . His win record is one win to 99 losses . He is the weakest opponent and the first players encounter in any of his roles . His mediocrity has been attributed to poor blocking and reaction time . He possesses several negative stereotypes of French people . 
