 The character was designed by Shigeru Miyamoto for the original Punch @-@ Out ! ! arcade game . The name " Glass Joe " was conceived by Genyo Takeda as a play on his glass jaw . Glass Joe 's appearance was revised by Makoto Wada for the NES Punch @-@ Out ! ! . The character is voiced by Christian Bernard in the Wii game ; much of his dialogue in between matches consists of counting to ten in French . Next Level Games ( the developer of the Wii game ) introduced cutscenes which depicted Glass Joe as a fashionable Frenchman . They also showed him in front of the Arc de Triomphe and the Eiffel Tower ( both Parisian landmarks ) The designers had croissants burst from Glass Joe as he is knocked out . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 Glass Joe 's debut was in the first Punch @-@ Out ! ! game for the arcades in 1984 . His role was to give young players a sense of accomplishment which motivated them to spend more money to try and beat the more difficult opponents . Glass Joe later appeared in Punch @-@ Out ! ! for the NES in 1987 . While he did not appear in the SNES game 's sequel , he opened a boxing school for potential fighters . Gabby Jay ( the game 's first opponent ) attended this school and got his first and only win against Glass Joe . Glass Joe 's most recent appearance was in Punch @-@ Out ! ! for the Wii in 2009 . He was one of the first characters revealed in pre @-@ release material . The Wii Punch @-@ Out ! ! has a mode called " Title Defense " which featured a more difficult version of Glass Joe among other opponents . This mode has Glass Joe wear a protective headgear due to a doctor 's recommendation after an X @-@ ray was done on his skull . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Glass Joe has come to be considered one of Punch @-@ Out ! ! ' s signature characters . He was included in a series of trading cards which depict various Punch @-@ Out ! ! boxers . Both UGO 's Chris Plante and G4TV 's " <unk> " considered the fight with Glass Joe one of the most memorable NES moments . Plante felt that it was even more memorable than the in @-@ game fight with Mike Tyson . GameDaily 's Chris Buffa called Glass Joe one of the most unappreciated Nintendo characters and said that he wanted to see him succeed . 
 His name has been used as a derogatory term for sportspeople who perform poorly such as Derek Anderson , Ahmad Bradshaw , and the players for the North Penn football team . The name has also been used by ESPN 's Bill Simmons to describe his disappointment with the heavyweight championship fight between boxers Wladimir Klitschko and Chris Byrd . When asked who among his boxing opponents most reminded him of Glass Joe , Mike Tyson said Bruce Seldon whom he claimed he didn 't even need to hit . Yahoo ! Sports ' Mike Oz created the " Glass Joe Title " ( awarded for poor performance in the MLB ) . He has so far awarded it to the Los Angeles Angels , the New York Mets , the New York Yankees , and the Atlanta Braves . 
 Glass Joe 's French characteristics have been discussed by critics such as writer <unk> Lahiri and Eurogamer 's Oli Welsh . IGN 's Craig Harris felt that the NES game focused more on his weaknesses and that the Wii game emphasized his stereotypes . A member of the Retronauts podcast also felt that he was defined more by his weakness than his nationality until he learned more about French stereotypes . Chris Buffa felt that the stereotypes could be considered offensive while Giant Bomb 's Ryan Davis felt that there was nothing legitimately offensive . 
 = = = Difficulty = = = 
 Glass Joe is considered noteworthy for his weakness . Writers have used him as a test of the usability of NES controllers such as the U @-@ Force and the Power Glove . Hardcore Gamer 's Nikola <unk> compared Glass Joe to the Super Mario enemy Goomba , which was featured alongside Glass Joe on a Nintendo Power list of their " favorite punching bags . " GamesRadar editor Mikel Reparaz included him in his list of the " 13 unluckiest videogame bastards " and gave respect to the fact that he never gives up . 
 His appearance in the " Title Defense " mode of the Wii Punch @-@ Out ! ! received attention for his increased difficulty . Official Nintendo Magazine 's Chris Scullion praised the fight and felt it proved that the Wii game would not be too easy . 
 = Boone Carlyle = 
 Boone Carlyle is a fictional character who was played by Ian Somerhalder on the ABC drama television series Lost , which chronicles the lives of the survivors of a plane crash in the south Pacific . Boone is introduced in the pilot episode as the stepbrother of fellow crash survivor Shannon Rutherford . He tries to contribute as much as he can to the safety of the castaways and eventually becomes John Locke 's protégé . 
 Also , unlike many other characters of the first season , who were rewritten based on their actors , Boone was largely the same through production . Somerhalder did not want to shoot a pilot ; however , he jumped at the opportunity once he found out he would be working with co @-@ creator / executive producer J.J. Abrams . The character was generally well received by critics and fans ; USA Today described Boone as a " callow , privileged young man striving for maturity . " Boone dies from his injuries after being crushed inside a falling plane . 
 = = Arc = = 
 = = = Before the crash = = = 
 Boone is born in October , 1981 , the son of wealthy Sabrina Carlyle , the head of a wedding company . When Boone was ten years old , Sabrina marries Adam Rutherford , who has an eight @-@ year @-@ old daughter named Shannon . When Boone is twenty years old , he becomes the chief operating officer of his mother 's business in New York City . Boone harbors a fondness for his stepsister , which develops into a romantic attraction . When Boone learns of Shannon ’ s financial difficulties after her father ’ s death he offers to give her money , but she does not accept . Boone " rescues " Shannon several times from abusive relationships by paying the boyfriends to leave her . One such rescue attempt leads Boone to Sydney , Australia in September 2004 , where he learns the relationships are actually scams concocted by Shannon to get his money and attention . Boone is deeply hurt by the deception . Boone and Shannon have sex after her Australian boyfriend runs away with her money . The next day , they board Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 to return to the United States . 
 = = = In the island = = = 
 Boone unsuccessfully tries to perform CPR on an unconscious Rose Henderson , which he claims to have learned from when he was a lifeguard , but Jack Shephard convinces him to retrieve a pen , unnecessarily . Boone maintains a generally helpful attitude and remains protective of Shannon ( although he criticizes her for her <unk> ) . His protective attitude combines with jealousy when she develops feelings for Sayid Jarrah , and Boone unsuccessfully attempts to discourage the relationship . 
 Boone is drawn to the hunting and survival skills of John Locke , a fellow castaway . He becomes Locke ’ s apprentice and begins to distance himself from the other survivors . Boone and Locke find a metal hatch while tracking the kidnapped Claire Littleton and Charlie Pace . The two excavate the hatch , keeping its existence a secret from the other survivors . Locke subjects Boone to a hallucinatory exercise on their twenty @-@ fourth day on the island allowing Boone to resolve his feelings for Shannon , in which Boone sees Shannon after she is killed by the monster . Forty @-@ one days after the crash , Boone and Locke discover a heroin runner 's Beechcraft stuck high in a tree canopy . Boone climbs up into the aircraft and finds a working radio in the cockpit , which he uses to transmit a Mayday signal . He receives a response to his message by a man , later revealed to be Bernard Nadler of the tail @-@ section survivors , but the aircraft <unk> and falls nose @-@ first to the ground . Boone sustains severe injuries and , despite Jack 's attempts to treat him , dies on November 2 , 2004 . Boone tries to pass a message to Shannon through Jack , but dies before he is able to finish the sentence . Somerhalder said the news of his character 's death was " pretty devastating " , which is notable for being the first death of a major character on the series . 
 Almost four weeks later , Locke experiences a self @-@ induced hallucination , where a longer @-@ haired Boone appears and pushes Locke around in a wheelchair in an imaginary Sydney International Airport , where the other survivors are present but acting in different roles . Boone tells Locke someone in the airport was in serious danger . Close to the end of the hallucination , Locke finds Eko 's stick covered in blood and Boone appears bloody and injured . He tells Locke " They 've got him . You don 't have much time . " In the Oceanic Six 's cover story , Boone was one of the ones who survived the initial crash , but soon died of internal injuries . 
 = = = In the alternate timeline = = = 
 In the alternate timeline , Shannon does not go back with Boone . In " LA X " , Boone goes back alone on Flight 815 and sits beside Locke , where he finds out about Locke supposedly going on a Walkabout in Australia . In a parallel with the island timeline , Boone tells Locke if they crashed , he would follow him . Once the plane lands , Boone shakes Locke 's hand and exits the plane . Boone reappears in the final episode of Lost . In " The End " , we see Hurley and Sayid talking in a car on a dark street , and they witness a thug beating up a guy ( Boone ) outside of a bar . Shannon shouts " Leave my brother alone , " and Sayid gets out of the car to intervene . His and Shannon 's memories are restored the moment they touch . Boone , having conspired with Hurley to bring Shannon and Sayid together , wanders over to the car . He jokes with Hurley about how he had to take a beating and " thanks for taking your time . " He also comments how difficult it was to get Shannon to return from Australia with him , but he and Hurley agree the effort was worth it for this moment to have her and Sayid 's memories restored . Boone is one of the first people Jack greets in the church where everyone reunites to move on to the afterlife together . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 USA Today described Boone as " a callow young man who had been toughened by island challenges . " Variety called him " hot @-@ headed " , while Entertainment Weekly wrote he was " even @-@ tempered " . Boone 's quick decisions with good intentions are often rash . On his sixth day on the island , Joanna Miller drowns . As soon as he finds out she is drowning , he immediately tries to save her , although he does not succeed and almost becomes a casualty himself . While trying to take on a leadership role , Boone steals the camp 's water ; however , his plan backfires and the survivors turn on him . When Boone suspects Sawyer has Shannon 's medicine , he attempts to steal it . Aside from Shannon , he was closest to John Locke , who acted as a father figure and mentor to the younger , inexperienced Boone and who , unlike others including Shannon , tried to help him do his part on the island . Boone similarly is one of the few to trust Locke 's guidance and made Locke feel like the hero he had always wanted to be . Boone reflects aspects of Locke 's personality , such as his desire to have a unique purpose and his willingness to believe in the unlikely . 
 Boone always offers to help his fellow survivors , joining the party trying to send a radio distress call on the second day , helping Sayid triangulate Danielle Rousseau 's distress signal on the eighth day , searching for the abducted Claire Littleton on the sixteenth day and standing guard for the return of Ethan Rom on the twenty @-@ eighth day . IGN wrote " he appeared to be both integral and counterproductive to their survival " and " Boone appeared to be a pure and honest guy who tried to help people on the island and attempted to carry his own weight among the seemingly @-@ unscathed survivors of Oceanic Flight 815 . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Unlike many other characters of the first season , who were rewritten based on their actors , Boone was largely the same through production . He was originally going to be named Boone Anthony Markham V , going by the nickname , " Five . " In the script for the pilot , the writers ran a search and replace to change Boone 's name so when Jack counted to five , the script read , " One , two , three , four , Boone . " Somerhalder did not want to shoot a pilot ; however , he jumped at the opportunity once he found out he would be working with co @-@ creator / executive producer J.J. Abrams . Somerhalder was paid between $ 20 @,@ 000 and $ 40 @,@ 000 an episode , initially received the third highest billing in the credits , before the producers decided to list the main cast alphabetically . 
 Boone has appeared in a total of twenty @-@ five episodes , and his voice has been heard in a twenty @-@ sixth episode . Boone has physically appeared in three episodes since the first season with the credit of " special guest star . " He returned for the flashbacks of Shannon , Nikki Fernandez and Paulo and Locke 's hallucination . In Nikki 's third season flashback , the producers did not ask Somerhalder to cut his hair for two days of work and had him wear a wig , making his hair noticeably longer than it should have been . There is some confusion over the spelling of Boone 's last name . While " Carlyle " appears on Boone 's checkbook and grave , " Carlisle " appears on the subtitles for " Hearts and Minds . " 
 In the original outline of the eleventh episode , Locke was to be accompanied by two guest characters to search for Claire and discover the Hatch . In the final product , Boone accompanied Locke , a choice leading to Boone 's death . While the executive producers have stated Somerhalder took the news of his character 's death professionally , Somerhalder has said he found it " pretty devastating . " Boone 's death is notable as the first death of a major character on the series . According to executive producers Damon Lindelof and Carlton Cuse , Boone 's death made sense from a story perspective to fuel the rivalry between Jack and Locke and lead to the events in the season finale . Following Somerhalder 's departure from the show , ABC signed him to another one @-@ year contract . Somerhalder stated being a part of Lost was " the greatest experience " of " the greatest year of his life . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 BuddyTV called Boone a fan " favorite . " After three episodes had aired , an article in USA Today called Somerhalder " camera @-@ friendly . " A poll was run by ComingSoon.net in spring 2005 on the favorite of the fourteen main Lost characters , in which Boone placed seventh with 4 @.@ 3 % of over 2000 votes . After his death , a TV Guide critic wrote she misses Boone 's " very pretty eyes . " IGN ranked Boone as the tenth best character of the first three seasons of Lost . 
 Somerhalder co @-@ won the 2005 Screen Actors Guild Award for " Best Ensemble - Drama Series . He was also nominated in the category of " TV : Choice Breakout Performance – Male " in the 2005 Teen Choice Awards , but lost to Desperate Housewives ' Jesse Metcalfe , who plays John Rowland . While starring on Lost , Somerhalder was voted one of " 20 Teens Who Will Change the World " by Teen People , despite being 26 years old at the time . Teen People also called him " the next Johnny Depp . " He placed ninth on TV Guide 's " Top Ten Hunks " list . 
 = Half @-@ Life 2 : Survivor = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Survivor is an arcade game based on the science fiction first @-@ person shooter video game , Half @-@ Life 2 . It was released on June 28 , 2006 on Taito 's Type X + arcade system , with a 32 " widescreen high definition LCD . The game 's player character is controlled with joysticks and floor pedals , and offers three game modes : Story , Battle , and Mission , each with different objectives . The game was met with a generally positive reception . Reviewers found it interesting to play the game in an arcade environment , and considered the shift to an arcade setting an excellent introduction of the Half @-@ Life series of video games to Japan . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players control their movement using two joysticks ( one for each hand ) and floor pedals . Three gameplay modes are available : Story , which approximates the events of the original game ; Mission , which forces networked players to work cooperatively toward a goal ; and Battle , which parallels the deathmatch content of the original game . Up to eight players — either local players or individuals in other networked arcades — can participate in the Battle and Mission modes . 
 In Story mode , players advance through partial combat scenes from the original game , following neon @-@ lit guiding arrows . Each chapter has several levels with goals such as " Kill the Combine " or " Find your way to the goal " . When goals are completed , the player is taken to next level . When players finish all the levels of the chapter , the game ends . Progress can be saved on a removable card to allow the player to choose a new chapter at the next visit . Aside from the G @-@ Man introductory cut @-@ scene , Half Life 2 : Survivor does not incorporate any of Half @-@ Life 2 's story elements , levels , or physics @-@ based puzzles . 
 In Mission mode , there are three objective maps with three difficulties : normal , hard , and super hard . Map goals include " Collect gems " , " Destroy Zombie spawning points " , and " Escape " . A Battle mode is also available in the game . It is essentially four @-@ on @-@ four team match . Players can choose between two different factions : the Combine and the Human Resistance . Both factions have four classes of troops : Ranger , Soldier , Sniper , and Engineer . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game uses content common to the Xbox and PC releases , although the game focuses on the set pieces that characterized the original game . Half @-@ Life 2 : Survivor was first revealed to the public by Taito in a private exhibition in Tokyo on November 29 , 2005 . It was originally meant to be released in March 2006 but it was pushed back to June 28 , 2006 . The game is only available in Japan . 
 The game runs on a machine based on Taito 's Type X unit , an arcade system built with PC components , which runs on the Windows XP Embedded operating system . The game machine 's cabinet uses a 32 @-@ inch LCD screen which runs at a resolution of <unk> pixels . The machine also has a 5 @.@ 1 @-@ channel surround sound system , and it uses a smart card for storing player data . Because the game is network @-@ enabled , players in different arcades are able to play with each other . A maximum of eight players can play in the same match ; robots are used to fill in empty player slots if there are fewer than eight human players . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reception to the transposition of the Half @-@ Life series to an arcade setting was generally positive . The stylistic shift from the earlier , more traditional gameplay style to the newer , multi @-@ point arcade control scheme was a significant stylistic shift , one reviewer calling the gameplay " weird and disorienting " , but still concluding it to be very enjoyable overall . The video games review website , Video Games Blogger , considered the port to an arcade setting " interesting and totally unexpected " , and concluded its review by commenting that the arcade game could possibly increase interest in first @-@ person shooter video games in Japan , a country considered to be more interested in arcade @-@ style games . 
 = Playa de Oro virus = 
 Playa de Oro virus ( OROV ) is a probable species of hantavirus found in the rodents Oryzomys couesi and Sigmodon mascotensis in the Mexican state of Colima . The former is thought to be the main host . The sequences of parts of the virus 's RNA @-@ based genome have been determined ; they differ by 7 – 10 % in amino acid composition and 22 – 24 % in nucleotide composition from closely related viruses . 
 Playa de Oro virus was identified as a new species in 2008 and is most closely related to Bayou virus , Catacamas virus , Muleshoe virus , and Black Creek Canal virus , found in other species of Oryzomys and Sigmodon . Catacamas virus is found in a different population of Oryzomys couesi , and the presence of different viruses in these two species has been used as an argument for classifying the two populations of the host as separate species . 
 = = History and occurrence = = 
 Playa de Oro virus was first identified in rodents collected in 2004 as part of a survey of wild mammals at Playa de Oro in Manzanillo , Colima , western Mexico . The discovery was published in 2008 by Yong @-@ Kyu Chu and colleagues . Among 600 small mammals , antibodies against the hantavirus Sin Nombre virus were found in 23 individuals ( out of 358 studied ) of Oryzomys couesi , a rice rat that was the most common species found , six ( out of 87 ) of the cotton rat Sigmodon mascotensis , and one ( out of 77 ) of the pygmy mouse <unk> musculus . In addition , twelve O. couesi and one S. mascotensis yielded hantavirus RNA . Viruses were found in males more often than in females . Because the amino acid sequences in sequenced parts of the virus 's genome differed by as much as 7 to 10 % from closely related hantaviruses , Chu and colleagues identified the virus found at Playa de Oro as a new species , called Playa de Oro virus or OROV . Although the authors could not prove that the virus fulfilled all the criteria for identifying a new virus species , they argued that it was likely that it did fulfill those criteria . It is currently treated as a probable species in the Hantavirus genus . 
 = = Virology = = 
 <unk> have a genome that consists of three segments of single @-@ stranded , negative @-@ sense RNA ( see RNA virus : Replication ) , called the large ( L ) , medium ( M ) , and small ( S ) segments . The entire S segment and a fragment of the M segment have been sequenced . 
 The S segment consists of 1953 bases , of which 1287 ( starting at position 43 ) code for the nucleocapsid protein . In addition , a second 192 @-@ base open reading frame occurs in the middle of this sequence ( starting at position 122 ) , as in several other hantaviruses . Among three specimens of O. couesi , the sequence in this segment differed by only 1 % , and all changes were silent mutations . The amino acids of the S segment differ by 7 to 10 % from those of the related hantaviruses Bayou virus ( BAYV ; from the marsh rice rat , Oryzomys palustris ) , Catacamas virus ( CATV ; from a Honduras population of Oryzomys couesi ) , and Black Creek Canal virus ( BCCV ; from the hispid cotton rat , Sigmodon hispidus ) . The nucleotide sequence differs by 24 % from those viruses . 
 Among 1537 @-@ base fragments of the sequence of the M segment , several variable sites were observed , including some non @-@ silent mutations . The sequence differs by 8 to 10 % from BAYV , CATV , and BCCV in terms of amino acids and by 22 % in terms of nucleotides . 
 = = = Epidemiology and effects = = = 
 Because OROV occurs frequently in Oryzomys couesi , Chu and colleagues suggested that it is the primary host of the virus and that infections in Sigmodon mascotensis are the result of spillover between these two rodent species , which occur closely together . Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome , the disease caused by hantaviruses such as Sin Nombre virus , has never been reported in Mexico , but antibodies against hantaviruses have been found in human blood samples in Yucatán and various wild rodents are known to be reservoirs of hantavirus species . Thus , there is a potential risk of OROV infection in humans . Before the discovery of OROV , one hantavirus species had been identified in Mexico — El Moro Canyon virus from the small rodent <unk> megalotis . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 According to phylogenetic analyses based on the sequences of both the S and M segments , OROV is most closely related to the clade formed by BAYV , CATV , BCCV , and Muleshoe virus ( <unk> ; from the hispid cotton rat ) . In 2009 , Piet Maes and colleagues proposed that the closely related BAYV , BCCV , and <unk> be united into a single species . Chu and colleagues were surprised to find that the same species , Oryzomys couesi , harbored different viruses ( OROV and CATV ) , though noted that the subspecies infected by the two viruses were different . In 2010 , Delton Hanson and colleagues suggested on the basis of various lines of evidence , including the presence of different hantaviruses , that western Mexican populations of Oryzomys couesi represent a different species , Oryzomys mexicanus . 
 = The Boat Race 1980 = 
 The 126th Boat Race took place on 5 April 1980 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . It was won by Oxford in the closest finish for a century , despite one of their oarsman collapsing before the end of the race . 
 In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by five lengths , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Oxford were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Cambridge by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in the previous year 's race . However Cambridge held the overall lead , with 68 victories to Oxford 's 56 . The race was sponsored for fourth time by Ladbrokes . It was the last race to be commentated on BBC Radio by John Snagge . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Cambridge coach Graeme Hall was stroke for the Light Blues in the 1968 race , racing against Oxford coach Daniel Topolski who was bowman for the Dark Blues that year . Cambridge Boat Club president John Woodhouse noted : " We have cut down the number of formal dinners with old Blues and old coaches , and we have tried to keep the evenings quiet . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew featured three Old Blues , Chris Mahoney , Mike <unk> , and Boris Rankov , who was rowing in his third University Boat Race . In J.S. Palmer and A.G. Phillips , Cambridge 's crew contained two Blues returning from the previous year 's race . Hugh Laurie was following the tradition of his father , former Light Blue president and Olympic gold medallist Ran , who had won the Boat Race in 1934 , 1935 and 1936 . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start on the Surrey station . The race started at 4 @.@ 45 pm . Following a clash soon after the start , and another at Harrods , the crews were level . Despite Oxford 's number seven , Thomas Barry , losing part of his blade , his crew established a lead and defended it against a higher rating Cambridge . Umpire Alan Burrough allowed the race to continue , despite the clash and close steering . By Barnes Bridge , Oxford 's bowman , Steve Francis , son of author Dick Francis , was exhausted and " had more or less stopped rowing " . Cambridge 's push continued but Oxford passed the finishing post with a canvas ' advantage , the closest finish of the century . Francis was treated for exhaustion , but was later diagnosed with hepatitis . 
 In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by five lengths , their first victory in four years . In the 35th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Oxford triumphed , only their second victory in twenty years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 It was the first time Oxford had won five consecutive races since 1913 and was the " closest finish since at least the turn of the century . " Laurie recalls his attempts to emulate his father 's rowing career as " feeble " . Rankov , rowing in the third of his six Boat Races , recalls the race as one of his most memorable . He continued : " It was unbelievable . They kept coming at us and every time we tried to get away nothing happened . " Woodhouse lamented : " All I can say is that we shouldn 't have lost by so much . " 
 BBC reporter Snagge , commentating on his last Boat Race , remarked : " An absolutely cracking race ... a grand battle . " 
 = Does Anybody Hear Her = 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " is a song recorded by Christian rock band Casting Crowns , released by Beach Street Records , Reunion Records , and Provident Label Group . Written by Mark Hall and produced by Mark A. Miller , it was released on September 23 , 2006 as the third single from the band 's 2005 album Lifesong . An alternative CCM and adult contemporary song , " Does Anybody Hear Her " relates the story of a girl who is being pushed away by the Christian church as well as the message that condemning other people is wrong . 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " received positive reviews from most music critics , many of whom praised the song 's lyrical theme . It was successful on Christian radio , peaking at number one on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs and Hot Christian AC charts ; it also topped the Radio & Records Christian AC and Soft AC / Inspirational charts . It ranked at number thirty @-@ three on the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian AC chart and number forty @-@ six on the 2000s decade @-@ end Hot Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 According to lead vocalist Mark Hall , " Does Anybody Hear Her " is about a girl " who is making all the wrong decisions and about how " and how the Christian church is not there for her . Hall began writing the song around 2000 about a girl in his youth group ; it ultimately encompassed around 15 @-@ 20 girls who due to their father not being there for them tried to find intimacy elsewhere , ultimate " [ giving ] themselves away to the first person who loves them " . Hall said that " We [ the Christian church ] attach identities to people , saying , ' It ’ s too late to reach this person , ' or ' This person here , there ’ s still some good there , so we should try on this one , ' or ' This one ’ s a lost cause , we just need to get him out of here ' . That ’ s a scary place to live if you ’ re that person — if you didn ’ t make the church ’ s ' list ' " . 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " was written by Mark Hall . It was produced by Mark A. Miller and recorded and mixed by Sam Hewitt at Zoo Studio in Franklin , Tennessee . Additional recording was done at Lifesong Studio in McDonough , Georgia . The song was mastered by Richard Dodd and engineered by Dale Oliver and John Lewis Lee III . The strings on the song were arranged by Bobby Huff and were recorded at Little Big Studio by Boeho Shin and Daewoo Kim . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " is a song with a length of four minutes and twenty @-@ eight seconds . According to the sheet music published by Musicnotes.com , it is set in common time in the key of F major ( although the band usually performs the song live in the key of E major ) and has a tempo of 77 beats per minute . Mark Hall 's vocal range in the song spans from the low note of C4 to the high note of F5 . A ballad , " Does Anybody Hear Her " is an alternative CCM and adult contemporary song . Lyrically , the song relates the story of a young woman who is being pushed away by the Christian church . It delivers the message that condemning other people is wrong and that the Christian church is being too judgmental of pregnant teenagers . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " received positive reviews from most music critics . Kim Jones of About.com called the song her favorite off of Lifesong . Jared Johnson of Allmusic praised the song as an example of " Mark Hall 's artistic balladry " . Deborah Evans Price of Billboard described it as " potent " . David McCreary of CCM Magazine felt that the song 's " softer cadence " didn 't diminish its " hard @-@ hitting message " . Although describing it as " poignant " , Russ Breimeier of Christianity Today felt the song was too broad in scope . John DiBiase of Jesus Freak Hideout described " Does Anybody Hear Her " as " a step backwards from the opening tracks [ of Lifesong ] " but felt that its musical tone " still works in the grand scheme of the song 's message " . 
 = = Release and chart performance = = 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " was released to Christian AC and Soft AC / Inspirational radio on September 23 , 2006 . It debuted at number twenty @-@ four on the Billboard Hot Christian Songs for the chart week of November 4 , 2006 . It advanced to number five in its seventh chart week and to number four in its twelfth chart week . In its fifteenth chart week , " Does Anybody Hear Her " hit the number one position , which it held for six consecutive weeks . In total , it spent thirty @-@ three weeks on the Hot Christian Songs chart . It also peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot Christian AC and Radio & Records Christian AC and Soft AC / Inspirational charts . 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " ranked at number eighty @-@ nine on the 2006 year @-@ end Radio & Records Christian AC chart . It ranked at number eight on the 2007 year @-@ end Billboard Hot Christian AC chart and at number ten on the 2007 year @-@ end Hot Christian Songs chart , as well as at number eight on the 2007 year @-@ end Radio & Records Christian AC chart and number thirteen on the 2007 year @-@ end Soft AC / Inspirational chart . On the decade @-@ end Billboard charts , " Does Anybody Hear Her " ranked at number thirty @-@ three on the Hot Christian AC chart and number forty @-@ six on the Hot Christian Songs chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Casting Crowns performed " Does Anybody Hear Her " as the fourth song on their set list at a concert on November 12 , 2005 at the Stabler Arena in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania . They performed it as the eleventh song on their setlist at a concert on February 4 , 2010 at the Sprint Center in Kansas City , Missouri . As part of an acoustic set at a concert on February 28 , 2010 in Hershey , Pennsylvania . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Does Anybody Hear Her " – 4 : 28 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits lifted from the album liner notes of Lifesong . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release and radio history = = 
 = Pennsylvania Route 63 = 
 Pennsylvania Route 63 ( PA 63 ) is a 37 @.@ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 60 @.@ 2 km ) state highway located in the Philadelphia , Pennsylvania area . The western terminus of the route is at PA 29 in Green Lane , Montgomery County . The eastern terminus is at Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) in Bensalem Township , Bucks County . The route heads through a mix of suburban and rural areas of northern Montgomery County as a two @-@ lane road , passing through Harleysville , before coming to an interchange with I @-@ 476 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike Northeast Extension ) in Towamencin Township . From this point , PA 63 continues through predominantly suburban areas of eastern Montgomery County as a two- to four @-@ lane road , passing through Lansdale , Maple Glen , Willow Grove , and Huntingdon Valley . Upon entering Northeast Philadelphia , the route follows Red Lion Road and U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) before heading southeast on a freeway called Woodhaven Road to I @-@ 95 . 
 What would become PA 63 was originally designated as Legislative Route 198 in 1911 , running from Green Lane to Northeast Philadelphia . When first designated , PA 63 ran from PA 29 in Green Lane to US 611 ( now PA 611 ) in Willow Grove , following its current alignment . In 1928 , it was extended east to PA 532 in Northeast Philadelphia , following Edge Hill Road , Terwood Road , and Welsh Road to Bethayres , where the route continued along Philmont Avenue to PA 532 . By 1940 , PA 63 was moved to its current alignment between Willow Grove and Bethayres and was realigned to follow Byberry Road to PA 532 . The former alignment of PA 63 on Edge Hill Road and Terwood Road became PA 163 , which was removed by 1950 . In the 1950s , the Woodhaven Road freeway was planned to serve Northeast Philadelphia , connecting I @-@ 95 to PA 63 at Philmont Avenue , with a further extension to I @-@ 276 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike ) in Southampton once planned . The freeway was completed to Evans Street just west of US 1 in the 1960s and PA 63 was extended along Byberry Road and Woodhaven Road to end at I @-@ 95 . In the 1980s , PA 63 was rerouted to use Red Lion Road and US 1 to reach Woodhaven Road . Plans to extend Woodhaven Road through the rest of Northeast Philadelphia remain , but have been on hold due to community opposition and financial constraints . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Green Lane to Lansdale = = = 
 PA 63 begins at a " T " intersection with PA 29 in the borough of Green Lane in Montgomery County . From this intersection , the route heads southeast as two @-@ lane undivided Main Street , passing by several homes . After crossing Upper Ridge Road , the road crosses into Marlborough Township and becomes Sumneytown Pike . PA 63 continues through rural areas with some development , passing through the community of Sumneytown . Upon crossing Unami Creek , the route enters Upper Salford Township and heads into forested areas , where PA 63 meets the southern terminus of PA 563 ( Ridge Road ) . Following that intersection , the road passes through a mix of farmland , woodland , and residential developments . The route crosses over the East Branch of Perkiomen Creek before crossing into Lower Salford Township . At this point , PA 63 becomes Main Street and heads into the community of Harleysville , where it passes through suburban residential neighborhoods before heading into a commercial area , crossing PA 113 ( Harleysville Pike ) . 
 In the area of this intersection , PA 63 is briefly a divided highway . After PA 113 , the road passes through the center of Harleysville . The road turns south , becoming a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane before it heads to the southeast again as a two @-@ lane road , continuing past a mix of farm fields and residential and commercial development . PA 63 bypasses the community of Mainland to the northeast with two westbound lanes and one eastbound lane before entering Towamencin Township near a crossing of Skippack Creek . 
 In Towamencin Township , PA 63 widens to four lanes and is called Sumneytown Pike again , passing woods and development before reaching an interchange with I @-@ 476 ( Pennsylvania Turnpike Northeast Extension ) . Southeast of I @-@ 476 , the route enters a commercial area , where the highway turns northeast onto Forty Foot Road , a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . PA 63 passes through suburban areas , narrowing to three lanes before widening back to five lanes . Along this stretch , the route passes southeast of Christopher Dock Mennonite High School . A short distance later , PA 63 turns southeast onto Welsh Road and Forty Foot Road continues northeast toward Hatfield as PA 463 . Along two @-@ lane Welsh Road , PA 63 forms the border between Hatfield Township to the northeast and Towamencin Township to the southwest . The road heads through residential neighborhoods . 
 At the intersection with Squirrel Lane , PA 63 briefly forms the border between Lansdale to the northeast and Towamencin Township to the southwest before fully entering Lansdale and becoming Main Street . The road passes a mix of homes and businesses before coming to the northern terminus of PA 363 ( Valley Forge Road ) . After the PA 363 intersection , the road runs through the downtown of Lansdale , where the route crosses SEPTA ’ s Lansdale / Doylestown Line near the Lansdale Transportation Center . The road leaves downtown and heads into areas of homes and businesses . At a crossing of Wissahickon Creek , PA 63 forms the border between Lansdale to the northeast and Upper Gwynedd Township to the southwest before running along the border of Montgomery Township and Upper Gwynedd Township after crossing North Wales Road . 
 = = = Lansdale to Willow Grove = = = 
 At North Wales Road , PA 63 again becomes Welsh Road and passes several businesses as a four @-@ lane divided road . The route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road again as it passes between business parks to the northeast and farms and woods to the southwest ahead of an intersection with US 202 Bus . ( Dekalb Pike ) . Upon intersecting US 202 , PA 63 forms the border between Montgomery Township to the northeast and Lower Gwynedd Township to the southwest . The road passes through a mix of residential and <unk> development , widening into a three @-@ lane road with two westbound lanes and one eastbound lane . PA 63 becomes the border between Horsham Township and Lower Gwynedd Township and crosses PA 309 ( Bethlehem Pike ) , with jughandles controlling the movements from PA 309 to PA 63 . 
 The route narrows back to two lanes as it passes residential subdivisions , becoming the border between Horsham Township to the northeast and Upper Dublin Township to the southwest at the Tennis Avenue intersection . Upon reaching the community of Maple Glen , PA 63 passes businesses and crosses PA 152 ( Limekiln Pike ) and Norristown Road . Past Maple Glen , the road continues past more homes , along with a few farms . 
 Farther southeast , the route widens into a three @-@ lane road with one eastbound lane and two westbound lanes as it passes near business parks . PA 63 soon widens to four lanes , with two lanes in each direction . The road becomes a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane as it comes to the Blair Mill Road intersection , at which point it forms the border between Upper Moreland Township to the northeast and Upper Dublin Township to the southwest . 
 The road becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway that soon becomes undivided as it crosses over the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( I @-@ 276 ) and Norfolk Southern ’ s Morrisville Line before heading into a mix of residential and commercial areas as a five @-@ lane road again . Upon forming the border between Upper Moreland Township and Abington Township , PA 63 becomes Moreland Road , briefly becoming a divided highway . The route heads into the community of Willow Grove as a five @-@ lane road . The road enters a business area , becoming a divided highway again as it passes to the northeast of the Willow Grove Park Mall . The road crosses Easton Road and becomes undivided as it crosses SEPTA ’ s Warminster Line . The route passes a mix of homes and businesses as it comes to an intersection with PA 611 ( Old York Road ) . 
 = = = Willow Grove to Bensalem = = = 
 At this point , PA 63 heads into wooded residential areas as a two @-@ lane road . At the intersection with Edge Hill Road , the route turns southwest onto that road and fully enters Abington Township , eventually turning southeast onto Old Welsh Road . The road curves to the east and crosses into Lower Moreland Township . The road becomes Welsh Road again and widens to four lanes as it enters a mix of residential and commercial establishments in the community of Huntingdon Valley , crossing Pennypack Creek . Upon crossing PA 232 ( Huntingdon Pike ) , the route becomes Philmont Avenue and narrows back to two lanes . PA 63 turns south onto Red Lion Road and crosses SEPTA ’ s West Trenton Line as it continues through wooded residential subdivisions , making a turn to the southeast into Philadelphia . 
 PA 63 enters the Northeast Philadelphia section of the city a short distance past the Pine Road intersection . PA 63 widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and passes between the Island Green Country Club ( site of the former Budd Company Red Lion plant ) and residential and industrial developments to the south . The road continues through a mix of residential and commercial development as it crosses PA 532 ( Bustleton Avenue ) . East of PA 532 , the route passes over CSX ’ s Trenton Subdivision and comes to an intersection with US 1 ( Roosevelt Boulevard ) . 
 PA 63 turns left and follows a concurrency with US 1 , which at this point is a wide boulevard with local @-@ express lanes . The road carries a 3 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 lane configuration as it heads northeast through areas of businesses and industrial parks . After intersecting Byberry Road , the concurrency with US 1 ends at a cloverleaf interchange , where PA 63 heads southeast onto the six @-@ lane Woodhaven Road freeway , which is lined with frontage roads . 
 Woodhaven Road carries the route between an industrial park to the northeast and residential neighborhoods to the southwest as it comes to the Thornton Road interchange . Past here , the freeway passes residential areas on both sides and has interchanges with Academy Road and Knights Road . At this point , the surroundings along PA 63 become commercial as it comes to the Franklin Mills Boulevard / Millbrook Road interchange that provides access to the Philadelphia Mills shopping mall . Within the interchange , the road is temporarily four lanes wide . The frontage roads end past that interchange as Woodhaven Road turns south to cross <unk> Creek and head into Bensalem Township in Bucks County . Upon entering Bucks County , PA 63 has an interchange with US 13 . A short distance south of US 13 , PA 63 ends at an interchange with I @-@ 95 at exit 35 . This interchange also has access to the park and ride at the <unk> Heights Station on Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor and SEPTA ’ s Trenton Line . 
 Two portions of PA 63 are part of National Highway System : between I @-@ 476 and Sumneytown Pike in Towamencin Township and from Norristown Road in Maple Glen east to I @-@ 95 in Bensalem Township . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1911 , what would become PA 63 was designated as Legislative Route 198 between Green Lane and Philadelphia . By 1927 , PA 63 was designated to run from PA 29 in Green Lane to US 611 ( now PA 611 ) in Willow Grove , following its current alignment . PA 63 was extended east to PA 532 in Philadelphia in 1928 , following its current alignment between US 611 and Edge Hill Road in Willow Grove . From this intersection , the road followed Edge Hill Road and Terwood Road east before following Welsh Road to an intersection with PA 163 / PA 232 in Bethayres and following Philmont Avenue between PA 163 / PA 232 and PA 532 . 
 By 1930 , PA 63 had seven auxiliary routes : PA 163 , PA 263 , PA 363 , PA 463 , PA 563 , PA 663 , and PA 763 . PA 63 was moved to its current alignment between Willow Grove and Bethayres by 1940 , with the former alignment of the route between these two points becoming a rerouted PA 163 . Also by this time , PA 63 was rerouted to follow Byberry Road between Philmont Avenue and PA 532 . By 1950 , the PA 163 designation was removed from Edge Hill Road and Terwood Road . 
 In 1954 , the Philadelphia City Planning Commission planned a freeway named Woodhaven Road to run from I @-@ 95 in Bensalem Township northwest to Lower Moreland Township , passing through Northeast Philadelphia . Construction on Woodhaven Road began in 1962 with completion between I @-@ 95 and US 13 in 1963 and northwest past US 1 to Evans Street in 1966 . Following the completion of the freeway , PA 63 was extended east onto it . By 1983 , PA 63 was rerouted to use Red Lion Road and US 1 between Philmont Avenue and Woodhaven Road instead of Byberry Road . 
 The PA 63 freeway was at one time proposed to continue north from Northeast Philadelphia to the Pennsylvania Turnpike in Southampton . From here , the freeway would become known as the Cross County Expressway and serve the PA 611 corridor , utilizing the Doylestown Bypass as it continued north to the PA 33 freeway near Easton . The freeway south of the Pennsylvania Turnpike was planned to cost $ 68 million and be finished by 1975 while the part north of there was planned to be completed by 1985 . However , this freeway was never built . Meanwhile , plans still existed to extend Woodhaven Road from Evans Street to the Montgomery County border at Philmont Avenue . This extension had been approved by the Federal Highway Administration in 1968 and PennDOT had torn down 28 homes in the Somerton neighborhood in order to build the road . The Woodhaven Road extension was cancelled in the late 1970s due to funding issues and opposition from Lower Moreland Township residents who did not want to see increased congestion from the extension . 
 In 1998 , the Woodhaven Road extension resurfaced as a means to relieve traffic along Byberry Road . This proposed extension was to continue west only to PA 532 ( Bustleton Avenue ) . However , Lower Moreland Township officials again voiced their opposition that the extension would increase traffic on area roads . In addition , residents in the Westwood development blocked the proposed road . PennDOT removed the Woodhaven Road extension from its long @-@ range plans in 1996 . 
 Despite this , plans for extending Woodhaven Road resurfaced in 2001 when local officials began discussing the extension with PennDOT . Various options for the extension were created , including extending the freeway as far as Philmont Avenue and possibly PA 232 ( Huntingdon Pike ) as well as widening and improving adjacent roads including PA 532 ( Bustleton Avenue ) and Byberry Road . In addition , the project also calls for replacing the weight @-@ restricted Byberry Road bridge over a CSX rail line . 
 After putting the Woodhaven Road project on hold due to budget issues , PennDOT brought it back again as a parkway that is to continue west to PA 532 , with an estimated cost of $ 30 million . Under this proposal , the railroad bridge is to be replaced , with Byberry Road terminating at cul @-@ de @-@ sacs on both sides . The current Woodhaven Road extension plan continues to face opposition from area residents who fear increased traffic . 
 In June 2011 , the portion of PA 63 in Mainland between Freed Road and Old Forty Foot Road was shifted to a new alignment to the northeast , with the old alignment becoming Mainland Road . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = PA 63 Alternate Truck = = 
 Pennsylvania Route 63 Alternate Truck is a truck route around a weight @-@ restricted bridge over the Unami Creek in Marlborough Township , on which trucks over 30 tons and combination loads over 40 tons are prohibited . The route follows PA 29 , Park Avenue , Schwenksville Road , and Old Skippack Road . It was signed in 2013 . 
 = = Related routes = = 
 PA 163 was a route designated between 1930 and 1940 to connect PA 73 in Philadelphia to PA 63 / PA 232 in Bethayres . Between 1940 and 1950 , the route was redesignated to connect Willow Grove to Bethayres along Edge Hill Road and Terwood Road . 
 PA 263 is a route that connects PA 611 in Willow Grove to PA 32 in Centre Bridge . 
 PA 363 is a route that connects US 422 in Audubon to PA 63 in Lansdale . 
 PA 463 is a route that connects PA 63 in Hatfield Township to PA 611 in Horsham . 
 PA 563 is a route that connects PA 63 in Upper Salford Township to PA 412 in Nockamixon Township . 
 PA 663 is a route that connects PA 100 in Pottstown to PA 309 / PA 313 in Quakertown . 
 PA 763 was a route that connected PA 263 in Hatboro to PA 232 in Lower Moreland Township , following Byberry Road . It was created by 1930 with the designation removed by 1940 . 
 = The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword is an action @-@ adventure game for the Wii home console , developed and published by Nintendo . The sixteenth mainline entry in the The Legend of Zelda series , it was released worldwide in November 2011 . Taking the role of series protagonist Link , players navigate the the skies around the floating island of Skyloft and the land below it , completing quests that advance the story and solving environmental and dungeon @-@ based puzzles . Gameplay mechanics and combat , the latter focusing on attacking and blocking with sword and shield , are reliant on the Wii MotionPlus expansion device . 
 Skyward Sword takes place at the beginning of the Zelda continuity , detailing the origins of the Master Sword , a recurring weapon within the series . The current incarnation of Link , resident of a floating town called Skyloft , heads on a quest to rescue his childhood friend Zelda after she is kidnapped and spirited to the Surface , an abandoned land below the clouds . Armed with the Goddess Sword and aided by a spirit named Fi , Link must ensure Zelda 's safety and stop Ghirahim as he attempts to resurrect his master . 
 Development lasted around five years , beginning after the release of Twilight Princess in 2006 . Multiple earlier Zelda games influenced the developers , including Twilight Princess , Ocarina of Time and Majora 's Mask . Many aspects of the game 's overworld and gameplay were designed to streamline and populate the experience for players . The art style was influenced by the work of impressionist painters including Paul Cézanne . The implementation of Wii MotionPlus proved problematic for the developers , to the point where it was nearly discarded . The music , composed by a team led by Hajime Wakai and supervised by Koji Kondo , was the first Zelda title to use a live orchestra for majority of the tracks . 
 First revealed in 2009 , it was initially planned for release the following year before being delayed to 2011 to further refine and expand it . The game was a critical and commercial success , receiving perfect scores from multiple journalistic sites , winning and receiving nominations for numerous industry and journalist awards , and selling over three million copies worldwide . Feedback on the game later influenced the development of the next entry for home consoles , Breath of the Wild . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword is an action @-@ adventure video game in which players take on the role of series protagonist Link through a series of overworlds populated by monsters and navigating dungeons featuring puzzles and further enemies including dedicated bosses . Link is controlled using the Wii Remote and Nunchuk , and the Wii MotionPlus expansion device is required to play . The greater majority of gameplay mechanics revolve around use of motion controls : these include camera control with the Nunchuck and general <unk> actions and movement linked to the Wii Remote . Jumping across gaps and scaling ledges happen automatically within context . The Nunchuck is also used to make Link perform a forward roll . In addition to his standard pace , Link can sprint for short distances . Sprinting and other actions such as climbing and carrying heavy objects is limited by a stamina meter , which recharges after a few seconds when not performing actions that drain it . When depleted entirely , Link 's movement speed is reduced and he is left vulnerable until the meter refills . Standard navigation takes place from a third @-@ person perspective , while the Dowsing search function switches to a first @-@ person view : Dowsing scans an area for a selected object , with new Dowsing objectives appearing depending on game context . 
 Fighting enemies , which appear in both the overworld and dungeons , relies on Link 's use of his sword and shield . Link 's sword movements are mapped to the direction the Wii Remote is flicked by the player , and other moves include a forward thrust and a stab . Enemy movements are designed to anticipate and block Link 's combat movements . By raising the Wii Remote , the sword gathers energy which can be unleashed in a Skyward Strike . Skyward Strikes are also used to trigger environmental elements such as magical switches . The shield is controlled with the Nunchuck : when the shield is raised , it can be used to reflect attacks . Spin attacks and Finishing Blows are activated by swinging both the Wii Remote and Nunchuck . Link 's health is represented with Hearts , with Link taking damage whenever he is hit : if he loses all Hearts , the game ends . 
 The game takes place on the floating island of Skyloft and surrounding airborne islands ; and the three Surface overworlds where the majority of the main adventure takes place . Side quests for the town 's citizens are unlocked as the game progresses . The different areas of the Surface are accessed through portals in the clouds . Side quests for characters of the Surface are also available , and sometimes mandatory for completing the main quest . The Skyloft overworld is navigated with a great bird called a Loftwing , while the Surface is navigated on foot . Marker beacons can be set on the map for Link to follow , and save points in the form of statues preserve Link 's progress up to that point . During his quest , Link is aided by the sword spirit Fi , who is able to give hints to the player for both environmental elements and enemies : for example , when an enemy is targeted and Fi is summoned , she will give the enemy 's characteristics and weaknesses . 
 Traditional series items such as Bombs used for demolition and the Bow and Arrow for ranged attacks are available as Link progresses through the game , along with new additions such as a mechanical Beetle that flies to areas beyond Link 's reach for a variety of actions including activating switches ; and a whip for grabbing otherwise @-@ unreachable objects and levers . Link 's shield takes damage when blocking attacks fail , and may eventually break . Items and equipment can also be optionally upgraded using materials gathered from defeated monsters and within each overworld environment , making them stronger and more durable . In addition to consuming resources , Link must also pay for the upgrade with Rupees , the game 's currency which is scattered throughout the world . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Skyward Sword takes place at the beginning of the Zelda continuity : according to legend , three ancient Goddesses bestowed a great power capable of granting any wish : the Triforce . The Demon King Demise sought the Triforce , and lay waste to much of the land in his quest for it . The Goddess Hylia gathered the remaining people on a giant outcrop of rock and sent it into the sky beyond the clouds , allowing her to launch a full @-@ scale offensive against Demise allied with the land 's remaining benevolent races . She was victorious , but the land was severely damaged . <unk> years later , the outcrop is known under the name of Skyloft , and its people believe the " Surface " below the clouds is a myth . 
 In the present , knight @-@ in @-@ training Link passes his final exam despite the attempted interference of his class rival Groose , who considers himself a romantic rival for Link 's childhood friend Zelda . After passing the exam and on a celebratory flight together , Zelda is whisked away below the clouds by a dark tornado . After recovering back on Skyloft , Link is led to the island 's statue of Hylia by Fi , the spirit of the Goddess Sword residing within the statue . Link draws the sword , showing himself to be the prophesied hero who will finally destroy Demise . Opening a way to the Surface , Link is guided by Fi to the Sealed Temple , where he meets an old woman who tells him to track Zelda : this leads Link across the regions of Faron Woods , Eldin Volcano , and the Lanayru Desert . While he catches up with Zelda , he is prevented from returning her to Skyloft by Impa , a young woman guarding and guiding Zelda . Link is also confronted by Ghirahim , a self @-@ proclaimed Demon Lord working towards freeing Demise . At the Temple of Time in the Lanayru Desert , Link defends Zelda and Impa from Ghirahim , giving the two time to depart through a Time Gate into the past which Impa destroys as they pass through . 
 Returning to the Temple of Hylia , Link is followed by Groose and the two end up on the Surface together . Link then has to defeat the Imprisoned , a monstrous form of Demise attempting to reach the Sealed Temple , after the old woman shows him a second dormant Time Gate . With the Imprisoned defeated , Link sets out to strengthen the Goddess Sword by passing trials set by the ancient Goddesses and using their gifts to find Sacred Flames to purify and strengthen the blade so the Time Gate can be awakened . Returning to find the Imprisoned attempting to break free , Link <unk> it with help from Groose . Activating the Time Gate and traveling to the past , he finds Zelda and learns that she is the mortal reincarnation of Hylia : Hylia could not kill Demise and was too weakened from their battle to fend him off again , so she created the Goddess Sword and reincarnated as a mortal to find someone who would fulfill her duty by using the Triforce to wish Demise 's destruction , as only mortals can use the artifact . Zelda then seals herself inside a crystal to strengthen the seal on Demise , after granting her power to the Goddess Sword , evolving it into the true Master Sword . 
 Link locates the Triforce on Skyloft and uses it to destroy Demise . With Demise dead , Zelda is freed , but Ghirahim arrives and kidnaps Zelda : though Demise is dead in the present , Ghirahim intends to use Zelda as a sacrifice to resurrect him in the past . Link pursues Ghirahim into the past and fights through his army . He then defeats Ghirahim , who turns out to be the spirit of Demise 's sword , but is unable to prevent Zelda 's soul from being used to reincarnate Demise ' humanoid form . Groose guards Zelda 's body while Link challenges Demise to single combat : Link triumphs , absorbing Demise 's essence into the sword , but not before Demise curses Link and Zelda 's bloodlines to be haunted by his reincarnated rage . To complete the sword 's seal , Link drives it into a pedestal in the Sealed Temple , with Fi accepting eternal slumber as a result . Groose , Link and the revived Zelda return to their time while Impa remains behind as she is a person of that time period and must watch over the Time Gate and Master Sword . In the present , the old woman greets them one last time before she dies and vanishes , revealing that she was Impa . The game ends with Zelda deciding to remain on the Surface to watch over the Triforce : she and Link together establish the kingdom of Hyrule . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 Skyward Sword began development in 2006 , after the release of The Legend of Zelda : Twilight Princess for GameCube and Wii . It was developed by Nintendo Entertainment Analysis & Development , a development division of series publisher Nintendo . Its producer was Eiji Aonuma , a major contributor to the Legend of Zelda series . His main preoccupation during these early stages was whether the developers could continue creating The Legend of Zelda titles using the same development mindset that had been used up to Twilight Princess . The game 's director was Hidemaro Fujibayashi : previously working as assistant director on The Legend of Zelda : Phantom Hourglass for the Nintendo DS , Skyward Sword was his first project for home consoles . He began work on Skyward Sword after finishing Phantom Hourglass , and continued working on the game alongside his work on The Legend of Zelda : Spirit Tracks . When Spirit Tracks was finished , Fujibayashi and the game 's development team transferred back to working on Skyward Sword . 
 According to Aonuma , the team 's starting point for development was the Wii version of Twilight Princess : feeling they had not fully realized their goal of creating a vast and realistic world with Twilight Princess , they used their previous work as a foundation for the next title . They also sought to create a memorable experience equivalent to The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time , by that time considered the series ' most memorable title . Development lasted around five years , and according to series producer Shigeru Miyamoto , the game 's budget was considered quite high for a Nintendo project . The development time was initially estimated at three years , but difficulties and changes in the game 's development extended development time by a further two years : despite this , Miyamoto felt that this was not wasted development time as the first two years went into experimentation . By June 2011 , the game was complete aside from fine tuning and balancing its mechanics . 
 A new Zelda title was first hinted at in April 2008 , when Miyamoto stated that the Zelda development team were reforming to create new games . Miyamoto later confirmed at the 2008 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) that a new Zelda was in development for the Wii . The game was officially unveiled at E3 2009 , although its official title remained unknown . Due to its in @-@ development state , Miyamoto could not show off gameplay as he had wished . Instead , he showed promotional art featuring Link and Fi . He also announced the game 's use of Wii MotionPlus , along with its planned 2010 release window . In a later interview , Aonuma 's comments on the game 's playability brought this release window into doubt . He also noted that his wish to focus on the new game meant that the release date of Spirit Tracks was shifted to the end of 2009 rather than its initial projected release in early 2010 . The game 's official title was announced at the event , along with its revised release period in 2011 and a playable demonstration . According to <unk> , the game was delayed from its planned 2010 release window as the staff felt that they would be releasing an unfinished product if they put the convenience of the company ahead of creating a quality experience . They used the extra year to both finish the core elements and polish up the game as a whole . 
 Multiple promotional elements were created : a five @-@ part online comic was written and illustrated by Jerry Holkins and Mike Krahulik under their Penny Arcade Presents series , and television commercials featuring actor and comedian Robin Williams and his daughter Zelda were made , playing on the actor 's stated love for the series . Skyward Sword released in all regions in November 2011 : it released in Europe on November 18 , North America on November 20 , Japan on November 23 , and Australia on November 24 . The game was released as both a standard edition and a limited deluxe edition that included a gold Wii Remote Plus . An anniversary CD was included with both editions containing orchestrated versions of various iconic musical pieces from the series . Following its release , a game @-@ breaking bug that corrupted save files if three late @-@ game events were taken in a certain order was discovered . Once revealed , Nintendo issued instructions on avoiding it and set up a special channel on their Wii site in Japan to gain feedback , along with offering to manually repair corrupted save files . 
 = = = Scenario = = = 
 The script for cinematic scenes was written by Naoki Mori , who joined the project for one and a quarter years in his role : the cinematic director was Shigeki Yoshida , who was brought on at the same time as and worked on the storyboards with Mori . The initial script was proposed by Fujibayashi based on his perception of the game 's structure . As the game 's theme was the use of the sword , and the sword most associated with the series was the Master Sword , the team decided to make it an origin story for the weapon . An early element was whether to incorporate the creation of Hyrule , while also needing to explain the creation of Skyloft : this initial stage of story development ended up being difficult as their initial story plans were full of contradictions to established series lore due to them wanting to create an origin story for the entire series . These issues were further complicated by the third year of development with the necessity of finalizing the gameplay and environments . Feigning illness , Fujibayashi shut himself away in a hotel room and wrote the synopsis in a single day . Mori wrote the dialogue based on Fujibayashi 's synopsis , who needed to work out the fine details with Fujibayashi . A scene Fujibayashi was intent on including was where Zelda jumped from the edge of Skyloft and Link caught her : this was fitted in for the two characters after the end of Link 's exam . The early part of the story was quite different from earlier Zelda titles , playing out in a similar way to a school drama . Once the script was finished , it was handed to Yoshida so his team could create the cinematics . The total number of cinematics was estimated as 79 , coming to over 120 minutes . 
 The relationship between Link and Zelda was quite different from earlier incarnations , in particular the fact that Zelda was not a member of royalty . According to Aonuma , a recurring difficulty was how contrived the necessity for Link to rescue Zelda became with each passing installment , as their contact may only have been fleeting beforehand . In response to this , the team considered how to make the player care about Zelda and want to rescue her . Having the two characters as childhood friends both served this purpose and cut down on extraneous plot elements . They continued to encourage the player by having Link only just miss her on her early travels across the Surface . <unk> elements were also added to Zelda 's personality by her pushing Link over an ledge : initially intended as a rule of three @-@ style gag , it was cut down to two during development . The figure of Hylia was a new addition to the world 's lore , although her existence was linked to Zelda , with the two being essentially the same character known under different names in subsequent ages . Groose , who acted as Link 's rival , was introduced to make the story more interesting within the school setting . Groose 's maturation during the course of the story was intended to help convey Link 's parallel growth as a character as he was otherwise mute and static . 
 Fi was created before the implantation of Wii MotionPlus , when she was going to be part of some different undefined gameplay concepts unrelated to motion control . Her design was based on the design of the Master Sword , referencing her origins as the sword 's spirit . She also served as an alternative explanatory voice as Link was a silent protagonist . According to staff , Fi 's technical dialogue for each area of the game was written by different people , verbal inconsistencies arose that needed addressing , so Fujibayashi adjusted them all so she sounded consistent . Nearly all of Fi 's dialogue was ultimately written by Fujibayashi . Ghirahim was designed to be similar to the Dark Link character from Ocarina of Time : he could read Link 's movements , requiring players to think strategically to defeat him rather than simply swinging Link 's sword around randomly . Character designs were far more detailed than in previous Zelda titles . Clothing was frequently designed to complement backgrounds , such as Zelda 's pink and red dress in the opening . The game 's use of warm colors and brushstroke @-@ like aesthetics was inspired by impressionist artwork , pioneered in the 19th century by painters such as Claude Monet : a particular element cited by Miyamoto was the sky , which he called a tribute to the work of Paul Cézanne . The basic starting point for the art style was the fact of it being a fantasy world . The final version was referred to as a balance between the more overt cartoon styling of The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker and Twilight Princess , where the cartoon shading was transferred onto an older version of Link . The team settled this artstyle as it would properly portray the more exaggerated actions of some characters and general swordplay while preserving Link 's mature appearance . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 During development , the team faced a lot of problems when designing the game so it would be both familiar for series fans and fresh to old and new players . The pieces of gameplay experimentation meant that the development was " a more fundamental ground @-@ up process " than earlier titles such as The Wind Waker . Their earlier titles had involved lifting elements from earlier games and pasting them into a new entry , but for Skyward Sword the developers wanted to add a new play structure to avoid fans seeing it as more of the same . The original concept for gameplay using the Wii MotionPlus was proposed by Fujibayashi at a point when the team were already developing the gameplay around the console 's standard Wii Remote and Nunchuk control scheme . When first proposed , Aonuma was highly enthusiastic , and his wish to change to Wii MotionPlus meant that work on the game needed to begin all over again . The use of Wii MotionPlus proved challenging for the developers to implement , to the point where at one point Aonuma seriously considered dropping it from the game entirely . After the release of Wii Sports Resort , the team saw how motion controls could be used for swordplay : after talking with the development team , they were able to borrow the technology and used it to create the motion @-@ driven swordplay . The implementation of Wii MotionPlus meant that the enemy artificial intelligence needed to be able to counter it , adjusting their stances depending on the position of Link 's sword . 
 When creating Link 's sword movements , the team initially wanted them to be as realistic as possible , but as this was being detrimental to the character 's portrayal , they had to include unrealistic movements to preserve the atmosphere . The Skyward Strike was initially born from Aonuma thinking up a possible mechanic of holding the sword still above Link : these also gave rise to the game 's title . Having sword fighting relying on Wii MotionPlus freed up other buttons on the controller , allowing the addition of the Dash sprinting option . So as not to interrupt the flow of gameplay , they incorporated other elements into the Dash function , such as scaling walls rather than just slamming into them . The Dowsing mechanic was created early on , based on the gameplay themes of discovery and exploration . Due to the introduction of Dowsing , the team did not have to create environmental landmarks for places and objects of importance as they had done in previous titles . So players would not get lost in the terrain , they also introduced the marker beacons . Items were designed so they could be visible in any area , such as the bright blue Bombs . They were also designed based on their original location : those from Skyloft used a bird motif , while those from other Surface regions used more intricate designs . The Beetle acted as a replacement for the <unk> , as the team wanted an item that players could control . The Beetle and other pseudo @-@ technical items gave rise to the ancient mechanical theme that appeared in the Lanayru Desert region . At Miyamoto 's insistence , the more desirable items that were normally placed towards the end of a campaign were made available to players from an early stage . When designing items , the developers were faced with the usual problems of the interdependence of items and dungeons creating a chicken @-@ and @-@ egg scenario for the developers . The menu for Item access was also redesigned around the use of Wii MotionPlus . 
 In past Zelda titles , the team had made numerous new fields for player exploration , but this time they limited the number of overworlds to three and expanded their content so players would be able to full appreciate them through repeated visits . The team also created the world based on their experiences with Twilight Princess : feeling that the overworld and dungeons were too large with puzzles too thinly dispersed , the team both sought to compact areas and have environmental puzzles in the overworld . The biggest difficulty was ensuring that players could reach areas quickly while still discovering new features and puzzles . The creation of the Skyloft overworld was due to difficulties connecting the three Surface @-@ based overworlds with each other due to drastically contrasting environments . The sky was initially going to be presented similar to the course selection screen from the Super Mario series , but this was changed to an overworld with its own quests and population so Link had a place where he could prepare for his adventures . An initial idea , when jumping down from the sky seemed unlikely to be approved , was to have a huge tower acting as a central hub , with the height at which Link jumped lengthening the duration of his free fall . Once the concept of traveling from the sky had been chosen instead , the Loftwing mounts were created so it looked and felt more rational to players . These overlapping gameplay mechanics triggered the creation of Skyloft , along with elements of the early game such as the Knight Academy . The continual movements and routines of Skyloft 's people were modeled after similar time @-@ driven mechanics from The Legend of Zelda : Majora 's Mask , with similar links between character @-@ specific side quests and the main narrative . Despite the aerial element , the mechanics necessary for free navigation meant a Loftwing racing minigame could not be implemented . 
 Each Surface overworld had a specific theme : the forest overworld revolved around landforms altering gameplay , the volcano overworld focused around changing the rules of gameplay , while the desert overworld was themed around duality between past and present . The first areas , the Sealed Grounds and Faron Woods , were created so players could be eased into the game 's mechanics and navigation . While the forest areas were made to be mostly flat , the Eldin Volcano overworld was made with height differences in mind to provide a greater challenge . Elements in the volcano terrain included areas of lava , and slopes where Link 's sprinting ability would become necessary for reaching new areas . For the Lanayru Desert , the team created three different overworld zones due to its unique time shifting mechanics , triggered with Time Shift stones : this shifting between different zones was inspired by similar systems in Ocarina of Time and Twilight Princess . The portable Time Shift stones were one of many ideas included in the desert overworld as they did not fit with the forest or volcano environments . A difficult feature to include naturally was the remnants of Lanayru 's Ancient Civilization , which used electricity to power both its technology and citizens . Enemy types that recurred in all Surface @-@ based overworld areas were given slightly altered designs so they would be unique to each overworld . The Silent Realms were created as a new mechanic , filled with enemies that could not be defeated and relying on Link 's sprinting ability rather than his weapons or items . While they had experimented with indestructible enemies in Phantom Hourglass and Spirit Tracks , but this time it was changed by restricting Link 's options and actions . They also created a time limit for added strategy , as knowledge of the areas where the Spirit Realms were located was key to completing them . This was also why they were set up in areas players would already be familiar with . They were originally in the form of special dungeons , but this was discarded in favor of the familiar areas . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The game 's sound team consisted of ten people : five handling general sound design , and five handling music composition . Hajime Wakai acted as the game 's sound director and lead composer , with the other composers being Shiho Fujii , Mahito Yokota , and Takeshi Hama . Longtime series composer Koji Kondo had a supervisory role , only composing a single piece by himself : the music accompanying the prologue video describing the mythical origins of Demise and Hylia . He also helped in arranging the other composer 's pieces , using an electric piano and a Mac computer . Fujii was responsible for the music focused on environments , dungeons , boss battles : among her work was the music for Skyloft . She used art and environmental assets so that her compositions would fit in with their environments . A first for the Zelda series , the music was performed using a live orchestra rather synthesized instruments . It was the first time Nintendo EAD had used a live orchestra . Any previous orchestral elements in Twilight Princess , which amounted only to one track , were handled by their Tokyo division . Due to his experience , the department 's musical lead Yokota was brought on to help orchestrate the score . Aonuma initially did not think of using an orchestra , and was still sure the score would remain synthesized even after Wakai asked him about it . An orchestra was finally chosen after Miyamoto insisted upon it , a decision which surprised the entire team . 
 Using the orchestra enabled a greater expression of emotion , which meant that they used it when creating scores for environments , cinematic scenes , and emotional moments within the story . Conversely , the team were given less freedom to adjust tracks as they had been able to with synthesized tracks . Something new they did for Skyward Sword was producing unique themes for specific characters such as Link and Zelda . They also added people singing songs , another element new to the series . One notable element was the game 's main theme " Ballad of the Goddess " , which was actually a reversed version of the recurring tune " Zelda 's Lullaby " . Due to the use of an orchestra and the sheer amount of extra work going into the sound design , the music team doubled in size from the standard five @-@ person group , and became the largest sound team at the time to have worked on a Nintendo game . The positive reception of the orchestral score within the company led to the creation of The Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary Symphony Concert , a celebratory concert featuring orchestrated versions of classic Zelda themes . Music was also woven into the story and gameplay through the use of the harp Link receives , using a recurring theme within the series of music being a central part of the experience . In contrast to previous titles , the instrument could be played at any time rather than at specific times and places . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Skyward Sword received " universal " critical acclaim from multiple journalistic magazines and websites upon release : it received a score of 93 / 100 on aggregate site Metacritic based on 81 reviews . It was the site 's 10th highest scoring game of 2011 , and also ranked as the 6th best @-@ reviewed Wii game of all time . It received perfect scores from multiple publications : these included Famitsu , IGN , Eurogamer , Game Informer , Edge Magazine and <unk> In the case of Famitsu , Skyward Sword was the third Zelda title and sixteenth video game in the magazine 's history to be given a perfect score at that time . 
 Famitsu was highly positive , praising the overworld and gameplay : one reviewer felt that it would form the new standard for both the Zelda series and video games as a whole . Edge was highly positive about all aspects of the game aside from the player @-@ driven upgrade system , and even then it was not enough to spoil the experience for the reviewer . Nintendo Power gave it similar praise , saying that " it 's truly worthy of being called ' epic ' " . Ray Carsillo of Electronic Gaming Monthly appreciate the game 's nostalgic value , but found the motion control difficult to handle and kept the game from being truly great . Jose Otero , writing for 1UP.com , praised the developers for putting effort into moving away from Zelda tradition and called it one of the better games in the series , but said that those detrimental elements that remained such as side quests and some item usage made Skyward Sword " a weird middle ground filled with genuine surprises , inessential carry @-@ overs , and copy / paste quest structures " . 
 GameSpot 's Tom McShea was notably less positive than other critics , praising the storyline , dungeons , enemies and visuals while faulting the controls for being unreliable and feeling that most of the experience felt both unnecessary and overly familiar . Destructoid 's Jonathan Holmes called Skyward Sword his new 3D game from the series , but noted that its exclusive use of motion controls would put off potential players . Oli Welsh of Eurogamer was highly positive , praising the controls , gameplay experience and additional elements such as upgrades : he gave particular praise to the game 's visuals , which were impressive despite hardware limitations . Game Informer 's Phil Kollar echoed both general praise of the gameplay and presentation , and minor issues experienced with the motion controls : he concluded by saying that Nintendo had fulfilled its initial promises for the Wii with Skyward Sword . GamesRadar 's Carolyn Gudmundson called it " perfectly balanced mix of innovation and classic Zelda gameplay " despite minor control issues . 
 GameTrailers noted that , despite its many strengths such as a believable relationship between Link and Zelda , Skyward Sword represented the series ' " first gray hairs " due to some of its mechanics feeling dated in the modern gaming landscape . IGN 's Richard George felt that the game returned The Legend of Zelda to being a revolutionary series in the gaming industry , praising almost every aspect of the game with the exception of the soundtrack , which he felt did not live up to series standards despite its quality . Joystiq writer Griffin McElroy noted that a lot of the game 's content seemed unnecessary and extravagant , but said that beneath this surface lay " the best Zelda game of all time " . Steve Hogarty of Official Nintendo Magazine shared many points of praise with other positive journalist reviews , calling it the greatest game in the series to date . VideoGamer.com 's Chris Schilling called it one of the best Zelda games , praising its motion controls , narrative and treatment of series tradition . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Following its release , Skyward Sword won numerous awards . At IGN 's " Best of 2011 " awards , it was awarded " Best Game " , " Best Graphics " , " Best Sound " and " Best Story " in the Wii category . It was also given the " Reader 's Choice " award in the " Best Overall Game " category : it was also among those nominated as the site 's " Game of the Year " . In Digital Trends ' similar awards , it was named as " Best Action @-@ Adventure " and " Best Wii Exclusive " , and was nominated for the site 's " Game of the Year " award . RPGamer 's own " Best of 2011 " awards named Skyward Sword " Best Console and PC Game " and awarded it for " Best Music " . It also received " Game of the Year " awards from Electronic Gaming Monthly , GameSpot , Edge and Nintendo Power . It received " Excellence " and " Most Valuable Character " awards from Famitsu , the latter being awarded for the protagonist Link . It received multiple nominations in 2012 at the D.I.C.E. Awards , Game Developers Choice Awards and the BAFTA Games Awards . At Spike , the game won awards for " Best Wii Game " and " Best Motion Game " . Skyward Sword has since been ranked among the best games developed for the Wii . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Upon its Japanese debut , Skyward Sword sold nearly 195 @,@ 000 units , reaching the top of sales charts . Sales quickly declined , dropping out of the Top 20 within a few weeks . By the end of December , it had sold less than 320 @,@ 000 units : this was below equivalent sales for other recent home console and portable Zelda titles . The game 's sales were strong overall going into January 2012 , with its largest sales coming from North America . Its first month sales in North America came to around 600 @,@ 000 units , nearly double its Japanese sales . In the UK , Skyward Sword was the seventh best @-@ selling game of November in the multiformat charts , stated as impressive given the waning popularity of the platform . It was also the region 's top @-@ selling Wii title during its week of release , supplanting the previous week 's top seller Just Dance 3 . It failed to reach the top @-@ five best @-@ selling Wii titles for that year . Its total worldwide first @-@ week sales came to 919 @,@ 119 units . According to Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils @-@ Aime , Skyward Sword was the fastest selling title in the series at that time . As of December 2011 , the game has sold 3 @.@ 41 million units worldwide : 380 @,@ 000 of these units were sold in Japan while 3 @.@ 04 million units were sold overseas . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 When development started on the next home console Zelda title , The Legend of Zelda : Breath of the Wild , the developers wanted to improve on what they had achieved with Skyward Sword , along with creating a non @-@ linear world based on player complaints about the linearity of Skyward Sword . Aonuma and Fujibayashi both returned respectively as producer and director . Aonuma 's stated wish with Breath of the Wild was to make " to expand and make a better Skyward Sword " . In addition , Aonuma stated that it might be possible to create an HD remake of Skyward Sword for current hardware . 
 = = = External references = = = 
 = = = Primary references = = = 
 Nintendo EAD ( 2011 @-@ 11 @-@ 18 ) . The Legend of Zelda : Skyward Sword . Wii . Nintendo . 
 = Blackdown Hills = 
 The Blackdown Hills are a range of hills along the Somerset @-@ Devon border in south @-@ western England , which were designated an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) in 1991 . 
 The plateau is dominated by hard chert bands of Upper Greensand with some remnants of chalk , and is cut through by river valleys . The hills support an extensive range of wildlife leading to the designation of 16 Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) . 
 There is evidence of human occupation since the Iron Age . Fortifications include the remains of ancient hill forts , Norman motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles and Second World War airfields . There are also religious buildings such as Dunkeswell Abbey and village churches . The hills are crossed by a network of minor roads with major transport routes including the M5 motorway running around the periphery . 
 = = Natural region = = 
 The Blackdowns form a natural region that has been designated as a national character area - No. 147 - by Natural England , the public body responsible for England 's natural environment . Neighbouring natural regions are : the Devon Redlands to the west , the Vale of Taunton and Quantock Fringes to the north , the Mid Somerset Hills to the northeast , the Yeovil Scarplands to the east and the Marshwood and <unk> <unk> to the southeast . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Straddling the borders of Somerset and Devon , the Blackdown Hills AONB covers an area of 370 square kilometres ( 143 sq mi ) . Heavily cut with sharp valleys , the hills reach their highest point of 315 metres ( 1 @,@ 033 ft ) above sea level at Staple Hill in Somerset . The hills in the southern part of the area , near Honiton in Devon , are more gentle . The Blackdown Hills are a sparsely populated area ; much of the land is used for dairy farming . 
 The River Culm rises at a spring ( grid reference <unk> ) near Culmhead and flows west through Hemyock , then Culmstock to <unk> before joining the River Exe on the north @-@ western outskirts of Exeter . The name of the river is thought to mean ' knot ' or ' tie ' , in reference to the river 's twists and loops ; or is derived from a Celtic river @-@ name meaning winding stream . The River Otter rises near <unk> , where a stream feeds the <unk> lakes : ( <unk> ) . It then flows south for 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) through East Devon to the English Channel at the western end of Lyme Bay . The Permian and Triassic sandstone aquifer in the Otter Valley is one of Devon 's largest groundwater sources , supplying drinking water to Taunton . The other rivers are the River <unk> and the Corry Brook . 
 Villages in the northern , Somerset part of the hills include Staple Fitzpaine , Buckland St Mary , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The larger , more southerly area in Devon includes Dunkeswell , <unk> , <unk> , Hemyock , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Stockland , Sheldon and <unk> . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The geology of the Blackdown Hills together with the adjoining East Devon AONB is unique in south @-@ west England , forming part of the only extensive outcrop of Upper Greensand in the region . 
 The Blackdown Hills form a flat plateau dominated by hard chert bands , made up of clay with flints , of Upper Greensand with some remnants of chalk . The cretaceous rocks rest over eroded Jurassic and Triassic beds , with an outcrop of Rhaetian beds . In the western areas the Upper Greensand is devoid of calcareous material but the sands yield fossils of marine bivalves and gastropods ( snails ) preserved in silica . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Along with the rest of south @-@ west England , the Blackdown Hills have a temperate climate that is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) and shows a seasonal and a diurnal variation , but because of the modifying effect of the sea the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom ( UK ) . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months , with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . December is normally the most cloudy month and June the sunniest . High pressure over the Azores often brings clear skies to south @-@ west England , particularly in summer . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills . The average annual sunshine totals around 1 @,@ 600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds , and a large proportion of rain falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 35 – 60 inch ( 900 – 1500 mm ) . About 10 @-@ 20 days of snowfall is typical . From November to March , mean wind speeds are highest ; winds are lightest from June to August . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 There are 16 Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) in the Blackdown Hills ranging from the 156 @-@ hectare ( 390 @-@ acre ) Black Down and Sampford Commons to Reed Farm pit at just less than 1 @-@ hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 @-@ acre ) . In total they cover 640 hectares ( 1 @,@ 600 acres ) , or just under 2 % of the AONB . Of these SSSIs 79 % are deemed by English Nature to be being positively managed . SSSI is a conservation designation denoting a protected area in the United Kingdom , selected by Natural England , for areas with particular landscape and ecological characteristics . It provides some protection from development , from other damage , and ( since 2000 ) from neglect , under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 . 
 The grasslands , heathland , meadows and mire support extensive populations of birds such as barn owls ( Tyto alba ) and nightjar , with butterflies including marbled white ( <unk> <unk> ) , green hairstreak ( <unk> <unk> ) and the gatekeeper butterfly ( <unk> <unk> ) . The flora includes the heath spotted @-@ orchid ( Dactylorhiza maculata ) , corky fruited water dropwort ( <unk> ) , green @-@ winged orchid ( Anacamptis morio ) , heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) , <unk> ( Pedicularis ) and birds foot trefoil ( Lotus corniculatus ) . The hedgerows and woodlands are made up of ash , hazel ( Corylus ) , grey willow ( Salix cinerea ) and pedunculate oak ( Quercus robur ) which support populations of dormouse ( Gliridae ) , common lizards , siskin , stinking iris ( Iris foetidissima ) and the purple hairstreak butterfly ( <unk> quercus ) . The rivers and streams are home to kingfisher , otter and the Daubenton 's bat . 
 Blackdown and Sampford Commons have extensive surviving examples of the heathland , carr woodland and marshy grassland habitats that have developed on the acidic soils overlying the Greensand and Keuper <unk> of the Blackdown Hills . The heathland supports a typical invertebrate fauna , including a wide variety of butterfly species , and with spiders notably abundant . The site is regionally important for birds which favour heathland habitats . 
 <unk> , a grassland clearing in a forestry plantation well known for its butterflies including Duke of Burgundy , marsh fritillary and wood white , is a candidate for Special Area of Conservation ( <unk> ) . These are designated under the European Commission Habitats Directive ( 92 / 43 / EEC ) as internationally important habitats . 
 = = History = = 
 <unk> studies have shown that organic material began to accumulate on the Blackdown Hills in the Mesolithic and Neolithic periods with areas of open meadow , grass land with small woodland components being identified . There are several Bronze Age burial sites including Robin Hood 's Butts near <unk> . 
 Notable archaeological sites include the Iron Age hill forts at <unk> Castle , Hembury and Castle Neroche . Hembury is a Neolithic causewayed enclosure near Honiton . It dates to the late fifth and early fourth millennia BC and is believed to have been the capital of the Dumnonii tribe . The fort is situated on a promontory to the north of and overlooking the River Dart at approx 178 m ( 584 ft ) above sea level . It has given its name to some of the earliest Neolithic pottery in southern Britain . An Iron Age hill fort was later built on the same site . There has been archaeological evidence found on the site of Roman Military occupation , suggesting a Fort within the existing Iron Age site . It is now a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 Fourteen hill slope enclosures , dating from the Iron Age have been identified on the Blackdown Hills , and prehistoric remains , from about 100 BC , have been found in Hemyock . 
 Castle Neroche is a Norman motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle on the site of an earlier hill fort near Staple Fitzpaine . The hill rises to 260 metres ( 853 ft ) on the northern escarpment of the Blackdown Hills . The castle was probably built by Robert of Mortain in the 11th century and probably went out of use in the 12th century . Around the crossroads at Staple Fitzpaine there are several large sandstone boulders . They are called <unk> and are said to have been thrown by the Devil from Castle Neroche . According to legend if you prick them with a pin they draw blood . English word ' <unk> ' means pillar or post and it is thought likely that this gave the village the first part of its name . The second part of the name comes from the Fitzpaine family who owned the manor between 1233 and 1393 . 
 A Roman bath house and Edwardian folly in the village of <unk> were excavated by the archaeological television programme Time Team . There is also evidence of iron workings in the Romano @-@ British period , at Dunkeswell , which radiocarbon dating has placed in the 2nd century . It has been suggested that these and other iron @-@ based technologies gave the hills a fairly industrial landscape during the Romano @-@ British period , providing a source of the name Blackdown Hills . Local iron ores were smelted at Hemyock in small bloomeries ( furnaces ) to produce pure iron until the Middle Ages . 
 At <unk> a battle between the native Britons and King Ine 's Saxon army , put an end ( temporarily ) to the Kings expansion to the west . In 710 , Ine and Nothhelm fought against Geraint of Dumnonia , according to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle ; John of Worcester states that Geraint was killed in this battle . Ine 's advance brought him control of what is now Devon , the new border with Dumnonia being the river Tamar . 
 Just to the north of Culmstock , at Culmstock Beacon , is one of a chain of Elizabethan beacons built to warn of possible invasion by the Spanish Armada . On 5 November 1380 , King Richard II granted Sir William and Lady Margaret <unk> a licence to crenellate the Hemyock manor house , meaning the permission to fortify it . Over the centuries , Hemyock Castle had many notable owners including Lord Chief Justice Sir John Popham . During the English Civil War it was held for Parliament , subjected to a brief but brutal siege and eventually slighted to destroy its military value . Parts of the castle walls , towers and moat still remain . They are a scheduled ancient monument and include displays of history and archaeology . The castle was also owned by General Sir John Graves Simcoe the first lieutenant @-@ governor of Upper Canada in 1792 . He is buried at Wolford Chapel near Dunkeswell . The chapel is now owned by the Province of Ontario . 
 Early attempts were made by Charles I to enclose parts of the Blackdowns in the 1630s however this was opposed by the local lord and the commoners . He managed to enclose 1 @.@ 634 acres ( 6 @,@ 610 m2 ) and soon sold these , but many of the hedges and fences were removed during the English Civil War . This was followed by further attempts at enclosure in 1658 but again only about a third was successfully enclosed , which remained the situation until 1833 when the rest of the hills were enclosed . 
 Coldharbour Mill was built around 1800 to exploit the available water power of the River Culm and was used for wool and yarn production until its commercial closure in 1981 . It is now managed by an educational trust and plays a role in telling the industrial history of the area . 
 The Wellington Monument is located on Wellington Hill at grid reference <unk> , 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of Wellington , Somerset . It was erected to celebrate the Duke of Wellington 's victory at the Battle of Waterloo . The foundation stone was laid in 1817 , on land belonging to the Duke , but the monument was not completed until 1854 . Its design was inspired by an Egyptian obelisk , but in the shape of the type of bayonet used by Wellington 's armies . It is now owned by the National Trust , and is floodlit at night . 
 The artist Robert <unk> Bevan worked in the Blackdown Hills from 1912 – 1925 as a guest of landowner and amateur artist Harold Harrison . Until the end of his life Bevan continued to paint in the <unk> valley and nearby <unk> his angular style sitting well with the strong patterning of the landscape . Many of the images that he produced in the area are now in national museums . 
 In the Second World War , airbases were built at Dunkeswell , <unk> and Culmhead . Dunkeswell Aerodrome ( IATA : N / A , ICAO : <unk> ) was built in the Second World War by the RAF , briefly used by the USAF , and then the Fleet <unk> 7 of the USN . It was the only American Navy air base commissioned on UK soil during the Second World War . 
 According to local legend , the Holman <unk> Inn is the home of a hearth spirit called <unk> Charlie . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The Blackdown Hills have , since 1991 , been designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) . As they have the same landscape quality , AONBs may be compared to the national parks of England and Wales . AONBs are created under the same legislation as the national parks : the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . However , National Parks , unlike AONBs , have their own authorities and have special legal powers to prevent unsympathetic development . By contrast , there are very limited statutory duties imposed on local authorities within an AONB . Further regulation and protection of AONBs was added by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 . 
 The total population of the Blackdown Hills AONB in 2001 was 13 @,@ 300 ; of which 10 @,@ 500 live in Devon and 2 @,@ 800 within Somerset . Many of the villages have their own parish councils which have some responsibility for local issues . The Blackdown Hills AONB is managed by a partnership of public bodies , local organisations and voluntary groups with an active interest in the hills . Funding is provided by Devon and Somerset County Councils , East Devon , Mid Devon , South Somerset and Taunton Deane Councils and Natural England . 
 The AONB straddles the borders of three parliamentary constituencies : Tiverton and Honiton , Taunton Deane and Yeovil . The area is also part of the European Parliament 's South West England constituency . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Dunkeswell Abbey , a Cistercian monastery and offshoot of Forde Abbey , was founded in 1201 by William Briwere . The abbey was closed in 1539 and granted to Lord Russell . It was mostly demolished promptly , though a section remained in domestic use until the 19th century . In 1842 , a parish church was built on a part of the site . Some surviving fragments of monastery include the partial end wall of the <unk> range and parts of a gatehouse . Some carved fragments survive within the Victorian era church . 
 The Church of St Peter in Staple Fitzpaine was originally built in the Norman style , and has a Norman doorway reset in the south aisle . The chancel dates from the 14th century ; the north aisle was added and the church <unk> in the 15th century . The tower dates from about 1500 . The south porch and the vestry are much more recent , dating from 1841 . The crenellated 3 @-@ stage tower , has merlons pierced with trefoil headed arches set on a quatrefoil pierced parapet . The church has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The Blackdown Hills are crossed by a network of minor roads . There are several major roads including the A30 , A303 and A35 . The M5 motorway is at the northwestern boundary of the AONB . The Bristol to Exeter line and the remains of the Grand Western Canal run , quite close in places , to the west of the M5 motorway but do not pass through the Blackdown Hills . 
 The Culm Valley Light Railway opened in 1876 , having been built by local enterprise . The line was purchased by the Great Western Railway , which had operated it from the start , in 1880 . The line closed to passengers in 1963 but served the milk depot at Hemyock until its closure in 1975 . 
 Dunkeswell Aerodrome ( IATA : N / A , ICAO : <unk> ) is now a busy civilian airfield with a mix of light aircraft , microlights and parachuting . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Blackdown Hills AONB is unique in that there are no towns or cities within its boundary . Employment opportunities are concentrated in the surrounding towns and in a number of small @-@ scale industrial parks — notably around Dunkeswell airfield . A resurgence of interest in local and sustainable food production has led to significant growth in the number and variety of small @-@ scale food and drink businesses in the area in recent years . Tourism is also a significant contributor to the local economy with visitors attracted by activities such as walking and riding . 
 The Blackdown Hills Business Association was established as a member organisation in 2002 to encourage and support all businesses that are based in or serve the Blackdown Hills . Membership stands at around 400 businesses . 
 = On My Way ( Glee ) = 
 " On My Way " is the fourteenth episode and winter finale of the third season of the American musical television series Glee , and the fifty @-@ eighth overall . Written by Roberto Aguirre @-@ Sacasa and directed by Bradley Buecker , the episode aired on Fox in the United States on February 21 , 2012 . It features New Directions competing against the Dalton Academy Warblers at the Regionals show choir competition , Rachel ( Lea Michele ) and Finn ( Cory Monteith ) moving up their wedding , the return of special guest stars Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell as Rachel 's fathers , and the attempted suicide of Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) . 
 The episode received a strong and varied reaction from reviewers . Most heaped praise on the scenes featuring Karofsky , both the events leading up to his suicide attempt and when Kurt ( Chris Colfer ) visited him in the hospital . However , many felt the strength of this storyline unbalanced the episode , and the rest of the episode , particularly the Regionals competition and the Rachel and Finn wedding storyline , did not measure up . The final scene , which ended with Quinn ( Dianna Agron ) being in a potentially fatal car crash , was controversial . 
 The only song that was given a strongly enthusiastic reception was " Cough Syrup " , which was sung by Blaine ( Darren Criss ) and used to soundtrack the Karofsky suicide sequence . The other songs , all performances for the Regionals competition , received a mixture of reviews . Five of the six singles released from this episode charted on both the Billboard Hot 100 and the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 ; the mash @-@ up of " Fly " and " I Believe I Can Fly " performed by New Directions charted the highest in the US , while " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " performed by the Troubletones as part of the New Directions set charted the best of the five in Canada . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 46 million American viewers and received a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership was up from " Heart " , which aired the previous week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 With the Regionals Competition imminent , Dalton Academy Warblers captain Sebastian Smythe ( Grant Gustin ) threatens to post a sexually explicit photoshopped picture of Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) on the Internet unless New Directions co @-@ captain Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) withdraws from the competition . Rachel , who believes that her performance is crucial to her admission to NYADA , refuses to do so , which angers Finn . 
 Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) is outed at his school and subsequently bullied by his teammates in the locker room . He is also mercilessly attacked online . Karofsky , devastated , attempts suicide by hanging , but is saved in time by his father . The news causes shock at his old school , McKinley High : Members of the staff believe they could have done more to help him when he had been a student there , while Kurt blames himself for ignoring Karofsky 's repeated phone calls that week . It also shocks Sebastian , who had cruelly rebuffed Karofsky at a gay bar , and he destroys the photos of Finn , thus abandoning his attempt at blackmail . New Directions coach Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) has all of the members reveal something they are looking forward to in the future , to remind them that no matter how low they think their lives have sunk , they should not forget what is ahead of them . Rachel and Finn apologize to each other , and decide to get married the day after Regionals . 
 Regionals opens with the Warblers performing two songs , " Stand " and " Glad You Came " , and the second group , the Golden <unk> , are strong performers as well . In the choir room , before New Directions goes on , Finn announces that he and Rachel are getting married afterward , and tells the group to live each day as if it is their last . New Directions opens their set with a mash @-@ up of " Fly " and " I Believe I Can Fly " , which is followed by a Troubletones performance of " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " . Rachel ends the set by performing " Here 's to Us " , and New Directions wins the competition , with the Warblers finishing second . 
 Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) asks cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) to allow her to rejoin the Cheerios , but Sue refuses , although she confides in Quinn that she is pregnant . However , following Regionals , she changes her mind , and gives Quinn a cheerleading uniform . Quinn also changes her mind about Finn and Rachel 's marriage and tells Rachel that she now supports it , and hopes it isn 't too late to be a bridesmaid . 
 Hiram Berry ( Jeff Goldblum ) and Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) attempt to devise a last @-@ minute scheme to derail the wedding . Rachel is reluctant to start without Quinn , who has driven home to pick up her bridesmaid 's dress , and texts Quinn to find out where she is . Quinn is responding to Rachel 's text when a truck crashes into the driver 's side of her car . 
 = = Production = = 
 " On My Way " is the second episode to be written by co @-@ producer Roberto Aguirre @-@ Sacasa , whose first episode was this season 's " The First Time " ; the episode was directed by co @-@ executive produce Bradley Buecker . The cast began work on the episode on January 30 , 2012 ; the final two numbers for the previous episode , " Heart " , were filmed on the following day , January 31 , 2012 . The Regionals competition scenes concluded the filming for the episode , and were shot on the two days ending February 8 , 2012 . 
 Special guest stars Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell return as Rachel 's fathers Hiram and LeRoy Berry . Other recurring guest stars include glee club members Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) , Rory Flanagan ( Damian McGinty ) and Sugar Motta ( Vanessa Lengies ) , Dalton Academy Warbler Sebastian Smythe ( Grant Gustin ) , Kurt and Finn 's parents Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) and Carole Hudson @-@ Hummel ( Romy Rosemont ) , former McKinley student Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) and his father Paul ( Daniel Roebuck ) , Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) , football coach Shannon Beiste ( Dot @-@ Marie Jones ) , and new McKinley transfer student Joe Hart ( Samuel Larsen ) . Glee co @-@ creator Ian Brennan appeared in the episode as a Regionals competition judge named <unk> , a parody of the character <unk> . NeNe Leakes , who plays coach Roz Washington , was announced by a Fox press release as guest starring in the episode , and Leakes and Chris Colfer both tweeted a picture of the two of them together from the set during the filming of the Regionals competition , but the scenes shot with Leakes did not appear in the episode as broadcast , nor was she credited . A scene between Rachel and Quinn , which was shown during a promo for the episode , also did not appear , having been cut " for time " , but it was released as a YouTube video on August 2 , 2012 , by executive producer Ryan Murphy . 
 The episode features performances of cover versions of eight songs , and seven of them are being released as six singles , available for downloading , with the two @-@ song mash @-@ up released as one single . The songs on the singles include " Cough Syrup " by Young the Giant , performed by Darren Criss ; " Glad You Came " by The Wanted and " Stand " by Lenny Kravitz , performed by the Dalton Academy Warblers ; Kelly Clarkson 's " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " performed by the Troubletones , a mash @-@ up of " Fly " by Nicki Minaj featuring Rihanna with R. Kelly 's " I Believe I Can Fly " performed by New Directions ; and " Here 's to Us " by Halestorm , performed by Michele and New Directions . The eighth song is performed by a glee club from the school Our Lady of Perpetual Sorrow : Eric Barnum 's setting of Lord Byron 's poem " She Walks in Beauty " . The vocal rendition comes from a 2008 recording by University of Redlands ' Madrigal Singers . The soundtrack uses the original " Chapel of Love " by The Dixie Cups during the episode 's final sequence ; the song was briefly covered by Hiram and LeRoy Berry in the previous episode , " Heart " . 
 The teen suicide storyline , and the public service announcement broadcast during the episode for The Trevor Project , an organization that works to prevent LGBT suicide , resulted in a record number of calls to the project 's hotline and record traffic for its website . According to Trevor Project cofounder Peggy <unk> , because the show " worked in conjunction " with them , they were prepared in advance to handle the greater hotline traffic , which was " triple the [ usual ] number of calls " ; they also saw a nearly sevenfold increase to 10 @,@ 000 website visitors on the evening the program aired . 
 The " idea for a character to get into a texting @-@ while @-@ driving accident " has been under consideration since April 2010 , and was inspired by the appearance of the show 's cast early that month on The Oprah Winfrey Show . At the time , the cast members signed contracts at Winfrey 's behest , pledging not to text while they were driving . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " On My Way " was first broadcast on February 21 , 2012 in the United States on Fox . It received a 3 @.@ 0 / 8 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and attracted 7 @.@ 46 million American viewers during its initial airing , an increase over the 2 @.@ 8 / 8 rating / share and 6 @.@ 99 million viewers of the previous episode , which was broadcast on February 14 , 2012 . Viewership increased slightly in Canada , where 1 @.@ 74 million viewers watched the episode on the same day as its American premiere . It was the fifteenth most @-@ viewed show of the week , down two slots but up about 1 % from the 1 @.@ 72 million viewers who watched " Heart " the previous week . 
 In the United Kingdom , " On My Way " first aired on March 29 , 2012 , and was watched on Sky 1 by 763 @,@ 000 viewers . Viewership was down over 3 % from " Heart " , which attracted 792 @,@ 000 viewers when it aired the week before . In Australia , " On My Way " was broadcast on March 23 , 2012 . It was watched by 558 @,@ 000 viewers , which made Glee the fifteenth most @-@ watched program of the night , down from fourteenth two weeks before , when the previous episode , " Heart " , aired . Actual viewership declined less than 1 % from the 563 @,@ 000 viewers on March 9 , 2012 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 There was a strong and varied reaction to the episode by reviewers . Erica Futterman of Rolling Stone described it as " an emotional rollercoaster that at times may have been jarring or heavy @-@ handed , but overall did what a winter finale should : gave us plenty of surprises , while setting things up for the future " . IGN 's Robert Canning was " won over by a powerfully acted and directed story " and gave the episode a " great " rating of 8 @.@ 0 out of 10 ; he noted that " as is often the case , the smaller stories involving Karofsky and Quinn were more successful than larger arcs like Rachel and Finn 's " . Bobby Hankinson of the Houston Chronicle said that rather than " a million different storylines " there were a few " really good ones " and added , " It was chaos , but controlled chaos . " The A.V. Club 's Todd VanDerWerff wrote , " The sequence in which Karofsky prepared himself for death was , unquestionably , one of the best things Glee has ever done . " He added that it was " all the more a shame " that it occurred in an episode that did not know how to make effective use of " the impact of that moment " , and he gave the episode as a whole a " D " grade . In a similar vein , James Poniewozik of Time said , " the beginning of the episode was a very effective 15 minutes or so of television " , but said that was also the episode 's problem . Michael Slezak of TVLine noted that the show 's " audacity " allowed it " to tackle some of the most important issues of the day with a <unk> and honesty that aren ’ t merely refreshing , but absolutely necessary " , and added , " If I ’ ve got any complaint with the episode , it would have to be that for a show that ’ s billed as a musical comedy , there certainly weren ’ t many laughs , and the musical interludes seemed like something of an afterthought " . In a similar vein , Billboard 's Rae Votta wrote , " Any thoughts that Glee is , in fact , a comedy should be soundly crushed by now . It 's a fantastical reality , and sometimes you laugh at that , but other times you cry . " 
 The sequence where Karofsky attempts suicide was greatly praised on many levels ; Slezak called it " as devastating as anything I ’ ve seen on TV this year " . Canning wrote that " the initial locker room scene was heartbreaking " and " Max Adler 's subtle facial expressions were brilliant " . Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV applauded Adler " for doing such an amazing job " on the suicide scene . She stated , " I would have preferred if Karofsky 's story line would have been the focus of the entire episode . " BuddyTV 's John Kubicek was critical of the entire storyline , and wrote that teen suicide was " one of those incredibly sensitive issues " that " shouldn 't be taken on so directly by a light , silly musical comedy like Glee " . VanDerWerff commented that " as the show got the little details of Karofsky 's desperate act just right , the whole thing took on a weight " , and singled out the scene " where the teachers talked about what had happened and the smash cut to Karofsky 's father screaming at him to get up " as " heart @-@ wrenching " ; he added , " This was the Glee I had first loved , the Glee that could blend music and romance and comedy and highly volatile drama into one cocktail " , though he also said that the episode had failed to " pay off those emotions " . Bell declared that " best scene in the entire episode is when Kurt visits Karofsky in the hospital " . Joseph Brannigan Lynch of Entertainment Weekly called it " one of the most touching scenes of this season " and " guileless , well @-@ acted and eye @-@ watering " . Votta wrote , " As always , Kurt and Karofsky 's scenes shine as the strongest in whichever episode they 're featured . " 
 MTV 's Kevin P. Sullivan wrote that the episode " jammed in Regionals , something that used to matter " , and did so without any " meaningful buildup to the competition " . Poniewozik described the competition showdown as " unconnected with the episode we began watching " , and Canning said that " Regionals just got in the way " and the performances " did a disservice to what was going on with Karofsky " . Votta characterized the McKinley victory as " so secondary to the point of this episode that it feels completely anticlimactic " , and VanDerWerff summarized , " When New Directions hoists that trophy aloft at the end , it ’ s about the least compelling victory for the group yet . " 
 VanDerWerff said that Morrison had " a nice moment when he underplays the scene where he talks about how Will once contemplated suicide after getting caught cheating on a test " , though while Lynch thought the " idea of the scene was nice " , it was " more awkward than meaningful " . Slezak called it " the worst moment of the episode " , and criticized the " utter lack of context " regarding what else Will might have been going through . Kubicek described it as an " embarrassingly uncomfortable speech " , and Will 's implicit comparison of cheating on a test to the stresses of teenage homosexuality was " just wrong " . VanDerWerff thought that the next part of the sequence had " a smallness , a realness to the scene that 's kind of beautiful , really " , and that it feels " like they 're actual high school kids " ; Votta commented that " as the kids admit all the things they are looking forward to " , it reminds viewers why they are " rooting for this ragtag bunch " . 
 The wedding of Rachel and Finn did not excite interest among reviewers . Votta said the plot " continues to feel exhausting " and was " small in comparison to the other threads going on " , and Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal called it the " most preposterous of all " the storylines . VanDerWerff wrote , " I can buy that Finn and Rachel would be that stupid as to think getting married would perk everybody right on up " , as could Votta , who likened it to " people needing to find [ something ] positive to focus " on , " even if that supposedly positive thing is its own train wreck " . The Washington Post 's Jen Chaney wondered why the showed " squander [ ed ] the presence of Jeff Goldblum and Brian Stokes Mitchell for the second week in a row " . 
 Bell lauded the " brilliant conversation between Quinn and Sue toward the end where Sue told Quinn that she admired her " . Lynch though that Kurt was " out of line " when he " declared Quinn didn 't know what it was like to truly suffer " . He noted that she was " kicked out of her house and disowned by her father while pregnant " and added , " she 's suffered plenty for a teenager " . He said about the episode 's final scene , which ended as the car Quinn was driving was about to be hit by a rapidly moving truck , " you can 't help but feel sucker @-@ punched when something like this happens " . Flandez called it a " cowardly ending " , but Canning praised the " good cliffhanger " , and the " subtle enough " storytelling that did not " telegraph anything " before the closing sequence . 
 A number of reviewers praised Sebastian 's villainous ways despite his decision to abandon his blackmail attempt . Futterman noted that people had just gotten " used to the idea of a well @-@ played villain on the show " , while Amy Reiter of The Los Angeles Times expressed doubt about a complete conversion : " We 'll see how long that lasts . " Slezak called him a " gem when it comes to delivering spicy one @-@ liners " , though he was less enthusiastic about the character 's vocal solos , as was Canning , who nevertheless hailed Sebastian as a " fine nemesis " . 
 Absent more screen time for the Karofsky storyline , Bell said that the episode " felt more like a PSA " as it " plugged everything from The Trevor Project to Lady Gaga 's Born This Way Foundation " . Flandez stated that " this incredibly <unk> message of hope became sullied with unexpected product placements : Edible Arrangements , Peanut Butter & Co . , even Sex and the City 3 . " Sullivan was unsure whether the God Squad 's plan to bring " an Edible Arrangement to Karofsky " was a " poorly timed joke or product placement " , but deemed it " regrettable either way " . 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances were given a mixed response by reviewers . Canning wrote that " the performances of the episode didn 't measure up " to the non @-@ musical material , and " were bland and flat " , while Chaney characterized them as " often lackluster " and added that they were part of " the most boring regionals competition ever " . Hankinson , however , called it a " night of very solid performances " . Chaney said that Criss " did a fine job " with the first number , " Cough Syrup " , which was sung during the Karofsky suicide sequence , and gave it a " B " . Futterman said Blaine " flawlessly deliver [ ed ] the vocal " . Lynch called it a " chilling rendition " that was " hard to shake " and gave it an " A − " , the same grade given by Slezak , who wrote , " taken on its own , Blaine 's vocal was strong and passionate — perhaps better than the original " . Hankinson said it was the " best " of the episode , and added that the " scene was really , really well done and carried maximum emotional punch " . 
 The Regionals songs by the Warblers were given a lukewarm reception . " Stand " was characterized by Lynch as " bouncy fun , but in a bland , forgettable sense " , and " Glad You Came " as " rather unmemorable " ; both songs received a " B − " grade . Slezak gave the two songs a " C + " , and called Sebastian 's lead vocals " as bland as a bowl of plain lasagna noodles " , and Canning described his as " a weak voice that doesn 't deliver a very convincing performance " . Votta described " Stand " as " lackluster and mild " , but called " Glad You Came " the " strongest Warbler number since Blaine 's defection " . She added , " It 's catchy and well @-@ choreographed , and if Sebastian 's addition to the Warblers spurred them to finally take their in @-@ Dalton dance @-@ heavy and exuberant performance style to competition , then it 's a welcome one . " Hankinson noted that the Warblers " performed two wonderful songs " that were new to him . Flandez and Chaney , among others , wished it were Blaine leading the Warblers , not Sebastian . 
 Chaney wrote that the mash @-@ up of " Fly " and " I Believe I Can Fly " was " an unexpectedly lovely mix " and gave it a " B + " . Futterman said it " seamlessly " wove the two " into an uplifting and thematically appropriate mash @-@ up " , and credited Santana and Blaine with " an impressive job on Minaj 's rap verses , while Rachel , Artie and Mercedes split tastefully understated solos " . Slezak credited " solid vocals from Artie , Finn , Rachel , and Mercedes , and some not terrible rapping from Blaine and Santana " , but he thought the number " lacked the epic scope you want from a Regionals showdown " and disliked the song " I Believe I Can Fly " ; his grade was a " B − " . Votta characterized the mashup as " just off " and " better visually than it is just to listen to the track " . Lynch said Santana had " attitude to spare " in her rap and New Directions " harmonized wonderfully on this very re @-@ listenable mash @-@ up " , and gave it a " B + " grade . 
 Slezak said that the vocals on " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " were " fantastic " and graded the song an " A − " . Flandez called the Troubletones " fine , fierce and fabulous " , though Chaney wrote that the rendition was " a fairly routine take " . Chaney and Slezak both wondered about the extra girls in the number , but Lynch simply said , " Nice to get a little Troubletones action separate from ( but still part of ) the New Directions " . Lynch 's grade was a " B " , in part because Mercedes 's voice " seemed strangely buried " . 
 Reviewers of " Here 's to Us " differed on what they felt worked and didn 't . Lynch said the song " seemed the wrong fit " for Rachel — " not horrible , but a misfire " — and gave it a " B − " . Chaney was more critical of the song itself when she gave her " C + " grade and described it as " so bland " that it " had little emotional impact " despite Michele 's " determined ferocity " . Votta called the number " pretty " but said the placement of the boys in the balconies was " cute but not really compelling as a staged performance " . Slezak stated that it was " hard to find any fault with Lea Michele 's vocal performances " and gave it a " B + " , and Futterman wrote , " It 's <unk> [ sic ] and celebratory , and Rachel kills it . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 Of the six singles released for the episode , five debuted on US and Canadian top 100 charts . The mash @-@ up of " Fly " and " I Believe I Can Fly " was the highest debut in the US at number fifty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 , followed by " Cough Syrup " at number sixty @-@ five , " What Doesn 't Kill You ( Stronger ) " at number sixty @-@ six , " Here 's to Us " at number seventy @-@ three and " Glad You Came " at number ninety . The chart order was different on the Billboard Canadian Hot 100 , where " ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) Stronger " had the highest debut at number fifty @-@ one , " Fly / I Believe I Can Fly " debuted at number fifty @-@ nine , " Here 's to Us " at number sixty @-@ four , " Cough Syrup " at number sixty @-@ seven and " Glad You Came " at number seventy @-@ four . 
 The singles also had an effect on the charting of the original versions of three of the songs . Kelly Clarkson 's " Stronger ( What Doesn 't Kill You ) " moved back into first place from fourth on the Billboard Hot 100 , and from fourth to third , equalling its previous best showing , on the Canadian Hot 100 . It was beaten there by The Wanted 's " Glad You Came " , which was that chart 's " greatest gainer " , and moved from number twenty @-@ six to number two , its highest position on the Canadian chart to date . " Glad You Came " also made a big jump in the US , and went from number eighteen to number five . " Cough Syrup " by Young the Giant debuted on both charts , at number ninety @-@ five in the US and number eighty @-@ two in Canada , and was the first time the group had been on the Billboard Hot 100 , though the song had previously " bubbled under " the chart at number 117 . 
 = She 's Done it Again = 
 She 's Done it Again is a 1910 American silent short comedy written by Lloyd Lonergan and produced by the Thanhouser Company in New Rochelle , New York . A thief named Sikes decides to rob a society woman who falsely claimed to have been robbed when she in fact pawned her jewelry . A gentleman thief strikes and robs her , but no one believes her . The thief is caught only by a clever detective . The film was the third release of the Thanhouser company and featured the leading players , Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . The film was met with positive reviews , but is presumed to be lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The official synopsis of the film survives in The Moving Picture World . It states : " Sikes , a gentleman of the Raffles order , reads in the paper that Mrs. Eldridge , a young society woman , who alleged that she had been robbed of her jewels , confessed that she had in reality pawned them - admitting that the robbery was a prearranged affair in which she played the leading role and her maid the supporting one . Sikes decides to have it appear that the lady robbed herself a second time . Disguised as a clergyman , he obtains the jewels . Naturally , everybody believes Mrs. Eldridge [ is lying ] again [ ... ] ! And then - a clever detective turns up and shows [ that the ] public opinion [ is ] mistaken by fastening the offense on the real offender . " It is likely that Anna Rosemond played the role of Mrs. Eldridge and that Frank H. Crane played the role of Sikes . 
 = = Production = = 
 The scenario was written by Lloyd F. Lonergan . Lonergan was the writer of both of the previous productions , The Actor 's Children and St. Elmo . This release marked the first comedy release of a scenario written by Lonergan and also the first comedy produced by the Thanhouser company . Lonergan was an experienced newspaperman still employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . He was the most important script writer for Thanhouser , averaging 200 scripts a year from 1910 to 1915 . Film historian Q. David Bowers attributes the director of the production to Lloyd B. Carleton , the stage name of Carleton B. Little . He would direct a number of films for the Thanhouser Company before moving to the Biograph Company by the summer of 1910 . Bowers also credits Blair Smith as the cameraman . 
 The two known credits in the film are for the leading players Anna Rosemond and Frank H. Crane . Rosemond was one of two leading ladies for the first year of the company and joined in the autumn of 1909 , their first year of productions . Crane was involved in the very beginnings of the Thanhouser Company from 1909 . Crane was the first leading man of the company and acted in numerous productions before becoming a director at Thanhouser . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The film was released on March 29 , 1910 and was met with some positive reviews . The film was known to have an alternate or working title of The Liar and the Thief , which is credited by Bowers and appears in an index in the Moving Picture World . Another reference for the film instead shortens the name to Done it Again . Two reviews for the film would appear in Moving Picture World , with the first praising the release and using a testimonial by Ray Norton to support that it is a good comedy . The second review was more nuanced and descriptive by highlighting the original plot and stating , " The acting is sympathetic - one almost wants to say vigorous , and the photographer has performed his part satisfactorily . The combination of these elements has contributed to the success of the picture . " 
 The film had advertisements announcing its showing in Pennsylvania and Indiana . The film is presumed lost , but a surviving film still exists from a quarter @-@ page advertisement in Billboard . 
 = Operation Hardboiled = 
 Operation Hardboiled was a Second World War military deception . Undertaken by the Allies in 1942 , it was the first attempt at deception by the London Controlling Section ( LCS ) and was designed to convince the Axis powers that the Allies would soon invade German @-@ occupied Norway . The LCS had recently been established to plan deception across all theatres , but had struggled for support from the unenthusiastic military establishment . The LCS had little guidance in strategic deception , an activity pioneered by Dudley Clarke the previous year , and was unaware of the extensive double agent system controlled by MI5 . As a result , Hardboiled was planned as a real operation rather than a fictional one . Clarke had already found this approach to be wasteful in time and resources , preferring to present a " story " using agents and wireless traffic . 
 Resistance to the operation by the chosen units meant that much of the preparation was not completed . Adolf Hitler ordered the reinforcement of Scandinavia in March and April 1942 , before Hardboiled was shelved in May . It is unclear to what extent the operation contributed to his decision . Despite its limited impact , the operation gave the LCS experience in planning deceptions , and laid the groundwork for future exploitation of Hitler 's belief that Northern Europe was strategically important . 
 = = Background = = 
 Strategic deception was a new topic for the Allies , having been pioneered in 1941 in Cairo by Dudley Clarke and his Advanced Headquarters ' A ' Force . Following a presentation in September by Clarke , the Joint Planning Staff of the British War Ministry decided that a special organisation should be set up to plan and execute deception operations . They recommended that a " controlling section " be set up to oversee strategic deception planning , which would then be put into practice at the operational level by the armed services . The idea was approved and Clarke was offered the role . After he declined , the Chiefs of Staff chose Colonel Oliver Stanley , the former Secretary of State for War , as the new Controlling Officer . 
 Stanley had great difficulty in convincing the Allied military establishment , which was sceptical of strategic deception and resistant to the idea of a central planning authority , to take part in an operation . Despite obtaining a few staff officers , the London Controlling Section ( LCS ) was , in the words of one member , in a state of " near impotence " . In December 1941 Stanley received permission to plan the LCS 's first operation , following several months of pressure on the Allied command . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Hardboiled had no specific goal for the Allies , other than to convince the Germans of an imminent invasion threat against Norway . Clarke had already established that deception operations should have a clear idea of what the enemy was supposed to do ( rather than what they were expected to think ) . Stanley was unaware of this , not being in communication with Clarke 's department in Cairo . As a result , the objective for Hardboiled was chosen because the resources existed and it would not affect real future operations ( planners had already rejected Norway as a viable target ) , rather than for any strategic advantage it brought the Allies . Stanley was also unaware of the extensive double agent network under the control of the Twenty Committee , having merely been told that MI5 had an avenue through which to pass information to the enemy . 
 Stanley at first proposed that the notional target should be Narvik or Trondheim . Allied commanders decided these were implausible targets because of their northern location and an amphibious landing at Stavanger was chosen , based on planning for Operation Dynamite ( a previously considered , and rejected , invasion of the country ) . The date of the fictional invasion was set for 1 May 1942 . Hardboiled was planned as a real operation , involving actual training and troop movements , culminating in the embarkation of a fake invasion . The plan relied on German intelligence , rumour and leaks to convey the deception to the enemy . Clarke and ' A ' Force had already discovered in previous operations that realistic training was wasteful , having found that much of the effort could be falsified using agents and wireless traffic . The LCS lacked guidance from Cairo and so made many of the same mistakes . 
 The LCS also lacked knowledge of MI5 's Double @-@ Cross System and its double agents . The department were unaware that no uncontrolled German operatives were active in the UK , and so incorrectly believed any deception would have to be highly realistic to appear genuine . 
 Before the operation could go into action , Stanley had one final objection ; he found the codename Hardboiled " silly " . LCS member Dennis Wheatley had picked it from a book of codewords , and explained to Stanley ( who was unaware ) that the name had been randomly selected so as to bear no relation to the operation 's aims . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The Royal Marines Division were earmarked for Hardboiled , trained in mountain warfare , and given cold weather equipment . Realistic invasion plans were drawn up and Norwegian currency was stockpiled . These preparations met with considerable resistance from the armed forces , who considered the operation to be a waste of effort . The need for soldiers in real operations and training meant that , in the end , a lot of the preparation never occurred . 
 The LCS attempted passive deception as part of Hardboiled . Agents canvassed Norwegian refugees for information about Stavanger and for possible interpreters . The hope was that rumours would reach neutral countries and filter back to the German intelligence network . Some deception was also passed on via agents . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hardboiled soon petered out as the Royal Marines were required for an amphibious operation in Madagascar in July 1942 . It had appeared effective , as during April and May the Germans had reinforced the region . Historian Joshua Levine notes that Hitler had a " near @-@ obsession with defence of Scandinavia " during this period and that it is unclear how much the operation had contributed to his strategy . Michael Howard , who wrote the official British history of strategic deception , attributes the lacklustre response to severe setbacks the Allies were then facing on every front , and writes that it is difficult to imagine the Germans believing that a major offensive operation was being planned . 
 The operation did not give the Allies any tactical or strategic advantage ; Howard notes that it provided experience for the planners in handling deception and for the Twenty Committee in proving the worth of double agents . Terry Crowdy , writing in 2008 , argued that any experience that the LCS attained was limited by the lack of guidance from Cairo and knowledge of double agents . Dudley Clarke had already shown that the most effective method of deception involved the use of agents and faked wireless traffic , rather than major training and troop movements . Hardboiled was the first deception plan aimed at Norway . It led into several others , including Operation Tindall and Operation Solo , culminating in the 1944 Operation Fortitude North , one of the Allies ' largest and most successful deceptions . 
 In May 1942 , John Bevan replaced Stanley as head of the LCS , after the latter had asked Winston Churchill for permission to re @-@ enter politics . At the same time , the committee was given much broader powers . Hardboiled was sidelined by the new regime , and had been dropped entirely from the LCS programme by the end of May . 
 = Exhumation and reburial of Richard III of England = 
 The exhumation and reburial of Richard III began with the discovery of the king 's remains within the site of the former Greyfriars Friary Church in Leicester , England , in September 2012 . Following extensive anthropological and genetic testing , the remains of Richard III , the last English king killed in battle , were ultimately reinterred at Leicester Cathedral on 26 March 2015 . 
 Richard III , the final ruler of the Plantagenet dynasty , was killed on 22 August 1485 in the Battle of Bosworth Field , the last significant battle of the Wars of the Roses . His body was taken to Greyfriars Friary in Leicester , where it was buried in a crude grave in the friary church . Following the friary 's dissolution in 1538 and subsequent demolition , Richard 's tomb was lost . An account arose that Richard 's bones had been thrown into the River Soar at the nearby Bow Bridge . 
 A search for Richard 's body began in August 2012 , initiated by the Looking for Richard project with the support of the Richard III Society . The archaeological excavation was led by the University of Leicester Archaeological Services , working in partnership with Leicester City Council . On the first day a human skeleton belonging to a man in his thirties was uncovered showing signs of severe injuries . The skeleton , which had several unusual physical features , most notably a severe curvature of the back was exhumed to allow scientific analysis . Examination showed that the man had probably been killed either by a blow from a large bladed weapon , probably a halberd , which cut off the back of his skull and exposed the brain , or by a sword thrust that penetrated all the way through the brain . Other wounds on the skeleton had probably occurred after death as " humiliation injuries " , inflicted as a form of posthumous revenge . 
 The age of the bones at death matched that of Richard when he was killed ; they were dated to about the period of his death and were mostly consistent with physical descriptions of the king . Preliminary DNA analysis showed that mitochondrial DNA extracted from the bones matched that of two matrilineal descendants , one 17th @-@ generation and the other 19th @-@ generation , of Richard 's sister Anne of York . Taking these findings into account along with other historical , scientific and archaeological evidence , the University of Leicester announced on 4 February 2013 that it had concluded beyond reasonable doubt that the skeleton was that of Richard III . 
 As a condition of being allowed to disinter the skeleton , the archaeologists agreed that , if Richard were found , his remains would be reburied in Leicester Cathedral . A controversy arose as to whether an alternative reburial site , York Minster or Westminster Abbey , would be more suitable . A legal challenge confirmed there were no public law grounds for the courts to be involved in that decision . <unk> took place in Leicester on 26 March 2015 , during a televised memorial service held in the presence of the Archbishop of Canterbury and senior members of other Christian denominations . 
 = = Death and initial burial = = 
 Richard was killed fighting Henry Tudor at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485 , the last major battle of the Wars of the Roses . The Welsh poet Guto 'r Glyn credited Richard 's death to Sir Rhys ap Thomas , a Welsh member of Henry 's army who was said to have struck the fatal blow . Following his death , Richard 's body was stripped naked and taken to Leicester where it was put on public display . The anonymous Ballad of Bosworth Field says that " in Newarke laid was hee , that many a one might <unk> on him " — almost certainly a reference to the collegiate Church of the Annunciation of Our Lady of the Newarke , a Lancastrian foundation on the outskirts of medieval Leicester . According to the chronicler Polydore Vergil , Henry VII " tarried for two days " in Leicester before leaving for London , and on the same date as Henry 's departure — 25 August 1485 — Richard 's body was buried " at the convent of Franciscan monks [ sic ] in Leicester " with " no funeral solemnity " . The Warwickshire priest and antiquary John Rous , writing between 1486 and 1491 , recorded that Richard had been buried " in the choir of the Friars Minor at Leicester " . Although later writers ascribed Richard 's burial to other places , the accounts of Vergil and Rous were seen by modern investigators as the most credible . 
 = = = Burial site = = = 
 In 1495 , ten years after the burial , Henry VII paid for a marble and alabaster monument to mark Richard 's grave . Its cost is recorded in surviving legal papers relating to a dispute over payment showing that two men received payments of £ 50 and £ <unk> respectively to make and transport the tomb from Nottingham to Leicester . No first @-@ person descriptions of the tomb survive , but Raphael Holinshed wrote in 1577 ( perhaps quoting someone who had seen it in person ) that it incorporated " a picture of alabaster representing [ Richard 's ] person " . Sir George Buck 40 years later wrote that it was " a fair tomb of mingled colour marble adorned with his image " . Buck also recorded the epitaph inscribed on the tomb . 
 Following the dissolution of Greyfriars in 1538 , the friary was demolished and the monument either was destroyed , or slowly decayed as a result of being exposed to the elements . The site of the friary was sold to two Lincolnshire property speculators and was later acquired by Robert Herrick , the Mayor of Leicester . Herrick built a mansion close to Friary Lane , on a site that is now buried under the modern Grey Friars Street , and turned the rest of the land into gardens . Although Richard 's monument had evidently disappeared by this time , the site of his grave was still known . The antiquary Christopher Wren ( father of Christopher Wren the architect ) recorded that Herrick erected a monument on the site of the grave in the form of a stone pillar three feet ( 1 m ) high carved with the words , " Here lies the Body of Richard III , Some Time King of England . " The pillar was visible in 1612 but had disappeared by 1844 . 
 The cartographer and antiquarian John Speed wrote in his Historie of Great Britaine ( 1611 ) that local tradition held that Richard 's body had been " borne out of the City , and contemptuously bestowed under the end of Bow @-@ Bridge , which giveth passage over a branch of <unk> upon the west side of the town . " His account was widely accepted by later authors . In 1856 a memorial plaque to Richard III was erected next to Bow Bridge by a local builder , stating , " Near this spot lie the remains of Richard III the last of the Plantagenets 1485 " . The discovery of a skeleton in 1862 in the river sediments near the bridge led to claims that Richard 's bones had been found , but closer examination showed they were probably those of a man in his early 20s and not Richard 's . 
 The origin of Speed 's claim is unclear ; it was not attributed to any source , nor did it have any antecedents in other written accounts . The writer Audrey Strange suggests that the account may be a confused retelling of desecration of the remains of John Wycliffe in nearby <unk> in 1428 , when a mob disinterred him , burned his bones and threw them into the River Swift . The independent British historian John Ashdown @-@ Hill proposes that Speed made a mistake over the location of Richard 's grave and invented the story to account for its absence . If Speed had been to Herrick 's property he would surely have seen the commemorative pillar and gardens , but instead he reported that the site was " overgrown with nettles and weeds " and there was no trace of Richard 's grave . The map of Leicester drawn by Speed incorrectly shows Greyfriars where the former Blackfriars was , suggesting that he had looked for the grave in the wrong place . 
 Another local legend arose about a stone coffin that supposedly held Richard 's remains , which Speed wrote was " now made a drinking trough for horses at a common Inn " . A coffin certainly seems to have existed ; John Evelyn recorded it on a visit in 1654 , and Celia Fiennes wrote in 1700 that she had seen " a piece of his tombstone [ sic ] he lay in , which was cut out in exact form for his body to lie in ; it remains to be seen at ye Greyhound [ Inn ] in Leicester but is partly broken . " William Hutton found in 1758 that the coffin , which had " not withstood the ravages of time " , was kept at the White Horse Inn on <unk> Gate . Although the coffin 's location is no longer known , its description does not match the style of late 15th @-@ century coffins , and it is unlikely to have had any connection with Richard . It is more likely that it was salvaged from one of the religious establishments demolished following the Dissolution . 
 Herrick 's mansion , Greyfriars House , remained in the possession of his family until his great @-@ grandson Samuel sold it in 1711 . The property was subsequently divided and sold in 1740 ; three years later , New Street was built across the western part of the site . Many burials were discovered when houses were laid out along the street . A townhouse , 17 Friar Lane , was built on the eastern part of the site in 1759 and survives today . During the 19th century , the site became increasingly built on . In 1863 Alderman Newton 's Boys ' School built a schoolhouse on part of the site . Herrick 's mansion was demolished in 1871 , the present Grey Friars Street was laid through the site in 1873 , and more commercial developments , including the Leicester Trustee Savings Bank , were built . In 1915 the rest of the site was acquired by Leicestershire County Council which built offices on it in the 1920s and 1930s . The council relocated in 1965 when its new County Hall opened , and Leicester City Council moved in . The rest of the site , where Herrick 's garden had once been , was turned into a staff car park in about 1944 , but was not otherwise built on . 
 In 2007 , a single @-@ storey building from the 1950s was demolished on Grey Friars Street giving archaeologists the opportunity to excavate and search for traces of the medieval friary . Very little was unearthed , except for a fragment of a post @-@ medieval stone coffin lid . The results of the dig suggested that the remains of the friary church were farther west than previously thought . 
 = = Looking for Richard project = = 
 The location of Richard III 's body has long been of interest to the members of the Richard III Society , a group established to bring about a reappraisal of the King 's tarnished reputation . In 1975 an article by Audrey Strange was published in the society 's journal , The Ricardian , suggesting that his remains were buried under Leicester City Council 's car park . The claim was repeated in 1986 , when historian David Baldwin suggested that the remains were still in the Greyfriars area . He speculated , " It is possible ( though now perhaps unlikely ) that at some time in the twenty @-@ first century an excavator may yet reveal the slight remains of this famous monarch . " In 2004 and 2005 , John Ashdown @-@ Hill tracked down two 17th @-@ generation matrilineal descendants of Richard III 's sister Anne of York . He concluded from his knowledge of the layout of Franciscan priories that the ruins of the priory church at Greyfriars were likely to lie under the car park and had not been built over . 
 Although the Richard III Society remained interested in discussing the possible location of the king 's grave , they did not search for his remains . Individual members suggested possible lines of investigation , but neither the University of Leicester nor local historians and archaeologists took up the challenge , probably because it was widely thought that the grave site had been built over or the skeleton had been scattered , as John Speed 's account suggested . 
 In 2004 and 2005 , Philippa Langley , secretary of the Scottish Branch of the Richard III Society , carried out research in Leicester in connection with a biographical Richard III screenplay . She became convinced that the car park was the key location for investigation and contacted Ashdown @-@ Hill after hearing of his DNA research . At her urging , he contacted the producers of Channel 4 's Time Team archaeology series to propose an excavation of the car park , but they declined as the dig would take longer than the standard three @-@ day window for Time Team projects . Three years later , another writer , Annette Carson , in her book Richard III : The <unk> King ( 2008 ) , independently came to the conclusion that his body probably lay under the car park . She joined forces with Langley and Ashdown @-@ Hill to carry out further research , in the course of which she found what she called a " smoking gun " — a medieval map of Leicester showing the Greyfriars Church at the north end of what was now the car park . 
 In February 2009 , Langley , Carson and Ashdown @-@ Hill teamed up with Richard III Society members — Dr David Johnson and his wife Wendy — to launch a project with the working title Looking for Richard : In Search of a King , which Langley envisaged as a " landmark TV special " . Its premise was a search for Richard 's grave " while at the same time telling his real story " , with an objective " to search for , recover and rebury his mortal remains with the honour , dignity and respect so conspicuously denied following his death at the battle of Bosworth . " 
 The project gained the backing of several key partners — Leicester City Council , Leicester Promotions ( responsible for tourist marketing ) , the University of Leicester , Leicester Cathedral , Darlow Smithson Productions ( responsible for the planned TV show ) and the Richard III Society . Funding for the initial phase of pre @-@ excavation research came from the Richard III Society 's bursary fund and members of the Looking for Richard project , with Leicester Promotions agreeing to pick up the £ 35 @,@ 000 cost of the dig . The University of Leicester Archaeological Services — an independent body with offices at the university — was appointed as the project 's archaeological contractor . 
 = = Greyfriars project and excavations = = 
 In March 2011 an assessment of the Greyfriars site began to identify where the monastery had stood , and which land might be available for excavation . A desk @-@ based assessment was conducted to determine the archaeological viability of the site , followed by a survey in August 2011 using ground @-@ penetrating radar ( GPR ) . The GPR results were inconclusive ; no clear building remains could be identified owing to a layer of disturbed ground and demolition debris just below the surface . The survey was useful in finding modern utilities crossing the site , such as pipes and cables . 
 Three possible excavation sites were identified : the staff car park of Leicester City Council Social Services , the disused playground of the former Alderman Newton 's School and a public car park on New Street . It was decided to open two trenches in the Social Services car park , with an option for a third in the playground . Because most of the Greyfriars site had been built on , only seventeen per cent of its former area was available to excavate ; the area to be investigated amounted to just one per cent of the site , owing to the limitations of the project 's funding . 
 The proposed excavation was announced in the June 2012 issue of the Richard III Society 's magazine , the Ricardian Bulletin , but a month later one of the main sponsors pulled out leaving a £ 10 @,@ 000 funding shortfall ; an appeal resulted in members of the several Ricardian groups donating £ 13 @,@ 000 in two weeks . A press conference held in Leicester on 24 August announced the start of the work . Archaeologist Richard Buckley admitted the project was a long shot : " We don 't know precisely where the church is , let alone where the burial site is . " He had earlier told Langley that he thought the odds were " fifty @-@ fifty at best for [ finding ] the church , and nine @-@ to @-@ one against finding the grave . " 
 Digging began the next day with a trench 1 @.@ 6 metres ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) wide by 30 metres ( 98 ft ) long , running roughly north @-@ south . A layer of modern building debris was removed before the level of the former monastery was reached . Two parallel human leg bones were discovered about 5 metres ( 16 ft ) from the north end of the trench at a depth of about 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) , indicating an undisturbed burial . The bones were covered temporarily to protect them while excavations continued further along the trench . A second , parallel trench was dug next day to the south @-@ west . Over the following days , evidence of medieval walls and rooms was uncovered , allowing the archaeologists to pinpoint the area of the friary . It became clear that the bones found on the first day lay inside the east part of the church , possibly the choir , where Richard was said to have been buried . On 31 August , the University of Leicester applied for a licence from the Ministry of Justice to permit the exhumation of up to six sets of human remains . To narrow the search , it was planned that only the remains of men in their thirties , buried within the church , would be exhumed . 
 The bones found on 25 August were uncovered on 4 September and the grave soil dug back further over the next two days . The feet were missing , and the skull was found in an unusual propped @-@ up position , consistent with the body being put into a grave that was slightly too small . The spine was curved in an S @-@ shape . No sign of a coffin was found ; the skeleton 's posture suggested the body had not been put in a shroud , but had been hurriedly dumped into the grave and buried . As the bones were lifted from the ground , a piece of rusted iron was found underneath the vertebrae . The skeleton 's hands were in an unusual position , crossed over the right hip , suggesting they were tied together at the time of burial , although this could not be established definitively . After the exhumation , work continued in the trenches over the following week , before the site was covered with soil to protect it from damage and re @-@ surfaced to restore the car park and playground to their former condition . 
 = = Analysis of the discovery = = 
 On 12 September , the University of Leicester team announced that the human remains were a possible candidate for Richard 's body , but emphasised the need for caution . The positive indicators were that the body was of an adult male ; it was buried beneath the choir of the church ; it had severe scoliosis of the spine possibly making one shoulder higher than the other . An object that appeared to be an arrowhead was found under the spine and the skull had severe injuries . 
 = = = DNA evidence = = = 
 After the exhumation the emphasis shifted from the excavation to laboratory analysis of the bones that had been recovered . Ashdown @-@ Hill had used genealogical research to track down matrilineal descendants of Anne of York , Richard 's older sister , whose matrilineal line of descent is extant through her daughter Anne St Leger . Academic Kevin Schürer subsequently traced a second individual in the same line . 
 Ashdown @-@ Hill 's research came about as a result of a challenge in 2003 to provide a DNA sequence for Richard 's sister Margaret , to identify bones found in her burial place , the Franciscan priory church in Mechelen , Belgium . He tried to extract a mitochondrial DNA sequence from a preserved hair from Edward IV held by the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford but the attempt proved unsuccessful , owing to degradation of the DNA . Ashdown @-@ Hill turned instead to genealogical research to identify an all @-@ female @-@ line descendant of Cecily Neville , Richard 's mother . After two years he found a British @-@ born woman who had emigrated to Canada after World War II , Joy Ibsen ( née Brown ) , was a direct descendant of Richard 's sister , Anne of York ( and therefore Richard 's 16th @-@ generation great @-@ niece ) . Ibsen 's mitochondrial DNA was tested and found to belong to mitochondrial DNA Haplogroup J , which by deduction should be Richard 's mitochondrial DNA haplogroup . The mtDNA obtained from Ibsen showed that the Mechelen bones were not those of Margaret . 
 Joy Ibsen , a retired journalist , died in 2008 , leaving three children : Michael , Jeff and Leslie . On 24 August 2012 , her son Michael ( born in Canada in 1957 , a cabinet maker based in London ) gave a mouth @-@ swab sample to the research team to compare with samples from the human remains found at the excavation . Analysts found a mitochondrial DNA match between the exhumed skeleton , Michael Ibsen , and an unnamed second direct maternal line descendant , who shares a relatively rare mitochondrial DNA sequence , mitochondrial DNA haplogroup <unk> . 
 The other living female @-@ line relative of Richard III , since named as New Zealander Wendy Duldig , is a 19th @-@ generation descendant of Anne of York ; their female lines of descent separated after Anne of York 's granddaughter Catherine Manners . Duldig 's mitochondrial DNA is a match apart from one mutation . Wendy Duldig has no surviving children . 
 Despite the matching mitochondrial DNA , geneticist Turi King continued to pursue a link between the paternally @-@ inherited Y @-@ DNA and that of descendants of John of Gaunt . Four living male @-@ line descendants of Gaunt have been located , and their results are a match to each other . The Y @-@ DNA from the skeleton is somewhat degraded , but proved not to match any of the living male @-@ line relatives , showing that a false @-@ paternity event had happened somewhere in the 19 generations between Richard III and Henry Somerset , 5th Duke of Beaufort ; work by Turi King and others has shown that historical rates of false paternity are around 1 – 2 % per generation . 
 = = = Bones = = = 
 An osteological examination of the bones showed them to be in generally good condition and largely complete except for the missing feet , which may have been destroyed by Victorian building work . It was immediately apparent that the body had suffered major injuries , and further evidence of wounds was found as the skeleton was cleaned . The skull shows signs of two lethal injuries ; the base of the back of the skull had been completely cut away by a bladed weapon , which would have exposed the brain , and another bladed weapon had been thrust through the right side of the skull , striking the inside of the left side through the brain . Elsewhere on the skull , a blow from a pointed weapon had penetrated the crown of the head . <unk> weapons had clipped the skull and sheared off layers of bone , without penetrating it . Other holes in the skull and lower jaw were found to be consistent with dagger wounds to the chin and cheek . The multiple wounds on the king ’ s skull indicated that he was not wearing his helmet , which he may have removed or lost when he was on foot after his horse had become stuck in the marsh . One of his right ribs had been cut by a sharp implement , as had the pelvis . There was no evidence of the withered arm that afflicted the character in William Shakespeare 's play Richard III . 
 Taken together , the injuries appear to be a combination of battle wounds , which were the cause of death , followed by post @-@ mortem humiliation wounds inflicted on the corpse . The body wounds show that the corpse had been stripped of its armour , as the stabbed torso would have been protected by a backplate and the pelvis would have been protected by armour . The wounds were made from behind on the back and buttocks while they were exposed to the elements , consistent with the contemporary descriptions of Richard 's naked body being tied across a horse with the legs and arms dangling down on either side . There may have been further flesh wounds not apparent from the bones . 
 The head wounds are consistent with a 1485 poem by Guto 'r Glyn in which a Welsh knight , Sir Rhys ap Thomas killed Richard and " shaved the boar 's head " . It had been thought that this was a figurative description of Richard being decapitated , but the skeleton 's head had clearly not been severed . Guto 's description may instead be a literal account of the injuries that Richard suffered , as the blows sustained to the head would have sliced away much of his scalp and hair and slivers of bone . Other contemporary sources refer explicitly to head injuries and the weapons used to kill Richard ; the French chronicler Jean Molinet wrote that " one of the Welshmen then came after him , and struck him dead with a halberd " , and the Ballad of Lady Bessie recorded that " they struck his <unk> to his head until his brains came out with blood . " Such accounts would certainly fit the damage inflicted on the skull . 
 Sideways curvature of his spine was evident as the skeleton was excavated . It has been attributed to adolescent @-@ onset scoliosis . Although it was probably visible in making his right shoulder higher than the left and reducing his apparent height , it did not preclude an active lifestyle , and would not have caused a hunchback . The bones are those of a male with an age range estimation of 30 – 34 , consistent with Richard , who was 32 when he died . 
 = = = Radiocarbon dating and other scientific analyses = = = 
 Two radiocarbon datings to find the age of the bones suggested dates of 1430 – 60 and 1412 – 49 — both too early for Richard 's death in 1485 . Mass spectrometry carried out on the bones found evidence of much seafood consumption , which is known to make radiocarbon dating samples appear older than they are . A Bayesian analysis suggested there was a 68 @.@ 2 % probability that the true date of the bones was between 1475 and 1530 , rising to 95 @.@ 4 % for between 1450 and 1540 . Although by itself not enough to prove that the skeleton was Richard 's , it was consistent with the date of his death . The mass spectrometry result indicating the rich seafood diet was confirmed by a chemical isotope analysis of two teeth , a femur and a rib . From the isotope analysis of carbon , nitrogen and oxygen in the teeth and bones the researchers discovered the diet included much freshwater fish and exotic birds such as swan , crane and heron , and a vast quantity of wine — all items at the high end of the luxury market . Close analysis of the soil immediately below the skeleton revealed that the man had been infested with roundworm parasites at the time of his death . 
 The excavators found an iron object under the skeleton 's vertebrae and speculated it might be an arrowhead that had been embedded in its back . An X @-@ ray analysis showed it was a nail , probably of Romano @-@ British date , that by chance had been in the ground immediately under the grave or was in soil disturbed when it was dug and had nothing to do with the body . 
 = = Identification of Richard III and other findings = = 
 On 4 February 2013 , the University of Leicester confirmed that the skeleton was that of Richard III . The identification was based on mitochondrial DNA evidence , soil analysis , and dental tests , and physical characteristics of the skeleton consistent with contemporary accounts of Richard 's appearance . <unk> Jo Appleby commented : " The skeleton has a number of unusual features : its slender build , the scoliosis , and the battle @-@ related trauma . All of these are highly consistent with the information that we have about Richard III in life and about the circumstances of his death . " 
 Caroline Wilkinson , Professor of Craniofacial Identification at the University of Dundee , led the project to reconstruct the face , commissioned by the Richard III Society . On 11 February 2014 , the University of Leicester announced a project headed by Turi King to sequence the entire genome of Richard III and Michael Ibsen — a direct female @-@ line descendant of Richard 's sister , Anne of York – whose mitochondrial DNA confirmed the identification of the excavated remains . Richard III is thus the first ancient person with known historical identity whose genome has been sequenced . A study published in Nature in December 2014 confirmed a perfect whole @-@ mitochondrial genome match between Richard 's skeleton and Michael Ibsen and a near @-@ perfect match between Richard and his other confirmed living relative . However , Y chromosome DNA inherited via the male line found no link with five other claimed living relatives , indicating that at least one " false @-@ paternity event " occurred in the generations between Richard and these men . One of these five was found to be unrelated to the other four , showing that another false @-@ paternity event had occurred in the four generations separating them . 
 The story of the excavation and subsequent scientific investigation was told in a Channel 4 documentary , Richard III : The King in the Car Park , broadcast on 4 February 2013 . It proved a ratings hit for the channel , watched by up to 4 @.@ 9 million viewers , and won a Royal Television Society award . Channel 4 subsequently screened a follow @-@ up documentary on 27 February 2014 , Richard III : The Untold Story , which detailed the scientific and archaeological analyses that led to the identification of the skeleton as Richard III . 
 The site was re @-@ excavated in July 2013 to learn more about the friary church , before building work on the adjacent disused school building . In a project co @-@ funded by Leicester City Council and the University of Leicester , a single trench about twice the area of the 2012 trenches was excavated . It succeeded in exposing the entirety of the sites of the Greyfriars presbytery and choir sites , confirming archaeologists ' earlier hypotheses about the layout of the church 's east end . Three burials identified but not excavated in the 2012 project were tackled afresh . One burial was found to have been interred in a wooden coffin in a well @-@ dug grave , while a second wooden @-@ <unk> burial was found under and astride the choir and presbytery ; its position suggests that it pre @-@ dates the church . 
 A stone coffin found during the 2012 excavation was opened for the first time , revealing a lead coffin inside . An investigation with an endoscope revealed the presence of a skeleton along with some head hair and fragments of a shroud and cord . The skeleton was at first assumed to be male , perhaps that of a knight called Sir William de Moton who was known to have been buried there , but later examination showed it to be of a woman — perhaps a high @-@ ranking benefactress . She may not necessarily have been local , as lead coffins were used to transport corpses over long distances . 
 = = = Plans and challenges = = = 
 The University of Leicester 's plan to inter Richard 's body in Leicester Cathedral was in keeping with British legal norms which hold that Christian burials excavated by archaeologists should be reburied in the nearest consecrated ground to the original grave and was a condition of the licence granted by the Ministry of Justice to exhume any human remains found during the excavation . The British Royal Family made no claim on the remains – Queen Elizabeth II was reportedly consulted but rejected the idea of a royal burial – so the Ministry of Justice initially confirmed that the University of Leicester would make the final decision on where the bones should be re @-@ buried . David Monteith , Canon Chancellor of Leicester Cathedral , said Richard 's skeleton would be reinterred at the cathedral in early 2014 in a " Christian @-@ led but ecumenical service " , not a formal reburial but rather a service of remembrance , as a funeral service would have been held at the time of burial . 
 The choice of burial site proved controversial and proposals were made for Richard to be buried in places which some felt were more fitting for a Roman Catholic and Yorkist monarch . Online petitions were launched calling for Richard to be buried in Westminster Abbey , where 17 other English and British kings are interred ; York Minster , which some claimed was Richard 's own preferred burial site ; the Roman Catholic Arundel Cathedral ; or in the Leicester car park in which his body was found . Only two options received significant public support , with Leicester receiving 3 @,@ 100 more signatures than York . The issue was discussed in the Houses of Parliament ; the Conservative MP and historian Chris Skidmore proposed that a state funeral should be held , while John Mann , the Labour MP for <unk> , suggested that the body should be buried in Worksop in his constituency – halfway between York and Leicester . All options were rejected in Leicester , whose mayor Peter Soulsby retorted : " Those bones leave Leicester over my dead body . " 
 After legal action brought by the " Plantagenet Alliance " , a group representing claimed collateral descendants of Richard , his final resting place remained uncertain for nearly a year . The group , which described itself as " his Majesty 's representatives and voice " , called for Richard to be buried in York Minster , which they claimed was his " wish " . The Dean of Leicester called their challenge " disrespectful " , and said that the cathedral would not invest any more money until the matter was decided . Historians said there was no evidence that Richard III wanted to be buried in York . Mark Ormrod of the University of York expressed scepticism over the idea that Richard had devised any clear plans for his own burial . The standing of the Plantagenet Alliance was challenged . Mathematician Rob <unk> calculated that Richard III may have millions of living collateral descendants , saying that " we should all have the chance to vote on Leicester versus York " . 
 In August 2013 Justice Haddon @-@ Cave granted permission for a judicial review since the original burial plans ignored the common law duty " to consult widely as to how and where Richard III 's remains should appropriately be reinterred " . The judicial review opened on 13 March 2014 and was expected to last two days but the decision was deferred for four to six weeks . Lady Justice Hallett , sitting with Justice Ouseley and Justice Haddon @-@ Cave , said the court would take time to consider its judgment . On 23 May the High Court ruled there was " no duty to consult " and " no public law grounds for the court to interfere " , so reburial in Leicester could proceed . The litigation cost the defendants £ 245 @,@ 000 – far more than the cost of the original investigation . 
 = = = Reburial and commemorations = = = 
 In February 2013 , Leicester Cathedral announced a procedure and timetable for the reinterment of Richard 's remains . The cathedral authorities planned to bury him in a " place of honour " within the cathedral . Initial plans for a flat ledger stone , perhaps modifying the memorial stone installed in the chancel in 1982 , proved unpopular . A table tomb was the most popular option among members of the Richard III Society and in polls of Leicester people . In June 2014 the design was announced , in the form of a table tomb of <unk> fossil stone . In June 2014 the statue of Richard III that had stood in Leicester 's Castle Gardens was moved to the redesigned Cathedral Gardens , which were reopened on 5 July 2014 . 
 The reburial took place during a week of events between 22 and 27 March 2015 . The sequence of events included : 
 Sunday 22 March 2015 : Richard 's bones were sealed in a lead @-@ lined ossuary and placed in a wooden coffin . The remains were moved from the University of Leicester to Leicester Cathedral via the site of the Battle of Bosworth at Fenn Hill Farm and through Dadlington , Sutton Cheney , Bosworth Battlefield Heritage Centre and Market Bosworth retracing part of Richard 's last journey . The coffin , made from English oak from the Duchy of Cornwall estate by Richard 's present @-@ day collateral mitochondrial relative Michael Ibsen , was transferred from a motor hearse to a four @-@ horse drawn hearse for entry into the city of Leicester . 
 Monday 23 – Wednesday 25 March 2015 : Remains lay in repose in the cathedral . Waiting times to view the coffin were reported to exceed four hours . 
 Monday 23 March 2015 : Cardinal Vincent Nichols , the Archbishop of Westminster , celebrated Mass for Richard III 's soul in Holy Cross Priory , Leicester , the Catholic parish church , and in Holy Cross Church . 
 Thursday 26 March 2015 : Reburial in the presence of Archbishop of Canterbury , Justin Welby , and senior members of other Christian denominations . The service , shown live on Channel 4 , included memorial prayers for Richard III and the victims of Bosworth and other conflicts . Actor Benedict Cumberbatch , a distant relative of Richard III , read a poem written for the service by the poet laureate , Carol Ann Duffy . The Royal Family was represented by Sophie , Countess of Wessex , Prince Richard , Duke of Gloucester , and his wife Birgitte , Duchess of Gloucester — Richard III was Duke of Gloucester before coming to the throne himself . Music during the service included a setting of Psalm 138 by Leonel Power ; Ghostly Grace , an anthem composed for the service by Judith Bingham ; a setting of Psalm 150 by Philip Moore ; and an arrangement of " God Save the Queen " by Judith Weir . 
 Friday 27 March 2015 : Unveiling the tomb to the public , followed by commemorations across Leicester . 
 = = Reactions = = 
 After the discovery , Leicester City Council set up a temporary exhibition about Richard III in the city 's medieval guildhall . The council announced it would create a permanent attraction and subsequently spent £ 850 @,@ 000 to buy the freehold of St Martin 's Place , formerly part of Leicester Grammar School , in Peacock Lane , across the road from the cathedral . The site adjoins the car park where the body was found , and overlies the chancel of Greyfriars Friary Church . It was converted into a £ 4 @.@ 5 million visitor centre telling the story of Richard 's life , death , burial and rediscovery , with artefacts from the dig including Philippa Langley 's Wellington boots and the hard hat and high @-@ visibility jacket worn by archaeologist Mathew Morris on the day he found Richard 's skeleton . Visitors can see the grave site under a glass floor . The council anticipated that the visitor centre , which opened in July 2014 , would attract 100 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 In Norway , archaeologist Øystein <unk> hoped that the interest in the discovery of the English king would spill over to Norway . In contrast to England where , with the possible exception of Edward V , all the kings since the 11th century have now been discovered , in Norway about 25 medieval kings are buried in unmarked graves around the country . <unk> proposed to start with Harald Hardrada , who was probably buried anonymously in Trondheim , beneath what is today a public road . A previous attempt to exhume Harald in 2006 was blocked by the Norwegian Directorate for Cultural Heritage ( <unk> ) . 
 Richard Buckley of the University of Leicester Archaeological Services , who said he would " eat his hat " if Richard was discovered , fulfilled his promise by eating a hat @-@ shaped cake baked by a colleague . Buckley later said : 
 Cutting edge research has been used in the project and the work has really only just begun . The discoveries , such as the very precise carbon dating and medical evidence , will serve as a benchmark for other studies . And it is , of course , an incredible story . He 's a controversial figure , people love the idea he was found under a car park , the whole thing unfolded in the most amazing way . You couldn 't make it up . 
 = Phantom Phorce = 
 Phantom Phorce is a remix album of Super Furry Animals ' 2003 record Phantom Power . The remixes had previously appeared on the DVD version of Phantom Power — they were re @-@ released as Phantom Phorce on the band 's own Placid Casual label as a way of ensuring the remixers would receive royalties for the tracks . The album features a commentary from the fictional ' Kurt Stern ' who appears between songs to discuss the re @-@ recording of Phantom Power under his guidance after being unhappy with the original . First editions of the album came packaged in a case that doubled as a paper model of a video game arcade cabinet , and included a bonus CD ; the Slow Life EP . Critical reaction to Phantom Phorce was generally positive . 
 = = Origins , concept and music = = 
 Phantom Phorce features remixes previously available on the DVD version of Phantom Power . According to drummer Dafydd Ieuan the band didn 't have the money to pay the artists involved for these remixes so , in order to provide them with royalties , promised to release an album featuring the tracks on their own label . 
 The record features remixes of every track from 2003 's Phantom Power presented in sequence , along with extra versions of " Valet Parking " and " Hello Sunshine " which appear at the end of the album . The remixes vary from radical reworkings such as Killa Kella 's beatbox treatment of " Golden Retriever " and <unk> 's " unrecognisable " version of " Sex , War and Robots " , to the likes of Mario Caldato Jr 's take on " Liberty Belle " and High Llamas ' " Valet Parking " which are merely " spruced up " . 
 The remixes are interspersed with anecdotes from ' Kurt Stern ' ( actually the band 's road manager ) who supposedly made the decision to make these remixes after being unhappy with the original Phantom Power . According to bassist Guto Pryce this " running commentary is tongue in cheek , it 's our road manager pretending to be a producer , and he ends up sounding like a ... <unk> ! " These anecdotes give the actual release a different track listing from that which appears on the back of the album . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Initial copies of the album came bundled with the Slow Life EP in packaging which could be folded into the shape of a video game arcade cabinet , or " personal console " as described on the instructions section of the sleeve . The CDs themselves were housed in individual sleeves designed to look like 3 @.@ 5 " floppy disks . Zeth Lundy , reviewing the album for PopMatters , commented that he constructed the arcade cabinet with " sheer geeky delight " while <unk> called the packaging " nostalgic but infuriating " . Phantom Phorce was also issued on gold @-@ coloured vinyl . 
 Critical reaction to Phantom Phorce was generally positive with Uncut stating that the album features an " inspired overhaul " of tracks from Phantom Power , the Western Mail describing the record as a " mind @-@ bending collection that radically re @-@ works each track from the original record to create something entirely different , but equally appealing " and musicOMH calling it " an innovative and thoroughly enjoyable set of remixes " . Some reviews pointed out that the album compares favourably with other remix albums with The Guardian calling Phantom Phorce " stimulating and often rather beautiful , bucking the trend set by most other self @-@ indulgent and pointless remix albums " and the NME stating that " hearing a rock band get the remix treatment is usually a mildly diverting experience rather than a life @-@ changing one . So it 's an extremely pleasant surprise to be faced with a whole album of the buggers ... and be thoroughly entertained . " Q stated that the commentary by ' Kurt Stern ' was one of the best features of the album and The Times expressed surprise that these " ' amusing interludes ' between tracks are actually funny " , however Pitchfork Media found that ' Stern ' " gets in the way more than he helps " and claimed that , by the time the listener had heard the full album he or she would " likely consider redubbing it without [ ' Stern 's ' ] contributions " . Reviewing Phantom Phorce for <unk> magazine , Jordie Yow called it " good , but not exceptional " and claimed that the remixes simply made him want to listen to the original versions of the tracks while website Angry Ape was scathing , calling the album a " bland & uninspiring package to put you off remixes for life " and suggested that it was merely a " cash @-@ in " by the band . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Super Furry Animals . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to Phantom Phorce : 
 = = = Band = = = 
 Gruff Rhys – Lead vocals , rhythm guitar 
 Huw Bunford – Lead guitar , backing vocals 
 Guto Pryce – Bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – Keyboards , backing vocals 
 Dafydd Ieuan – Drums , backing vocals 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = = Additional musicians = = = 
 = = = Artwork = = = 
 Pete Fowler – Illustration & design 
 John Mark James – Illustration & design 
 = Windsor Locks , Connecticut tornado = 
 The Windsor Locks , Connecticut tornado struck the towns of Windsor , Windsor Locks , and Suffield , Connecticut and Feeding Hills , Massachusetts on October 3 , 1979 . The short @-@ lived but intense tornado struck without warning and caused three deaths and 500 injuries . 
 The storm , rated F4 on the Fujita scale , also caused more than $ 400 million in property damage along an 11 @.@ 3 @-@ mile ( 18 @.@ 2 km ) path , and ranks as the ninth most destructive tornado in American history . 
 = = Storm synopsis = = 
 The storm system that caused the tornado had produced severe weather , including two weak tornadoes , in eastern Pennsylvania and New Jersey that morning . This was an unusual setup for a significant tornado , associated with a warm front near a low @-@ pressure center . A thunderstorm cell formed south of Long Island around 10 : 20 am , and became a supercell sometime later after interacting with a surface low @-@ pressure center . It turned north as a left @-@ moving supercell , meaning it moved left with respect to the mean atmospheric flow . Left @-@ moving supercells are very rare , as cyclonic storms usually turn to the right of the mean flow . It is unknown whether this leftward movement was due to an atmospheric interaction or terrain @-@ induced movement , as the storm moved straight up the Connecticut River valley . 
 No tornado watches or warnings were issued before the storm struck . This was later determined to be because of missing atmospheric sounding data , as well as an incorrect assessment of the height of the tropopause , which led to an underestimation of the strength of the thunderstorm which produced the tornado . Although a severe thunderstorm warning was issued at 2 : 57 pm , very few people received the warnings in time . 
 The tornado touched down in Poquonock , Connecticut , a village in the town of Windsor , just north of Hartford . Poquonock Elementary School was heavily damaged ; fortunately , students were sent home early at 1 : 30 pm on Wednesdays . Students at a Brownie meeting were led into a hallway just before the auditorium they had been in was destroyed . The historic Poquonock Community Church building had its roof ripped off . Miraculously , all but one of the stain glass windows from the old church were salvaged . The tornado traveled almost due north , an unusual direction for a tornado . The most severe damage occurred along River Road , Hollow Brook Road , Pioneer Drive and Settler Circle , where large frame houses were left " in splinters " . The tornado roughly followed Connecticut Route 75 just east of Bradley International Airport . The airport 's weather station recorded a wind gust of 39 m / s ( 87 mph ; 140 km / h ) as the tornado passed nearby . A United Airlines flight with 114 passengers was attempting to land as the tornado was passing the airport ; the pilot saw the tornado and was able to abort the landing just in time . The tornado then crossed the northern portion of the airport , where the New England Air Museum was located . More than 20 vintage aircraft were completely destroyed , with many more damaged . The museum 's hangar was also rendered unusable . The tornado moved north into Feeding Hills before dissipating near the Westfield city line , about five miles north of the Massachusetts state line . 
 The tornado was accompanied by more than 7 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) of rain , and several instances of downburst winds . Damage from downburst winds was reported across the Connecticut River in Enfield . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Because there were no tornado warnings before the storm ( and it occurred in an area where tornadoes are rare ) , the initial damage reports claimed an explosion had damaged a roof . Soon , however , the storm 's nature and impact became apparent . Governor Ella Grasso lived just a block away from the tornado 's path , though she was in Hartford at the time of the storm . She declared an 8 pm – 5 am curfew in the days following the tornado . About 500 National Guardsmen were activated to prevent looting and direct traffic , and the area was declared a disaster area by President Carter . FEMA trailers were provided within a few days , and were used by many residents until reconstruction or repairs could be completed . In all , at least 38 businesses were damaged or destroyed , 65 homes were completely destroyed , and at least 75 homes were damaged . Twenty @-@ five tobacco sheds were " extensively damaged " . At the airport , at least 30 vintage aircraft were damaged or destroyed , as well as most of the state 's National Guard helicopters . The final damage total reached $ 200 million ( 1979 USD ) , or $ 442 million in 1997 dollars . 
 Because of the vast scope of the damage , initially Windsor town officials feared many , possibly even hundreds , of people could have been killed . While there were many serious injuries , only three people were killed by the storm . Two victims , construction workers working in a bank parking lot , took shelter in a work truck when they saw the storm approach . The first victim was killed immediately by a piece of flying lumber , the other died a few weeks later from his injuries becoming the 3rd victim . The second victim was found the next day across the street from her obliterated house . Over 400 people were hospitalized , mostly for injuries from flying glass or the victims ' having been thrown by winds . 
 = = Records = = 
 The tornado was the costliest on record in the Northeastern United States , and the 10 @-@ costliest in US history . The three people who were killed made it the deadliest tornado in Connecticut since the 1878 Wallingford tornado . 
 = Traveling ( song ) = 
 " Traveling " ( stylized as " traveling " ) is a song recorded by Japanese – American recording artist Utada Hikaru . It was released as the second single from her fourth studio and third Japanese language album , Deep River ( 2002 ) . The track was written and composed by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and long @-@ time collaborator Akira Miyake . Musically , " Traveling " is a dance @-@ pop song , influenced by house music . Lyrically , it discusses human activities and dreams . 
 The song received positive reviews from most music critics . Many selected it as one of Utada 's best singles , and was complimented for its production and dance @-@ oriented composition . It was also successful in Japan , peaking at number one on both the Oricon Singles Chart and Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV singles chart . It was certified in two categories by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) , and was the second best selling single of the year 2001 . A music video was filmed for " Traveling " in 2001 , featuring Utada as a hostess travelling on a spacecraft with passengers . It has been performed on some of Utada 's tours , including Utada in Bokuhan ( 2004 ) and Utada United ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Traveling " was written and composed by Utada , whilst production was handled by Utada , her father Teruzane Utada , and long @-@ time collaborator Akira Miyake . This was Utada 's first original single to have been handled by Utada , her father , and Miyake since her single releases from her debut album First Love ( 1999 ) ; she had primarily worked with American producers , such as Rodney Jenkins , Jimmy Jam & Terry Lewis for her second studio album Distance ( 2001 ) . The song included live instrumentation by Saito <unk> , who played the bass guitar , and Tsunemi Kazuhide , who played synthesizers , while it was arranged by Utada and Kawano Kei . The song was recorded and mixed by Ugajin Masaaki and Matsui <unk> in 2001 at Bunkamura Studio , Shibuya , Tokyo . It was released as the second single from her fourth studio and third Japanese language album , Deep River ( 2002 ) . Since then , the song has been remastered and re @-@ released twice ; the first on April 1 , 2004 , and the second time on December 9 , 2014 for Utada 's first greatest hits album Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) . 
 It was released as a CD single , in both Japan and China . Both formats included the original track , two remixes by <unk> and <unk> , plus the instrumental version . The artwork for the CD single 's were photographed by Utada 's husband at the time , Kazuaki Kiriya . It has a close @-@ up shot of Utada in front of a multi @-@ colored background . A promotional 12 " vinyl was released by Toshiba @-@ EMI in December 2001 , and included both the remixed tracks . Then on January 30 , 2002 , Toshiba @-@ EMI released " Traveling " as a DVD single , which included the " behind the scenes " video and the music video . The vinyls artwork was a screenshot taken by Kiriya . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Musically , " Traveling " is a dance @-@ pop song , influenced by house music . Kano , editor in chief for Rockin 'On Japan magazine noted elements of house music in the song 's composition . An editor for Amazon labelled the track a " party tune " . CD Journal staff member 's wrote that the song had a " speedy dance beat " . Similarly , rock musician and music journalist David Bertrand Wilson had reviewed the parent album Deep River , and described the composition as a dance song . Lyrically , it discusses human activities and dreams . Kano felt that although the song themes are about dreams and nightmares , he believed it should " be taken seriously " as he felt it intertwined with reality . The reviewer from Amazon stated that " Traveling " was proof that Utada was one of the most successful singer @-@ songwriters in Japanese music . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Traveling " received very positive reviews from music critics . Journalist and rock musician David Bertrand Wilson had reviewed the parent album with journalist John Alroy , and selected it as the album 's best track ; he believed that the song was a " consistently catchy [ melody ] " , one of the major factors that made the parent album " work " . Similarly , AllMusic 's David Jeffries selected the song as one of Utada 's best singles . Fellow Japanese recording artist Kyary Pamyu Pamyu contributed to The Guardian 's music playlist columns , and highlighted " Traveling " as one of Utada 's best songs ; she further stated in a detailed review : " People living outside Japan will also enjoy her creativity . It ’ s pop and yet a little bit dark and scary . I like the chemistry . " A reviewer from Amazon praised the track , calling it " perfect " . In another positive review , a critic from CD Journal complimented the dance composition , but favored the lyrical content as the best feature from the track . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 16th Japan Gold Disc Awards , Utada won the Song of the Year award for " Traveling " ; she had also won another similar award that year for her single " Can You Keep a Secret ? " " . Similarly , she also received the Silver Award recognition at the 2003 Japanese Society for Rights of Authors , Composers and Publishers Awards ( JASRAC ) . In December 2015 , in honor of Utada 's comeback into the music business , Japanese website Goo.ne.jp hosted a poll for fans to rank their favourite songs by Utada out of 25 positions ; the poll was held in only twenty @-@ four hours , and thousands submitted their votes . As a result , " Traveling " was ranked at number seven with 71 votes in total . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Commercially , " Traveling " was a success in Japan . It became her sixth single to debut at number one on the Oricon Singles Chart , with over 277 @,@ 100 units sold in its first week . It stayed at number one for a sole week , and spent a total of 20 weeks on that chart . By the end of 2002 , the single was ranked at number two on Oricon 's Annual 2002 chart , just behind Ayumi Hamasaki 's extended play H ; it sold 856 @,@ 140 units by the end of the year . This made it the second highest selling single by a female artist , just behind Hamasaki 's entry , but was the highest selling single that did not include any other b @-@ side or a @-@ side tracks . The single was certified million by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for physical shipments of one million units . 
 The single debuted at number one on Tokyo Broadcasting System 's ( TBS ) Count Down TV chart during the chart week of December 8 , 2001 , her seventh non @-@ consecutive single to do so . It stayed at the top spot for two consecutive weeks . The single stayed in the chart for 20 weeks , and was ranked at number 26 and 39 on their 2001 and 2002 Annual Chart . Eight years after its initial release , " Traveling " entered the Billboard Adult Alternative Radio Songs chart at number 81 during the chart week of April 6 . It re @-@ entered the chart during the chart week of May 6 , 2015 , peaking at number 75 . It was certified gold by RIAJ for cellphone downloads of 100 @,@ 000 units . According to the Oricon Style database , it is Utada 's sixth highest selling single . 
 The DVD single was a success on the Oricon DVD Chart , peaking at number one . The Oricon Style database ranks the DVD single as Utada 's second best selling DVD , just behind the live release of her Bohemian Summer 2000 Concert tour . As of May 2016 , it is the 51st best selling DVD in Japan , selling over 820 @,@ 000 units . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video was directed by Kazuaki Kiriya . It opens with the camera traveling through a tunnel full of lights , and includes the song 's title and Utada 's name . For the first part of the song , it has Utada singing into a microphone , whilst walking inside the head of a spacecraft . The spacecraft exits the station , and flies all over a futuristic cityscape . The first verse has Utada as a hostess on the spacecraft , helping and serving the passengers in a dancing manner ; the passengers are wearing theatrical clothing and headpieces that cover their faces . During the pre @-@ chorus , Utada sings in front of a forest @-@ like backdrop , whilst a stop @-@ motion animation of her is walking through the woods , observing disfigured creatures . The chorus has Utada and the passengers marching across a bridge , while continuous intercut scenes of Utada outside a party is seen . 
 During the second verse , it has the spacecraft traveling past the moon , whilst Utada cleans up the mess the passengers left on their tables . By the second pre @-@ chorus , several passengers play ping pong , as Utada exercises . The second chorus has Utada dancing inside a party , whilst intercut scenes of different stop motion animations are seen . In the bridge section , it has a close @-@ up of Utada in front of a forest @-@ like backdrop again , and also has Utada sitting on a swing . The final chorus has the spacecraft falling onto the ground , and creates a vast field of flowers , trees , and grass . The final scene has the camera zooming out of the spacecraft next to a tree , riddled with vines and flowers . The music video and the behind the scenes video was included on her DVD compilation Single Clip Collection Vol . 3 ( 2000 ) . 
 The video achieved success by critics and several award ceremonies . Japanese recording artist Kyary Pamyu Pamyu wrote for the The Guardian , and said that the video " is a strong interpretation of the music . " She also praised the video 's creativity . At the 17th Japan Gold Disc Awards , " Traveling " won the Music Video of the Year trophy . 
 = = Live performances and promotion = = 
 The single has been performed on majority of Utada 's concert tours . Its first performance was in 2004 , during her Bokuhan concert tour . It appeared on the live DVD , which was released on July 28 , 2004 . It was included on Utada 's debut English concert tour named Utada United , which was later included on the live DVD , released on December 20 , 2006 . The song was performed during Utada 's two date concert series Wild Life in December 2010 . Since the track 's release , it has appeared on three compilation releases : Utada Hikaru Single Collection Vol . 1 ( 2003 ) , its 2014 remastered version , and a special bundle of the compilation and the vol . 2 collection on a USB . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = DVD charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Adventure Time = 
 Adventure Time is an American animated television series created by Pendleton Ward for Cartoon Network . The series follows the adventures of a boy named Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) — a dog with the magical power to change shape and size at will . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo . Throughout the show , they interact with the other main characters Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Hynden Walch ) , The Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) , and Marceline the Vampire Queen ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) . The series is based on a short produced for Nicktoons and Frederator Studios ' animation incubator series Random ! Cartoons . After the short became a viral hit on the Internet , Cartoon Network commissioned a full @-@ length series that previewed on March 11 , 2010 , and officially premiered on April 5 , 2010 . 
 The series was inspired by the fantasy role @-@ playing game Dungeons & Dragons and video games . It is produced using hand @-@ drawn animation ; episodes are created through the process of storyboarding . Multiple episodes are worked on concurrently with each individual episode taking roughly eight to nine months to complete . The Adventure Time cast record their lines in group recordings and the series regularly employs guest actors for minor and recurring characters . Each Adventure Time episode runs for about eleven minutes ; pairs of episodes are often telecast to fill half @-@ hour program slots . Six seasons of the program have been completed , the seventh is currently airing , and the show has been renewed for an eighth season , which is scheduled to air in the latter part of 2016 . As of October 2015 , a feature @-@ length film is in development . 
 Since its debut , Adventure Time has been a ratings success for Cartoon Network , with the highest @-@ rated episodes having attracted over 3 million viewers . The show has received positive reviews from critics and — despite being aimed primarily at children — has developed a following among teenagers and adults . Adventure Time has won awards including four Primetime Emmy Awards , a Peabody Award , two Annie Awards , two British Academy Children 's Awards , a Motion Picture Sound Editors Award , a Pixel Award , and a Kerrang ! Award . The series has also been nominated for three Critics ' Choice Television Awards , two Annecy Festival Awards , a TCA Award , and a Sundance Film Festival Award , among others . A comic book spin @-@ off based on the series won an Eisner Award and two Harvey Awards . The series has also inspired various clothing items and related merchandise , video games , comic books , and DVD compilations . 
 = = Premise = = 
 Adventure Time follows the adventures of a boy , Finn the Human , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake the Dog , who has magical powers to change shape and to change size at will . The show 's creator Pendleton Ward describes Finn as a " fiery little kid with strong morals " ; Jake is based on Bill Murray 's character in Meatballs , Tripper Harrison . Finn and Jake live in the post @-@ apocalyptic Land of Ooo , where they interact with the show 's other main characters : Princess Bubblegum ( voiced by Hynden Walch ) , the sovereign of the Candy Kingdom ; the Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) , a menacing but largely misunderstood ice wizard ; and Marceline the Vampire Queen ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) , a thousand @-@ year @-@ old vampire and rock music enthusiast . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Concept and creation = = = 
 According to series creator Pendleton Ward , the show 's style was influenced by his time attending the California Institute of the Arts ( CalArts ) and his experiences working as a writer and storyboard artist on The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack . In an interview with Animation World Network , Ward said he strives to combine the series ' subversive humor with " beautiful " moments , using Hayao Miyazaki 's film My Neighbor Totoro as inspiration . Ward has also named Home Movies and Dr. Katz , Professional Therapist as influences , largely because both shows are " relaxing " and feature " conversational dialogue that feels natural [ and ] not over the top [ nor ] cartoony and shrill " . 
 The show began as a stand @-@ alone animated short film that ran for seven minutes . Ward created the short almost entirely by himself , and concluded its production in early 2006 . The film was first broadcast on Nicktoons Network on January 11 , 2007 , and was re @-@ aired as part of Frederator Studios ' anthology show Random ! Cartoons on December 7 , 2008 . After its initial release , the short video became a viral hit on the Internet . Frederator Studios then pitched an Adventure Time series to Nicktoons Network , but the network rejected it twice . Eventually , the studio 's rights to commission a full series expired , and Frederator — the short 's production animation studio — pitched it to other channels . The studio approached Cartoon Network , which said it would be willing to produce a series if Ward could prove the short could be expanded into a full series while maintaining elements of the original 's pilot . Rob Sorcher , the chief content officer at Cartoon Network , was influential in getting the network to take a chance on the show ; he recognized the series as " something that felt really indie ... comic book @-@ y [ and ] really new " . 
 Ward quickly rethought the concept of the pilot ; he wanted a potential series to be " fully realized " , rather than be characterized by the " pre @-@ school vibe " that permeated the original film . Ward 's college friends Patrick McHale and Adam Muto helped him produce a rough storyboard that featured Finn and Princess Bubblegum going on a spaghetti @-@ supper date . Cartoon Network was not happy with this story and asked for another . Ward then created a storyboard for the episode " The Enchiridion ! " , which was his attempt to emulate the style of the original Nicktoons short . Cartoon Network approved the first season in September 2008 , and " The Enchiridion ! " was the first episode to enter into production . Ward and his production team began storyboarding episodes and writing plot outlines . Cartoon Network was still concerned about the direction of the new series . During the pitch of an episode titled " Brothers in Insomnia " — which was eventually scrapped — McHale said the room was filled with executives from Cartoon Network . The pitch went well ; the production staff were soon inundated with questions about the stylistic nature of the series . Hoping to resolve these issues , Cartoon Network management hired three veteran animators who had worked on SpongeBob SquarePants : Derek Drymon ( who served as executive producer for the first season of Adventure Time ) , Merriwether Williams ( who served as head story editors for the show 's first and second seasons ) , and Nick Jennings ( who became the series ' long @-@ serving art director ) . Thurop Van Orman , the creator of The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack , was also hired to guide Ward and his staff for the first two seasons . 
 One of the main changes from the pilot to the series was the emphasis placed on the background art . Dan " Ghostshrimp " James , a freelance illustrator who had also storyboarded on Flapjack , was tasked with designing the show 's world ; Ward told him to make the series look as though it took place " in a ' Ghostshrimp World ' " . James designed major locations , including Finn and Jake 's home , the Candy Kingdom , and the Ice Kingdom . During the production of season one , Ward assembled a storyboarding team for the series . He was drawn to " younger , inexperienced people " , and he used the Internet to help with his search . During this time , Phil Rynda , who worked as the series ' lead character designer for two and a half seasons , was hired . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 While many cartoons are based on script pitches to network executives , Cartoon Network allowed Adventure Time to " build their own teams organically " and communicate through the use of storyboards and animatics . Rob Sorcher said this novel approach was sanctioned because the company was dealing with " primarily visual people " , and that by using storyboards the writers and artists could learn and grow " by actually doing the work " . The storyboard artists generally work on an episode in pairs , independent from other storyboarders , which , according to freelance writer David Perlmutter in his book America Toons In , prevents creative ennui and results in no two episodes being " alike in either content or tone " . Many members of the series ' production staff have backgrounds in indie comics , and Pendleton Ward has called them " really smart , <unk> people " who were responsible for inserting more idiosyncratic and spiritual ideas into the series during its third and later seasons . 
 In an interview with The A.V. Club , Ward said the writing process for the show usually begins with the writers telling each other what they had done the previous week in an attempt to find something humorous to build from . He also said , " a lot of the time , if we 're really stuck , we 'll start saying everything that comes to our mind , which is usually the worst stuff , and then someone else will think that 's terrible but it 'll give him a better idea and the ball just starts rolling like that " . Ward also said a major inspiration for the series is the fantasy role @-@ playing game Dungeons and Dragons of which many of the show 's writers were fans . Because of the busy schedule of writing and coordinating a television series , they no longer had time to play the game . Ward said because the writers were too busy , they would attempt to write stories they would " want to be playing D & D with " . Sometimes , the writers and storyboard artists convene and play writing games . One game is called exquisite corpse ; one writer starts a story on a sheet of paper , which is then folded and another writer tries to finish it . Ward said , " the ideas are usually terrible " . Storyboard artist Cole Sanchez said episode scripts are either created by expanding the good ideas produced by these writing games , or are based upon an idea proposed by a storyboard artist in the hope it can be developed into an episode . 
 After the writers pitch stories , the ideas are compiled onto a two @-@ or @-@ three @-@ page outline that contain " the important beats " . The episodes are then passed to storyboard artists who are given a week to " thumbnail a storyboard " and fill in the details complete with action , dialogue , and jokes . Ward and his creative directors then review the storyboard and make notes . The artists are then given another week to implement the notes and clean up the episode . Storyboard writing and revising can take up to a month . Following the revisions , the voices for the episode are recorded and an animatic is compiled to reduce the running time to the necessary 11 minutes . Prop , character , and background designers then create and clean up the designs . After this , the animation process begins . The episodes ' design and coloring are done in Burbank , California . Animation is handled in South Korea by either Rough Draft Korea or by Saerom Animation . 
 Animating an episode can take between three and five months . During this time , retakes , music scoring , and sound design are completed . Once the animation is finished , it is sent back to the United States where it is reviewed ; the staff look for mistakes in the animation or " things that didn 't animate the way [ the staff ] intended " . These problems are then fixed in Korea and the episode is finished . It takes between eight and nine months for each episode to be created ; because of this , multiple episodes are worked on concurrently . According to former lead character designer Phil Rynda , most pre @-@ production is done in Photoshop . The animation is hand @-@ drawn on paper which is then digitally composited and painted with digital ink and paint . The series has occasionally hired guest animators for certain episodes . For instance , the second season entry " Guardians of Sunshine " was partially rendered in 3 @-@ D to emulate the style of a video game . The fifth @-@ season episode " A Glitch is a Glitch " was written and directed by Irish filmmaker and writer David OReilly , and features his distinctive 3 @-@ D animation . Another fifth season episode , " James Baxter the Horse " featured animation courtesy of noted animator James Baxter . The sixth season episode Food Chain was written , storyboarded , and directed by Japanese anime director Masaaki Yuasa , and was animated entirely by Yuasa 's own studio . Another sixth season episode " Water Park Prank " features Flash animation by David Ferguson . A stop @-@ motion episode titled " Bad <unk> " , directed by Kirsten Lepore , aired near the middle of the show 's seventh season . Lindsay and Alex Small @-@ Butera , noted for their web animation series <unk> <unk> , also contributed animation for the seventh season episode " Beyond the Grotto " . 
 Ward described the show as a " dark comedy " and said he enjoys experiencing ambivalent emotions , such as the feeling of being " happy and scared at the same time " . Executive producer Fred Seibert compared the show 's animation style to that of Felix the Cat and various Max Fleischer cartoons , but said its world was also inspired by Dungeons and Dragons and video games . Ward intends the show 's world to have a physical logic rather than " cartoony slapstick " . Although magic exists in the story , the show 's writers try to create an internal consistency in the characters ' interactions with the world . In the United States , the series is rated TV @-@ PG ; Ward has said he does not want to push the show 's PG rating . He said , " I 've never really even thought about the rating ... we don 't like stuff that 's overly gross . We like cute stuff and nice things . " 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , Ward said he had stepped down as series showrunner sometime during the fifth season in favor of Muto . As a naturally introverted person , he found dealing with people every day to be exhausting . Adam Muto , a storyboard artist and creative director for the show since the first season , became the show 's new showrunner . Until late 2014 , Ward continued to work on the series as a storyboard artist and storyline writer . After November 2014 , he stopped writing episode stories and focused on producing an Adventure Time movie . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Voice actors for the series include : Jeremy Shada ( who portrays Finn the Human ) , John DiMaggio ( who portrays Jake the Dog ) , Tom Kenny ( who plays the Ice King ) , Hynden Walch ( who voices Princess Bubblegum ) , and Olivia Olson ( who voices Marceline the Vampire Queen ) . Ward provides voices for several minor characters and Lumpy Space Princess . Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console BMO in English , and Jake 's girlfriend Lady Rainicorn in Korean . Polly Lou Livingston , a friend of Pendleton Ward 's mother Bettie Ward , plays the voice of the small elephant named Tree Trunks . 
 The Adventure Time cast members record their lines together in group recordings rather than individually , with the goal of recording natural @-@ sounding dialogue . Hynden Walch has described these group recordings as being akin to " doing a play reading — a really , really out there play " . The series regularly employs guest actors for minor and recurring characters . The crew members cast people they are interested in working with . For instance , in a panel , both Adam Muto and Kent Osborne said the Adventure Time crew has been attempting to cast the entire cast of Star Trek : The Next Generation and The Office as various characters . 
 = = = Setting and mythology = = = 
 The show is set in a fictional continent called the " Land of Ooo " , in a post @-@ apocalyptic future about a thousand years after a nuclear holocaust called the " Great Mushroom War " . According to Ward , the show takes place " after the bombs have fallen and magic has come back into the world " . Before the series was fully developed , Ward 's intended the Land of Ooo to be simply " magical " . After the broadcast of " Business Time " , in which an iceberg containing reanimated business men floats to the surface of a lake , the show became post @-@ apocalyptic ; Ward said the production crew " just ran with it " . Ward later described the setting as " <unk> on the surface and dark underneath " , and said he had never intended the Mushroom War and the post @-@ apocalyptic elements to be " hit over the head in the show " . He limited it to " cars buried underground in the background [ and other elements that do not ] raise any eyebrows " . Ward has said the post @-@ apocalyptic elements of the series were influenced by the 1979 film Mad Max . Kenny called the way in which the elements are worked into the plot " very fill @-@ in @-@ the @-@ blanks " , and DiMaggio said , " it 's been obvious the Land of Ooo has some issues " . 
 The series has a canonical mythology — an overarching plot and backstory — that is expanded upon in various episodes . The backstory mainly involves the Mushroom War , the origin of the series ' principal antagonist the Lich , and the backstories of several of the series ' principal and recurring characters . Ward has said the details behind the Mushroom War and the series ' dark mythology form " a story worth telling " , and that he feels the show will " save it and continue to dance around how heavy the back @-@ history of Ooo is " . 
 = = = Title sequence and music = = = 
 When Ward was developing the show 's title sequences , the rough draft version consisted of quick shots and vignettes that were " just sort of crazy , nonsensical " , which alluded to the show 's theme of quirky adventures . These drafts included " the characters ... just punching random ghosts and monsters , jumping through anything and everything [ and ] there were a bunch of atomic bombs at the end of it " . Ward later called this version " really silly " . He sent the draft to Cartoon Network ; they did not enjoy it and wanted something more graphical like the introduction to The Brady Bunch . Inspired by the title sequences of The Simpsons and Pee @-@ wee 's Playhouse , Ward developed a new title sequence that featured a panning sweep of the Land of Ooo while a synthesizer note rose slowly until the main theme was played . Ward 's draft for this idea was handed to layout animators and the sequence evolved ; Ward added " silly character stuff on top of his pass " , and Pat McHale worked on the Ice King 's shot and gave him a " high school [ year ] book " smile . The crew also struggled to get the shadows in the shot featuring Marceline correct . After the panning sweep , the sequence cuts to the theme song as shots of Finn and Jake adventuring are shown . For this part of the sequence , Ward was inspired by the " simple " aspects of the introduction of the 2007 comedy film Superbad . When the theme mentions " Jake the Dog " and " Finn the Human " , the characters ' names are displayed next to their heads , with a solid color in the background . The sequence was finalized immediately before the series was aired . 
 The show 's eponymous theme song is performed by Ward , who is accompanied by a ukulele . The theme first appeared in the pilot episode ; in this version Ward was accompanied by an acoustic guitar . In the version used in the series , Ward sings in a noticeably higher register ; this is because Ward felt it was necessary to match his singing with the higher key of the ukulele . The finalized version of the theme song was originally supposed to be a temporary version . Ward said , " I recorded the lyrics for the opening title in the animatics room where we have this little crummy microphone just so that we could add it to the titles and submit it to the network . Later , we tried re @-@ recording it and I didn 't like it ... I only liked the temp one ! " According to Ward , much of the series ' music has " hiss and grit " because one of the show 's original composers , Casey James Basichis , " lives in a pirate ship he 's built inside of an apartment [ and ] you can hear floorboards squeak and lots of other weird sounds " . As the show progressed , Basichis 's friend Tim Kiefer joined the show as an additional composer . The two currently work together on its music . 
 The show 's title sequence and theme song have mostly stayed consistent throughout its run , with two exceptions . During the Fionna and Cake episodes , all of the characters featured in the sequence are gender @-@ bent and the theme is sung by former storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri . Similarly , the introduction of the miniseries Stakes places most of the emphasis on Marceline , and the theme song is sung by Olivia Olson . 
 The series regularly features songs and musical numbers . Many of the cast members — including Shada , Kenny , and Olson — sing their characters ' songs . Characters often express their emotions in song ; examples of this include Marceline 's song " I 'm Just Your Problem " and Finn 's " All <unk> Up Inside " . Although the background music for the series is composed by Basichis and Kiefer , the songs sung by characters are often written by the storyboard artists . For instance , the " Fry Song " was written by storyboard artist Rebecca Sugar , who storyboarded its parent episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " . Frederator , Seibert 's production company , often posted demos and full versions of songs sung by the characters . The show also rarely but occasionally refers to popular music . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 Each Adventure Time episode is about eleven minutes in length ; pairs of episodes are often telecast in order to fill a half @-@ hour program time slot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Since its debut , Adventure Time has been a ratings success for Cartoon Network . In March 2013 , it was reported that the show averages roughly 2 to 3 million viewers an episode . According to a 2012 report by Nielsen , the show consistently ranks first in its time slot among boys aged 2 to 14 . The show premiered on April 5 , 2010 , and was watched by 2 @.@ 5 million viewers . The episode was a ratings success ; according to a press release by Cartoon Network , the episode 's time slot saw triple @-@ digit percentage increases from the previous year . The program was viewed by 1 @.@ 661 million children aged 2 – 11 — a 110 percent increase from the previous year 's figures . It was watched by 837 @,@ 000 children aged 9 – 14 — an increase 239 percent on the previous year 's figures . Between the second and sixth seasons , the show 's ratings continued to grow ; the second season premiere was watched by 2 @.@ 001 million viewers ; the third season debut was watched by 2 @.@ 686 million , the fourth season premiere was watched by 2 @.@ 655 million ; the fifth season premiere was watched by 3 @.@ 435 million ; and the sixth season premiere was watched by 3 @.@ 321 million . The show 's seventh season opener , however , took a substantial ratings tumble , being watched by only 1 @.@ 07 million viewers . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 The show has received positive reviews from critics and has developed a strong following among children , teenagers , and adults ; fans are drawn to Adventure Time because of " the show 's silly humor , imaginative stories , and richly populated world " . Television critic Robert Lloyd , in an article for the LA Times , said the series was a good companion piece " to the network 's [ then ] currently airing Chowder and The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack . " He complimented the setting and compared the show to the two previously mentioned series , saying each takes place " in a fantastical land peopled with strange , somewhat disturbing characters and has at its center a young male person or person @-@ like thing making his way in that world with the help of unusual , not always reliable , mentors " . He also said the show is " not unlike CN 's earlier Foster 's Home for Imaginary Friends , about a boy and his imaginary friend , though darker and stranger and even less connected to the world as we know it " . Lloyd also compared it to " the sort of cartoons they made when cartoons themselves were young and delighted in bringing all things to rubbery life " . In a review of the third season , Mike LeChevallier of Slate , wrote that the series " scores relatively high marks for storytelling , artwork , music , voice acting , and realization with its neatly wrapped , 11 @-@ minute packages of multicolored awesomeness " , awarding the third and fourth seasons a rating of four stars out of five . He said the show " scarcely appears to be trying too hard to attract attention , yet it does just that " . He also said , " the short @-@ form format leaves some emotional substance to be desired " , and that this was inevitable for a series with such short episodes . In a review of season four , LeChevallier complimented the show for " growing up " with its characters , and said " the show 's dialogue is among the best of any current animated series " . He concluded that the series has " strikingly few faults " . 
 The A.V. Club reviewer Zack Handlen called Adventure Time " a terrific show [ that ] fits beautifully in that gray area between kid and adult entertainment in a way that manages to satisfy both a desire for sophisticated ( i.e. , weird ) writing and plain old silliness " . He concluded that the show was " basically what would happen if you asked a bunch of 12 @-@ year @-@ olds to make a cartoon , only it 's the best possible version of that , like if all the 12 @-@ year @-@ olds were super geniuses and some of them were Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and the Marx Brothers " . Robert <unk> of Den of Geek said Adventure Time " is the first cartoon in a long time that is pure imagination " . He heavily complimented the show for " its non @-@ reliance on continually referencing pop culture ... and the general outlook is positive and fun " . Eric Kohn of IndieWire said the show " represents the progress of [ cartoon ] medium " in the current decade . Kohn said he enjoyed the way the show revels in " random , frequently adorable and effusive " aspects and " toys with an incredibly sad subtext " . Entertainment Weekly named Adventure Time number 20 on its " The 25 Greatest Animated Series Ever " list . In 2013 , Entertainment Weekly reviewer Darren Franich awarded the series an " A " and called it " a hybrid sci @-@ fi / fantasy / horror / musical / fairy tale , with echoes of Calvin and Hobbes , Hayao Miyazaki , Final Fantasy , Richard Linklater , Where the Wild Things Are , and the music video you made with your high school garage band " . Franich praised the series ' " consistently inventive " plotlines and its " vivid landscape " , as well as its continued maturation . Emily Nussbaum of The New Yorker praised the show , likening it to " World of Warcraft as recapped by Carl Jung " , and praised its unique approach to emotion , humor , and philosophy . Freelance writer David Perlmutter , in his book America Toons In , wrote favorably of Adventure Time , calling it " a more sophisticated blend of high and low comedy " . Perlmutter applauded the show 's voice acting , noting that " the dialogue delivery is far less frantic and rushed than it can be in other series " , and he also wrote positively of the show 's transcending of its source material . With this being said , he argued that the show 's vacillation between high and low comedy epitomizes the fact that Cartoon Network is " unsure of what direction to pursue " . He also noted that " while some of [ Adventure Time 's ] episodes work well , others simply [ are ] confusing . " 
 = = = Industry impact = = = 
 Heidi MacDonald of Slate has argued that Adventure Time 's scouting of indie comic creators has led to an " Animation Gold Rush " in which major studios are actively seeking under @-@ the @-@ radar talent for their shows . She also pointed out that Adventure Time has influenced the tone of modern comics , noting , " Where once young cartoonists overwhelmingly produced gloomy masculine self @-@ absorption and misanthropy in the tradition of Daniel Clowes or Chris Ware , these days many booths feature fantasy epics with colorful characters and invented worlds heavy on the talking animals . It shouldn 't be surprising that up @-@ and @-@ coming cartoonists are absorbing the Adventure Time aesthetic . " 
 = = = Academic interest = = = 
 Adventure Time has attracted academic interest for its examination of gender and gender roles . Emma A. Jane said although the two main characters are male and that many episodes involve them engaging in violent acts to save princesses , " Finn and Jake are part of an expansive ensemble cast of characters who are anything but stereotypical and who populate a program which subverts many traditional gender @-@ related paradigms " . She said the show features " roughly equal numbers of female and male characters in protagonist , antagonist , and minor roles " ; includes characters with no fixed gender ; uses " gendered ' design elements ' " such as eyelashes and hair to illustrate character traits rather than gender ; equally distributes traits regardless of gender ; privileges found , adoptive families or extended families ; frames gender in ways that suggest it is fluid ; and features elements of queer and transgender sub @-@ text . Carolyn <unk> agrees , saying , " despite having two male leads , Adventure Time is particularly strong when it comes to questioning and challenging gender stereotypes " . She uses Princess Bubblegum , BMO , and Fionna and Cake as examples of characters who refuse to be readily categorized and <unk> . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 Since its debut , Adventure Time has amassed a steadily growing fandom . The show is often described as having a cult following among teenagers and adults ; Eric Kohn of Indiewire said while it began with a cult following , the series has " started to look like one of the biggest television phenomenons of the decade " . The show is popular at fan conventions , such as the San Diego @-@ hosted Comic Con. Reporter Emma @-@ Lee Moss said , " This year 's [ 2014 ] Comic @-@ Con schedule reflected Adventure Time 's growing success , with several screenings , a dramatic reading with the show 's voice talent and a special Adventure Time Cosplay ball " . 
 The show is also popular with cosplayers , or performance artists who wear costumes and fashion accessories to represent characters from the Adventure Time universe . Moss wrote , " Looking into the crowd , it was clear that [ Finn 's ] distinctive blue shirt and white hat were being mirrored by hundreds of <unk> , male and female " . In an interview , Olivia Olson said , " Literally , anywhere you look , anywhere in your range , you 're going to see at least two people dressed up like Finn . It 's crazy . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = = Television = = = = 
 = = = = Comics = = = = 
 = = Related media = = 
 = = = Comic books = = = 
 On November 19 , 2011 , KaBOOM ! Studios announced plans for an Adventure Time comic book series written by independent web comic creator Ryan North , who wrote the series Dinosaur Comics . The series launched on February 8 , 2012 , with art by <unk> <unk> and Braden Lamb . In October 2014 , it was revealed that North had left the comic series after three years . His duties were assumed by Christopher Hastings , the creator of The Adventures of Dr. <unk> . 
 After the success of the ongoing comic book line , several spin @-@ off mini @-@ series were launched . In April 2012 , a six @-@ issue miniseries titled Adventure Time : Marceline and the Scream Queens and written by Meredith Gran — who created the series Octopus Pie — was announced . It was launched in July 2012 and features the characters Marceline and Princess Bubblegum touring the Land of Ooo as a part of Marceline 's rock band Scream Queens . Another six @-@ issue mini @-@ series , Adventure Time with Fionna & Cake was launched in January 2013 . This series , drawn by Adventure Time series character designer and storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri , follows the gender @-@ bent characters Fionna the Human and Cake the Cat from the episode " Fionna and Cake " . Other spin @-@ off comic series including Candy Capers , Flip Side , Banana Guard Academy , and Adventure Time : Ice King , have been released ; each written and illustrated by different writers and artists . One @-@ shot spin @-@ offs have also been announced ; the first , <unk> # 1 , was released in October 2015 . 
 A separate line of comics , officially denoted as graphic novels , have also been released . The first of these , titled Adventure Time : Playing with Fire , was written by Danielle <unk> and illustrated by Zack Sterling . It was released in April 2013 , and focuses on Flame Princess ' " very first adventure " with Finn and Jake . Playing with Fire was followed by several other volumes , including : Pixel Princesses ( November 6 , 2013 ) , Seeing Red ( May 2 , 2014 ) , Bitter Sweets ( November 11 , 2014 ) , Graybles <unk> ( May 12 , 2015 ) , Masked Mayhem ( November 11 , 2015 ) , and The Four Castles ( May 17 , 2016 ) An eighth original graphic novel , entitled President Bubblegum , is slated for release in September 2016 . 
 = = = Other literature = = = 
 Other Adventure Time @-@ themed books have also been released . The Adventure Time Encyclopaedia , published on July 22 , 2013 , was written by comedian Martin Olson , who is the father of Olivia Olson and the voice of recurring antagonist Hunson Abadeer . This book was followed by Adventure Time : The Enchiridion & Marcy 's Super Secret Scrapbook ! ! ! , which was released on October 6 , 2015 . This book — written by Martin and Olivia Olson — is presented as a combination of the Enchiridion and Marceline 's secret diary . An official Art of ... book , titled The Art of Ooo was published on October 14 , 2014 ; it contains interviews with cast and crew members , and opens with an introduction by film @-@ maker Guillermo del Toro . There are also a series of prose novels published under the header " Epic Tales from Adventure Time " , including : The Untamed <unk> written by Adrianne Ambrose , and Queen of Rogues and The Lonesome Outlaw both written by Leigh Dragoon . These books were published under the pseudonym " T. T. <unk> " . Two volumes with collections of the show 's title cards have also been released . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 A video game based on the series was announced by Pendleton Ward on his Twitter account . The game , titled Adventure Time : Hey Ice King ! Why 'd You Steal Our Garbage ? ! ! , was developed by WayForward Technologies for Nintendo DS , and Nintendo 3DS , and was released by D3 Publisher on November 20 , 2012 . Various video games , including Legends of Ooo , Fionna Fights , <unk> – Adventure Time , and Ski Safari : Adventure Time , have been released on the iOS App Store . In May 2013 , it was announced that a new game called Adventure Time : Explore the Dungeon Because I Don 't Know ! would be released . The game follows Finn and Jake as they strive " to save the Candy Kingdom by exploring the mysterious Secret Royal Dungeon deep below the Land of Ooo . " It was released in November 2013 . 
 A video game titled Finn & Jake 's Quest was released on April 11 , 2014 , on Steam . Adventure Time : The Secret of the Nameless Kingdom was released on November 18 , 2014 , for Nintendo 3DS , Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and Microsoft Windows . Cartoon Network also released a multiplayer online battle arena ( MOBA ) game titled Adventure Time : Battle Party on <unk> , on June 23 , 2014 . In April 2015 , two downloadable content packs for LittleBigPlanet 3 on PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4 were released ; one contained Adventure Time costumes , the other contained a level kit with decorations , stickers , music , objects , a background and a bonus Fionna costume . In October 2015 , the fourth major Adventure Time video game , titled Finn & Jake Investigations , was released . It is the first in the series to feature full 3D graphics . 
 A virtual reality game entitled Adventure Time : Magic Man 's Head Games was also released to Oculus Rift , HTC Vive , and PlayStation VR . Adventure Time characters will be added to the LEGO Dimensions game in September 2016 . 
 = = = Other merchandise = = = 
 Jazwares has produced an assortment of 2- , 5- , 10- , and 20 @-@ inch licensed action figures for the series , which were launched in late 2011 . " Grow Your Own " characters that expand when immersed in water were also released . Role playing toys have been produced ; a 24 @-@ inch " Finn Sword " was released first . Jazwares is also producing a " cuddle pillow " of Jake and Lumpy Space Princess . " Splat toys " of the same characters were released in early 2012 . Since the dramatic increase in popularity of the series , many graphic T @-@ shirts have been officially licensed through popular clothing retailers . Pendleton Ward hosted T @-@ shirt designing contests on two of these retailers ' websites . Other shirts can be purchased directly from Cartoon Network 's store . A collectible card game called Card Wars , inspired by the season four episode of the same name , has been released . On March 11 , 2016 , it was announced by Lego via Lego Ideas that an official Adventure Time Lego set from an idea by site user , <unk> , had met voting qualifications and was approved to be produced in cooperation with Cartoon Network . The set has been slated for an early 2017 release . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In February 2015 , it was reported that a theatrical Adventure Time movie was being developed by Cartoon Network Studios , Frederator Films , and Warner Animation Group . The film is being executive produced and written by Pendleton Ward , and produced by Roy Lee and Chris McKay . In October 2015 , series producer Adam Muto confirmed that series creator Pendleton Ward was “ working on the premise ” for the film , but that there was “ nothing official to announce yet . ” 
 = = Home media = = 
 On September 27 , 2011 , Cartoon Network released the region 1 DVD My Two Favorite People , which features a random selection of 12 episodes from the series ' first two seasons . The success of this DVD led to the release of several other region @-@ 1 compilation DVDs , including : It Came from the Nightosphere ( 2012 ) , Jake vs. Me @-@ Mow ( 2012 ) , Fionna and Cake ( 2013 ) , Jake the Dad ( 2013 ) , The Suitor ( 2014 ) , Princess Day ( 2014 ) , Adventure Time and Friends ( 2014 ) , Finn the Human ( 2014 ) , Frost & Fire ( 2015 ) , The Enchiridion ( 2015 ) , Stakes ( 2016 ) , and Card Wars ( 2016 ) . In addition , seasons one through five have been released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray . On March 30 , 2013 , the first season of Adventure Time was made available on the Netflix Instant Watch service for online streaming ; the second season was made available on March 30 , 2014 . Both seasons were removed on March 30 , 2015 , although seasons one through six were eventually made available for streaming on Hulu on May 1 , 2015 . 
 = John Peckham = 
 John Peckham ( / <unk> / ; also <unk> ; c . 1230 – 8 December 1292 ) was Archbishop of Canterbury in the years 1279 – 1292 . He was a native of Sussex who was educated at Lewes Priory and became a Friar Minor about 1250 . He studied at the University of Paris under Bonaventure , where he would later teach theology . From his teaching , he came into conflict with Thomas Aquinas , whom he debated on two occasions . Known as a conservative theologian , he opposed Aquinas ' views on the nature of the soul . Peckham also studied optics and astronomy , and his studies in those subjects were influenced by Roger Bacon . 
 In around 1270 , Peckham returned to England , where he taught at the University of Oxford , and was elected the provincial minister of England ( <unk> ) in 1275 . After a brief stint in Rome , he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in 1279 . His time as archbishop was marked by efforts to improve discipline in the clergy as well as reorganize the estates of his see . Pluralism , or holding more than one clerical benefice , was one of the abuses that Peckham combatted . He served King Edward I of England in Wales , where he formed a low opinion of the Welsh people and laws . Before and during his time as archbishop , he wrote a number of works on optics , philosophy , and theology , as well as writing hymns . Numerous manuscripts of his works survive . On his death , his body was buried in Canterbury Cathedral , but his heart was given to the Franciscans for burial . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Peckham came from a humble family , possibly from Patcham in Sussex . He was born about 1230 and was educated at Lewes Priory . About 1250 , he joined the Franciscan order at Oxford . He then went to the University of Paris , where he studied under Bonaventure and became regent master , or official lecturer , in theology . While at Paris , he wrote a Commentary on Lamentations , which sets out two possible sermons . 
 For years Peckham taught at Paris , where he was in contact with many of the leading scholars of his time , including Thomas Aquinas . He famously debated Aquinas on at least two occasions during 1269 and 1270 , during which Peckham defended the conservative theological position , and Thomas put forth his views on the soul . The Thomist doctrine of the unity of form was condemned after these debates . His theological works later were used by his pupil Roger Marston who in turn inspired Duns Scotus . 
 Peckham also studied other fields , however ; and was guided by Robert Grosseteste and Roger Bacon 's views on the value of experimental science . Where Peckham met Bacon is not known , but it would have been at either Paris or Oxford . Bacon 's influence can be seen in Peckham 's works on optics ( the <unk> communis ) and astronomy . 
 = = Return to England = = 
 = = = Reorganization of the archdiocese = = = 
 About 1270 , he returned to England to teach at Oxford , and was elected provincial minister of the Franciscans in England in 1275 . He did not long remain in that post , being summoned to Rome as lector sacri <unk> , or theological lecturer at the papal palace . It is likely that he composed his <unk> super <unk> Fratrum <unk> , a work that included information on preaching , a subject that Peckham felt was of great importance . In 1279 he was appointed Archbishop of Canterbury by Pope Nicholas III who had prohibited the election of Robert Burnell , Edward I 's preferred candidate . He was provided ( appointed by the pope to the see ) on 25 January 1279 and consecrated on 19 February 1279 . 
 Peckham laid stress on discipline , which often resulted in conflict with his clergy . His first episcopal act was calling a council at Reading in July 1279 to implement ecclesiastical reform , but Peckham 's specifying that a copy of Magna Carta should be hung in all cathedral and collegiate churches offended the king as an unnecessary intrusion into political affairs . Another ruling was on non @-@ residence of clergy in their livings . The only exception Peckham was prepared to make on non @-@ residence was if the clerk needed to go abroad to study . At the Parliament of Winchester in 1279 , the archbishop compromised and Parliament invalidated any regulation of the council dealing with royal policies or power . The copies of Magna Carta were taken down . One reason the archbishop may have backed down was that he was in debt to the Italian banking family of the Riccardi , who also were bankers to Edward and the pope , and Peckham was under threat of excommunication from the pope unless he repaid the loans . 
 However , Peckham worked hard to reorganise the estates of the diocese , and held an inquiry in 1283 through 1285 into the revenues of the see . He set up administrative structures in the manors that divided them into seven administrative groups . Peckham , though , was almost continually in debt , and because he was a Franciscan , he had no personal property to help with his living expenses . He had inherited the diocesan debts that his predecessor had allowed to accumulate , and never managed to clear them . 
 = = = Relations with the Welsh = = = 
 Notwithstanding his other actions , Peckham 's relations with the king were generally good , and Edward sent him on a diplomatic mission to Llywelyn ap Gruffudd in Wales . In 1282 he attempted to mediate between the Welsh and King Edward , but given that Edward would not budge on the main issues , it was a hopeless mission . In the end , Peckham excommunicated some of the Welsh who were resisting Edward , not unsurprising given Peckham 's views of the Welsh . Peckham visited the Welsh dioceses as part of his tour of all his subordinate dioceses . While there , Peckham criticised the Welsh clergy for their unchaste lives , conspicuous consumption , and heavy drinking . He also found the Welsh clergy to be uneducated , although he did order a Welsh @-@ speaking suffragan bishop to be appointed to help with pastoral duties in the diocese of Coventry and Lichfield . Peckham also criticised the Welsh people as a whole , contrasting their pastoral economy with the farming @-@ based economy of England , and finding the Welsh to be lazy and idle . 
 As part of his diplomatic duties , Peckham wrote to Llywelyn , and in those letters the archbishop continued his criticisms of the Welsh people , this time condemning their laws as contrary to both the Old and New Testament . Peckham was particularly offended that Welsh laws sought to get parties to homicides or other crimes to settle their differences rather than the process of English law which condemned the criminal . 
 Peckham also had problems with his subordinate Thomas Bek , who was Bishop of St David 's in Wales . Bek tried to revive a scheme to make St David 's independent from Canterbury , and to elevate it to metropolitan status . This had originally been put forth by Gerald of Wales around 1200 , but had been defeated by the actions of Hubert Walter , then the Archbishop of Canterbury . Bek did not manage even the four @-@ year fight that Gerald had managed , for Peckham routed him quickly . 
 = = = Ecclesiastical matters = = = 
 Skirmishes with Edward over clerical privileges , royal power , Peckham 's use of excommunication , and ecclesiastical taxation continued , but in October 1286 , Edward issued a writ entitled <unk> <unk> which specified what types of cases the ecclesiastical courts could hear . These included moral issues , matrimonial issues , disputes about wills and testaments , the correction of sins , and slander and physical attacks on the clergy . 
 Peckham was very strict in his interpretations of canon law , and once wrote to Queen Eleanor that her use of loans from Jewish moneylenders to acquire lands was usury and a mortal sin . He also felt that Welsh laws were illogical and conflicted with Biblical teachings . He also mandated that the clerical tonsure worn by the clergy should not just include the top of the head , but also have the nape and over the ears shaved , which allowed the clergy to be easily distinguished from the laity . To help with this , the archbishop also forbade the clergy from wearing secular clothing , especially military garb . He also forbade an effort by the Benedictine order in England to reform their monastic rule , to allow more time for study and for more education for the monks . Peckham 's reason was that they were against custom , but he may also have had concerns that these reforms would have drawn recruits away from the Franciscans . 
 At an ecclesiastical council held at Lambeth in 1281 , Peckham ordered the clergy to instruct their congregations in doctrine at least four times a year . They were to explain and teach the Articles of Faith , the Ten Commandments , the Works of Mercy , the Seven Deadly Sins , the Seven Virtues and the Sacraments . This command was issued as a canon , or law , of the council , and the group is known as the Lambeth Constitutions . Even later these constitutions were collected as the <unk> <unk> . The six doctrines comprised the minimum theological knowledge the archbishop considered necessary for the laity to know . The constitutions , which were originally in Latin , were the basis and inspiration for pastoral and devotional works throughout the remainder of the Middle Ages , and were eventually translated into English in the 15th century . 
 The crime of " plurality , " or pluralism , which was the holding by one cleric of two or more benefices , was one of Peckham 's targets , as were clerical absenteeism and laxity in the monastic life . His main method of fighting these was a system of " visitation " of his subordinate dioceses and religious houses , which he used with an unprecedented frequency . This often resulted in conflicts over whether or not the archbishop had jurisdiction to conduct these visits , but Peckham was also papal legate , which added a layer of complexity to the resulting disputes . The numerous legal cases that resulted from his visitation policy strengthened the archiepiscopal court at the expense of the lower courts . Peckham also fought with Thomas de Cantilupe , Bishop of Hereford over the right to visit subordinate clergy . The quarrel involved an appeal over the jurisdiction of the archbishop , that Thomas sent to Rome in 1281 , but Thomas died before the case could be decided . Peckham also decreed that the clergy should preach to their flocks at least four times a year . 
 Peckham often was in conflict with his subordinate bishops , mainly because of his efforts to reform them , but Peckham 's own attitude and handling of his clergy contributed to the problem . He once wrote to Roger de <unk> , the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield " These things need your attention , but you have been absent so long that you seem not to care . We therefore order you , on receipt of this letter , to take up residence in your diocese , so that — even if you are not competent to redress spiritual evils — you may at least minister to the temporal needs of the poor . " The historian Richard Southern says that Peckham 's disputes with his suffragan bishops were " conducted in an atmosphere of bitterness and perpetual ill @-@ will " , which probably owed something to a " petulant strain in Peckham 's character " . Peckham 's conflicts started because his own ideals were those of a Franciscan , but most of his clergy were concerned with more mundane and materialistic affairs . These strains between the archbishop and his subordinates were intensified by clashes over ecclesiastical and secular authority , as well as Edward 's great need for income . 
 Archbishop John Peckham was a notable anti @-@ semite . On August 19 , 1282 , in a letter to Richard Gravesend , Bishop of London , he ordered the Bishop to compel the Jews of London , using every instrument of ecclesiastical censure , to destroy all their synagogues except one within a brief time period to be determined by the Bishop . In a second letter he congratulates the Bishop because the Judaica <unk> is being overcome by the bishop 's attention and vigilance . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 A number of manuscripts of Peckham 's works on philosophy and biblical commentary remain extant . Queen Eleanor persuaded him to write for her a scholarly work in French , which was later described as " unfortunately rather a dull and uninspired little treatise . " His poem Philomena is considered one of the finest poems written in its time . 
 Peckham died on 8 December 1292 at Mortlake and was buried in the north transept , or the Martyrdom , of Canterbury Cathedral . His heart , however , was buried with the Franciscans under the high altar of their London church . His tomb still survives . He founded a college at <unk> , Kent in 1286 , probably a college of canons serving a church . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 A number of his works have survived , and some have appeared in print in various times : 
 Peckham is the earliest Archbishop of Canterbury to have his registers , the principal records of archiepiscopal administration , held at Lambeth Palace Library . 
 = Zombi 2 = 
 Zombi 2 is a 1979 zombie film directed by Lucio Fulci . The film was adapted from an original screenplay by <unk> Sacchetti to serve as a sequel to George A. Romero 's Dawn of the Dead , released in Italy as Zombi . It stars Tisa Farrow , Ian McCulloch and Richard Johnson , and featured a score by frequent Fulci collaborator Fabio Frizzi . 
 The film tells the story of a Caribbean island cursed by voodoo , whose dead residents rise as zombies to attack the living . A scientist 's daughter journeys to the island after her father 's boat turns up abandoned in New York City . Intended as a return to " classic zombie tales " by its writer , Zombi 2 was filmed in Italy , with further location shooting in New York and Santa Domingo . 
 Produced on a small budget of ₤ 410 million , the film earned several times its production costs back in international gross . It attracted controversy upon its United Kingdom release , becoming listed as a " video nasty " ; however , later years have seen a greater appreciation for the film from critics . Frizzi 's score has also been released independently of the film , as well as being performed live on tour by the composer . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Investigating an abandoned boat in a New York harbour , a patrolman is killed by a zombie before his partner chases it overboard . The dead patrolman 's body is taken to the morgue . Anne Bowles ( Tisa Farrow ) is questioned by police , as the boat belonged to her father . She claims he is conducting research on Matul , a Caribbean island . A newspaper reporter , Peter West ( Ian McCulloch ) , is investigating the story . He and Bowles learn that Bowles ' father is suffering from a strange illness on the island . They hire a boat and two guides — Brian Hull ( Al <unk> ) and his wife Susan Barrett ( <unk> Gay ) — to reach Matul . 
 Meanwhile , on Matul , Dr. David Menard ( Richard Johnson ) , and his wife Paola ( Olga <unk> ) have been researching the phenomenon of zombie reanimation . Paola wishes to flee the island but Menard insists on staying . That night , Paola is alone in the house when a zombie tries to enter . She pushes the door shut but it breaks through with one arm . Paola is dragged through the hole and killed , with her eye being gouged out by splintered wood . 
 Approaching Matul , Barrett dives in the ocean around the boat . She encounters a shark and flees behind a reef , only to be accosted by a submerged zombie . Surfacing , she reaches the boat while the shark and zombie attack each other . Eventually , the boat docks at Matul . 
 Menard is alarmed to find that one of his colleagues has died of the zombie infection ; he waits for the body to reanimate before shooting it in the head . While digging a grave for the body , he hears gunfire and follows it to discover the boat group . Menard takes them back to his mansion , discovering Paola 's corpse being eaten by zombies . The group fends off an attack and escapes in a jeep , with West suffering an ankle injury when the vehicle veers off @-@ road . Resting in a jungle clearing , the group realise they have encountered a Conquistador @-@ era graveyard ; Barrett is killed when one of the corpses rises from the earth and bites out her throat . 
 As more corpses reanimate , the group flees to a hospital , where Menard explains that the dead are rising as a result of a voodoo curse which he has been trying to stop . The hospital is besieged by zombies , and Menard is killed by one of his former staff . As the zombies attempt to enter , those being treated for infection inside the hospital also reanimate , killing several hospital staff who have stayed behind . As the dead outside breach the door , Bowles sets the building on fire . The undead Barrett attacks Hull but is shot in the head by West . Bowles , West and Hull escape to the boat and leave the island . 
 At sea , Hull dies of his infection , and his body is locked in a cabin to be used as evidence of what has happened . However , as the boat approaches New York again , a radio broadcast reports that the city is under attack from zombies — the result of the initial attack in the harbour . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 Zombi 2 serves as a sequel to Zombi , a re @-@ edited Italian release of George A. Romero 's 1978 film Dawn of the Dead ; Zombi had been edited by Dario Argento and given a new score by the Italian band Goblin , and proved successful upon its release in Italy . As Italian copyright law allows any film to be marketed as a sequel to another work , the film was quickly greenlit and financed by producer Fabrizio De Angelis . Enzo G. Castellari was offered to direct Zombi 2 , but turned it down as he didn 't feel he would be the right director for a horror film . Director Lucio Fulci was De Angelis ' second choice for the project , and was hired based on his handling of violent scenes in his previous films Sette note in nero and Non si <unk> un <unk> . 
 Screenwriter <unk> Sacchetti had already worked with Fulci on Sette note in nero . Sacchetti has since stated that his initial script for Zombi 2 — originally written under the title Nightmare Island — had been influenced by The Island of Doctor Moreau and had been intended to return to " classic zombie tales " such as I Walked with a Zombie , The Walking Dead or Voodoo Island . Sacchetti began work on this script in July 1978 , before it was optioned by Angelis ' company Variety Films that December and re @-@ tooled as Zombi 2 . Lead star McCulloch was cast primarily on the success in Italy of the 1975 BBC television series Survivors , which had impressed producer Ugo Tucci . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production occurred during June and July 1979 . Filming took place in Latina , Italy , as well as in New York City and Santo Domingo . Several of the actors ' contracts had specified being provided with trailers for the duration of production ; however , none were present when filming started and only Johnson was able to convince the producers to provide one . McCulloch and Johnson had known each other for many years by the time they collaborated on Zombi 2 , having first met while they were members of the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1962 , with the younger McCulloch coming to idolise Johnson 's work . 
 = = Music = = 
 The score to Zombi 2 was composed by Fabio Frizzi , who frequently scored Fulci 's works , including Sette note in nero , I quattro dell <unk> and Sella d <unk> previously . Zombi 2 marked the first time the two had worked together on a straight horror movie as opposed to their previous spaghetti western and giallo thriller work ; Frizzi would go on to compose for many more horror films with and without Fulci . 
 Frizzi 's work on Zombi 2 — particularly " <unk> . 6 " , the sequence composed for the eye @-@ gouging scene — was inspired by the melody of The Beatles ' 1967 song " A Day in the Life " . Elsewhere in the score , Frizzi included Caribbean musical cues , which he noted were intended to " pleasantly deceive " the audience . A medley of the score was later included as part of Frizzi 's 2013 Fulci 2 Frizzi live tour , including the 2014 live album release Fulci 2 Frizzi : Live at Union Chapel . The score itself was released on vinyl by Death Waltz Records in 2015 , with new artwork by Tom Beauvais . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Fabio Frizzi . 
 = = Release = = 
 Zombi 2 was first released in September 1979 in Italy , before being released in English @-@ speaking markets in 1980 . The film would go on to gross over ₤ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worldwide , significantly higher than its ₤ 410 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 budget . Zombi 2 has also been released under the titles <unk> , The Island of the Living Dead , Zombie Flesh Eaters , Zombie , Zombie The Dead Walk Among Us , Gli <unk> Zombi , <unk> , L 'Enfer de Zombies , Zombie 2 : The Dead Are Among Us and Nightmare Island . 
 Upon its release in the United Kingdom on 2 January 1980 , the British Board of Film Classification required a total of one minute and forty @-@ six seconds of material to be cut in order to obtain an X rating ; its most recent home release on 1 August 2005 passed for an 18 rating with no cuts required . However , the 1980 release found itself classified as a " video nasty " , having been considered a breach of the Obscene Publications Act . This classification , and the de facto " ban " it involved , has subsequently been used for publicity when advertising future home releases 
 Zombi 2 has been released several times on home video , beginning with a 1981 VHS version by VIPCO following the theatrical cuts directed by the BBFC . VIPCO produced an uncut release , marketed as the " strong uncut version " , on VHS the following year ; this is the release which was widely confiscated as a " video nasty " . Further VHS releases followed in 1991 and 1994 , with the latter being edited for widescreen viewing . The film was first released on DVD by VIPCO in 2004 , with minor cuts , and uncut by Anchor Bay Entertainment in 2005 . Other DVD releases include a 2004 version by Cornerstone Media , and a 2012 DVD and Blu @-@ ray version by Arrow Films . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Zombi 2 grossed higher in the domestic Italian box office than its predecessor , leading to future sequels — Fulci began directed Zombi 3 before illness forced him to hand over the reigns to Bruno Mattei and Claudio <unk> , the latter of whom would also direct Zombi 4 . 
 In a contemporary review , Tom Milne reviewed a 89 @-@ minute English @-@ language dub in the Monthly Film Bulletin and compared the film to Dawn of the Dead . While noting that the cast was competent and the film featured " sometimes effective make @-@ up work " , Milne opined that the film " lacks @-@ for all weaknesses of Romero 's film — even a tenth of the <unk> charge harboured by Zombies . " The review noted that the censorship trimmed a " promisingly gruesome sequence " with a corpse undergoing an autopsy . In Italy , La Stampa described the film as " pedestrian " , as well finding it hard to bear Olga <unk> ' character 's death scene . 
 In a 2012 review for The Guardian , Phelim O 'Neill described the film as " the ultimate undead movie " , praising its commitment to gory scenes and convincing effects . O 'Neill felt that the film stood the passage of time well , and explained that this was " because it delivers , plain and simple " . He also highlighted Frizzi 's work on the score , and summed the film up as " a real influence on what followed " . Anne Billson , writing for The Daily Telegraph in 2013 , included Zombi 2 in her list of the top ten zombie films , describing its opening scenes as " sublimely creepy " and the eye @-@ gouging scene as " memorably nasty " . Writing for the Daily Mirror , James <unk> praised Fulci 's directing , finding that he consistently made evocative use of particular shots to accentuate the film 's action or horror . <unk> felt that the film " can often blind with its shock violence but is well worth the look " . 
 Writing for AllMovie , Robert Firsching described Zombi 2 as a " relatively well made shocker " which " led to the zombie @-@ gore film becoming the dominant motif of 1980s Italian horror " . Firsching rated the film three stars out of five . Empire 's Kim Newman awarded the film two stars out of five , chalking up much of its " video nasty " reputation to the " eye gouging " scene , comparing this unfavourably to similar material in 1929 's Un Chien Andalou . Newman did compliment several sequences as interesting , particularly one underwater scene depicting a zombie attacking a shark , but found that overall the film did no " keep up the pace or <unk> sufficiently " . 
 = New York State Route 195 = 
 New York State Route 195 ( NY 195 ) was a 6 @.@ 20 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 98 km ) long north – south state highway located within the town of Lawrence in St. Lawrence County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route was at NY 11B in the hamlet of Nicholville . Its northern terminus was at U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) in the community of Lawrenceville . NY 195 was located in an extremely rural portion of the county and had only three intermediary intersections with other through traffic roads . 
 NY 195 was first a piece of the former Route 30 , a legislative route designated by the state in 1908 . The route was replaced in 1924 , by NY 2 , the first set of signed state routes in New York , with a bypassed section near Lawrenceville being designated as NY 2A about two years later . NY 2 and NY 2A were decommissioned in 1927 for US 11 , leaving the route unnumbered for a few years . In the 1930 state highway renumbering , the Nicholville – Lawrenceville route was designated as NY 11B . By 1938 , NY 11B was realigned to Malone , and the route was replaced by NY 195 . The route was officially decommissioned by the New York State Department of Transportation on April 10 , 1980 , but the route remained under state control for two more years , until September 1 , 1982 , when the alignment was turned over to St. Lawrence County and designated as County Route 55 ( CR 55 ) and County Route 54 ( CR 54 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 195 began at an intersection with NY 11B in the hamlet of Nicholville within the town of Lawrence . It headed north out of the community and into a series of cultivated fields . About quarter of the way between Nicholville and Lavery 's Corner , the fields gave way to forested areas , which themselves ceded to more fields near an intersection with Cady Road . NY 195 continued on to Lavery 's Corner , where it intersected with a pair of county highways and turned east toward Lawrenceville . On its way to Lawrenceville , the highway met Ferris Road , the last through route along NY 195 's routing excluding the roadway at its northern terminus . East of Ferris Road , NY 195 curved northeast to enter Lawrenceville , where it ended at US 11 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature created Route 30 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Niagara Falls to Rouses Point via Maple View , Potsdam and Lawrenceville . Route 30 followed what is now NY 11B east from Potsdam to Nicholville , where it turned north to follow modern County Route 55 ( CR 55 ) and CR 54 to Lawrenceville . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , NY 2 was assigned to most of legislative Route 30 between Maple View and Rouses Point . The lone exception was from Potsdam to Lawrenceville , where NY 2 followed a more northerly alignment via Winthrop and North Lawrence . The bypassed section of legislative Route 30 between Potsdam and Lawrenceville was designated as NY 2A by 1926 . 
 The Nicholville – Lawrenceville segment of NY 2A was concurrent with NY 56 , another route assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s that extended from Massena in the northwest to Meacham Lake in the southeast via Winthrop and Saint Regis Falls . When NY 2 was redesignated as US 11 in 1927 , the NY 2A designation was eliminated and replaced with a realigned NY 56 from Potsdam to Nicholville . The Nicholville – Lawrenceville roadway was left unnumbered until the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York when it was designated as NY 11B . The designation was extended west to Potsdam by the following year . NY 11B was rerouted c . 1938 to continue east from Nicholville to Malone while its former routing north of Nicholville was designated as NY 195 . 
 NY 195 remained unchanged up to April 10 , 1980 , when the designation was officially removed from the route . However , the highway remained under state jurisdiction until September 1 , 1982 , when ownership and maintenance of NY 195 's former routing was transferred from the state of New York to St. Lawrence County as part of a larger highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . The alignment that NY 195 once followed is now part of CR 55 from Nicholville to Lavery 's Corner and part of CR 54 from Lavery 's Corner to Lawrenceville . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route was in Lawrence , St. Lawrence County . 
 = The Experienced English Housekeeper = 
 The Experienced English Housekeeper , is a cookery book by the English businesswoman Elizabeth Raffald ( 1733 – 1781 ) . It was first published in 1769 , and went through 13 authorised editions and at least 23 pirated ones . 
 The book contains some 900 recipes for : soups ; main dishes including roast and boiled meats , boiled puddings , and fish ; desserts , table decorations and " little savory dishes " ; potted meats , drinks , wines , pickles , preserves and distilled essences . The recipes consist largely of direct instructions to the cook , and do not contain lists of ingredients . The book is illustrated with three fold @-@ out copper plate engravings . 
 The book is noted for its practicality , departing from earlier practice in avoiding plagiarism , consisting instead almost entirely of direct instructions based on Raffald 's experience . It introduced the first known recipe for a wedding cake covered in marzipan and royal icing , and is an early use of barbecue . The book remains a reference for cookery writers . 
 = = Context = = 
 Raffald was born in Doncaster in 1733 . Between 1748 and 1763 she was employed as a housekeeper by several families , including the Warburtons of Arley Hall in Cheshire , where she met her future husband , John <unk> , Arley Hall 's head gardener . In 1763 the couple moved to Manchester , where Elizabeth opened a confectionery shop and John sold flowers and seeds at a market stall . They had 16 children , all girls . As well as her cookery book , she wrote a book on midwifery and ran a registry office in Manchester . In 1773 , she sold the copyright to the book to her publisher for £ 1400 , equivalent to about £ 160 @,@ 000 as of 2015 . 
 Raffald writes in her Preface that she not only worked as a housekeeper " in great and worthy families " , but " had the opportunity of travelling with them " . The bibliographer William Carew Hazlitt observes that in this way she " widened her sphere of observation . " A 2005 article in <unk> described Raffald as " the most celebrated English cookery writer of the eighteenth century after Hannah Glasse . " 
 = = Book = = 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 The following page numbers refer to the 4th edition of 1775 . 
 Part I [ Soups , meat , fish , pies and puddings ] 
 Chapter 1 : Soups . Page 1 
 Chapter 2 : Dressing Fish . Page 14 
 Chapter 3 : Roasting and Boiling . Page 52 
 Chapter 4 : Made Dishes . Page 79 
 Chapter 5 : Pies . Page 143 
 Chapter 6 : Puddings . Page 167 
 Part II [ Desserts and accompanying dishes ] 
 Chapter 7 : Making Decorations for a Table . Page 186 
 Chapter 8 : Preserving . Page 209 
 Chapter 9 : Drying and <unk> . Page 237 
 Chapter 10 : Creams , Custards , and Cheese @-@ Cakes . Page 247 
 Chapter 11 : Cakes . Page 264 
 Chapter 12 : Little Savory Dishes . Page 280 
 Part III [ Preserves , pickles , wines , distilled essences ] 
 Chapter 13 : <unk> and <unk> . Page 293 
 Chapter 14 : <unk> , Gruel , & c . Page 308 
 Chapter 15 : Wines , <unk> , and Vinegar . Page 317 
 Chapter 16 : Pickling . Page 342 
 Chapter 17 : Keeping Garden @-@ Stuff , and Fruit . Page 358 
 Chapter 18 : Distilling . Page 364 
 [ Appendices ] 
 A correct List of every Thing in Season in every Month of the Year . Page 368 
 Directions for a Grand Table . Page 381 
 Index . Page 383 [ Finis Page 397 ] 
 = = = Approach = = = 
 The book begins without a table of contents , though the three parts are described on the title page . The front matter consists of a dedication " To the Honourable Lady Elizabeth Warburton " , occupying two pages , a three @-@ page Preface to the First Edition , and a fold @-@ out plate of a suitable stove , complete with a " Description of the Plate " on the facing page . Plagiarism was combated in later editions ( from as early as 1775 ) with the declaration at the foot of the title page " N. B. No Book is genuine but what is signed by the Author " , and a matching handwritten signature in brownish @-@ black ink bracketing the heading of Chapter 1 . 
 Each chapter begins with a section of " Observations " on the topic of the chapter ; thus , Chapter 3 has three pages of " Observations on Roasting and Boiling " . The observations are close to instructions , as " when you boil mutton or beef , observe to dredge them well with flour before you put them into the kettle of cold water , keep it covered , and take off the scum " . 
 The rest of each chapter consists entirely of " receipts " ( recipes ) . These are usually named as instructions like " To roast a Pig " , " To make Sauce for a Pig " . Occasionally there is a comment , as in " A nice way to dress a Cold Fowl " . 
 The names of dishes are overwhelmingly in English , even when the dish is in fact foreign ; thus " To make Cream Cakes " is the heading for the recipe for meringue , beginning " Beat the whites of nine eggs to a stiff froth , then stir it gently with a spoon , for fear the froth should fall " . 
 Raffald is however not afraid to use foreign words for new techniques , as " to <unk> Lamb Stones " , " to barbecue a Pig " , " <unk> Beef " , " Ducks a @-@ la @-@ mode " , " To <unk> Pigeons " , " To <unk> Mushrooms " . In explanation of this , she writes in the Preface to the First Edition : 
 And though I have given some of my dishes French names , as they are known only by those names , yet they will not be found very expensive , nor add compositions but as plain as the nature of the dish will admit of . 
 The recipes themselves are written entirely as directions , without lists of ingredients . They are generally terse , the reader being assumed to know how to beat eggs and to separate the white from the yolk , to boil starchy foods in milk without burning the pan , or to make a " paste " ( pastry ) , all of which are required skills for this recipe for sago pudding : 
 A <unk> <unk> another way . 
 Boil two ounces of sago till it is quite thick in milk , beat six eggs , leaving out three of the whites , put to it half a pint of cream , two spoonfuls of sack , nutmeg and sugar to your taste ; put a paste round your dish . 
 = = = Illustrations = = = 
 Official editions contained three engravings on pages that folded out , interspersed with the text . The first illustrated a stove ; the other two , suggested table layouts for the first course and for the second course . Raffald explains in her Directions for a GRAND <unk> that : 
 being desirous of rendering it easy for the future , have made it my study to set out the dinner in as elegant a manner as lies in my power , and in the modern taste ; but finding I could not express myself to be understood by young house @-@ keepers , in placing the dishes upon the table , obliged me to have two copper @-@ plates ; as I am very unwilling to leave even the weakest capacity in the dark , it being my greatest study to render my whole work both plain and easy . 
 The book , intended for " a burgeoning middle class that required explanation and elucidation " , provided an accurate description of how to serve an elegant meal à la française , complete with two fold @-@ out engravings of the layout of a table with 25 " prettily @-@ shaped " and symmetrically @-@ arranged serving @-@ dishes " laid in generous profusion on the table " , each annotated with the name of the appropriate recipe . It is not clear whether the term " cover " for the layout of such a " Grand meal " is an acknowledgement of the French <unk> , as it may simply mean , with Hannah Glasse , " a large table to cover " . 
 The layout for the second course contains the dishes ( from top ) : 
 Pheasant , 
 Snow balls , Crawfish in savory jelly , Moonshine , 
 <unk> 'd <unk> , <unk> 'd Veal , 
 Fish pond , Mince Pies , Globes of gold web with mottoes in them , 
 <unk> <unk> , <unk> Cream , 
 Roast <unk> , transparent pudding covered with a silver web , pea Chick with asparagus , 
 <unk> , Stew 'd mushrooms , 
 <unk> Cream , <unk> with Hot <unk> , Floating Island , 
 Collared Pig , Pott 'd <unk> , 
 Rocky Island , Snipes in savory jelly , Burnt Cream , 
 Roast 'd Hare . 
