 Are full of passionate intensity . 
 Here , Yeats incorporates his ideas on the gyre – a historical cycle of about 2000 years . He first published this idea in A Vision , which predicted the anarchy expected to be released around 2000 years after the birth of Christ . 
 According to some interpretations " the best " referred to the traditional ruling classes of Europe who were unable to protect the traditional culture of Europe from materialistic mass movements . The concluding lines also refer to Yeats 's belief that history was cyclic , and that his age represented the end of the cycle that began with the rise of Christianity . 
 And what rough beast , its hour come round at last , 
 <unk> towards Bethlehem to be born ? 
 = The Baby Show = 
 " The Baby Show " is the ninth episode of the first season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt and directed by Michael Engler . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 4 , 2007 . Guest stars in this episode include Katrina Bowden , Rachel Dratch , John Lutz , Bridget Moloney , Maulik Pancholy , Chris Parnell , Keith Powell , and Lonny Ross . 
 In the episode , Cerie Xerox ( Bowden ) gets engaged so that she can be a " young hot mom " , causing Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to think about marriage and having a family . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) has trouble dealing with his own domineering mother , who wants to move in with him , and at the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) becomes upset by Josh Girard 's ( Ross ) impression of him . 
 " The Baby Show " received mixed reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Cerie Xerox ( Katrina Bowden ) announces her engagement during a gathering for Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) birthday , and says that she wants to be a " young hot mom " . Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) confronts her own marital and maternal status . She speaks with Jenna about this , and Jenna proceeds to tell all of the men in the office — Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) , James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) , and J. D. Lutz ( John Lutz ) — that Liz is looking for someone to get her pregnant . Later that day , Liz sees Cerie in the makeup department getting herself made up . Anna ( Bridget Moloney ) , the makeup artist has her baby at work with her . She asks Liz to hold the baby for a while , so Liz takes the baby for a stroll around the 30 Rock building . Suddenly she realizes that she is no longer in the building , but is now in her apartment . She hurries back to the office with the baby , and Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) fixes the situation . 
 Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) is being harassed by his mother over the phone . She calls him repeatedly , with the intention of moving in with him . The situation causes him to exhibit some stress @-@ eating tendencies . At the same time , Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) and Josh Girard ( Lonny Ross ) begin to hang out , but Tracy gets annoyed of Josh 's impression of him . He demands that Liz fire Josh , but she refuses , so instead she tries to fix the situation , but Tracy threatens to go to Jack if she does not . Josh tries to avoid getting in trouble by calling Tracy and impersonating Jack , and then calling Jack and impersonating Tracy . It is not long before he is caught and Jack and Tracy have their revenge on him . As part of his punishment , Jack forces Josh talk to his mother " Every day , for the rest of your or her life . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Baby Show " was written by co @-@ executive producer Jack Burditt and directed by Michael Engler . This was Burditt 's second writing credit , having written the episode " Jack Meets Dennis " , and was Engler 's first directed episode . " The Baby Show " originally aired on January 4 , 2007 on NBC as the ninth episode of the show 's first season and overall of the series . This was the first of several episodes to make reference to Liz 's desire to become a mother . This plot came to a head in the third season episode " Do @-@ Over " in which Liz attempts to adopt a child . 
 Rachel Dratch , longtime comedy partner and fellow Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) alumna of series ' creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , the latter who was the show 's head writer from 1999 until 2006 , was originally cast to portray Jenna Maroney . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , actress Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement . Executive producer Lorne Michaels announced that while Dratch would not be playing a series regular , she would appear in various episodes in a different role . In the pilot and in this episode , Dratch played Greta Johansen , the The Girlie Show 's cat wrangler . In this episode , Greta tells Liz Lemon that she would be interested in carrying her baby , after hearing that Liz was looking for someone to get her pregnant . Actor Chris Parnell appeared as Dr. Leo Spaceman in " The Baby Show " , in which Liz calls him for fertility purposes . Various other cast members of SNL have appeared on 30 Rock . These cast members include : Fred Armisen , Kristen Wiig , Will Forte , Jason Sudeikis , Molly Shannon , Horatio Sanz , and Jan Hooks . Fey and Tracy Morgan have both been part of the main cast of SNL . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " The Baby Show " was watched by 5 @.@ 9 million households , the same as the previous week 's episode " The Break @-@ Up " , in its original American broadcast . It received a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 7 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 0 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . 
 IGN contributor Robert Canning said the episode " had plenty of standout bits " but that it " represented a major flaw " and " perhaps in the program as a whole " , citing that " [ t ] here seems to be more of an emphasis on comedic ' bits ' rather than comedic ' situations , ' which doesn 't bode well for a situation comedy . " He explained that " The Baby Show " in particular " felt very disjointed , bouncing between jokes more than storylines . It even opened with a Jenna surprise @-@ birthday segment that was funny for what it was , but had absolutely nothing to do with the rest of the show . " Canning gave the episode a 7 @.@ 0 out 10 rating . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich liked that Josh had a story in this episode , and said that his impression of Tracy was " pretty good " . He remarked that " The Baby Show " was " a solid episode , if a bit too theme @-@ y for my broad @-@ sitcom liking . " 
 = SMS Prinz Adalbert ( 1865 ) = 
 For other ships of the same name , see SMS Prinz Adalbert 
 SMS Prinz Adalbert was an ironclad warship of the Prussian Navy , originally ordered by the Confederate States Navy . Prussia purchased the ship during the Second Schleswig War against Denmark , though the vessel was not delivered until after the war . The vessel was designed as an armored ram , but also carried three guns : one 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) and two 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) pieces in armored turrets . She was named after Prince Adalbert of Prussia , an early proponent of German naval power . 
 The ship was poorly constructed and as a result had a very limited service career . She was heavily modified after her delivery to Prussia in 1865 and briefly served with the fleet between 1866 and 1871 . During the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 – 1871 , the ship was assigned as a guard ship in Hamburg . After the war , it was discovered that the internal wood construction was badly rotted ; she was therefore removed from service in October 1871 . Prinz Adalbert was stricken from the naval register in May 1878 and broken up for scrap that year . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics and propulsion = = = 
 Prinz Adalbert was 50 @.@ 48 meters ( 165 @.@ 6 ft ) long at the waterline and 56 @.@ 96 m ( 186 @.@ 9 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 9 @.@ 92 m ( 32 @.@ 5 ft ) and a draft of 4 @.@ 96 m ( 16 @.@ 3 ft ) forward and 5 @.@ 02 m ( 16 @.@ 5 ft ) aft . She was designed to displace 1 @,@ 440 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 420 long tons ; 1 @,@ 590 short tons ) at a normal load and up to 1 @,@ 560 t ( 1 @,@ 540 long tons ; 1 @,@ 720 short tons ) at combat load . The ship 's hull was constructed from transverse frames , and included both iron and timber . The hull was sheathed in copper to protect it from parasites . The Prussians regarded the ship as a poor sea boat . The ram bow caused the vessel to ship a great deal of water . It was , however , responsive to commands from the helm and had a very tight turning radius . Prinz Adalbert had a crew of ten officers and 120 enlisted men . 
 Prinz Adalbert 's propulsion system was provided by <unk> , based in Le Havre . The ship was powered by a pair of 2 @-@ cylinder single expansion engines , each of which drove a four @-@ bladed screw that was 3 @.@ 6 m ( 11 ft 10 in ) in diameter . The engines were placed in a single engine room . Two trunk boilers , also in a single boiler room , supplied steam to the engines at 1 @.@ 5 standard atmospheres ( 150 kPa ) . Two rudders were fitted side by side to control the vessel . The ship was initially fitted with a 740 square meter ( 2 @,@ 428 sq ft ) brig rig , though this was subsequently replaced with a 677 square meter topsail schooner rig . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 As built , Prinz Adalbert was armed with three rifled 36 pounder muzzle @-@ loading guns . One was placed in an integral five @-@ port bow turret , while the other two were located in a fixed two @-@ port turret amidships . After delivery in 1865 , the French guns were replaced with a 21 @-@ centimeter ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) L / 19 gun in the bow and two 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) L / 25 guns in a revolving turret . The forward gun was supplied with 76 rounds of ammunition while the central guns had 71 shells each . Prinz Adalbert was armored with wrought iron , which was mounted on the wooden hull . The armored belt , which protected the waterline of the ship , was 127 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The turrets were protected by 114 mm ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) of armor plating on the sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Prinz Adalbert was built under the cover name Cheops by the French shipyard of the Arman brothers in Bordeaux . Her sister ship , built under the cover name Sphinx , was delivered to the Confederate Navy and renamed CSS Stonewall . The French emperor , Napoleon III , ordered the Arman brothers to sell Cheops to another navy immediately ; Prussia purchased the ship on 25 May 1864 . The Second Schleswig War between Denmark and Prussia and its ally Austria delayed delivery of the ship . Cheops was commissioned into the Prussian fleet on 29 October 1865 as Prinz Adalbert . Along with the turret ship Arminius , Prinz Adalbert was among the first armored vessels acquired by the Prussian Navy . The ship was named for Prince Adalbert of Prussia , one of the creators of the German fleet . While conducting trials off Denmark in June 1865 , Prinz Adalbert ran aground . During the Austro @-@ Prussian War in 1866 , Prinz Adalbert was mobilized in Kiel under the command of Admiral Jachmann , but due to the lack of opponents in the North and Baltic Seas , the ship remained in the Baltic for the duration of the war . 
 The ship did not last long in service due to her poor construction ; this necessitated significant refurbishment , which was carried out at the naval depot at Geestemünde in 1868 – 1869 . Her armor plating had to be removed and reinstalled , a breakwater was installed at the stern of the ship , and the main mast had to be relocated . She was re @-@ rigged to a schooner rig during this refit . Prinz Adalbert also suffered from severe leaking throughout her short career . In 1870 , shortly before the outbreak of the Franco @-@ Prussian War , the Prussian fleet was mobilized for a training cruise into the Atlantic . Prinz Adalbert and the recently commissioned broadside ironclad König Wilhelm steamed to Plymouth , England , where they rendezvoused with the rest of the fleet . While in Plymouth , the squadron received news of imminent hostilities with France , and made for safety in Wilhelmshaven , arriving on 16 July , three days before the outbreak of war . For the duration of the conflict , Prinz Adalbert served as a harbor guard ship in Hamburg . Her timber hull was found to be rotten in 1871 , which forced her decommissioning . She was removed from service on 23 October 1871 and disarmed in 1875 – 1876 . The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 28 May 1878 . She was broken up that year in Wilhelmshaven , and her engines were removed and reused . 
 = Battle of Lissa ( 1811 ) = 
 The Battle of Lissa ( sometimes called the Battle of Vis ; French : Bataille de Lissa ; Italian : Battaglia di Lissa ; Croatian : <unk> bitka ) was a naval action fought between a British frigate squadron and a larger squadron of French and Venetian frigates and smaller ships on 13 March 1811 during the Adriatic campaign of the Napoleonic Wars . The engagement was fought in the Adriatic Sea for possession of the strategically important island of Lissa ( also known as Vis ) , from which the British squadron had been disrupting French shipping in the Adriatic . The French needed to control the Adriatic to supply a growing army in the Illyrian Provinces , and consequently dispatched an invasion force in March 1811 consisting of six frigates , numerous smaller craft and a battalion of Italian soldiers . 
 The French invasion force under Bernard Dubourdieu was met by Captain William Hoste and his four ships based on the island . In the subsequent battle , Hoste sank the French flagship , captured two others , and scattered the remainder of the Franco @-@ Venetian squadron . The battle has been hailed as an important British victory , due to both the disparity between the forces and the signal raised by Hoste , a former subordinate of Horatio Nelson . Hoste had raised the message " Remember Nelson " as the French bore down , and had then manoeuvred to drive Dubourdieu 's flagship ashore and scatter his squadron in what has been described as " one of the most brilliant naval achievements of the war " . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Napoleonic Wars , the name for a succession of connected conflicts between the armies of the French Emperor Napoleon and his European opponents , were nine years old when the War of the Fifth Coalition ended in 1809 . The Treaty of Schönbrunn that followed the war gave Napoleon possession of the final part of Adriatic coastline not under his control : the Illyrian Provinces . This formalised the control the French had exercised in Illyria since 1805 and over the whole Adriatic Sea since the Treaty of Tilsit in 1807 . In the Treaty of Tilsit , Russia had granted France control over the Septinsular Republic and withdrawn their own forces from the region , allowing Napoleon freedom of action in the Adriatic . At Schönbrunn , Napoleon made the Illyrian Provinces part of metropolitan France and therefore under direct French rule , unlike the neighbouring Kingdom of Italy which was nominally independent but in reality came under his personal rule . Thus , the Treaty of Schönbrunn formalised Napoleon 's control of almost the entire coastline of the Adriatic and , if unopposed , would allow him to transport troops and supplies to the Balkans . The French army forming in the Illyrian Provinces was possibly intended for an invasion of the Ottoman Empire in conjunction with the Russians ; the two countries had signed an agreement to support one another against the Ottomans at Tilsit . 
 To disrupt the preparations of this army , the British Royal Navy , which had controlled most of the Mediterranean since the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 , seized the Dalmatian Island of Lissa in 1807 and used it as a base for raiding the coastal shipping of Italy and Illyria . These operations captured dozens of ships and caused panic and disruption to French strategy in the region . To counter this , the French government started a major shipbuilding programme in the Italian seaports , particularly Venice , and despatched frigates of their own to protect their shipping . Commodore Bernard Dubourdieu 's Franco @-@ Venetian forces were unable to bring the smaller British force under William Hoste to a concerted action , where Dubourdieu 's superior numbers might prove decisive . Instead , the British and French frigate squadrons engaged in a campaign of raids and counter @-@ raids during 1810 . 
 In October 1810 , Dubourdieu landed 700 Italian soldiers on Lissa while Hoste searched in vain for the French squadron in the Southern Adriatic . The island had been left in the command of two midshipmen , James Lew and Robert Kingston , who withdrew the entire population of the island into the central mountains along with their supplies . The Italian troops were left in possession of the deserted main town , Port St. George . The French and Italians burnt several vessels in the harbour and captured others , but remained on the island for no more than seven hours , retreating before Hoste returned . The remainder of the year was quiet , the British squadron gaining superiority after being reinforced by the third @-@ rate ship of the line HMS Montagu . 
 Early in 1811 the raiding campaigns began again , and British attacks along the Italian coast prompted Dubourdieu to mount a second invasion of Lissa . Taking advantage of the temporary absence of Montagu , Dubourdieu assembled six frigates and numerous smaller craft and embarked over 500 Italian soldiers under Colonel Alexander Gifflenga . The squadron amassed by Dubourdieu not only outnumbered the British in terms of men and ships , it was also twice as heavy in weight of shot . Dubourdieu planned to overwhelm Hoste 's frigate squadron and then invade and capture the island , which would eradicate the British threat in the Adriatic for months to come . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Dubourdieu ( as commodore ) led a squadron consisting of six frigates ( four of 40 guns and two of 32 guns ) , a 16 @-@ gun brig , two schooners , one xebec , and two gunboats . Three of his ships were from the French Navy , and the others from the Navy of the Kingdom of Italy . In addition the squadron carried 500 Italian soldiers . In the absence of Montagu , Hoste 's squadron consisted of three frigates ( one of 38 guns and two of 32 guns ) and one 22 @-@ gun post ship . The island of Lissa itself was defended by a small number of local troops under the command of two midshipmen . 
 Dubourdieu 's squadron was spotted approaching the island of Lissa at 03 : 00 on 12 March 1811 by Captain Gordon in HMS Active , which had led the British squadron from Port St George on a cruise off Ancona . Turning west , the British squadron awaited the French approach in line ahead , sailing along the north coast of the island within half a mile of the shoreline . By 06 : 00 , Dubourdieu was approaching the British line from the north @-@ east in two divisions , leading in Favorite at the head of the windward or western division . Dubourdieu hoped to pass ahead of Active at the head of the British line and cross it further east with Danaé , which led the leeward division . Dubourdieu intended to break the British line in two places and destroy the British squadron in the crossfire . 
 Over the next three hours the squadrons continued to close , light winds restricting them to a little over three knots . A protege of Nelson , Hoste recalled the inspirational effect of Nelson 's signal before the Battle of Trafalgar and raised his own : " Remember Nelson " , which was greeted with wild cheering from the squadron . As he closed with Hoste 's force , Dubourdieu realised that he would be unable to successfully cross Active 's bow due to the British ship 's speed , and would also be unable to break through their line due to the British ships ' close proximity to one another . He instead sought to attack the second ship in the British line , Hoste 's flagship HMS Amphion . Dubourdieu possessed not only a significant advantage in ships but also in men , the Italian soldiers aboard giving him the opportunity to overwhelm the British crews if he could board their frigates successfully . The first shots of the battle were fired at 09 : 00 , as the British used their wider field of fire to attack the leading French ships , Favorite and Danaé , unopposed for several minutes . The French squadron held their fire , Dubourdieu gathering his troops and sailors into Favorite 's bow in order to maximise the effect of his initial attack once his flagship came into contact with Amphion . 
 Hoste was aware of Dubourdieu 's intentions and the French advantage in numbers , and consequently ordered a large 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) howitzer on Amphion 's deck triple @-@ shotted until the cannon contained over 750 musket balls Once Favorite was within a few yards of Amphion 's stern , Hoste gave permission for the gun to be fired and the cannon 's discharge instantly swept the bow of Favorite clear of the French and Italian boarding party . Among the dozens killed and wounded were Dubourdieu and all the frigate 's officers , leaving Colonel Gifflenga in command of Favorite . As Favorite and Amphion closed with one another , firing continued between the British rear and the French leeward division , led by Danaé . Several of the French ships came at an angle at which they could bring their guns to bear on HMS Cerberus , the rearmost British ship , and both sides were firing regular broadsides at one another . 
 = = = Hoste 's manoeuvre = = = 
 Following the death of Dubourdieu , Captain Péridier on Flore ordered the French and Venetian ships to attack the British line directly . The battered Favorite led with an attempt to round Amphion and rake her before catching her in crossfire , as had been Dubourdieu 's original intention . The remainder of the Franco @-@ Venetian squadron followed this lead and attempted to bring their superior numbers to bear on the British squadron . Hoste was prepared for this eventuality and immediately ordered his ships to wear , turning south and then east to reverse direction . This movement threw the Franco @-@ Venetian squadron into confusion and as a result the squadron 's formation became disorganised . Favorite , which had lost almost its entire complement of officers , was unable to respond quickly enough to the manoeuvre and drove onto the rocky coastline in confusion , becoming a total wreck . 
 Thrown into further confusion by the loss of Favorite , the French and Venetian formation began to break up and the British squadron was able to pull ahead of their opponents ; the leading French ships Flore and Bellona succeeded in only reaching Amphion , which was now at the rear of the British line . Amphion found herself caught between the two frigates and this slowed the British line enough that the French eastern division , led by Danaé , was able to strike at HMS Volage , now the leading British ship after overtaking Cerberus during the turn . Volage was much smaller than her opponent but was armed with 32 @-@ pounder carronades , short range guns that caused such damage to Danaé that the French ship was forced to haul off and reengage from a longer range . The strain of combat at this greater distance ruptured Volage 's short @-@ ranged carronades and left the ship much weakened , with only a single gun with which to engage the enemy . 
 = = = Chase = = = 
 Behind Volage and Danaé , the Venetian Corona had engaged Cerberus in a close range duel , during which Cerberus took heavy damage but inflicted similar injuries on the Italian ship . This exchange continued until the arrival of Active caused the Danaé , Corona and Carolina to sheer off and retreat to the east . To the rear , Amphion , succeeded in closing with and raking Flore , and caused such damage that within five minutes the French ship 's officers threw the French colours overboard in surrender . Captain Péridier had been seriously wounded in the action , and took no part in Flore 's later movements . Amphion then attacked Bellona and in an engagement that lasted until 12 : 00 , forced the Italian ship 's surrender . During this combat , the small ship <unk> Augusta fired on Amphion from a distance , until the frigate was able to turn a gun on them and drive them off . Hoste sent a punt to take possession of Bellona but due to the damage suffered was unable to launch a boat to seize Flore . Realising Amphion 's difficulty , the officers of Flore , who had made hasty repairs during the conflict between Amphion and Bellona , immediately set sail for the French harbour on Lesina ( Hvar ) , despite having already surrendered . 
 Active , the only British ship still in fighting condition , took up pursuit of the retreating enemy and at 12 : 30 caught the Corona in the channel between Lissa and the small island of <unk> . The frigates manoeuvred around one another for the next hour ; captains Gordon and <unk> each seeking the best position from which to engage . The frigates engaged in combat at 13 @.@ 45 , Active forcing Corona 's surrender 45 minutes later after a fire broke out aboard the Italian ship . Active too had suffered severely and as the British squadron was not strong enough to continue the action by attacking the remaining squadron in its protected harbour on Lesina , the battle came to an end . The survivors of the Franco @-@ Venetian squadron had all reached safety ; Carolina and Danaé had used the conflict between Active and Corona to cover their escape while Flore had indicated to each British ship she passed that she had surrendered and was in British possession despite the absence of a British officer on board . Once Flore was clear of the British squadron she headed for safety , reaching the batteries of Lesina shortly after her Carolina and Danaé and ahead of the limping British pursuit . The smaller craft of the Franco @-@ Venetian squadron scattered during the battle 's final stages and reached Lesina independently . 
 = = = Conclusion = = = 
 Although Favorite was wrecked , over 200 of her crew and soldier @-@ passengers had reached the land and , having set fire to their ship , prepared to march on Port St. George under the leadership of Colonel Gifflenga . Two British midshipmen left in command of the town organised the British and indigenous population into a defensive force and marched to meet Gifflenga . The junior British officers informed Gifflenga that the return of the British squadron would bring overwhelming numbers of sailors , marines and naval artillery to bear on his small force and that if he surrendered immediately he could expect better terms . Gifflenga recognised that his position was untenable and capitulated . At Port St. George , the Venetian gunboat <unk> sneaked unnoticed into the harbour and almost captured a Sicilian privateer , <unk> . The raider was driven off by the remaining garrison of the town without the prize , while attempting to manoeuvre her out of the bay . 
 In the seas off Lissa , British prize crews were making strenuous efforts to protect their captures ; Corona was heavily on fire in consequence of her engagement with Active and the British prize crew fought the blaze alongside their Italian prisoners . The fire was eventually brought under control , but not without the death of five men and several more seriously burnt when the blazing mainmast collapsed . Problems were also experienced aboard Bellona , where Captain Duodo planned to ignite the powder magazine and destroy the ship following its surrender . Duodo had been mortally wounded in the action , and so ordered his second in command to light the fuse . The officer promised to do so , but instead handed control of the magazine to the British prize crew when they arrived . Duodo died still believing that the fuse had been lit . 
 Hoste also remained at sea , cruising in the battered Amphion beyond the range of the shore batteries on Lesina . Hoste was furious at the behaviour of Flore 's officers and sent a note into Lesina demanding that they give up the ship as indicated by its earlier surrender . In surrendering and then escaping , the officers of Flore had breached an informal rule of naval conflict under which a ship that voluntarily struck its flag submitted to an opponent in order to prevent continued loss of life among its crew . Flore had been able to pass unmolested through the British squadron only because she was recognised to have surrendered , and to abuse this custom in this way was considered , in the Royal Navy especially , to be a dishonourable act . The French at Lesina did not respond to Hoste 's note , and the British squadron was eventually forced to return to Lissa to effect repairs . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Casualties of the action were heavy on both sides . The British ships suffered 190 killed or wounded in the battle and a number lost afterwards in the fire aboard Corona . Captains Hoste and Hornby were both badly wounded and the entire British squadron was in need of urgent repair before resuming the campaign . In the French and Italian squadron the situation was even worse , although precise losses are not known . At least 150 had been killed aboard Favorite either in the action or the wreck , and the 200 survivors of her crew and passengers were all made prisoner . Bellona had suffered at least 70 casualties and Corona 's losses were also severe . Among the ships that escaped less is known of their casualties , but all required repair and reinforcement before the campaign could resume . Total French and Italian losses are estimated at no less than 700 . Losses among the officers of the combined squadron were especially high , with Commodore Dubourdieu and captains Meillerie and Duodo killed and Péridier seriously wounded . 
 The immediate aftermath saw renewed efforts by Hoste to induce the French to hand over Flore , efforts that were rebuffed by the captain of the Danaé , who had assumed command of the French squadron . The surviving French and Venetian ships were initially laid up in Ragusa ( Dubrovnik ) awaiting supplies to continue the campaign , but a separate British squadron discovered and sank the supply ship at <unk> ( Poreč ) , necessitating a full French withdrawal from the area . In Britain , Hoste 's action was widely praised ; the squadron 's first lieutenants were all promoted to commander and the captains all presented with a commemorative medal . Nearly four decades later the battle was also recognized in the issue of the clasp Lissa to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded to all British participants still living in 1847 . On their arrival in Britain , Corona and Bellone were repaired and later purchased for service in the Royal Navy , the newly built Corona being named HMS Daedalus and Bellone becoming the troopship HMS Dover . Daedalus was commissioned in 1812 under Captain Murray Maxwell , but served less than a year ; wrecked off Ceylon in July 1813 . 
 British numerical superiority in the region was assured ; when French reinforcements for the Adriatic departed Toulon on 25 March they were hunted down and driven back to France by Captain Robert Otway in HMS Ajax before they had even passed Corsica . Throughout the remainder of 1811 however , British and French frigate squadrons continued to spar across the Adriatic , the most significant engagement being the action of 29 November 1811 , in which a second French squadron was destroyed . The action had significant long @-@ term effects ; the destruction of one of the best @-@ trained and best @-@ led squadrons in the French Navy and the death of the aggressive Dubourdieu ended the French ability to strike into the Balkans against the Ottoman Empire . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Key 
 A † symbol indicates that the officer was killed during the action or subsequently died of wounds received . 
 The ships are ordered in the sequence in which they formed up for battle . 
 = British Royal Navy , = 
 French Navy , = Navy of the Kingdom of Italy . 
 = Jean @-@ Mathieu @-@ Philibert Sérurier = 
 Jean @-@ Mathieu @-@ Philibert Sérurier , 1st Comte Sérurier ( 8 December 1742 – 21 December 1819 ) led a division in the War of the First Coalition and became a Marshal of France under Emperor Napoleon . He was born into the minor nobility and in 1755 joined the Laon militia which was soon sent to fight in the Seven Years ' War . After transferring into the regular army as an ensign , he was wounded at Warburg in 1760 . He fought in the Spanish @-@ Portuguese War in 1762 . He married in 1779 after a promotion to captain . A newly minted major in 1789 , the French Revolution sped up promotion so that he was colonel of the regiment in 1792 . After leading Army of Italy troops in a number of actions , he became a general of brigade in 1793 and a general of division the following year . 
 Sérurier led a division in Napoleon Bonaparte 's Italian campaign of 1796 , except during bouts of illness . He especially distinguished himself at the Battle of Mondovì and the Siege of Mantua . In 1799 , he again fought in Italy during the War of the Second Coalition at Verona , Magnano and Cassano , being captured in the latter action . After being paroled , he supported Napoleon 's rise to political power in the Coup of 18 Brumaire in late 1799 . The apex of his career occurred on 19 May 1804 when Napoleon appointed him a Marshal of the Empire . His active military career over , Sérurier served in the French Senate and was ennobled by Napoleon . In 1814 as the First French Empire was crumbling , he burned all the many flags captured by the French armies . His troops called him the " Virgin of Italy " for his rigorous standards of discipline and honesty in an army known for generals who enriched themselves by plundering the conquered territories . His surname is one of the names inscribed under the Arc de Triomphe , on Column 24 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sérurier was born at Laon on 8 December 1742 , the son of Mathieu @-@ Guillaume Sérurier . The family formed part of the minor provincial nobility , his father holding the title Seigneur de Sort and the job of mole @-@ catcher to the king 's breeding stud . After 1750 his father 's title became Seigneur de Saint @-@ Gobert . Sérurier got a good education and was of sober character . He received a commission as lieutenant in the Laon militia battalion on 25 March 1755 , his uncle being the unit 's commander . He transferred to the Soissons militia battalion on 12 June 1758 . When he heard that the Laon battalion was called to serve in the Seven Years ' War he switched back to his old unit on 30 November 1758 . After sustaining a bayonet wound , he transferred into the Mazarin Infantry Regiment as a cadet on 1 October 1759 . At the Battle of Warburg on 31 July 1760 , Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick surprised the French under Louis Nicolas Victor de Felix d <unk> , Count Du Muy . While defending a critical post , Sérurier was hit on the right side of his face by a bullet , which broke his jaw and left a lasting scar . The injury also cost him most of his teeth . He was promoted to second lieutenant on 25 April 1762 . 
 Sérurier 's regiment was ordered to Bayonne where it joined a force under Charles Juste de Beauvau , Prince of Craon . These troops entered Spain on 3 June 1762 to take part in the Spanish @-@ Portuguese War . The first battalion , in which Sérurier served , participated in the siege of Almeida which fell to the Franco @-@ Spanish on 25 August 1762 . The unit returned to France in November that year and after the Treaty of Paris was renamed the Beauce Regiment . After the peace Sérurier was demoted to sous @-@ lieutenant and spent six years as a drill instructor . He was promoted to second lieutenant again on 21 February 1767 and was shipped to Corsica in 1770 . The Republic of Genoa transferred Corsica to France in 1764 but Pasquale Paoli led an insurrection against the occupiers which resulted in a few skirmishes . His superiors called Sérurier an " excellent officer " but he was not promoted to first lieutenant until 28 February 1778 . A year later he was promoted to captain . He married Louise @-@ Marie @-@ Madeleine <unk> on 3 July 1779 . Her father was the Registrar of the bail bondsmen of Laon . 
 On 29 July 1781 Sérurier was awarded the Order of Saint @-@ Louis . On 10 May 1782 he assumed the rank of captain commandant and on 1 June 1783 he took command of the regiment 's Chasseur company . <unk> by the lack of promotion , he asked to retire on pension on 8 September 1788 . His commanding officer argued to retain such a good officer and Sérurier transferred into the Médoc Regiment as a major on 17 May 1789 . He became lieutenant colonel on 1 January 1791 . Since the French Revolution the garrison at Perpignan became agitated so the regiment was sent there to calm down the other troops . Instead , the Médoc Regiment itself became affected by the troubles . On 23 July 1791 , fearing that Sérurier was about to leave the country with the regiment 's colors , a body of soldiers removed them from his quarters . In January 1792 , 19 officers from the regiment emigrated to Spain . A story existed that Sérurier and a companion tried to flee to Spain but were nearly caught by a patrol and only his companion made it across the border . In June 1792 the Médoc , renamed the 70th Infantry Regiment , marched to the Camp of <unk> in the Alps . Sérurier became the commanding officer of the 70th with the rank of colonel on 7 August 1792 . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 = = = 1792 – 94 = = = 
 On 29 September 1792 , a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ man division under Jacques Bernard d <unk> crossed the Var River and occupied Nice , then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia . This force was part of the Army of the Midi which was split on 1 October 1792 , with the troops on the Alpine front becoming the Army of the Alps . On 7 November d <unk> 's division became the Army of Italy , which included the 70th Regiment . At about this time Sérurier was arrested for harboring royalist sentiments , but Paul Barras got his rank restored . On 19 May 1793 , the new army commander Gaspard Jean @-@ Baptiste Brunet sent him with a column to occupy Saint @-@ Sauveur @-@ sur @-@ <unk> . Sérurier moved north up the <unk> River and captured Isola on the 21st . With 3 @,@ 000 troops , he attacked the Col de Raus west of Belvédère but was repulsed on 8 June . During the First Battle of Saorgio he led a major attack on the Massif de l <unk> on 12 June , but it was defeated with losses of 280 dead and 1 @,@ 252 wounded . At the end of July Brunet made another assault on Massif de l <unk> while Sérurier attacked the Col de Raus again but both efforts failed . The representatives on mission were pleased with Sérurier 's performance and nominated him general of brigade on 25 June ; the promotion was confirmed on 22 August 1793 . Meanwhile , Brunet was arrested and executed on 15 November 1793 . 
 In September 1793 the Sardinian army tried to recapture the County of Nice . The French right flank held its ground , but on the left Sérurier gave up the east bank of the <unk> River and fell back to <unk> on 10 September . Jacques François <unk> took command of the left wing three days later and Sérurier took charge of the right wing of the Army of the Alps at <unk> . Sérurier was arrested for retreating too much and for being of noble blood . He was reinstated after the representatives on mission and the War Minister Jean Baptiste Noël <unk> termed the charges as unimportant while the citizens of Laon sent a petition vouching for his patriotism . After the fighting petered out in the December snow , Sérurier 's division was transferred to form the left flank of the Army of Italy . In January 1794 he was denounced for listening to aristocratic songs and for not caring about desertions , but <unk> and the representatives brushed aside these charges . Under army commander Pierre <unk> Dumerbion a French offensive began on 5 April and Oneglia was seized . André Masséna commanded the 20 @,@ 000 @-@ man main column on the right wing while François Macquard directed the center division and Pierre Dominique Garnier led the left division . Sérurier , who commanded Garnier 's left brigade , reoccupied Isola and went on to seize the Colle delle Finestre against weak resistance . In the Second Battle of Saorgio on 24 April 1794 , Masséna defeated Michelangelo Alessandro Colli @-@ Marchi , the French inflicting 2 @,@ 800 casualties on the Sardinians while losing 1 @,@ 500 killed and wounded . In the aftermath , Macquard occupied <unk> and the Col de Tende while Masséna held Ormea in the Tanaro valley . At the end of June , Sérurier took part in a small operation in the Valle Stura di <unk> . 
 In September 1794 the Sardinians and Austrians advanced to <unk> , threatening to cut the French link to Genoa , where supplies were obtained . Advised by his artillery chief Napoleon Bonaparte , Dumerbion struck back on 15 September . While Sérurier feinted at <unk> on the left and Macquard feinted at <unk> Piemonte in the center , Masséna mounted the main thrust on the right . In the First Battle of Dego on 21 September , 18 @,@ 000 French troops beat Olivier , Count of Wallis and 8 @,@ 000 Austro @-@ Sardinians . Though the allies escaped encirclement , the French later seized the port of Vado <unk> . Dumerbion and Garnier both recommended Sérurier 's promotion and he was nominated general of division on 22 December 1794 . Given command of the right flank division in place of Masséna who was sick , his brigadiers were Barthélemy Catherine Joubert and <unk> Alexandre François de <unk> . 
 = = = 1795 = = = 
 On 4 November 1794 , Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer replaced the ill Dumerbion as army commander . Schérer wrote that Sérurier was " a very good officer , devoted to his duties ; his patriotism has been attacked in the time of Hébert and his consorts ; he has emerged victorious from all these charges . In my opinion he is worthy of the post he holds on the right of the active army . " Sérurier 's promotion was not confirmed until 13 June 1795 . The Austro @-@ Sardinian commander Joseph Nikolaus De Vins attacked the French lines on 24 June . Most of the assaults failed but since a few positions were captured and could not be retaken , the French withdrew from Vado to Borghetto Santo Spirito by 5 July . In the new line , Masséna with 14 @,@ 000 troops held the coast while Sérurier and 6 @,@ 000 men defended Ormea . On 5 July Sérurier reported that a key position had been partly lost , causing consternation at army headquarters . Later that day he reported that one of his brigadiers , Louis Pelletier , retook the position . Curiously , this incident did not count against him ; instead Sérurier was given command of the left wing in place of Garnier . On the evening of 31 August , his headquarters at Saint @-@ Martin @-@ <unk> was surrounded by the enemy . Though only 318 soldiers were at hand , Sérurier resisted successfully until early the following morning when he attacked and scattered his attackers , capturing 86 of them . The enemy commander , the émigré Chevalier <unk> committed suicide . Not only was he a good soldier , but Sérurier 's troops liked him , he treated the local civilians with decency and his diplomacy allowed him to serve as a link between his army and the neighboring Army of the Alps . François Christophe Kellermann then in command of both armies , wrote , " It is to the coolness and courage of this excellent officer that was due the success of this glorious day . " 
 On 23 – 24 November 1795 , the Battle of <unk> was fought . Schérer deployed Pierre Augereau with 6 @,@ 961 troops on the right , Masséna with 13 @,@ 276 men in the center and Sérurier with 5 @,@ 155 soldiers on the left . The plan called for Sérurier to pin down the Allied right while Masséna broke through the center and rolled up the Allied left with the help of Augereau . By luck , Wallis replaced De Vins in command of the Allies on 22 November . That day Sérurier 's attack on the Colle San Bernardo was repulsed but it tied down Colli 's division . The plan was carried out with success . Masséna and Augereau both defeated the forces in front of them . The Austro @-@ Sardinians suffered losses of 3 @,@ 000 killed and wounded , 4 @,@ 000 prisoners , 48 guns and five colors while French losses numbered 2 @,@ 500 killed and wounded and 500 captured . Snow soon compelled both armies to withdraw into winter quarters . The French soldiers were in a wretched state , with very little food ; they became insubordinate and the generals quarreled . Sérurier got into a dispute with Schérer and nearly left the army . On 18 March 1796 Sérurier 's division refused to obey orders . 
 = = = 1796 = = = 
 After the winter campaign , Schérer placed the divisions in the positions where they would start the 1796 campaign . From right to left , they were Masséna with two divisions on the coast , Augereau on the Bormida River , Sérurier on the Tanaro , Macquard at the Col de Tende and Garnier on the far left . On 27 March 1796 Bonaparte arrived to take command of the Army of Italy . At this date Sérurier was 53 years old with 40 years of military service . He applied to retire on a pension due to his age , health and wounds , but after meeting Bonaparte he decided to stay . Masséna later wrote that Bonaparte did not impress his generals at first . Then the new commander put on his hat and sharply questioned them ; the generals went away believing that they had a true leader at last . Bonaparte 's plan was to mass over 20 @,@ 000 men under Masséna and Augereau near <unk> where the Austrian and Sardinian armies linked . Sérurier 's division would join the others near <unk> as they moved west . His 9 @,@ 448 @-@ strong division consisted of the 39th , 69th and 85th Line Infantry Demi @-@ brigades . 
 In the Montenotte Campaign , the French won victories at Montenotte , <unk> and Dego between 11 and 15 April . In the Battle of <unk> Colli 's Sardinians repelled Augereau 's attack but they retreated to the west when Sérurier 's division appeared . Colli detailed Jean @-@ Gaspard <unk> de <unk> with 8 @,@ 000 Sardinians and 15 guns to defend San Michele <unk> against a French attack . On 19 April , Sérurier formed his division into two 3 @,@ 000 @-@ man brigades under Pascal Antoine Fiorella and Jean Joseph Guieu plus a reserve under his personal command . The <unk> River was <unk> due to the spring thaw and the French attack soon stalled . However , some of Guieu 's skirmishers found an unguarded footbridge and made a lodgement on the west bank . The French captured San Michele but the unpaid , hungry soldiers went on a looting spree . Led by a company of Swiss troops , Colli organized a counterattack which drove Sérurier 's division out of the town , though Guieu 's brigade maintained its bridgehead . The repulse cost the French about 600 casualties while the Sardinians lost 300 . 
 Colli 's troops withdrew toward Mondovì on the night of 20 April , but the move was soon discovered by the French who caught up with them at <unk> at mid @-@ morning . In the Battle of Mondovì on 21 April , the brigades of Fiorella , Guieu and <unk> Auguste Cousin de <unk> fought their way into <unk> and routed the Sardinians . <unk> was killed and Henri Christian Michel de Stengel mortally wounded . Mondovì surrendered in the late afternoon . There was no looting but large requisitions of food were made from the town . Auguste de Marmont recalled of Sérurier , " To form his men into three columns , put himself at the head of the central one , throw out a cloud of skirmishers , and march at the double , sword in hand , ten paces in front of his column : that is what he did . A fine spectacle , that of an old general , resolute and decided , whose vigor was revived by the presence of the enemy . I accompanied him in this attack , the success of which was complete " . On 28 April the Armistice of <unk> was signed , taking Sardinia out of the war . 
 In May 1796 , Bonaparte detailed Sérurier to demonstrate with his division at Valenza while the rest of the army crossed the Po River near Piacenza . After the Battle of Lodi , Bonaparte divided the Army of Italy into a cavalry reserve and four divisions including one under Sérurier . During the Battle of Borghetto on 30 May , his division feinted at the upper Mincio River while other troops made the main thrust against Johann Peter Beaulieu 's army at <unk> sul Mincio . On 1 June , the 4 @,@ 700 @-@ strong division took position on the north side of the fortress of Mantua . On 8 June , Sérurier , artillerist Augustin de <unk> and engineer Francois , marquis de Chasseloup @-@ Laubat reconnoitered the fortress . Two days later Bonaparte put Sérurier in charge of the Siege of Mantua with about 8 @,@ 000 soldiers . Soon after , Bonaparte wrote to the French Directory , " I shall not speak to you of the conduct of the intrepid General Sérurier , whose military reputation is established , and to whom we owe , amongst other things since the campaign began , the victory of <unk> " . Because of the approach of Dagobert Sigmund von Wurmser 's Austrian army , the siege was raised on 31 July , the heavy cannons were buried and the division withdrew behind the Oglio River . Sérurier then became feverish with malaria , so that Fiorella and Gaspard Amédée <unk> directed the division during the Battle of Castiglione . The general returned to France to recuperate . On 14 August 1796 Bonaparte wrote a confidential assessment of his generals to the Directory . In it he wrote , " Sérurier , fights like a private , takes nothing on himself , firm ; has not a good enough opinion of his troops , is ill " . 
 = = = 1797 = = = 
 After his recovery Sérurier took command at Livorno ( Leghorn ) but he was thrilled to get the order to return to the army . On 27 December 1796 he resumed command of the Mantua siege corps , replacing Charles Edward Jennings de Kilmaine who had also become ill . The corps consisted of 10 @,@ 000 men in two divisions under Thomas @-@ Alexandre Dumas and Claude <unk> . On 14 – 15 January 1797 Bonaparte defeated József Alvinczi in the Battle of Rivoli , inflicting terrible losses on the Austrians . Meanwhile , a relief column under Giovanni Marchese di Provera reached the north side of Mantua and on 16 January there was a battle . The Mantua garrison launched a sortie led by Karl Philipp <unk> that made progress at first but was beaten back by reinforcements under Claude Perrin Victor . At the same time , Sérurier and 1 @,@ 500 troops at La Favorita Palace blocked Provera from joining the garrison . By noon Provera was hemmed in by French reinforcements and at 2 : 00 pm he surrendered to Sérurier with 7 @,@ 000 men , 22 field guns , a pontoon train and a food convoy . Afterward , Sérurier got into a dispute with Dumas , who had commanded armies but was now a mere division commander . Angry that his contributions were not recognized , Dumas sent an abusive note to the army chief of staff Louis @-@ Alexandre Berthier and was demoted by Bonaparte . On 30 January , Wurmser began negotiations with Sérurier for the capitulation of Mantua ; this was signed on 2 February 1797 by the two generals . The articles permitted Wurmser , his staff , his generals , 700 soldiers and six artillery pieces to go free , but 16 @,@ 324 men of the garrison became prisoners of war . 
 For the spring 1797 campaign , Bonaparte organized his army into eight divisions of which the 3rd Division under Sérurier counted 6 @,@ 543 soldiers . In the Battle of <unk> on 16 March , Bonaparte drove back the rear guard of Archduke Charles , Duke of Teschen . During the operation Sérurier 's division was in reserve , but in the subsequent advance it was on the right flank while Jean @-@ Baptiste Bernadotte 's division was in the center and Guieu 's division was on the left flank . On 19 March Bernadotte attacked Gradisca d <unk> and was repulsed . After Sérurier 's division swung around the south side of Gradisca and gained the heights in the rear of the town , the garrison surrendered . The French captured four battalions of Austrian infantry totaling 2 @,@ 500 soldiers , 10 guns and eight colors . While Bernadotte continued advancing to the east , Guieu 's division followed by Sérurier turned north in pursuit of a column under Adam Bajalics von <unk> . At this time Sérurier fell ill and command of his division passed to Louis François Jean Chabot . Trapped between Massena and Guieu , Bajalics was forced to surrender with 4 @,@ 000 men in the Battle of <unk> . After recovering , Sérurier resumed command of his division at Graz on 20 April and after the Treaty of Leoben the unit withdrew from Austria and took position at <unk> . 
 On 3 June 1797 Bonaparte notified the French government that he was sending Sérurier with 22 captured colors . He wrote that he , " has in the last two campaigns displayed as much talent as bravery and patriotism ... General Sérurier is extremely severe with himself : he is sometimes so with others . A strict friend of discipline , and of the order and virtues most necessary to the maintenance of society , he disdains intrigue and intriguers , which has sometimes made him enemies amongst those men who are always ready to accuse of <unk> any one who wishes to see them submitted to their superiors " . He was received in Paris by a large audience of government officials on 28 June who he assured of his loyalty and that of his soldiers . He was back with his division on 9 August and missed the Coup of 18 Fructidor . A little later Louis Desaix described him , " tall , 55 years old ... honest , estimable in every respect , considered to be an aristocrat but supported by General Bonaparte , who values and admires him " . Venice was occupied by French troops but by the recent treaty was to be handed over to Austria . Bonaparte ordered Sérurier to carry out the unpleasant job of removing all military stores and ships as well as all works of art . Over the objection of the Austrians and the inhabitants , the city was thoroughly plundered . Although he was the target of anger and abuse , Sérurier did not personally benefit from the looting and did his best to prevent others from doing so . He confiscated the salt and biscuits in the Venice arsenal but that was to raise money to pay his soldiers . In the same army , Masséna and Augereau were notorious for looting for personal gain , and many lesser officers also did it . Sérurier earned such a reputation for honesty that his soldiers called him the " Virgin of Italy " . 
 = = = 1798 – 99 = = = 
 Early in 1798 Sérurier temporarily commanded the divisions left in Italy where he had his hands full trying to calm unpaid soldiers who were on the verge of mutiny . Bonaparte did not take him on the French campaign in Egypt and Syria because he was too old . Sometime after February 1798 , he was ordered to the Army of England where he made his headquarters at Rennes . On 15 September he became Inspector General of the troops in the interior of France . On 5 November 1798 he transferred back to Italy to serve under Army of Italy commander Joubert . Sérurier was ordered by Joubert to occupy Livorno , but instructions soon changed to invade the Republic of Lucca . His cavalry entered Lucca on 22 December 1798 and extorted large sums of cash and clothing for the army 's use . Sérurier 's 6 @,@ 000 infantry arrived at the city on 2 January 1799 . After declaring that Lucca was a French @-@ style republic on 25 January , he handed it over to <unk> on 5 February and returned to Mantua . At that time , the Army of Italy was led by Schérer who gave Sérurier command of the Tyrol Division with a paper strength of 8 @,@ 328 men . 
 The outbreak of the War of the Second Coalition saw Schérer with 43 @,@ 000 troops facing Paul Kray with 50 @,@ 700 Austrians near Verona and 24 @,@ 551 Russians under Alexander Suvorov marching up in support . Hoping to maul Kray before his Russians allies arrived , Schérer opted to attack . On 26 March 1799 in the Battle of Verona , the French gained a success at <unk> in the north , fought to a draw in front of Verona and were drubbed in the south at <unk> . In the north Sérurier drove the Austrians from Rivoli Veronese . On the 27th Kray rapidly shifted his strength to the north to assist his outnumbered right wing . Schérer shuffled the positions of his divisions which exhausted the soldiers without accomplishing anything . Belatedly , Schérer tried push his advantage in the north by sending Sérurier with 6 @,@ 000 troops to advance on Verona from the north . On 30 March he ran into 15 @,@ 000 Austrians at <unk> and was badly defeated , losing 600 killed and wounded and 1 @,@ 177 prisoners . Austrian casualties numbered only 390 . 
 The Battle of Magnano on 5 April 1799 resulted in a French defeat . In the fighting Sérurier 's division included three battalions each of the 18th , 29th and 30th Light Infantry Demi brigades , one battalion of the 1st Light , 180 grenadiers , 850 cavalry and 60 gunners . Both armies advanced , Sérurier successfully capturing Villafranca on the left . However , the divisions of Claude Perrin Victor and Paul Grenier were routed on the right . The French lost 7 @,@ 000 – 8 @,@ 000 men , seven colors and eight cannons , while Kray 's army sustained 5 @,@ 228 casualties . The worst casualty was the confidence of the French generals and the morale of the troops . When Schérer found that 12 @,@ 000 Austrians were marching from the County of Tyrol to turn his north flank , he withdrew from the line of the Mincio , leaving 12 @,@ 000 soldiers to defend Mantua . During the retreat many Italian and Swiss allies deserted from the Army of Italy . 
 By the end of April 1799 , Schérer had 28 @,@ 000 troops behind the Adda River , strung out on a line 115 kilometres ( 71 mi ) in length . The army was arranged in three small corps under Sérurier on the left , Grenier in the center and Victor on the right . By the morning of 27 April , Suvorov 's Austro @-@ Russian army had won crossings over the Adda at <unk> San Gervasio and Brivio . That day Jean Victor Marie Moreau replaced Schérer in command of the Army of Italy and the Allies defeated the French in the Battle of Cassano . After a struggle , Grenier 's soldiers were beaten at Trezzo while the Austrians broke through Victor 's defenses at Cassano . The French withdrew toward Milan leaving Sérurier isolated and without orders between Trezzo and Brivio . During the night the old veteran entrenched 2 @,@ 600 – 4 @,@ 000 troops in an all @-@ around defense near Verderio . Finding the French in his path , Josef Philipp Vukassovich split his division into three columns and enveloped Sérurier 's position . Vukassovich reported that his enemies put up a " desperate " fight , but out of ammunition , Sérurier surrendered on the evening of 28 April . By the terms of the capitulation , the general and his officers were released on parole to France . The Austrians reported capturing 243 officers and 3 @,@ 487 soldiers . Vukassovich 's troops suffered 2 @,@ 750 casualties , over half of the Allied losses at Cassano . Sérurier 's left wing near Lake Como escaped and rejoined the main army . 
 Suvorov invited the captured general to dinner and found it impossible to coax any military information from him . The Russian wondered why such a reputable man should be fighting for the First French Republic . Sérurier retorted , " My father , in giving me my sword , expressly ordered me to use it only to defend my country " . Historian Ramsay Weston Phipps considered Verderio to be the biggest blunder of Sérurier 's career . He suggested that the general was accustomed to seeing Bonaparte save dire situations with brilliant maneuvers . When Moreau next saw the paroled general , he severely reprimanded him but later admitted to the government that Sérurier 's only mistake was hewing to his orders too rigidly . This was the last time Sérurier led troops in combat . 
 Meanwhile , the French Directory sank in popularity after military defeats and mismanagement . Back in Paris , Sérurier became part of the Bonaparte faction , having seen nothing but disaster since serving under the military genius . Bonaparte launched the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799 during which Sérurier led a reserve detachment of soldiers at the Pont @-@ du @-@ Jour . The next day , the coup almost collapsed when Bonaparte had to be rescued from the Council of Five Hundred . However , Lucien Bonaparte convinced the Council 's own guard battalion that only a minority of members opposed his brother . These soldiers soon evicted the lawmakers from their own hall . During these events , Sérurier 's troops arrived at Saint @-@ Cloud and the general was heard addressing them , " The wretches ! They wished to kill General Bonaparte . Do not stir soldiers ; wait until you get orders " . In the aftermath of the coup , Sérurier was put on a commission to determine how to use auxiliary battalions on 15 November 1799 . He became a member of the Sénat <unk> ( Senate ) on 27 December . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In time Sérurier became vice @-@ president of the Senate and in 1803 was appointed president of a commission that determined the border between France and Piedmont . In 1804 he was named governor of Les Invalides , a hospital and retirement home for veterans . On 19 May that year Emperor Napoleon named him an honorary Marshal of France . Out of 18 marshals appointed on this date , the other three honorary ones were Bon Adrien Jeannot de <unk> , François Christophe de Kellermann and Catherine @-@ Dominique de Pérignon . Sérurier was awarded the Grand Eagle of the Légion d 'Honneur and the Grand Cordon of the Order of the Iron Crown . He was ennobled as a Count of the Empire in 1808 and granted a pension of 40 @,@ 000 francs per year . 
 On 31 March 1814 , upon the arrival of the Sixth Coalition armies at Paris , Sérurier publicly destroyed the 1 @,@ 417 captured enemy flags and personally burned the sword and sash of Frederick the Great as to not let them fall into the Allies ' hands . The restored King Louis XVIII made Sérurier a Peer of France , but he joined Napoleon during the Hundred Days , when the former emperor briefly returned to power . This caused him to lose his post at Les Invalides and his marshal 's salary after Napoleon 's second downfall . Despite his Bonapartist sympathies , as Peer Sérurier voted in favour of the death penalty for Marshal Michel Ney . 
 Sérurier was restored to the dignity of marshal in 1819 . He died on 21 December that year in Paris and was buried at Père Lachaise Cemetery . His body was not transferred to Les Invalides until 26 February 1847 <unk> is one of the names inscribed under the Arc de Triomphe , on Column 24 . 
 = Daniel Santos ( singer ) = 
 Daniel Santos ( February 5 , 1916 – November 27 , 1992 ) was a singer and composer of boleros , and an overall performer of multiple Caribbean music genres , including <unk> , <unk> and rumba . Over the course of his career he adopted several names created by the public and became known as " El Jefe " and " El Inquieto Anacobero " . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Santos ( birth name : Daniel <unk> Santos Betancourt ) was born and raised with his three sisters , Sara , Rosa Lydia and Luz América in <unk> , a poor section of Santurce , Puerto Rico . He attended Las <unk> Elementary School . Although he was doing well in school his father Rosendo took him out of school when he was in the fourth grade and forced him to shine shoes because of his family 's poverty . 
 In 1924 , his family moved to New York City looking for a better way of life . When his parents , Rosendo and María enrolled him in school , he had to start from the first grade again because he did not know enough English . Santos joined his high school 's choir , but he dropped out of high school in his second year and moved out of his parents ' apartment . When he was fifteen years old he began looking for work in Manhattan . 
 Santos moved into a small apartment , where , one day , he started to sing " Te Quiero , <unk> " ( You said ' I Love You ' ) . A member of the <unk> <unk> was passing by and heard him sing . He then knocked on Santos ' door . The trio member invited Daniel to join the trio and he accepted . Santos debuted with them on September 13 , 1930 ; he sang in various social events and was paid a dollar for every song that he sang . He returned to Puerto Rico only to return once more to Manhattan after he unsuccessfully tried to acquire a job as a singer at <unk> , which was one of the island 's main radio stations . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = " Cuarteto Flores " with Pedro Flores = = = 
 In late 1933 and 1934 , Santos performed in a nightclub named Los <unk> located near Broadway and was paid twenty dollars per weekend . Personally , Santos led a life of excesses , including maintaining several romantic relationships at once . In 1938 , Santos was working at the Cuban Casino Cabaret in Manhattan , which was normally visited by Puerto Ricans and other Latinos . His chores included singing , waiting on tables and on occasions he was the master of ceremonies for which he was paid a salary of thirty dollars . On one occasion , he was singing " Amor Perdido " ( Lost Love ) , without knowing that the composer of the song Pedro Flores was in the audience . Flores liked what he heard and invited Santos to join his group " El Cuarteto Flores " which also included <unk> Silva , and would in the future also include Pedro Ortiz Davila ( also known by his stage name " <unk> " ) . Santos recorded many songs with the Cuarteto Flores and started to gain fame . Among the songs he recorded were : " Perdon " ; " Amor " ; " El Ultimo Adios " " Si Yo Fuera Millonario " by singer / composer Miguel <unk> and <unk> no Vale ' . 
 = = = Participation in World War II = = = 
 In the early 1940s , many young Puerto Rican men were drafted for World War II , among them Santos . Santos recorded " Despedida " ( My Good @-@ bye ) , a farewell song written by Flores from the viewpoint of an Army recruit who had to leave behind his girlfriend and his ailing mother , which became a hit . Santos recalled in an interview once that he had to hold back tears while recording the song , since his draft papers had just arrived and he would soon have to live a situation similar to what the song 's lyrics described , but that a friend started mocking him at the control booth , to which he decided to curse him on the spot , trading the word mama 'o ( an expletive in Puerto Rican Spanish ) for mamá ( mother ) . This incident produced two mannerisms that Santos eventually adopted in his singing style : chopped delivery ( almost syllable by syllable , as suggested by Flores ) and stretched last vowel in the last verse of each stanza , in almost every song he recorded afterwards . 
 He was sent to Maui Island , after completing his basic military training in Kentucky . In Maui , he was assigned to a US Army infantry unit which was used to replenish casualties in the Pacific theatre . Santos would joke that he escaped the " replenishment levies " because of his guitar playing skills . Nevertheless , he was sent to Okinawa towards the end of the war . While in the military Santos teamed up with Juanito Jiménez as a part of a duo dubbed Los <unk> . After the war concluded Santos returned to New York , where he received a tribute upon his arrival . There he recorded " Linda " , written specially for him by Flores for one of Santos ' old girlfriends . 
 = = = International performances = = = 
 Santos became active in the Puerto Rican Independence Movement and identified himself with the Puerto Rican Nationalist Party and its president Pedro Albizu Campos after he was discharged from the military because of the prejudice which he experienced within the Army . His devotion for Albizu lasted throughout his life , to the point of commissioning , later in his life , a bronze bust of Albizu for his estate in Puerto Rico . With <unk> , he recorded " <unk> " ( " Patriots " ) and " La Lucha por la Independencia de Puerto Rico " ( " The Fight for Puerto Rico 's Independence " ) , which was adopted from one of Juan Antonio <unk> 's poems . 
 On March 1946 , Santos inaugurated a bar and restaurant named Borinquen , and administrated the establishment for some weeks . Two months later he began singing Mexican music and boleros at Greenwich Village . Later that year he visited the Dominican Republic , where he had legal problems and was jailed briefly . 
 = = = Santos in Cuba = = = 
 By this time Santos ' fame had grown and he decided to travel to Cuba , establishing a residence in Havana in 1946 . At the moment Cuba was experiencing economic growth and Santos developed an interest in the island . Upon arriving he experienced success , making presentations in Paseo del Prado , Miramar and <unk> . These included a special presentation titled <unk> de <unk> , which was broadcast by " Radio Progreso " , a radio station . He participated and sang for several other stations , including RHC @-@ Cadena Azul and <unk> , where he participated in a program named <unk> . This exposition came after he established friendships with local public figures . The Cuban public created two names adopted by Santos , these were Inquieto and Anacobero , which he later fused and became known as El Inquieto Anacobero . He also made five presentations in theaters , among them the Martí theater . 
 In 1948 , Santos was invited to perform in the Cuban National Palace by the president in office , Carlos Prío Socarrás . This year also marked Santos ' debut with La Sonora Matancera , where he served as vocalist . His first successful single was titled <unk> de Gato , based on an area of Havana named " <unk> " , which was infamous for serving as the home for fortune tellers . Later that year Santos was arrested after becoming involved in a fight where he accidentally injured a woman after trying to defend himself . Santos was subsequently pardoned by Prío Socarrás , but he asked to remain in jail twelve additional days to spend the Christmas celebration with some of the inmates . While in prison he composed a single named El <unk> and was asked to write <unk> as part of a campaign to promote the well @-@ being of inmates . This was followed by several successful productions with the Sonora Matancera . These included Dos <unk> and Pa ' <unk> los <unk> , which were based on Cuban music . Among several other contemporary records were : El juego de la vida , El 5 y 6 , El <unk> , El niño <unk> , <unk> <unk> and El <unk> <unk> . 
 On March 10 , 1952 , Fulgencio Batista organized a successful coup d 'état and took control of the island 's government . Santos , known for his Puerto Rican independentist preferences , was never in the good graces of the dictator . He made his nationalistic and democratic views well known throughout Latin America . As many people during those days , he viewed Fidel Castro 's fight against Batista very favorably . In 1958 , forbidden by Batista from returning to the island , he composed the song " Sierra Maestra " , which borrowed parts of the official hymn of the 26th of July Movement . Santos donated the profits from " Sierra Maestra " to the Cuban Revolution . 
 = = = Return to Puerto Rico = = = 
 He returned to the island later that year and began an international tour on 1953 , among the countries visited were Venezuela , Colombia and Mexico . In 1954 , he returned to Puerto Rico and performed in hotels located in San Juan before continuing his tour throughout America which extended from 1955 to 1956 . The tour concluded with a presentation in New York and he his returned to Cuba . Later that year he visited Ecuador for the first time in his artistic career . Here he was contracted to perform in a theater named " Apolo " , where he worked with a band named the " Costa Rica Swing Boys " . During his third presentation Santos lost his voice without completing the scheduled show , he tried to explain the situation to the public but was unable to calm them down and a riot erupted . While in Ecuador he composed two successful singles , <unk> pa ' and <unk> . Late in 1956 , Santos recorded with a Venezuelan record label named " <unk> " . 
 In 1959 , he briefly returned to Cuba . It was during this trip that he confronted Raul Castro and Ernesto " Che " Guevara about the political nature of the Cuban Revolution he had supported . He left Cuba abruptly , never to return , when Castro and Guevara failed to convince him that the Cuban Revolution was " nationalistic " . A self proclaimed " anti @-@ communist " , he explained that he had supported the Cuban Revolution because its leadership had assured him that it was not communist . 
 On July 22 , 1972 he performed in the inauguration ceremony of El Balcon del Pueblo , a building owned by Radio Cristal , which was located at Guayaquil . In this activity he performed for two consecutive hours , working an additional hour due to public acclaim . 
 = = Later years = = 
 During the last years of his life , Santos toured the United States and Latin @-@ America , while experiencing health problems . He continued performing with several music groups . While he performed with the Sonora Matancera , Santos suffered a heart attack while he was sleeping in a hotel located in La Reforma after eating dinner . Santos continued performing during the following decades , making presentations in several Latin American countries . He continued to sing the songs which he had written during his career until he finally retired and established a residence in Florida . 
 In 1991 , Santos visited some friends in New York City 's Barrio Latino , during this visit Santo 's was walking through the street on a Saturday evening when he fainted and collapsed . He was attended by some bystanders and residents of the neighborhood who called the New York City Police Department . When the police arrived at the scene they transported him to a local hospital , Santos was released two days after . During this time Santos was also suffering from mental illnesses , including memory loss due to Alzheimer 's disease . Despite his health he made final presentations in some of Puerto Rico 's municipalities where he received recognitions in San Juan and Ponce . Santos was also invited to participate in a music festival in Cuba , where he was supposed to receive a homage , but he was unable to attend . 
 Over the course of his life Daniel Santos was legally married on twelve separate occasions . His first marriage took place in 1934 , where he married Lucy Montilla when he was eighteen years old . In 1947 , he married Cuban socialite Eugenia Perez Portal , who gave him his first son in 1948 , Daniel Jr . After this he was involved in several relationships with women of several Latin American countries , on occasions having more than one consecutively . When he was fifty @-@ six years old he married Luz <unk> <unk> in a ceremony organized on Colombia . The couple had two children , <unk> and David Albizu . Santos ' last marriage was with Ana Rivera , who was originally of Puerto Rico . 
 Daniel Santos died on November 27 , 1992 , aged 76 , at his ranch , " Anacobero 's Ranch " in Ocala , Florida . He is buried at what is virtually Puerto Rico 's national pantheon , the St. Mary Magdalene of <unk> cemetery in Old San Juan , geographically quite close to where Albizu Campos and Pedro Flores were interred . Due to the scarcity of empty space in the cemetery , when fellow Puerto Rican singer and Santos boyhood friend Eladio <unk> ( commonly known as " Yayo El Indio " ) later died , he was also buried in Santos ' tomb . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Santos ' life was the subject of one semi @-@ autobiography , El Inquieto Anacobero : <unk> de Daniel Santos a Héctor <unk> , written as Santos told his story to Venezuelan author Héctor <unk> in 1982 . His life was also the subject of three biographical books : <unk> a <unk> adiós a los <unk> ( 1989 ) , by <unk> Ramos ; La <unk> de <unk> Daniel Santos ( 1988 ) , by Luis Rafael Sánchez and El Inquieto Anacobero , by Salvador Garmendia . 
 = 2007 Bernard Matthews H5N1 outbreak = 
 The 2007 Bernard Matthews H5N1 outbreak was an occurrence of avian influenza in England caused by the H5N1 subtype of Influenza virus A that began on 30 January 2007 . The infection affected poultry at one of Bernard Matthews ' farms in Holton in Suffolk . It was the third instance of H5N1 @-@ subtype detected in the United Kingdom and a range of precautions were instituted to prevent spread of the disease including a large cull of turkeys , the imposition of segregation zones , and a disinfection programme for the plant . 
 The cause of the outbreak was not determined . However , it was considered significant that Bernard Matthews regularly transports turkeys and turkey products between the UK and its plant in Hungary , and that the H5N1 strains previously found in Hungary , and those found at Suffolk , were effectively genetically identical . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = H5N1 = = = 
 H5N1 is a subtype of the Influenza A virus , the viruses responsible for influenza in humans and many other animal species . A bird @-@ adapted strain of H5N1 , called HPAI A ( H5N1 ) for " highly pathogenic avian influenza virus of type A of subtype H5N1 " , is the causative agent of H5N1 flu . 
 HPAI A ( H5N1 ) is considered an avian disease , although there is some evidence of limited human @-@ to @-@ human transmission of the virus . A risk factor for contracting the virus is handling of infected poultry , but transmission of the virus from infected birds to humans is inefficient . Poultry farming practices have changed due to H5N1 . The cost of poultry farming has increased , while the cost to consumers has gone down , due to fears from H5N1 driving demand below supply . 
 = = = Recent outbreaks in the UK and rest of EU = = = 
 The outbreak was the third instance of H5N1 detected in the United Kingdom . The first outbreak occurred in October 2005 among exotic birds imported from Taiwan and South America at a privately owned quarantine facility in Essex , England . The second instance involved a dead whooper swan found to have the virus in <unk> , Scotland in April 2006 . A corresponding incidence on a farm in south @-@ eastern Hungary was confirmed by the European Commission on 25 January 2007 . 
 = = The outbreak = = 
 Initial signs of the outbreak occurred on Tuesday , 30 January when 55 turkey <unk> died and 16 had to be killed because they were sick . At least 185 more died the following day . 
 It was not until 1 February that the deaths were reported to Defra . The farm was sealed off while tests were carried out , on samples taken from the dead birds , at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency in Weybridge , Surrey . Another 1 @,@ 500 birds died on 2 February . Then on 3 February 2007 the H5N1 causation was confirmed . 
 A 3 km protection zone , 10 km surveillance zone and a restricted zone encompassing 2000 km2 were set up . Another 159 @,@ 000 turkeys were slaughtered with the cull being completed on the evening of 5 February . Also on 5 February there was criticism that nearby farmers had not been advised as to the action to be taken . Around 320 workers at the plant were given anti @-@ viral drugs . Although a vet from the site was admitted into hospital , suffering from a ' mild respiratory illness ' during the evening of 6 February , it was found not to be bird flu . The plant was thoroughly disinfected , with cleaning complete on 12 February , and permission being given for production to resume . 
 It emerged in a highly critical report from Defra that there was a series of <unk> failings at the Holton plant , some of which were drawn to the company 's attention in the past . These included " gulls were taking turkey waste to roosts on top of the turkey @-@ house 500 m away " and " holes in the turkey houses could have allowed in birds or rodents " . Defra minister Jeff Rooker stated in a House of Lords debate on 22 February that the outbreak was " exclusively a Bernard Matthews Holton problem " . 
 = = Hungarian connection = = 
 The Government , on 8 February , admitted that the outbreak may have been caused by semi @-@ processed turkey meat imported directly from Hungary , where the disease is prevalent , despite earlier in the week the Environment Secretary , David Miliband assuring the House of Commons that there was " no Hungarian connection " . 
 Bernard Matthews had been importing 38 tons of partly processed turkey meat on a weekly basis from their Saga Foods company , in <unk> , Hungary , to a processing plant next to the farm . Though Saga Foods lies 165 miles ( 266 km ) from where the recent Hungarian H5N1 outbreak had occurred , a company director admitted it was " possible " that some of the meat could have come from the exclusion zone . In response to this revelation , Whitehall expressed concern over <unk> and whether any meat may have been distributed for human consumption in Britain . On 9 February 2007 the Hungarian authorities started an investigation to try to establish whether there was a connection between the Suffolk and Hungarian outbreaks . On 11 February the investigation revealed that turkey products were still being transported , in both directions , between the plant and Hungary with EU regulations being cited as the reason why a transport ban could not be imposed . 
 The Hungary link was dismissed by the European Commission on 12 February . Even so , the H5N1 bird flu strains found in Hungary and Britain were shown to be 99 @.@ 96 % genetically identical and , according to an analysis of the viruses by the Veterinary Laboratories Agency in Weybridge , Surrey , were almost certainly linked . A leak from the Government 's COBRA emergency committee indicated that the authorities were not aware of the Hungarian connection until an investigator found a <unk> delivery wrapper in a Bernard Matthews bin . This raised the possibility that the outbreak was due to a " third party abattoir , <unk> in Hungary , just outside the restricted zone " . This abattoir might have been a middle man for contaminated poultry farming tools , feed , or product from within the restricted zone , such as a Bernard Matthews owned subsidiary in Hungary . 
 In response to the incident and allegations of a cover @-@ up , Bernard Matthews himself stated on 14 February " I 'm sorry - but this has not been of our making . There 's been absolutely no cover up at our end . I 've been upset about allegations that we may have withheld information . That is completely untrue . " 
 Bernard Matthews was given permission to resume its shipments of poultry between the UK and Hungary from 17 February even though Defra indicated that Hungarian turkey products remained the " most plausible " cause of the outbreak . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 By 8 February there was a lengthening list of countries that had banned the importation of poultry products from Britain including South Africa , Russia , Japan , and many others but a spokesman for the European Commission condemned the bans as " totally disproportionate " and the British Poultry Council pointed out that exports were less than 9 % of the level of domestic sales . Supermarket sales of Bernard Matthews branded turkeys halved after the onset of the outbreak as shoppers sought out alternatives . One of the biggest ongoing surveys of consumer confidence revealed that , by 13 February 2007 , Bernard Matthews was the least respected and trusted brand in Britain . 
 Following the outbreak the company confirmed , on 19 February 2007 , that 130 workers would be laid off for a period of twenty days due to a drop in product sales . The Transport and General Workers ' Union then called for the government to provide compensation to the workers affected . The Transport and General Workers ' Union paid out hardship monies from union funds to union members , on top of any state benefits to which the laid @-@ off workers were entitled and a one @-@ off £ 100 payment from Bernard Matthews . 
 A row broke out on 1 March 2007 when it emerged that the Government were paying compensation to the company for the 159 @,@ 000 culled turkeys while laid @-@ off workers were receiving nothing . At £ 3 @.@ 75 each for hens and £ 3 @.@ 53 for toms , the payout was then estimated at between £ 537 @,@ 000 and £ 570 @,@ 000 . In the event , though , the actual compensation bill came out at £ 589 @,@ 356 @.@ 89 . The crisis cost Bernard Matthews at least £ 20 m in lost sales and costs . 
 = Norman Whiteside = 
 Norman Whiteside ( born 7 May 1965 ) is a former Northern Ireland international footballer who played in two World Cups . He played both as a midfielder and as a striker . 
 Whiteside began his career at Manchester United , signing professional forms in 1982 at the age of 17 and quickly becoming a key member of the side . He scored 68 goals in 278 league and cup appearances for the club over the next seven years , picking up two FA Cup winners medals in 1983 and 1985 , as well as playing in the 1982 FA Youth Cup final , the 1983 League Cup final , and the FA Charity Shield in 1983 . 
 He remained with United until July 1989 , when he was sold to Everton for £ 600 @,@ 000 . However , he retired from playing two years later , aged only 26 , due to a knee injury . 
 Whiteside holds records as the youngest player to take part in a World Cup , the youngest player to score in a League Cup and FA Cup final , and the youngest player to score a senior goal for Manchester United . Winning 38 caps for Northern Ireland , he played at the 1982 and 1986 World Cups , and also helped his country to win the last ever British Home Championship in 1984 . After retiring as a player he became a podiatrist , and still works at the corporate hospitality department at Old Trafford . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Belfast to Norman and Aileen Whiteside , he grew up on Shankill Road , and because of his aggressive , physical playing style he was later nicknamed the " Shankill Skinhead " by Manchester United supporters . The family later moved to 10 Danube Street , and the family 's poverty meant that Whiteside had to share a bed with his two brothers . He remained relatively unscathed by The Troubles as his Protestant parents kept a firm watch on their children to ensure that they did not stray far from home and that none of them became involved with Ulster <unk> . At the age of around seven he joined the Boys ' Brigade , and quickly showed his natural talent for football , scoring ten goals in a game against boys almost twice his age . He was educated at <unk> High School , and became famous in the Shankill area as a footballing prodigy by the age of 11 . 
 He was said to have been discovered by Ipswich Town scout Jim Rodgers ( his goals at schoolboy level meant that he was already well known to all the football scouts in Northern Ireland ) , who was told by manager Bobby Robson to wait until Whiteside grew older . Instead , it was Manchester United 's 80 @-@ year @-@ old Ulster scout Bob Bishop , who previously unearthed Belfast @-@ born George Best and Sammy McIlroy for the club , who first offered him a trial at an English club . Whiteside 's family were Manchester United supporters , though the youngster himself held no particular allegiance . He found that he had been offered schoolboy terms at the club during a school trip to the United States ; on the trip , he and his classmates met President Jimmy Carter at the Oval Office , a rare and extraordinary occasion for children from a disadvantaged background . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 A few days before Whiteside was old enough to sign schoolboy terms with Manchester United , he was offered a trial at Liverpool , causing United 's chief scout Joe Brown to fly over to Belfast to immediately offer him the schoolboy contract to sign . Whiteside remained in Belfast , and flew over to Manchester every weekend for training . From age 14 , he was constantly compared to the now @-@ retired George Best , and did little to cease such comparisons when he told a journalist that " the only thing I have in common with George Best is that we come from the same place , play for the same club and were discovered by the same man " . 
 His injury problems started as early as 1980 , when he was 15 years old and saw Glentoran 's physio Bobby McGregor to resolve a groin strain ; Whiteside said that the highly physical massage he was subjected to damaged his pelvis and robbed him of his natural pace . His lack of pace was later seen as the one weakness in his game . Six weeks into his apprenticeship , in July 1981 , and an innocuous looking challenge by a Preston North End player in an ' A ' team game saw Whiteside requiring an operation on his right knee . Had the injury occurred a couple of years later he would have been able to have pioneering keyhole surgery , which could potentially have saved his career . After a seven @-@ month lay @-@ off and a further operation to remove cartilage , he returned to fitness in January 1982 . He had to adapt his playing style to compensate for his damaged knee and pelvis , and developed well under youth team coach Eric Harrison . 
 Whiteside became United 's youngest first team player since Duncan Edwards in 1953 , when he made his debut as a substitute against Brighton & Hove Albion in a 1 – 0 league win at the Goldstone Ground on 24 April 1982 , two weeks before his 17th birthday . He later played in the FA Youth Cup final defeat to Watford , though it would be just another year before he appeared in the final of the senior competition . He turned professional at Old Trafford on his 17th birthday , signing a three @-@ year contract , and he shared a room with Steve Coppell , who was heading into retirement due to a knee injury of his own . He also struck up a close friendship with Paul McGrath , who would also face similar problems with his knee . On the final day of the season , eight days after his 17th birthday , he became the club 's youngest goalscorer in a 2 – 0 home win over Stoke City . 
 His performances at the World Cup convinced manager Ron Atkinson to start Whiteside alongside Frank Stapleton at the front of United 's attack for the 1982 – 83 season . The pair were similar players in that they held the ball up and made frequent runs into the box , allowing midfielder Bryan Robson to join in the attack . Whiteside scored four goals in the first five games of the campaign , before entering a seventeen @-@ game drought . He scored six goals in 16 games in domestic cup competitions that season , helping Manchester United to the finals of both the League Cup and FA Cup , notably by scoring past Arsenal in the FA Cup semi @-@ finals . At the age of 17 years and 323 days , he beat Liverpool centre @-@ half Alan Hansen to score in the League Cup final defeat at Wembley , making him the youngest player to score in a League Cup final ; his consistent performances against Liverpool during the 1980s earned him the moniker of the " Scourge of the <unk> " from United supporters . He gave an assist to Stapleton in the FA Cup Final , which finished as a 2 – 2 draw with Brighton & Hove Albion . At the age of 18 years and 18 days , he then scored a headed goal in the replay , which United won 4 – 0 , to become the youngest player score in an FA Cup Final . He also became the first player to score in both domestic cup finals in the same season . He played 57 times in all competitions that season and missed just three league games , scoring a total of 14 goals . 
 Manchester United later accepted a £ 1 @.@ 5 million offer for Whiteside from A.C. Milan , and offered him £ 100 @,@ 000 in cash to accept the transfer . He refused the move as he felt he still had a good future with Manchester United and because he was given only a brief time to consider whether or not to relocate to a club and location he knew little about . He continued to impress , despite on @-@ loan striker Garth Crooks being tipped to take his first team place and sign a permanent contract ( which never happened ) . United were trophyless however in 1983 – 84 , exiting both domestic cup competitions to Third Division sides . He did though play a part in the memorable 3 – 0 win over Barcelona at Old Trafford in the Third Round of the Cup Winners ' Cup . He lost his starting place to Mark Hughes for the semi @-@ final clash with Juventus at the Stadio Olimpico di Torino , which ended in a 2 – 1 defeat . 
 By February 1985 , he had started just eight games in the 1984 – 85 season , having fallen behind in the pecking order to Stapleton , Hughes , and new signing Alan Brazil . However , injury to midfielder Remi Moses left an opening at the centre of the field , and Whiteside proved to be a revelation in the role with his intelligent play and positioning skills , and stayed in midfield for the rest of manager Ron Atkinson 's time at the club . He formed a solid partnership with Bryan Robson , despite the two being similarly attacking players , and United lost just one of their first 15 games with this new midfield partnership in operation . Whiteside scored the only hat @-@ trick of his professional career in a 4 – 2 home win over West Ham United on 9 March 1985 , in the FA Cup quarter @-@ finals ; it was a ' perfect hat @-@ trick ' in that he scored once with each foot and once with his head . He went on to score the winning goal in the 1985 FA Cup Final , curling a shot in from the right hand side in the 20th minute of extra time , to give ten @-@ man United victory over Everton , and Whiteside his second FA Cup winner 's medal . The goal required vision , timing , and precise shooting ; and The Guardian praised his " cool footballing brain " and " clever concealment of the shot " . After this success he negotiated a new contract of £ 60 @,@ 000 a year . 
 United won 13 and drew two of their opening 15 league matches of the 1985 – 86 campaign , and seemed destined to win the First Division title . However they dropped off in mid @-@ season and won just six of their final 18 games to end the season in fourth place . The press blamed the decline in form on the club 's drinking culture and Ron Atkinson 's lax disciplinary attitude , though in his autobiography Whiteside denies that this was to blame , and states that stories of the player 's drinking sessions were exaggerated . 
 Then came a decline in his career at such a young age which began soon after the arrival of new manager Alex Ferguson in November 1986 , the change of manager coming after a dismal start to the season led to the decision to sack Ron Atkinson . Whiteside , still only 21 , was facing trouble from his right knee which was now beginning to require serious medical procedures to prevent it from causing his retirement . Ferguson put Whiteside back up front , and in turn he scored three times in his first four games back from injury . Ferguson did though have to rebuke Whiteside after some of his numerous drinking sessions . He ended the 1986 – 87 season with 10 goals in 37 appearances , however United could only manage an 11th @-@ place finish . 
 " I felt the excitement that is felt by watching a player of the highest class . He had self @-@ assurance that was extraordinary in a twenty @-@ one @-@ year @-@ old . The excellence of his technique gave him easy mastery of the ball and he had the gift of making time for himself in the stamp of quality . He was an island of composure , looking up and unhurriedly making his decisions . He rarely surrendered possession and he increased the angle and weight of his passes so well that the receiver never had to fight the ball . His eyes were as cold as steel and he had the temperament to match . As a player he was close to the genius category . " 
 At the start of the 1987 – 88 season , Whiteside represented the Football League in a game against the ' Rest of the World ' to celebrate the league 's centenary . He formed a solid partnership with Brian McClair , scoring 10 goals in 35 appearances , though United finished second in the league behind Liverpool , and he often found himself back in midfield or on the bench when Peter Davenport was selected to play alongside McClair . However he felt that he was due a better contract , and decided to ' call the bluff ' of the club by handing in a transfer request . Recovering from injury and abuse from some supporters for his transfer request , he put what many United fans call the best performance of his career at Anfield on 4 April 1988 , when he came off a substitute with his team 3 – 1 down to help United to salvage a point . 
 He ruptured his Achilles midway through the 1987 – 88 season and missed almost a year of first team action . Whiteside 's goal in a 2 – 1 win over Derby County in a league match at the Baseball Ground on 10 February 1988 would prove to be his last for Manchester United . He was limited to just six goalless appearances in 1988 – 89 . In the summer of 1988 , he came close to joining American club Portland Timbers , before injury put negotiations on hold . In view of Whiteside 's medical reports , Ferguson rejected bids of £ 500 @,@ 000 from Osasuna of Spain and from Ron Atkinson 's new club Sheffield Wednesday , before accepting a bid of £ 600 @,@ 000 ( with £ 150 @,@ 000 to follow if Whiteside reached 50 games ) from Everton in July 1989 . This was to the dismay of some of the club 's supporters , who felt that there was still hope that he could re @-@ establish himself as the key player he had been at the club as recently as three years earlier . Ferguson intended to build his own team having signed midfield duo Neil Webb and Mike Phelan , and also in the hunt for other players including Paul Ince , Gary Pallister and Danny Wallace . 
 He had played a total of 274 games in all competitions for United , scoring 67 goals , and collected two winner 's medals in the FA Cup , despite only being 24 years old when he left . 
 = = = Everton = = = 
 Whiteside signed a four @-@ year contract with Everton , and Alex Ferguson helped him to negotiate a pay deal that would see him earn more in two years at Goodison Park than he had done during his eight years in Manchester . He was also offered £ 50 @,@ 000 to put his name to a tabloid article criticising Ferguson , though he declined the offer . At the time Everton boasted more recent success than Manchester United , having won two league titles , an FA Cup and the European Cup Winners ' Cup . Manager Colin Harvey was planning to boost the " <unk> " chances of more silverware , and also in 1989 signed Mike Newell , Martin Keown , Stefan Rehn and Raymond <unk> . Whiteside became Everton 's playmaker in 1989 – 90 , and formed an effective partnership with Stuart McCall in midfield to score 13 goals in his 35 appearances . Everton finished the season in sixth place , some 20 points behind rivals Liverpool . 
 However intense running sessions ran by coach Mick Lyons took their toll on his right knee , and on 20 September 1990 he took a knock in a practice match , which required him to have yet another operation on his right knee . After the return of Howard Kendall as manager in November 1990 , Whiteside managed to appear in a few reserve team games , but this only delayed the inevitable , and he was forced to retire from the game at the age of 26 in June 1991 . He had a testimonial game between Manchester United and Everton at Old Trafford in May 1992 , but as United lost the title the previous week , only 7 @,@ 434 turned out for the occasion . 
 = = International career = = 
 Whiteside broke Pelé 's record as the youngest player to appear in a World Cup , when he debuted for Northern Ireland aged 17 years and 41 days at the 1982 World Cup in Spain . When selected for the World Cup squad by manager Billy Bingham , he had played just two competitive games at club level . The opening game against Yugoslavia at the La <unk> in Zaragoza on 17 June was his international debut ; he received a yellow card in the second half for a challenge on Nenad Stojković , and the game finished goalless . Five days later he helped " Norn Iron " to a 1 – 1 draw with Honduras , which was a disappointment , and many believed had doomed Northern Ireland 's chances of advancing in the competition . They needed a win against hosts Spain in the third and final group game at the Mestalla Stadium in Valencia . They faced a partisan atmosphere with a mostly Spanish crowd and a Spanish speaking referee in Héctor Ortiz who was unwilling to punish dirty play from the Spanish players . However a mistake from goalkeeper Luis <unk> gifted Gerry Armstrong the only goal of the game , and despite having Mal Donaghy sent off on 60 minutes , Northern Ireland went on to record an historic 1 – 0 win . Whiteside played at left @-@ midfielder for the 2 – 2 draw with Austria at the Vicente Calderón Stadium . A win against France would take them into the semi @-@ finals , however a French team inspired by Michel Platini won 4 – 1 and therefore eliminated Northern Ireland from the competition . 
 He featured in qualifying for UEFA Euro 1984 , as the " Green and White Army " suffered heartbreak after winning their final group game 1 – 0 over West Germany , Whiteside managing to get the better of one of the world 's best man @-@ markers in Karlheinz Förster . However the Germans secured the only qualification place in the group in their final match of the group with a late winner over Albania . The nation did though achieve some glory that year , when Whiteside helped Northern Ireland win the 100th and last edition of the British Home Championship in 1984 . 
 Northern Ireland won qualification to the World Cup for a second successive tournament with a goalless draw with England in their final group game ; Whiteside scored three goals during the qualification process , with his strike again Romania at Windsor Park proving to be crucial as they ended up qualifying at the Romanian 's expense . At the 1986 FIFA World Cup finals in Mexico , he scored in his country 's only result in the tournament , a 1 – 1 draw against Algeria at the Estadio Tres de <unk> . They were beaten in their other two group games , losing 2 – 1 to Spain and 3 – 0 to Brazil . Whiteside won a total of 38 caps and scored nine times in eight years playing for Northern Ireland . 
 = = Personal life and post @-@ retirement = = 
 He married wife Judy on 4 October 1987 ; the two had met when Whiteside was 16 and she was 20 . The relationship blossomed despite fears of reprisal on Shankill , with him being a Protestant and Judy being a Catholic . The marriage ended acrimoniously in 2001 , after the couple had 20 years together and three children : Della , Blaine and <unk> . He subsequently married Denise . 
 Upon retirement , Whiteside studied to become a podiatrist , graduating with a degree from the University of Salford , and served Northwich Victoria as their assistant manager / physio from October 1991 until March 1992 . He quit the role as he did not enjoy the amount of time spent travelling between games . During his playing career , he had attended courses at Lilleshall to pick up his coaching badges , but he did not wish to go into coaching . He instead became an after @-@ dinner speaker . He also worked for the Professional Footballers ' Association , while taking a postgraduate course at Manchester Metropolitan University . He later took up private practice as a podiatrist in Manchester . Since 1994 , he has also worked at the corporate hospitality department at Old Trafford . In 2003 , he released a book entitled My Memories of Manchester United . With the help of writer Rob Bagchi , he released his autobiography entitled Determined in August 2007 , published by Headline , and with a foreword by actor James Nesbitt . When Saturday Comes magazine reviewer Joyce Woolridge wrote that " Determined is an entertaining , well written account of one of the less ordinary 1980s footballers , with the added twist of how Whiteside was able to rebuild his life , if not his knee . " The next month it was reported that Whiteside had been diagnosed with irregular heart rhythms . Whiteside worked as a pundit on ITV 's coverage of UEFA Euro 2016 . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Club statistics = = = 
 Notes 
 European statistics : 1982 – 83 & 1984 – 85 ( UEFA Cup ) ; 1983 – 84 ( UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup ) . 
 Statistics listed in Whiteside 's autobiography : 
 = = = International statistics = = = 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Northern Ireland 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Manchester United 
 FA Cup ( 2 ) : 1983 , 1985 
 FA Charity Shield ( 1 ) : 1984 – 85 
 Northern Ireland 
 British Home Championship ( 1 ) : 1984 
 = Horace Greeley = 
 Horace Greeley ( February 3 , 1811 – November 29 , 1872 ) was editor of the New @-@ York Tribune , among the great newspapers of its time . Long active in politics , he served briefly as a congressman from New York , and was the candidate of the Democratic and Liberal Republican parties in the 1872 presidential election . He was defeated by President Ulysses S. Grant , and died before the casting of the electoral vote . 
 Born to a poor family in New Hampshire , Greeley was apprenticed to a printer in Vermont , and in 1831 went to New York City to seek his fortune . He wrote for or edited several publications , and involved himself in Whig Party politics , taking a significant part in William Henry Harrison 's successful 1840 presidential campaign . The following year , he founded the Tribune , which through weekly editions sent by mail became the highest @-@ circulating newspaper in the country . Among many other issues , he urged the settlement of the American West , which he saw as a land of opportunity for the young and the unemployed . He popularized the phrase " Go West , young man , and grow up with the country , " although it is uncertain whether it originated with him . 
 Greeley 's alliance with William H. Seward and Thurlow Weed led to him serving three months in the House of Representatives , where he angered many by investigating Congress in his newspaper . He helped found the Republican Party in 1854 , but about then broke with Seward and Weed , backing other presidential candidates against Seward at the 1860 Republican National Convention , and supporting the nominee , Abraham Lincoln . When the Civil War broke out , he mostly supported Lincoln , though urging him to commit to the end of slavery before the president was willing to do so . After Lincoln 's assassination , he supported the Radical Republicans in opposition to President Andrew Johnson . 
 Leading against the corruption of Grant 's Republican administration , Greeley was the new Liberal Republican Party 's candidate in the 1872 U.S. presidential election . Despite having the additional support of the Democratic Party , he lost in a landslide . Devastated at the defeat , he died three weeks later . Greeley is the only major @-@ party presidential candidate to have died prior to the electoral vote being cast . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Horace Greeley was born on February 3 , 1811 , on a farm about five miles from Amherst , New Hampshire . He could not breathe for the first twenty minutes of his life . It is suggested that this deprivation may have caused him to develop Asperger 's syndrome — some of his biographers , such as Mitchell <unk> , maintain that this condition would account for his eccentric behaviors in later life . 
 Greeley was the son of poor farmers Zaccheus and Mary ( Woodburn ) Greeley . Zaccheus was not successful , and moved his family several times , as far west as Pennsylvania . Horace attended the local schools , and was a brilliant student . He was of English descent , and his forebears included early settlers of Massachusetts and New Hampshire . 
 Seeing the boy 's intelligence , some neighbors offered to pay Horace 's way at Phillips Exeter Academy , but the <unk> were too proud to accept charity . In 1820 , Zaccheus 's financial reverses caused him to flee New Hampshire with his family lest he be imprisoned for debt , and settle in Vermont . Even as his father struggled to make a living as a hired hand , Horace Greeley read everything he could — the <unk> had a neighbor who let Horace use his library . In 1822 , Horace ran away from home to become a printer 's apprentice , but was told he was too young . 
 In 1826 , at age 15 , he was made a printer 's apprentice to Amos Bliss , editor of the Northern Spectator , a newspaper in East Poultney , Vermont . There , he learned the mechanics of a printer 's job , and acquired a reputation as the town encyclopedia , reading his way through the local library . When the paper closed in 1830 , the young man went west to join his family , living near Erie , Pennsylvania . He remained there only briefly , going from town to town seeking newspaper employment , and was hired by the Erie Gazette . Although ambitious for greater things , he remained until 1831 to help support his father . While there , he became a Universalist , breaking from his Congregationalist upbringing . 
 = = First efforts at publishing = = 
 In late 1831 , Greeley went to New York City to seek his fortune . There were many young printers in New York who had likewise come to the metropolis , and he could only find short @-@ term work . In 1832 , Greeley worked as an employee of the publication Spirit of the Times . He built his resources and set up a print shop in that year . In 1833 , he tried his hand with Horatio D. Sheppard at editing a daily newspaper , the New York Morning Post , which was not a success . Despite this failure and its attendant financial loss , Greeley published the thrice @-@ weekly Constitutionalist , which mostly printed lottery results . 
 On March 22 , 1834 , he published the first issue of The New @-@ Yorker in partnership with Jonas Winchester . It was less expensive than other literary magazines of the time and published both contemporary ditties and political commentary . Circulation reached 9 @,@ 000 , then a sizable number , yet it was ill @-@ managed and eventually fell victim to the economic Panic of 1837 . He also published the campaign news sheet of the new Whig Party in New York for the 1834 campaign , and came to believe in its positions , including free markets with government assistance in developing the nation . 
 Soon after his move to New York City , Greeley met Mary Young Cheney . Both were living at a boarding house run on the diet principles of Sylvester Graham , eschewing meat , alcohol , coffee , tea , and spices , as well as abstaining from the use of tobacco . Greeley was subscribing to Graham 's principles at the time , and to the end of his life rarely ate meat . Mary Cheney , a schoolteacher , moved to North Carolina to take a teaching job in 1835 . They were married in Warrenton , North Carolina on July 5 , 1836 , and an announcement duly appeared in The New @-@ Yorker eleven days later . Greeley had stopped over in Washington , D.C. on his way south to observe Congress . He took no honeymoon with his new wife , returning to work while his wife took up a teaching job in New York City . 
 One of the positions taken by The New @-@ Yorker was that the unemployed of the cities should seek lives in the developing American West ( in the 1830s , the West encompassed today 's Midwestern states ) . The harsh winter of 1836 – 1837 and the financial crisis that developed soon after made many New Yorkers homeless and destitute . In his journal , Greeley urged new immigrants to buy guide books on the West , and Congress to make public lands available for purchase at cheap rates to settlers . He told his readers , " Fly , scatter through the country , go to the Great West , anything rather than remain here ... the West is the true destination . " In 1838 , he advised " any young man " about to start in the world , " Go to the West : there your capabilities are sure to be appreciated and your energy and industry rewarded . " 
 In 1838 , Greeley met Albany editor Thurlow Weed . Weed spoke for a liberal faction of the Whigs in his newspaper the Albany Evening Journal . He hired Greeley as editor of the state Whig newspaper for the upcoming campaign . The newspaper , the Jeffersonian , premiered in February 1838 and helped elect the Whig candidate for governor , William H. Seward . In 1839 , Greeley worked for several journals , and took a month @-@ long break to go as far west as Detroit . 
 Greeley was deeply involved in the campaign of the Whig candidate for president in 1840 , William Henry Harrison . He published the major Whig periodical the Log Cabin , and also wrote many of the pro @-@ Harrison songs that marked the campaign . These songs were sung at mass meetings , many organized and led by Greeley . According to biographer Robert C. Williams , " Greeley 's lyrics swept the country and roused Whig voters to action . " Funds raised by Weed helped distribute the Log Cabin widely . Harrison and his running mate John Tyler were easily elected . 
 = = Editor of the Tribune = = 
 = = = Early years ( 1841 – 1848 ) = = = 
 By the end of the 1840 campaign , the Log Cabin 's circulation had risen to 80 @,@ 000 and Greeley decided to establish a daily newspaper , the New @-@ York Tribune . At the time , New York had many newspapers , dominated by James Gordon Bennett 's New York Herald , which with a circulation of about 55 @,@ 000 had more readers than its combined competition . As technology advanced , it became cheaper and easier to publish a newspaper , and the daily press came to dominate the weekly , which had once been the more common format for news periodicals . Greeley borrowed money from friends to get started , and published the first issue of the Tribune on April 10 , 1841 — the day of a memorial parade in New York for President Harrison , who had died after a month in office and been replaced by Vice President Tyler . 
 In the first issue , Greeley promised that his newspaper would be a " new morning Journal of Politics , Literature , and General Intelligence " . New Yorkers were not initially receptive ; the first week 's receipts were $ 92 and expenses $ 525 . The paper was sold for a cent a copy by newsboys who purchased bundles of papers at a discount . The price of advertising was initially four cents a line , but was quickly raised to six cents . Through the 1840s , the Tribune was four pages , that is , a single sheet folded . It initially had 600 subscribers and 5 @,@ 000 copies were sold of the first issue . 
 In the early days , Greeley 's chief assistant was Henry J. Raymond , who a decade later founded The New York Times . To place the Tribune on a sound financial footing , Greeley sold a half @-@ interest in it to attorney Thomas McElrath , who became publisher of the Tribune ( Greeley was editor ) and ran the business side . Politically , the Tribune backed Kentucky Senator Henry Clay , who had unsuccessfully sought the presidential nomination that fell to Harrison , and supported Clay 's American System for development of the country . Greeley was one of the first newspaper editors to have a full @-@ time correspondent in Washington , an innovation quickly followed by his rivals . Part of Greeley 's strategy was to make the Tribune a newspaper of national scope , not merely local . One factor in establishing the paper nationally was the Weekly Tribune , created in September , 1841 when the Log Cabin and The New @-@ Yorker were merged . With an initial subscription price of $ 2 a year , this was sent to many across the United States by mail , and was especially popular in the Midwest . In December 1841 , Greeley was offered the editorship of the national Whig newspaper , the <unk> . He demanded full control , and declined when not given it . 
 Greeley , in his paper , initially supported the Whig program . As divisions between Clay and President Tyler became apparent , he supported the Kentucky senator and looked to a Clay nomination for president in 1844 . However , when Clay was nominated by the Whigs , he was defeated by the Democrat , former Tennessee governor James K. Polk , though Greeley worked hard on Clay 's behalf . Greeley had taken positions in opposition to slavery as editor of The New @-@ Yorker in the late 1830s , opposing the annexation of the slaveholding Republic of Texas to the United States . In the 1840s , Greeley became an increasingly vocal opponent of the expansion of slavery . 
 Greeley hired Margaret Fuller in 1844 as first literary editor of the Tribune , for which she wrote over 200 articles . She lived with the Greeley family for several years , and when she moved to Italy , he made her a foreign correspondent . He promoted the work of Henry David Thoreau , serving as literary agent and seeing to it that Thoreau 's work was published . Ralph Waldo Emerson also benefited from Greeley 's promotion . Historian Allan Nevins explained : 
 The Tribune set a new standard in American journalism by its combination of energy in news gathering with good taste , high moral standards , and intellectual appeal . Police reports , scandals , dubious medical advertisements , and flippant personalities were barred from its pages ; the editorials were vigorous but usually temperate ; the political news was the most exact in the city ; book reviews and book @-@ extracts were numerous ; and as an inveterate lecturer Greeley gave generous space to lectures . The paper appealed to substantial and thoughtful people . 
 Greeley , who had met his wife at a Graham boarding house , became enthusiastic about other social movements that did not last , and promoted them in his paper . He subscribed to the views of Charles Fourier , a French mathematician and social thinker , then recently deceased , who proposed the establishment of settlements called " phalanxes " with a given number of people from various walks of life , who would function as a corporation and among whose members profits would be shared . Greeley , in addition to promoting Fourierism in the Tribune , was associated with two such settlements , both of which eventually failed , though the town that eventually developed on the site of the one in Pennsylvania was after his death renamed Greeley . 
 = = = Congressman ( 1848 – 1849 ) = = = 
 In November 1848 , Congressman David S. Jackson , a Democrat , of New York 's Sixth District was unseated for election fraud . Jackson 's term was to expire in March 1849 , but during the 19th century Congress convened annually in December , making it important to fill the seat . Under the laws then in force , the Whig committee from the Sixth District chose Jackson 's replacement and they chose Greeley , though they did not select him as their candidate for the seat in the following Congress . The Sixth District , or Sixth Ward as it was commonly called , was mostly Irish @-@ American , and Greeley proclaimed his support for Irish efforts towards independence from Great Britain . He took his seat when Congress convened in December 1848 . Greeley 's selection was procured by the influence of his ally , Thurlow Weed . 
 As a congressman for three months , Greeley introduced legislation for a homestead act that would allow settlers who improved land to purchase it at low rates — a fourth of what speculators would pay . He was quickly noticed because he launched a series of attacks on legislative privileges , taking note of which congressmen were missing votes , and questioning the office of House Chaplain . This was enough to make him unpopular . But he outraged his colleagues when on December 22 , 1848 the Tribune published evidence that many congressmen had been paid excessive sums as travel allowance . In January 1849 , Greeley supported a bill that would have corrected the issue , but it was defeated . He was so disliked , he wrote a friend , that he had " divided the House into two parties — one that would like to see me extinguished and the other that wouldn 't be satisfied without a hand in doing it . " 
 Other legislation , all failed , introduced by Greeley included attempts to end flogging in the Navy , and to ban alcohol from its ships . He tried to change the name of the United States to " Columbia " , abolish slavery in the District of Columbia , and increase tariffs . One lasting effect of the term of Congressman Greeley was his friendship with a fellow Whig , serving his only term in the House , Illinois 's Abraham Lincoln . Greeley 's term ended after March 3 , 1849 , and he returned to New York and the Tribune , having , according to Williams , " failed to achieve much except notoriety " . 
 = = = Influence ( 1849 – 1860 ) = = = 
 By the end of the 1840s , Greeley 's Tribune was not only solidly established in New York as a daily paper , it was highly influential nationally through its weekly edition , which circulated in rural areas and small towns . Journalist Bayard Taylor deemed its influence in the Midwest second only to that of the Bible . According to Williams , the Tribune could mold public opinion through Greeley 's editorials more effectively than could the president . Greeley sharpened those skills over time , laying down what future Secretary of State John Hay , who worked for the Tribune in the 1870s , deemed the " Gospel according to St. Horace " . 
 The Tribune remained a Whig paper , but Greeley took an independent course . In 1848 , he had been slow to endorse the Whig presidential nominee , General Zachary Taylor , a Louisianan and hero of the Mexican @-@ American War . Greeley opposed both the war and the expansion of slavery into the new territories seized from Mexico , and feared Taylor would support expansion as president . Greeley considered endorsing former president Martin Van Buren , candidate of the Free Soil Party , but finally endorsed Taylor , who was elected ; the editor was rewarded for his loyalty with the congressional term . Greeley vacillated on support for the Compromise of 1850 , which gave victories to both sides of the slavery issue , before finally opposing it . In the 1852 presidential race , he supported the Whig candidate , General Winfield Scott , but savaged the Whig platform for its support of the Compromise . " We defy it , <unk> it , spit upon it . " Such party divisions contributed to Scott 's defeat by former New Hampshire senator Franklin Pierce . 
 In 1853 , with the party increasingly divided over the slavery issue , Greeley printed an editorial disclaiming the paper 's identity as Whig and declaring it to be nonpartisan . He was confident that the paper would not suffer financially , trusting in reader loyalty . Some in the party were not sorry to see him go : the Republic , a Whig organ , mocked Greeley and his beliefs : " If a party is to be built up and maintained on Fourierism , Mesmerism , Maine Liquor laws , Spiritual <unk> , <unk> , Socialism , Abolitionism , and forty other isms , we have no disposition to mix with any such companions . " When in 1854 , Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas introduced his Kansas @-@ Nebraska Bill , allowing residents of each territory to decide whether it would be slave or free , Greeley strongly fought the legislation in his newspaper . After it passed , and the Border War broke out in Kansas Territory , Greeley was part of efforts to send free @-@ state settlers there , and to arm them . In return , proponents of slavery recognized Greeley and the Tribune as adversaries , stopping shipments of the paper to the South and harassing local agents . Nevertheless , by 1858 , the Tribune reached 300 @,@ 000 subscribers through the weekly edition , and it would continue as the foremost American newspaper through the years of the Civil War . 
 The Kansas @-@ Nebraska Act helped destroy the Whig Party , but a new party with opposition to the spread of slavery at its heart had been under discussion for some years . Beginning in 1853 , Greeley participated in the discussions that led to the founding of the Republican Party and may have coined its name . Greeley attended the first New York state Republican Convention in 1854 , and was disappointed not to be nominated either for governor or lieutenant governor . The switch in parties coincided with the end of two of his longtime political alliances : in December 1854 , Greeley wrote that the political partnership between Weed , William Seward ( who was by then senator after serving as governor ) and himself was ended " by the withdrawal of the junior partner " . Greeley was angered over patronage disputes , and felt Seward was courting the rival The New York Times for support . 
 In 1853 , Greeley purchased a farm in rural Chappaqua , New York , where he experimented with farming techniques . In 1856 , he designed and built Rehoboth , one of the first concrete structures in the United States . 
 The Tribune continued to print a wide variety of material . In 1851 , its managing editor Charles Dana recruited Karl Marx as a foreign correspondent in London . Marx collaborated with Friedrich Engels on his work for the Tribune , which continued for over a decade , covering 500 articles . Greeley felt compelled to print , " Mr. Marx has very decided opinions of his own , with some of which we are far from agreeing , but those who do not read his letters are neglecting one of the most instructive sources of information on the great questions of current European politics . " 
 In 1859 , Greeley traveled across the continent to see the West for himself , to write about it for the Tribune , and to publicize the need for a transcontinental railroad . He also planned to give speeches to promote the Republican Party . He went to Chicago , then to Lawrence in Kansas Territory , and was unimpressed by the local people . Greeley took one of the first stagecoaches to Denver , seeing the town then in course of formation as a mining camp of the Pike 's Peak Gold Rush . Sending dispatches back to be published in the Tribune , Greeley took the Overland Trail , reaching Salt Lake City , where he conducted a two @-@ hour interview with the Mormon leader , Brigham Young , the first newspaper interview Young had given . Greeley encountered Native Americans , and was sympathetic , but like many of his time , deemed Indian culture inferior . In California , he explored widely and gave many addresses . 
 = = = 1860 campaign = = = 
 Although he remained on cordial terms with Senator Seward , Greeley never seriously considered supporting him in his bid for the Republican nomination for president . Instead , during the run @-@ up to the 1860 Republican National Convention in Chicago , he pressed the candidacy of former Missouri representative Edward Bates , an opponent of the spread of slavery who had freed his own slaves . In his newspaper , in speeches , and in conversation , Greeley pushed Bates as a man who could win the North and even make inroads in the South . Nevertheless , when one of the dark horse candidates for the Republican nomination , Abraham Lincoln , came to New York to give an address at Cooper Union , Greeley urged his readers to go hear Lincoln , and was among those who accompanied him to the platform . Greeley thought of Lincoln as a possible nominee for vice president . 
 Greeley attended the convention as a substitute for a delegate from Oregon who was unable to attend . In Chicago , he promoted Bates but deemed his cause hopeless and felt that Seward would be nominated . In conversations with other delegates , he predicted that , if nominated , Seward could not carry crucial battleground states such as Pennsylvania . Greeley 's estrangement from Seward was not widely known , giving the editor more credibility . Greeley ( and Seward ) biographer <unk> G. Van Deusen noted that it is uncertain how great a part Greeley played in Seward 's defeat by Lincoln — he had little success gaining delegates for Bates . On the first two ballots , Seward led Lincoln , but on the second only by a small margin . After the third ballot , on which Lincoln was nominated , Greeley was seen among the Oregon delegation , a broad smile on his face . According to Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning historian Doris Kearns Goodwin , " it is hard to imagine Lincoln letting Greeley 's resentment smolder for years as Seward did " . 
 Seward 's forces made Greeley a target of their anger at the senator 's defeat . One subscriber cancelled , regretting the three @-@ cent stamp he had to use on the letter ; Greeley supplied a replacement . When he was attacked in print , Greeley responded in kind . He launched a campaign against corruption in the New York Legislature , hoping voters would defeat incumbents and the new legislators would elect him to the Senate when Seward 's term expired in 1861 ( senators were until 1913 elected by state legislatures ) . But his main activity during the campaign of 1860 was boosting Lincoln and denigrating the other presidential candidates . He made it clear that a Republican administration would not interfere with slavery where it already was , and denied that Lincoln was in favor of voting rights for African Americans . He kept up the pressure until Lincoln was elected in November . 
 Lincoln soon let it be known that Seward would be Secretary of State , meaning he would not be a candidate for re @-@ election to the Senate . Weed wanted William M. Evarts elected in his place , while the anti @-@ Seward forces in New York gathered around Greeley . The crucial battleground was the Republican caucus , as the party held the majority in the legislature . Greeley 's forces did not have enough votes to send him to the Senate , but they had enough strength to block Evarts 's candidacy . Weed threw his support to Ira Harris , who had already received several votes , and who was chosen by the caucus and elected by the legislature in February 1861 . Weed was content to have blocked the editor , and stated that he had " paid the first installment on a large debt to Mr. Greeley " . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 = = = = War breaks out = = = = 
 After Lincoln 's election , there was talk of secession in the South . The Tribune was initially in favor of peaceful separation , with the South becoming a separate nation . According to an editorial on November 9 @,@ 
 If the Cotton States shall become satisfied that they can do better out of the Union than in it , we insist on letting them go in peace . The right to secede may be a revolutionary one , but it exists nevertheless .... And whenever a considerable section of our Union shall deliberately resolve to go out , we shall resist all coercive measures designed to keep it in . We hope never to live in a republic where of one section is pinned to the residue by bayonets . 
 Similar editorials appeared through January 1861 , after which Tribune editorials took a hard line on the South , opposing concessions . Williams concludes that " for a brief moment , Horace Greeley had believed that peaceful secession might be a form of freedom preferable to civil war " . This brief flirtation with disunion would have consequences for Greeley — it was used by his opponents against him when he ran for president in 1872 . 
 In the days leading up to Lincoln 's inauguration , the Tribune headed its editorial columns each day , in large capital letters : " No compromise ! / No concession to traitors ! / The Constitution as it is ! " Greeley attended the inauguration , sitting close to Senator Douglas , as the Tribune hailed the beginning of Lincoln 's presidency . When southern forces attacked Fort Sumter , the Tribune regretted the loss of the fort , but applauded the fact that war to subdue the rebels , who formed the Confederate States of America , would now take place . The paper criticized Lincoln for not being quick to use force . 
 Through the spring and early summer of 1861 , Greeley and the Tribune beat the drum for a Union attack . " On to Richmond " , a phrase coined by a Tribune stringer , became the watchword of the newspaper as Greeley urged the occupation of the rebel capital of Richmond before the Confederate Congress could meet on July 20 . In part because of the public pressure , Lincoln sent the half @-@ trained Union Army into the field at the First Battle of Manassas in mid @-@ July where it was soundly beaten . The defeat threw Greeley into despair , and he may have suffered a nervous breakdown . 
 = = = = " Prayer of Twenty Millions " = = = = 
 Restored to health by two weeks at the farm he had purchased in Chappaqua , Greeley returned to the Tribune and a policy of general backing of the Lincoln administration , even having kind words to say about Secretary Seward , his old foe . He was supportive even during the military defeats of the first year of the war . Late in 1861 , he proposed to Lincoln through an intermediary that the president provide him with advance information as to its policies , in exchange for friendly coverage in the Tribune . Lincoln eagerly accepted , " having him firmly behind me will be as helpful to me as an army of one hundred thousand men . " 
 By early 1862 , however , Greeley was again sometimes critical of the administration , frustrated by the failure to win decisive military victories , and perturbed at the president 's slowness to commit to the emancipation of the slaves once the Confederacy was defeated , something the Tribune was urging in its editorials . This was a change in Greeley 's thinking which began after First Manassas , a shift from preservation of the Union being the primary war purpose to wanting the war to end slavery . By March , the only action against slavery that Lincoln had backed was a proposal for compensated emancipation in the border states that had remained loyal to the Union , though he signed legislation abolishing slavery in the District of Columbia . Lincoln supposedly asked a Tribune correspondent , " What in the world is the matter with Uncle Horace ? Why can 't he restrain himself and wait a little while ? " 
 Greeley 's prodding of Lincoln culminated in a letter to him on August 19 , 1862 , reprinted on the following day in the Tribune as the " Prayer of Twenty Millions " . By this time , Lincoln had informed his Cabinet of the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation he had composed , and Greeley was told of it the same day the prayer was printed . In his letter , Greeley demanded action on emancipation , and strict enforcement of the Confiscation Acts . Lincoln must " fight slavery with liberty " , and not fight " wolves with the devices of a sheep " . 
 Lincoln 's reply would become famous , much more so than the prayer that provoked it . " My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union , and is not either to save or to destroy slavery . If I could save the Union without freeing any slave , I would do it , and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it ; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that . What I do about slavery , and the colored race , I do because it helps to save the Union ; and what I forbear , I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union . " Lincoln 's statement angered abolitionists ; William Seward 's wife Frances complained to her husband that Lincoln had made it seem " that the mere keeping together a number of states is more important than human freedom . " Greeley felt Lincoln had not truly answered him , " but I 'll forgive him everything if he 'll issue the proclamation " . When Lincoln did , on September 22 , Greeley hailed the Emancipation Proclamation as a " great boon of freedom " . According to Williams , " Lincoln 's war for Union was now also Greeley 's war for emancipation . " 
 = = = = Draft Riots and peace efforts = = = = 
 After the Union victory at Gettysburg in early July 1863 , the Tribune wrote that the rebellion would be quickly " stamped out " . A week after the battle , the New York City draft riots erupted . Greeley and the Tribune were generally supportive of conscription , though feeling that the rich should not be allowed to evade it by hiring substitutes . Support for the draft made them targets of the mob , and the Tribune Building was surrounded , and at least once invaded . Greeley secured arms from the Brooklyn Navy Yard and 150 soldiers kept the building secure . Mary Greeley and her children were at the farm in Chappaqua ; a mob threatened them , but dispersed without doing harm . 
 In August 1863 , Greeley was requested by a firm of Hartford publishers to write a history of the war . Greeley agreed , and over the next eight months penned a 600 @-@ page volume , which would be the first of two , entitled The American Conflict . The books were very successful , selling a total of 225 @,@ 000 copies by 1870 , a large sale for the time . 
 Throughout the war , Greeley played with ideas as to how to settle it . In 1862 , Greeley had approached the French minister to Washington , Henri Mercier , to discuss a mediated settlement . However , Seward rejected such talks and the prospect of European intervention receded after the bloody Union victory at Antietam in September 1862 . In July 1864 , Greeley received word that there were Confederate commissioners in Canada , empowered to offer peace . In fact , the men were in Niagara Falls , Canada to aid Peace Democrats and otherwise undermine the Union war <unk> but they played along when Greeley journeyed to Niagara Falls , at Lincoln 's request : the president was willing to consider any deal that included reunion and emancipation . The Confederates had no credentials and were unwilling to accompany Greeley to Washington under safe conduct . Greeley returned to New York , and the episode , when it became public , embarrassed the administration . Lincoln said nothing publicly concerning Greeley 's credulous conduct , but privately indicated that he had no confidence in him anymore . 
 Greeley did not initially support Lincoln for nomination in 1864 , casting about for other candidates . In February , he wrote in the Tribune that Lincoln could not be elected to a second term . Nevertheless , no candidate made a serious challenge to Lincoln , who was nominated in June , which the Tribune applauded slightly . In August , fearing a Democratic victory and acceptance of the Confederacy , Greeley engaged in a plot to get a new convention to nominate another candidate , with Lincoln withdrawing . The plot came to nothing . Once Atlanta was taken by Union forces on September 3 , Greeley became a fervent supporter of Lincoln . Greeley was gratified both by Lincoln 's re @-@ election and continued Union victories . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 As the war drew to a close in April 1865 , Greeley and the Tribune urged magnanimity towards the defeated Confederates , arguing that making martyrs of Confederate leaders would only inspire future rebels . This talk of moderation ceased when Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth . Many concluded that Lincoln had fallen as the result of a final rebel plot , and the new president , Andrew Johnson , offered $ 100 @,@ 000 for the capture of fugitive Confederate president Jefferson Davis . After the rebel leader was caught , Greeley initially advocated that " punishment be meted out in accord with a just verdict " . 
 Through 1866 , Greeley editorialized that Davis , who was being held at Fortress Monroe , should either be set free or put on trial . Davis 's wife Varina urged Greeley to use his influence to gain her husband 's release . In May 1867 , a Richmond judge set bail for the former Confederate president at $ 100 @,@ 000 . Greeley was among those who signed the bail bond , and the two men met briefly at the courthouse . This act resulted in public anger against Greeley in the North . Sales of the second volume of his history ( published in 1866 ) declined sharply . Subscriptions to the Tribune ( especially the Weekly Tribune ) also dropped off , though they recovered during the 1868 election . 
 Beginning as a supporter , Greeley soon became disillusioned with President Johnson , whose Reconstruction policies allowed the quick formation of state governments without provision for suffrage for the freedman . When Congress convened and gradually took control of Reconstruction , Greeley generally supported their actions , favoring universal male suffrage and , his anger against the Confederates having cooled , amnesty . While Greeley generally supported the Radical Republicans , he did not like the harshness of Thaddeus Stevens . Greeley ran for Congress in 1866 , but lost badly , and for Senate in the legislative election held in early 1867 , to be defeated by Roscoe Conkling . 
 As president and Congress battled , Greeley remained firmly opposed to Johnson , and when the president was impeached in 1868 , Greeley and the Tribune strongly supported his removal , strongly attacking Johnson . Nevertheless , the president was acquitted by the Senate , much to Greeley 's disappointment . Also in 1868 , Greeley sought the Republican nomination for governor , but was frustrated by the Conkling forces . Greeley supported the successful Republican presidential nominee , General Ulysses S. Grant in the 1868 election . 
 = = = Grant years = = = 
 In 1868 , Whitelaw Reid joined the Tribune ' s staff as managing editor . In Reid , Greeley had found a reliable second @-@ in @-@ command . Also on the Tribune 's staff in the late 1860s was Mark Twain ; Henry George sometimes contributed pieces , as did Bret Harte . In 1870 , Lincoln 's assistant private secretary , John Hay , joined the staff as an editorial writer . Greeley soon pronounced Hay the most brilliant at that craft ever to write for the Tribune . 
 Greeley maintained his interest in associationism . Beginning in 1869 , he was heavily involved in an attempt to found a utopia on the prairie in a scheme led by Nathan Meeker . Named Greeley , Colorado Territory , its namesake served as treasurer of the town association , bought two lots there , which he inspected in 1870 , and lent Meeker money to keep the colony afloat . Greeley 's close friend P. T. Barnum also interested himself in the project , and built a hotel there . After early struggles , the colony survived under Meeker 's leadership , though adopting a normal municipal government . In 1871 , Greeley published a book What I Know About Farming , based on his childhood experience and that from his country home in Chappaqua . 
 Greeley continued to seek political office , running for state comptroller in 1869 and the House of Representatives in 1870 , losing both times . In 1870 , President Grant offered Greeley the post of minister to Santo Domingo ( today , the Dominican Republic ) , which he declined . 
 = = Presidential candidate = = 
 As had been the case for much of the 19th century , political parties continued to be formed and to vanish after the Civil War . In September 1871 , Missouri Senator Carl Schurz formed the Liberal Republican Party , founded on opposition to President Grant , opposition to corruption , and support of civil service reform , lower taxes , and land reform . He gathered around him an eclectic group of supporters whose only real link was their opposition to Grant , whose administration had proved increasingly corrupt . The party needed a candidate , with a presidential election upcoming . Greeley was one of the best @-@ known Americans , as well as being a perennial candidate for office . He was more minded to consider a run for the Republican nomination , fearing the effect on the Tribune should he bolt the party . Nevertheless , he wanted to be president , as a Republican if possible , if not , as a Liberal Republican . 
 The Liberal Republican national convention met in Cincinnati in May 1872 . Greeley was spoken of as a possible candidate , as was Missouri Governor Benjamin Gratz Brown . Schurz was ineligible as foreign @-@ born . On the first ballot , Supreme Court Justice David Davis led , but Greeley took a narrow lead on the second ballot . Former minister to Britain Charles Francis Adams took the lead , but on the sixth ballot , after a " spontaneous " demonstration staged by Reid , Greeley gained the nomination , with Brown as vice presidential candidate . 
 The Democrats , when they met in Baltimore in July , faced a stark choice — either nominate Greeley , long a thorn in their side , or split the anti @-@ Grant vote and go to certain defeat . They chose the former , and even adopted the Liberal Republican platform , calling for equal rights for African Americans . This was the first time one man had been nominated for president by two political parties . Greeley resigned as editor of the Tribune for the campaign , and , unusually for the time , embarked on a speaking tour to bring his message to the people . As it was more usual for candidates for major office to not actively campaign , he was attacked as a seeker after office . Nevertheless , in late July , Greeley ( and others , such as former Ohio governor Rutherford B. Hayes ) thought he would very likely be elected . Greeley campaigned on a platform of intersectional reconciliation , arguing that the war was over and the issue of slavery was resolved . It was time to restore normalcy and end the continuing military occupation of the South . 
 The Republican counterattack was well @-@ financed , accusing Greeley of support for everything from treason to the Ku Klux Klan . The anti @-@ Greeley campaign was famously and effectively summed up in the cartoons of Thomas Nast , whom Grant later credited with a major role in his re @-@ election . Nast 's cartoons showed Greeley giving bail money for Jefferson Davis , throwing mud on Grant , and shaking hands with John Wilkes Booth across Lincoln 's grave . The Crédit Mobilier scandal — corruption in the financing of the Union Pacific Railroad — broke in September , but Greeley was unable to take advantage of the Grant administration 's ties to the scandal as he had stock in the railroad himself , and some alleged it had been given him in exchange for favorable coverage . 
 Greeley 's wife Mary had returned ill from a trip to Europe in late June . Her condition worsened in October , and he effectively broke off campaigning after October 12 to be with her . She died on October 30 , plunging him into despair a week before the election . Poor results for the Democrats in those states that had elections for other offices in September and October presaged defeat for Greeley , and so it proved . He received 2 @,@ 834 @,@ 125 votes to 3 @,@ 597 @,@ 132 for Grant , who secured 286 electors to 66 chosen for Greeley . The editor @-@ turned @-@ candidate won only six states : Georgia , Kentucky , Maryland , Missouri , Tennessee and Texas . 
 = = = Final month and death = = = 
 Greeley resumed the editorship of the Tribune , but quickly learned there was a movement under way to unseat him . He found himself unable to sleep , and after a final visit to the Tribune on November 13 ( a week after the election ) remained under medical care . At the recommendation of a family physician , Greeley was sent to the asylum of Dr. George S. Choate at Pleasantville , New York . There , he continued to worsen , and died on November 29 , with his two surviving daughters and Whitelaw Reid at his side . 
 His death came before the Electoral College convened . His 66 electoral votes were divided among four others , principally Indiana governor @-@ elect Thomas A. Hendricks and Greeley 's vice presidential running mate , Benjamin Gratz Brown . 
 Although Greeley had requested a simple funeral , his daughters ignored his wishes and arranged a grand affair . He is buried in Brooklyn 's Green @-@ Wood Cemetery . Among the mourners were old friends , Tribune employees including Reid and Hay , his journalistic rivals , and a broad array of politicians , led by President Grant . 
 = = Appraisal = = 
 Despite the venom that had been spewed over him in the presidential campaign , Greeley 's death was publicly mourned . Harper 's Weekly , which had printed Nast 's cartoons , wrote , " Since the assassination of Mr. Lincoln , the death of no American has been so sincerely deplored as that of Horace Greeley ; and its tragical circumstances have given a peculiarly affectionate pathos to all that has been said of him . " Henry Ward Beecher wrote in the Christian Union , " when Horace Greeley died , unjust and hard judgment of him died also " . Harriett Beecher Stowe noted Greeley 's eccentric dress , " That poor white hat ! If , alas , it covered many weaknesses , it covered also much strength , much real kindness and benevolence , and much that the world will be better for " . 
 Greeley 's view of freedom was based in the desire that all should have the opportunity to better themselves . According to his biographer , Erik S. Lunde , " a dedicated social reformer deeply sympathetic to the treatment of poor white males , slaves , free blacks , and white women , he still espoused the virtues of self @-@ help and free enterprise " . Van Deusen stated : " His genuine human sympathies , his moral fervor , even the exhibitionism that was a part of his makeup , made it inevitable that he should crusade for a better world . He did so with apostolic zeal . " 
 Nevertheless , Greeley 's effectiveness as a reformer was undermined by his idiosyncrasies : according to Williams , he " must have looked like an apparition , a man of eccentric habits dressed in an old linen coat that made him look like a farmer who came into town for supplies " . Van Deusen wrote , " Greeley 's effectiveness as a crusader was limited by some of his traits and characteristics . Culturally deficient , he was to the end ignorant of his own limitations , and this ignorance was a great handicap . " 
 The Tribune remained under that name until 1924 , when it merged with the New York Herald to become the New York Herald @-@ Tribune , which ceased to publish in 1966 . The name survived until 2013 , when the International Herald @-@ Tribune became the International New York Times . 
 There is a statue of Greeley in City Hall Park in New York , donated by the Tribune Association . Cast in 1890 , it was not dedicated until 1916 . A second statue of Greeley is located in Greeley Square in Midtown Manhattan . Greeley Square , at Broadway and 33rd Street , was named by the New York City Common Council in a vote after Greeley 's death . Van Deusen concluded his biography of Greeley : 
 More significant still was the service that Greeley performed as a result of his faith in his country and his countrymen , his belief in infinite American progress . For all his faults and shortcomings , Greeley symbolized an America that , though often shortsighted and misled , was never suffocated by the wealth pouring from its farms and furnaces ... For through his faith in the American future , a faith expressed in his ceaseless efforts to make real the promise of America , he inspired others with hope and confidence , making them feel that their dreams also had the substance of realty . It is his faith , and theirs that has given him his place in American history . In that faith he still marches among us , scolding and benevolent , exhorting us to confidence and to victory in the great struggles of our own day . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Stede Bonnet = 
 Stede Bonnet ( <unk> – 10 December 1718 ) was an early 18th @-@ century Barbadian pirate , sometimes called " The Gentleman Pirate " because he was a moderately wealthy landowner before turning to a life of crime . Bonnet was born into a wealthy English family on the island of Barbados , and inherited the family estate after his father 's death in 1694 . In 1709 , he married Mary Allamby , and engaged in some level of militia service . Because of marital problems , and despite his lack of sailing experience , Bonnet decided to turn to piracy in the summer of 1717 . He bought a sailing vessel , named it Revenge , and traveled with his paid crew along the Eastern Seaboard of what is now the United States , capturing other vessels and burning other Barbadian ships . 
 Bonnet set sail for Nassau , Bahamas , to the haven for pirates known as the ' Pirates ' republic ' , but he was seriously wounded en route during an encounter with a Spanish warship . After arriving in Nassau , Bonnet met Edward Teach , the infamous pirate Blackbeard . Incapable of leading his crew , Bonnet temporarily ceded his ship 's command to Blackbeard . Before separating in December 1717 , Blackbeard and Bonnet plundered and captured merchant ships along the East Coast . After Bonnet failed to capture the Protestant Caesar , his crew abandoned him to join Blackbeard aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge . Bonnet stayed on Blackbeard 's ship as a guest , and did not command a crew again until summer 1718 , when he was pardoned by North Carolina governor Charles Eden and received clearance to go privateering against Spanish shipping . Bonnet was tempted to resume his piracy , but did not want to lose his pardon , so he adopted the alias " Captain Thomas " and changed his ship 's name to Royal James . He had returned to piracy by July 1718 . 
 In August 1718 , Bonnet anchored the Royal James on an estuary of the Cape Fear River to careen and repair the ship . In late August and September , Colonel William Rhett , with the authorisation of South Carolina governor Robert Johnson , led a naval expedition against pirates on the river . Rhett and Bonnet 's men fought each other for hours , but the outnumbered pirates ultimately surrendered . Rhett arrested the pirates and brought them to Charleston in early October . Bonnet escaped on 24 October , but was recaptured on Sullivan 's Island . On 10 November , Bonnet was brought to trial and charged with two acts of piracy . Judge Nicholas Trott sentenced Bonnet to death . Bonnet wrote to Governor Johnson to ask for clemency , but Johnson endorsed the judge 's decision , and Bonnet was hanged in Charleston on 10 December 1718 . 
 = = Pre @-@ criminal life = = 
 Bonnet is believed to have been born in 1688 , as he was christened at Christ Church parish on 29 July 1688 . His parents , Edward and Sarah Bonnet , owned an estate of over 400 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 km2 ) southeast of Bridgetown , which was bequeathed to Bonnet upon his father 's death in 1694 . It is not known where Bonnet received his education , but many who knew him described him as bookish , and Judge Nicholas Trott alluded to Bonnet 's liberal education when sentencing him . Bonnet married Mary Allamby in Bridgetown on 21 November 1709 . They had three sons — Allamby , Edward , and Stede — and a daughter , Mary . Allamby died before 1715 , while the other children survived to see their father abandon them for piracy . Edward 's granddaughter , Anne Thomasine Clarke , was the wife of General Robert Haynes , for 36 years Speaker of the Assembly of Barbados . 
 In A General History of the Pyrates , Charles Johnson wrote that Bonnet was driven to piracy by Mary 's nagging and " [ d ] <unk> he found in a married State . " Details of Bonnet 's military service are unclear , but he held the rank of major in the Barbados militia . The rank was probably due to his land holdings , since deterring slave revolts was an important function of the militia . Bonnet 's militia service coincided with the War of the Spanish Succession , but there is no record that he took part in the fighting . 
 = = Early career as a pirate = = 
 During the spring of 1717 , Stede Bonnet decided to become a pirate , despite having no knowledge of shipboard life . He contracted a local shipyard to build him a sixty @-@ ton sloop , which he equipped with six guns and named the Revenge . This was unusual , as most pirates seized their ships by mutiny or boarding , or else converted a privateer vessel to a pirate ship . Bonnet enlisted a crew of more than seventy men . He relied on his quartermaster and officer for their knowledge of sailing , and as a result , he was not highly respected by his crew . In another break from tradition , Bonnet paid his crew wages , not shares of plunder as most pirates did . Royal Navy intelligence reported that he departed Carlisle Bay , Barbados under cover of darkness . 
 Bonnet 's initial cruise took him to the coast of Virginia near the entrance of the Chesapeake Bay , where he captured and plundered four vessels , and burned the Barbadian ship <unk> to keep news of his crimes from his home island . He then sailed north to New York , taking two more ships , and picking up naval supplies and releasing captives at Gardiners Island . By August 1717 , Bonnet had returned to the Carolinas , where he attacked two more ships , a brigantine from Boston and a Barbadian sloop . He stripped the brigantine , but brought the cargo @-@ filled Barbadian sloop to an inlet off North Carolina to use for careening and repairing the Revenge . After the Barbadian sloop 's tackle was used to careen the Revenge , the ship was dismantled for timber , and the remains were then burned . In September 1717 , Bonnet set course for Nassau , which was then an infamous pirate den on the island of New Providence in the Bahamas . En route , he encountered , fought , and escaped from a Spanish man of war . The Revenge was badly damaged , Bonnet was seriously wounded , and half the crew of the sloop was killed or wounded in the encounter . Putting in at Nassau , Bonnet replaced his casualties and refitted the Revenge , increasing the sloop 's armament to twelve guns . 
 = = Collaboration with Blackbeard = = 
 While at Nassau , Bonnet met Captain Benjamin Hornigold and Edward Teach for the first time ; Teach , better known as Blackbeard , played a large role in the remainder of Bonnet 's life . Disabled by his wounds , Bonnet temporarily ceded command of the Revenge to Blackbeard , but remained aboard as a guest of the more experienced pirate captain . Blackbeard and Bonnet weighed anchor and sailed northward to Delaware Bay , where they plundered eleven ships . On 29 September 1717 , the Revenge , captained by Blackbeard , plundered the sloop Betty , which had a cargo full of Madeira wine . Captain Codd , whose merchant ship was taken on 12 October , described Bonnet as walking the deck in his nightshirt , lacking any command and still unwell from his wounds . The Revenge later captured and looted the Spofford and Sea Nymph , which were leaving Philadelphia . On 22 October , the Revenge stopped and robbed the Robert and Good Intent of their supplies . 
 Blackbeard and Bonnet left Delaware Bay and returned to the Caribbean in November , where they successfully continued their piracy . On 17 November , a 200 @-@ ton ship named the Concorde was attacked by two pirate craft nearly 100 miles ( 160 km ) away from the island of Martinique . The lieutenant on board described the pirate vessels as one having 12 guns and 120 men and the other having eight guns and 30 men . The crew of the Concorde put up a fight , but surrendered after the pirates bombarded them with " two volleys of cannons and musketry . " Blackbeard took the Concorde and sailed south into the Grenadines , where he renamed the ship Queen Anne 's Revenge , possibly as an insult to King George I of Great Britain . Some time after 19 December , Bonnet and Blackbeard separated . Bonnet now sailed into the western Caribbean . In March 1718 , he encountered the 400 @-@ ton merchant vessel Protestant Caesar off Honduras . The ship escaped him , and his frustrated crew became restive . When Bonnet encountered Blackbeard again shortly afterward , Bonnet 's crew deserted him to join Blackbeard . Blackbeard put a henchman named Richards in command of the Revenge . Bonnet , surprised that his colleague had betrayed him , found himself as a guest aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge . Bonnet confided in a few loyal crew members that he was ready to give up his criminal life if he could exile himself in Spain or Portugal . Bonnet would not exercise command again until the summer of 1718 . 
 Under Captain Richards , the Revenge captured a Jamaican sloop , the Adventure , captained by David Herriot . Herriot joined the pirates , and Blackbeard now possessed three ships . Bonnet accompanied Blackbeard to South Carolina , where Blackbeard 's four vessels blockaded the port of Charleston in the late spring of 1718 . Needing a place to rest and refit their vessels , Blackbeard and Bonnet headed north to Topsail Inlet , where the Queen Anne 's Revenge ran aground and was lost . Leaving the remaining three vessels at Topsail Inlet , Blackbeard and Bonnet went ashore and journeyed to Bath , which was then capital of North Carolina . Once there , both men accepted pardons from Governor Charles Eden under King George 's Act of Grace , putatively on condition of their renouncing piracy forever . While Blackbeard quietly returned to Topsail Inlet , Bonnet stayed in Bath to get a " clearance " to take the Revenge to Denmark 's Caribbean colony of St. Thomas , where he planned to buy a letter of marque and go privateering against Spanish shipping . Eden granted Bonnet this clearance . 
 = = Resumption of pirate command = = 
 Bonnet returned to Topsail Inlet to find that Blackbeard had beached the majority of their former crew , robbed the Revenge and two other vessels of the squadron of most of their supplies , and sailed away for parts unknown aboard the sloop Adventure , carrying all the loot with him . Bonnet now ( probably late June or early July 1718 ) resumed command of the Revenge . Few , if any , of his original crew from Barbados were still aboard . Bonnet reinforced the Revenge by rescuing a number of men whom Blackbeard had marooned on a sandbar in Topsail Inlet . 
 Shortly after Bonnet resumed command , a <unk> 's crew told him that Blackbeard was moored in Ocracoke Inlet . Bonnet set sail at once to hunt down his treacherous ex @-@ confederate , but could not find him , and Bonnet never met Blackbeard again . Although Bonnet apparently never discarded his hopes of reaching St. Thomas and getting his letter of marque , two pressing problems now tempted him back into piracy . First , Blackbeard had stolen the food and supplies he and his men needed to subsist ( one pirate testified at his trial that no more than ten or eleven barrels remained aboard the Revenge ) . Second , St. Thomas was now in the midst of the Atlantic hurricane season , which would last until autumn . However , returning to freebooting meant nullifying Bonnet 's pardon . 
 Hoping to preserve his pardon , Bonnet adopted the alias " Captain Thomas " and changed the Revenge 's name to the Royal James . The name Royal James that Bonnet conferred on his sloop was presumably a reference to the younger Prince James Stuart , and may suggest that Bonnet or his men had Jacobite sympathies . One of Bonnet 's prisoners further reported witnessing Bonnet 's men drinking to the health of the Old Pretender and wishing to see him king of the English nation . 
 Bonnet further tried to disguise his return to piracy by engaging in a pretense of trade with the next two vessels he robbed . Soon afterward , Bonnet quit the charade of trading and reverted to naked piracy . In July 1718 , he cruised north to Delaware Bay , pillaging another eleven vessels . He took several prisoners , some of whom joined his pirate crew . While Bonnet set loose most of his prizes after looting them , he retained control of the last two ships he captured : the sloops Francis and Fortune . On 1 August 1718 , the Royal James and the two captured sloops sailed southward from Delaware Bay . The captured sloops lagged behind , and Bonnet threatened to sink them if they did not stay closer . During the passage , Bonnet and his crew divided their loot into shares of about £ 10 or £ 11 and distributed them amongst themselves . This is the only time Bonnet is known to have practiced this important pirate custom , and it suggests he had by then abandoned his unorthodox practice of paying regular wages to his crew . 
 Twelve days out of Delaware Bay , Bonnet entered the estuary of the Cape Fear River and anchored near the mouth of a small waterway now known as Bonnet 's Creek . The Royal James had begun to leak badly and was in need of careening . Shortly afterward , a small shallop entered the river and was captured . Bonnet had the shallop broken up to help repair the Royal James . The work of careening was done , in whole or in part , by the prisoners Bonnet had captured . Bonnet threatened at least one man with marooning if he did not work the Royal James ' pumps . Bonnet remained in the Cape Fear River for the next 45 days . According to Bonnet 's boatswain , Ignatius Pell , the pirates intended to wait out the hurricane season there . 
 = = Battle of Cape Fear River = = 
 By the end of August , news had reached Charleston that Bonnet 's vessels were moored in the Cape Fear River . Robert Johnson , governor of South Carolina , authorised Colonel William Rhett to lead a naval expedition against the pirates , even though the Cape Fear River was in North Carolina 's jurisdiction . After a false start due to the appearance of another pirate ship near Charleston , Rhett arrived at the mouth of the Cape Fear River on 26 September with two eight @-@ gun sloops , the Henry and the Sea Nymph , and a force of 130 militia men . Bonnet initially mistook Rhett 's squadron for merchantmen and sent three canoes to capture them . Unfortunately for Rhett , his flagship Henry had run aground in the river mouth , enabling Bonnet 's canoe crews to approach , recognise the heavily armed and manned sloops as hostile and return uninjured to warn Bonnet . The sun had set by the time the rising tide lifted the Henry off the river bottom . 
 The 46 pirates were scattered among the three sloops . During the night , Bonnet brought all of them aboard the Royal James and planned to fight his way out to sea in the morning rather than risk the Cape Fear River 's narrow channels in the dark . Bonnet also wrote a letter to Governor Johnson , threatening to burn all the ships in Charleston harbor . At daybreak , on 27 September 1718 , Bonnet set sail toward Rhett 's force , and all three sloops opened fire , initiating the Battle of Cape Fear River . The two South Carolinian sloops split up in an effort to bracket the Royal James . Bonnet tried to avoid the trap by steering the Royal James close to the river 's western shore , but ran aground in the process . Rhett 's closing sloops also ran aground , leaving only the Henry in range of the Royal James . 
 The battle was at a stalemate for the next five or six hours , with all the participants immobilised . Bonnet 's men had the advantage that their deck was heeled away from their opponents , giving them cover , while the Henry 's deck was tilted toward the pirates , thus exposing Rhett 's men to punishing musket volleys . Bonnet 's force suffered twelve casualties while killing ten and wounding fourteen of Rhett 's 70 @-@ man crew . Most of Bonnet 's men fought enthusiastically , challenging their enemies to board and fight hand to hand , and tying a knot in their flag as a mock signal to come aboard and render aid . Bonnet himself patrolled the deck with a pistol drawn , threatening to kill any pirate who faltered in the fight . Nevertheless , some of the prisoners who had been forced to join the pirate crew refused to fire on Rhett 's men , and one narrowly escaped death at Bonnet 's hands in the confusion of the engagement . 
 The battle was ultimately decided when the rising tide lifted Rhett 's sloops free while temporarily leaving the Royal James stranded . Bonnet was left helpless , watching while the enemy vessels repaired their rigging and closed to board his paralysed vessel . Outnumbered almost three to one , Bonnet 's men would have had little hope of winning a boarding action . Bonnet ordered his gunner , George Ross , to blow up the Royal James 's powder magazine . Ross apparently attempted this , but was overruled by the remainder of the crew , who surrendered . Rhett arrested the pirates and returned to Charleston with his prisoners on 3 October . 
 = = Escape , recapture , and execution = = 
 In Charleston , Bonnet was separated from the bulk of his crew and held for three weeks in the provost marshal 's house along with his boatswain , Ignatius Pell , and his sailing master , David Herriott . On 24 October , Bonnet and Herriott escaped , probably by colluding with local merchant Richard <unk> . Governor Johnson at once placed a £ 700 bounty on Bonnet 's head and dispatched search teams to track him down . Bonnet and Herriott , accompanied by a slave and an Indian , obtained a boat and made for the north shore of Charleston Harbor , but foul winds and lack of supplies forced the four of them onto Sullivan 's Island . Governor Johnson sent a posse under Rhett to Sullivan 's Island to hunt for Bonnet . The posse discovered Bonnet after an extensive search , and opened fire , killing Herriott and wounding the two slaves . Bonnet surrendered and was returned to Charleston . While awaiting trial , some sort of civil uprising in his support took place within the city , an event authorities would later describe as having nearly resulted in the burning of the town and the overthrow of the government . 
 On 10 November 1718 , Bonnet was brought to trial before Sir Nicholas Trott , sitting in his capacity as Vice @-@ Admiralty judge . Trott had already sat in judgment on Bonnet 's crew and sentenced most of them to hang . Bonnet was formally charged with only two acts of piracy , against the Francis and the Fortune , whose commanders were on hand to testify against Bonnet in person . Ignatius Pell had turned King 's evidence in the trial of Bonnet 's crew and now testified , somewhat reluctantly , against Bonnet himself . Bonnet pleaded not guilty and conducted his own defence without assistance of counsel , cross @-@ examining the witnesses to little avail , and calling a character witness in his favor . Trott rendered a damning summation of the evidence , and the jury delivered a guilty verdict . Two days later , after treating the convicted man to a stern lecture on his violation of Christian duties , Trott sentenced Bonnet to death . 
 While awaiting his execution , Bonnet wrote to Governor Johnson , begging abjectly for clemency and promising to have his own arms and legs cut off as assurance that he would never again commit piracy . Charles Johnson wrote that Bonnet 's visibly disintegrating mind moved many Carolinians to pity , particularly the female population , and London papers later reported that the governor delayed his execution seven times . Bonnet was eventually hanged at White Point Garden , in Charleston , on 10 December 1718 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Bonnet 's authority = = = 
 The actual degree of authority any pirate captain exercised over his crew was questionable , as he had no access to the procedures and sanctions of admiralty law that supported legitimate captains . Many pirate captains were elected by their crews and could be deposed in the same manner . Because of his ignorance of nautical matters , Bonnet was in an even weaker position than other pirate captains , as is demonstrated by the utter domination Blackbeard exercised over him during their collaboration . During Bonnet 's early career , his crew seems to have been less than loyal to him and to have greatly preferred the more charismatic and experienced Blackbeard . 
 At his trial , Bonnet downplayed his own authority over his pirate crew . He told the court that his crew engaged in piracy against his will , and said he had warned them that he would leave the crew unless they stopped robbing vessels . He further stated that he had been asleep during the capture of the sloop Francis . The court did not accept these protestations . Boatswain Ignatius Pell testified that Bonnet 's quartermaster , Robert Tucker , had more power than Bonnet . A powerful quartermaster appears to have been a common feature of pirate crews in the early modern era . 
 Nevertheless , Bonnet 's crew represented him as being a leader , and it appears likely that , after his rescue of Blackbeard 's marooned crewmen , he became at least a co @-@ equal commander aboard the Royal James . He appears to have been entrusted with the company 's treasure , and made most major command decisions such as the direction of the ship and what vessels to attack . Most significantly , at Delaware Bay he ordered two of his crew to be flogged for breaches of discipline . Pirates did not lightly submit to flogging , as they resented the frequent use of this punishment in the naval and merchant services from which most of them came , and thus only a leader who commanded the obedience of his crew could successfully order such penalties . 
 = = = Bonnet 's pirate flag = = = 
 Bonnet 's flag is traditionally represented as a white skull above a horizontal long bone between a heart and a dagger , all on a black field . Despite the frequent appearance of this flag in modern pirate literature , no known early @-@ Georgian period source describes any such device , much less attributes it to Bonnet . This version of Bonnet 's flag is probably one of a number of pirate flags appearing on an undated manuscript with unknown provenance in Britain 's National Maritime Museum , which was donated by Dr. Philip Gosse in 1939 . Bonnet 's crew and contemporaries generally referred to him flying a " bloody flag " , which likely means a dark red flag . There is also a report from the 1718 Boston News @-@ Letter of Bonnet flying a death 's @-@ head flag during his pursuit of the Protestant Caesar , with no mention of color or of any long bone , heart , or dagger . 
 = = = Walking the plank = = = 
 Bonnet is alleged to have been one of the few pirates to make his prisoners walk the plank . No contemporary source makes any mention of Bonnet forcing prisoners to walk the plank , and modern scholars such as Marcus <unk> , Professor of History at the University of Pittsburgh , generally agree that the whole concept of pirates forcing prisoners to walk the plank belongs to a later age than Bonnet 's . 
 = = = Popular culture = = = 
 Bonnet has been portrayed several times in literature . He is a major character in Tim Powers ' On Stranger Tides , along with other famous piratical characters , particularly Blackbeard . In this novel , Bonnet takes up piracy after having been framed by Blackbeard , who has used Bonnet 's hatred for his wife ( only married two years in the novel ) against him . Kate Bonnet : The Romance of a Pirate 's Daughter , by 19th century author Frank Stockton , is a satirical novel relating the adventures of a fictional daughter of Bonnet named Kate . Portrayals of Bonnet also extend to video games , such as Sid Meier 's Pirates ! and Assassin 's Creed IV : Black Flag 
 A plaque commemorating Bonnet stands near Bonnet 's Creek in Southport , North Carolina , on the Cape Fear River . The Yacht Basin Provision Company also holds an annual Stede Bonnet Regatta near Southport , commemorating the infamous pirate 's dash for the ocean . 
 = Henry DeWolf Smyth = 
 Henry DeWolf " Harry " Smyth ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; May 1 , 1898 – September 11 , 1986 ) was an American physicist , diplomat , and bureaucrat . He played a number of key roles in the early development of nuclear energy , as a participant in the Manhattan Project , a member of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) , and U.S. ambassador to the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) . 
 Educated at Princeton University and the University of Cambridge , he was a faculty member in Princeton 's Department of Physics from 1924 to 1966 . He chaired the department from 1935 to 1949 . His early research was on the ionization of gases , but his interests shifted toward nuclear physics beginning in the mid @-@ 1930s . 
 During World War II he was a member of the National Defense Research Committee 's Uranium Section and a consultant on the Manhattan Project . He wrote the Manhattan Project 's first public official history , which came to be known as the Smyth Report . 
 On the AEC from 1949 to 1954 , Smyth argued unsuccessfully against a crash course to develop the hydrogen bomb and in favor of international control of nuclear weapons . He was the sole member of the commission to vote against stripping J. Robert Oppenheimer 's security clearance . As IAEA ambassador from 1961 to 1970 he played an important role in the realization of the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty . 
 He received the Atoms for Peace Award in 1968 and the U.S. State Department 's Distinguished Honor Award in 1970 . The American Nuclear Society 's award for " nuclear statesmanship " , of which he was the first recipient , is named in his honor . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Smyth was born May 1 , 1898 , in Clinton , New York , to Ruth Anne Phelps and Charles Henry Smyth , Jr . , a professor of geology at Hamilton College . Woodrow Wilson , then President of Princeton University , convinced Smyth <unk> to join the faculty at Princeton , and in 1905 the family moved to Princeton , New Jersey . 
 Henry DeWolf Smyth 's elder brother , Charles Phelps Smyth , attended the same primary and secondary schools as Henry . The elder brother also received undergraduate and master 's degrees from Princeton , but in chemistry . He earned his Ph.D. at Harvard University but like Henry and their father became a faculty member at Princeton . Both brothers served in the Chemical Warfare Service in World War I and on the Manhattan Project . 
 Henry DeWolf Smyth married Mary de <unk> on June 30 , 1936 . He was a member of the Democratic Party . 
 = = Education = = 
 In Princeton , Smyth attended Miss Fine 's School , which later became the Princeton Day School , and the Lawrenceville School . After graduating from Lawrenceville in 1914 , he entered Princeton University , where he received a classical education and graduated first in his class in 1918 . He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma Xi . 
 Smyth remained at Princeton to do graduate work ; he and Allen Shenstone were the only graduate students in the Department of Physics . Smyth earned a master 's degree and Ph.D. in physics from Princeton in 1920 and 1921 , respectively , studying under Karl Taylor Compton . The U.S. National Research Council awarded Smyth a fellowship , and he joined the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge . There he studied under Ernest Rutherford and earned a second Ph.D. in 1923 . At Cambridge he was affiliated with Caius College and formed a friendship with Pyotr Kapitsa , a Soviet physicist who would go on to win the Nobel Prize in Physics and work briefly on the Soviet atomic bomb project . 
 = = Early career = = 
 During World War I , Smyth worked in the Chemical Warfare Service and at the Aberdeen Proving Ground . After earning his second Ph.D. , he returned to Princeton for the last year of his NRC fellowship . During his early years on the Princeton faculty he lived in the Graduate College west of the main campus . He was appointed an instructor in 1924 , an assistant professor in 1925 , an associate professor in 1929 , and a full professor in 1936 . In 1935 he became chairman of the Department of Physics , a position he held until 1949 . During 1931 – 32 he was a Guggenheim Fellow at the University of Göttingen , where he studied the spectra of triatomic molecules , particularly carbon dioxide , with James Franck . 
 Smyth 's early research was in spectroscopy , focusing on ionization of gases by impact with electrons as a means to study the gases ' critical energy levels . He published his first research article , on the radiating potentials of nitrogen gas , in 1919 ; this became the basis of his first dissertation . In a 1922 article , he described a method for determining the ionization energy of a molecule using anode rays and demonstrated the method on mercury vapor . In the following year he used this same method to study nitrogen . He also published on the ionization of hydrogen , carbon dioxide , nitrous oxide , nitrogen dioxide , water vapor , sulfur dioxide , and carbon disulfide . As Robert H. Dicke , Val Logsdon Fitch , and <unk> Sherr wrote in 1989 , " By 1935 his 30 published papers established him as a leading experimentalist " in the field . In 1929 Kenneth Bainbridge completed his Ph.D. dissertation at Princeton working under Smyth , using anode rays to search for element 87 . 
 In the mid @-@ 1930s , Smyth began to shift his interest to nuclear physics , inspired by James Chadwick 's discovery of the neutron , John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton splitting the atom , and Ernest Lawrence 's invention of the cyclotron . Three of his last research articles concerned detection of triatomic hydrogen and helium @-@ 3 . His appointment as department chair forced him to devote more time to administrative work , at the expense of research . As department chair , he had two cyclotrons built at Princeton , one in 1935 and the other in 1946 . 
 He was a member of the subcommittee on physics of the National Research Council from 1928 to 1935 . In 1936 Smyth responded to media criticism of basic science research as " useless " by suggesting that seemingly useless research could turn out to be very useful later . 
 = = World War II = = 
 During World War II , Smyth was involved in helping the United States build the atomic bomb . From 1941 – 43 he was a member of the National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) ' s Uranium Section charged with producing fissile material for the bomb . Smyth proposed the electromagnetic methods that were used to enrich the first large U @-@ 235 samples for the project . He also oversaw a nuclear fission @-@ related project for the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) . During 1943 – 45 he was a consultant to the Manhattan Project , which built and tested the weapon , and associate director of the University of Chicago 's Metallurgical Laboratory , which contributed to the Manhattan Project . At the Metallurgical Laboratory he headed research on heavy water . He remained chairman of Princeton 's physics department throughout the war , and the attendant obligations forced him to participate less actively in the project 's later stages . 
 In August 1944 General Leslie Groves , director of the Manhattan Project , appointed Smyth to the Postwar Policy Committee , which was charged with proposing government policy for research and development of atomic energy after the war was over . The committee recommended that a national commission modeled on the OSRD fund and oversee continued production and fundamental research in government laboratories , universities , and the private sector . 
 = = = Smyth Report = = = 
 Smyth advocated within the NDRC for a comprehensive report to be released to the public following the weapon 's first use . Vannevar Bush , who as civilian director of the OSRD oversaw the NDRC , agreed , and selected Smyth to write the report following the recommendation of NDRC chairman James Bryant Conant . Groves granted Smyth unlimited access , waiving his usual security @-@ minded insistence on compartmentalization . Smyth wrote what became known as the Smyth Report in his office in Princeton 's Palmer Laboratory , which later became the Frist Campus Center . 
 The report was first released to the press on August 12 , 1945 , days after the attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki . The Government Printing Office could not print enough copies to meet demand , so Smyth persuaded the director of the Princeton University Press to print more . By the end of the Press 's 1946 fiscal year it had printed 103 @,@ 000 copies . Smyth held the copyright to the work to prevent others from claiming it , but he permitted widespread reproduction , essentially releasing it into the public domain . He later reported that " my financial balance from the Smyth Report is minus two dollars , the copyright fee . " 
 In the report , Smyth called it " a semi @-@ technical report which it is hoped men of science in this country can use to help their fellow citizens in reaching wise decisions " in the new Atomic Age . At the urging of his superiors , he removed several discussions of the bomb 's moral implications and its creators ' unease . Rebecca Press Schwartz argues that Smyth 's academic background and his report 's security @-@ driven focus on physics at the expense of engineering caused the Smyth Report to promote a public perception of the Manhattan Project as primarily an achievement of physicists . 
 = = Postwar = = 
 Following the war , Smyth returned full @-@ time to his duties at Princeton . He continued to chair the Physics Department and was named the Joseph Henry Professor of Physics in 1946 . During this time he spoke and wrote regularly about nuclear energy and science policy and worked to expand the physics department . 
 In early 1949 , physicist Robert Bacher stepped down from the Atomic Energy Commission . He and AEC Chairman David Lilienthal wanted a physicist to replace Bacher , and they ultimately recommended Smyth for the position . President Harry Truman nominated Smyth to the AEC later that year , prompting Smyth resign as Physics Department chairman . ( His old colleague Allen Shenstone took up the post . ) Smyth was the commission 's only scientist . He spent his first weeks in the position attending hearings of the U.S. Congress 's Joint Committee on Atomic Energy . Led by Senator Bourke Hickenlooper , the hearings inquired into a small amount of uranium that was alleged to be unaccounted for in AEC labs . Smyth later condemned the hearings as grounded in misconceptions about the work of nuclear scientists . 
 Following the Soviet Union 's successful nuclear test in August 1949 , the U.S. was considering a crash course to develop a hydrogen bomb . The AEC 's nine @-@ member General Advisory Committee , chaired by J. Robert Oppenheimer , recommended unanimously against such a course , and Smyth was one of three of the five AEC commissioners to agree . Smyth urged Truman to endorse international control of nuclear weapons , but Truman decided instead to authorize a hydrogen bomb program . In his autobiography , Smyth 's Princeton colleague John Archibald Wheeler recalled that Smyth recruited him to the Ivy Mike hydrogen bomb project and expressed support for the project in response to the Soviet test . 
 In 1953 Smyth and John A. Hall served as principal advisors to President Dwight Eisenhower in preparing his Atoms for Peace speech to the United Nations . The IAEA traces its origins to this speech . 
 In 1954 the AEC was considering rescinding Oppenheimer 's security clearance on suspicion that he was a Communist . Smyth was still the only scientist on the commission . Despite his personal dislike of Oppenheimer and pressure from the commission 's new chairman , Lewis Strauss , Smyth was the sole commissioner to vote against stripping Oppenheimer 's clearance on June 29 , 1954 . Smyth resigned from the AEC on September 30 of that year out of frustration with Strauss . <unk> Oppenheimer in 1967 , Smyth said of Oppenheimer 's treatment , " Such a wrong can never be righted ; such a blot on our history never erased .... We regret that his great work for his country was repaid so shabbily " . 
 Smyth returned to Princeton and served on several high @-@ level administrative committees . This work included advising on the construction of a particle accelerator built jointly with the University of Pennsylvania and overseeing Project Matterhorn , which became the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory . He chaired the committee that chose Robert F. Goheen to succeed Harold W. Dodds as President of Princeton . He also served as a consultant on nuclear power to Congress , the AEC , and private industry . He retired from Princeton in 1966 . 
 Smyth was a fellow of the American Physical Society and served as its Vice President in 1956 and its President in 1957 . He was elected to the American Philosophical Society in 1947 and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1956 . He was a member of the Council on Foreign Relations . 
 = = IAEA representative = = 
 President John F. Kennedy appointed Smyth as the representative of the United States to the IAEA , a position with the rank of Ambassador . Smyth assumed the position on June 13 , 1961 , following confirmation by the U.S. Senate . Smyth shared the organization 's stated goal of developing nuclear technology for peaceful purposes . He helped develop what Glenn Seaborg later called " an unprecedented atmosphere of rapport " at the IAEA and played a crucial role in the adoption of the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty in 1970 . He retired from the IAEA on August 31 , 1970 . 
 In September 1961 , Harlan Cleveland , then Assistant Secretary of State for International Organization Affairs , appointed Smyth to chair a committee to review U.S. policy toward the IAEA . The committee 's report affirmed the importance of civilian uses of nuclear energy . In 1962 Cleveland again tapped Smyth , this time as an adviser to the State Department on the IAEA . In this position Smyth advocated for a transfer of national nuclear safeguards to the IAEA . 
 In December 1965 , Smyth was elected Chairman of the Board of the Universities Research Association . During Smyth 's tenure , the URA signed a contract with the U.S. government to construct and operate the National Accelerator Laboratory , which later became known as Fermilab . Construction began , and research programs were planned . Smyth stepped down as chairman in 1970 but remained on the board . He also served on the board of Associated Universities , Inc . , which operated the Brookhaven National Laboratory and National Radio Astronomy Observatory . 
 Smyth received the Atoms for Peace Award in 1968 ( with <unk> Eklund and Abdus Salam ) and the State Department 's Distinguished Honor Award in 1970 . In 1972 he became the first recipient of an award for nuclear statesmanship given jointly by the American Nuclear Society and the Nuclear Energy Institute . By 1974 , when the award was next given , it had been named the Henry DeWolf Smyth Nuclear Statesman Award . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 After retiring from the IAEA , Smyth remained active . On the 40th anniversary of the Trinity test in 1985 , he denounced President Ronald Reagan 's Strategic Defense Initiative and called for joint arms reductions between the United States and the Soviet Union . He died September 11 , 1986 , in Princeton . The cause was cardiac arrest , though he had long battled cancer . 
 Smyth endowed a chair in the Physics Department in his will . The sitting Henry DeWolf Smyth Professor of Physics is Suzanne <unk> . 
 = Sebaceous gland = 
 Sebaceous glands are microscopic exocrine glands in the skin that secrete an oily or waxy matter , called sebum , to lubricate and waterproof the skin and hair of mammals . In humans , they occur in the greatest number on the face and scalp , but also on all parts of the skin except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . The type of secretion of the sebaceous glands is referred to as holocrine . 
 In the eyelids , meibomian glands , also called tarsal glands , are a type of sebaceous gland that secrete a special type of sebum into tears . Fordyce spots are ectopic ( misplaced ) sebaceous glands found usually on the lips , gums and inner cheeks . <unk> glands surround the female nipples . <unk> glands also known as Tyson 's glands are found in the genitals of both sexes of mice and rats . 
 Several related medical conditions involve sebum — including acne , sebaceous cysts , hyperplasia , and sebaceous adenoma . These are usually attributable to overactive sebaceous glands , which produce excess sebum . 
 = = Structure = = 
 = = = Location = = = 
 The sebaceous glands are found throughout all areas of the skin except the palms of the hands and soles of the feet . There are two types of sebaceous gland , those connected to hair follicles , in pilosebaceous units , and those that exist independently . 
 Sebaceous glands are found in hair @-@ covered areas , where they are connected to hair follicles . One or more glands may surround each hair follicle , and the glands themselves are surrounded by arrector pili muscles . The glands have an acinar structure ( like a many @-@ lobed berry ) , in which multiple glands branch off a central duct . The glands deposit sebum on the hairs , and bring it to the skin surface along the hair shaft . The structure consisting of hair , hair follicle , arrector pili muscles , and sebaceous gland is an epidermal invagination known as a pilosebaceous unit . 
 Sebaceous glands are also found in hairless areas ( glabrous skin ) of the eyelids , nose , penis , labia minora , the inner mucosal membrane of the cheek , and nipples . Some sebaceous glands have unique names . Sebaceous glands on the lip and mucosa of the cheek are known as Fordyce spots , and glands on the eyelids are known as meibomian glands . Sebaceous glands of the breast are also known as Montgomery 's glands . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Sebaceous glands are first visible from the 13th to the 16th week of fetal development , as <unk> off hair follicles . Sebaceous glands develop from the same tissue that gives rise to the epidermis of the skin . <unk> of the signalling factors Wnt , Myc and SHH all increase the likelihood of sebaceous gland presence . 
 The sebaceous glands of a human fetus secrete a substance called vernix <unk> , a waxy , translucent white substance coating the skin of newborns . After birth , activity of the glands decreases until there is almost no activity during ages 2 – 6 years , and then increases to a peak of activity during puberty , due to heightened levels of androgens . 
 = = Function = = 
 Sebaceous glands secrete the oily , waxy substance called sebum ( Latin : fat , tallow ) that is made of triglycerides , wax esters , squalene , and metabolites of fat @-@ producing cells . Sebum waterproofs and lubricates the skin and hair of mammals . Sebaceous secretions in conjunction with apocrine glands also play an important thermoregulatory role . In hot conditions , the secretions <unk> the sweat produced by the <unk> glands and this produces a sheet of sweat that is not readily lost in drops of sweat . This is of importance in delaying dehydration . In colder conditions , the nature of sebum becomes more lipid and in coating the hair and skin , rain is effectively repelled . 
 Sebum is produced in a holocrine process , in which cells within the sebaceous gland rupture and disintegrate as they release the sebum and the cell remnants are secreted together with the sebum . The cells are constantly replaced by mitosis at the base of the duct . 
 = = = Sebum = = = 
 Sebum , secreted by the sebaceous gland in humans , is primarily composed of triglycerides ( ~ 41 % ) , wax esters ( ~ 26 % ) , squalene ( ~ 12 % ) , and free fatty acids ( ~ 16 % ) . The composition of sebum varies across species . Wax esters and squalene are unique to sebum and not produced as final products anywhere else in the body . <unk> acid is a sebum fatty acid that is unique to humans , and is implicated in the development of acne . Sebum is odorless , but its breakdown by bacteria can produce strong odors . 
 Sex steroids are known to affect the rate of sebum secretion ; androgens such as testosterone have been shown to stimulate secretion , and estrogens have been shown to inhibit secretion . <unk> acts as the primary androgen in the prostate and in hair follicles . 
 = = = Immune function and nutrition = = = 
 Sebaceous glands are part of the body 's integumentary system and serve to protect the body against germs . Sebaceous glands secrete acids that form the acid mantle . This is a very fine , slightly acidic film on the surface of the skin that acts as a barrier to bacteria , viruses , and other potential contaminants that might penetrate the skin . The pH of the skin is between 4 @.@ 5 and 6 @.@ 2 , and this acidity helps to neutralise the primarily alkaline nature of contaminants . 
 Sebaceous lipids make an important contribution in maintaining the integrity of the skin barrier , and express both pro @-@ inflammatory and anti @-@ inflammatory properties . Sebum may act as a delivery system for antioxidants , antimicrobial lipids , pheromones , and hydration of the stratum corneum . The insoluble fatty acids contained within sebum have broad antimicrobial activity . Additionally , sebaceous gland secretion provides vitamin E to the upper layers of facial skin . 
 = = = Unique sebaceous glands = = = 
 During the last three months of fetal development , the sebaceous glands of the fetus produce vernix <unk> , a waxy white substance that coats the skin to protect it from amniotic fluid . 
 The <unk> glands are in the areola that surrounds the nipple in the female breast . These glands secrete an oily fluid that lubricates the nipple , and also secrete volatile compounds that are thought to serve as an olfactory stimulus for the newborn . During pregnancy and lactation these glands , also called Montgomery 's glands , become enlarged . 
 <unk> glands , in the eyelids , secrete a form of sebum called <unk> onto the eye , that slows the evaporation of tears . It also serves to create an airtight seal when the eyes are closed and its lipid quality also prevents the eyelids from sticking together . The meibomian glands are also known as tarsal glands , <unk> glands and palpebral glands . They attach directly to the follicles of the eyelashes , which are arranged vertically within the tarsal plates of the eyelids . 
 Fordyce spots , or Fordyce granules , are ectopic sebaceous glands found on the genitals and oral mucosa . They show themselves as yellowish @-@ white <unk> ( <unk> ) . 
 <unk> is partly composed of sebum produced by glands in the ear canal . These secretions are viscous and have a high lipid content , which provides good lubrication . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 Sebaceous glands are involved in skin problems such as acne and keratosis pilaris . In the skin pores , sebum and keratin can create a hyperkeratotic plug called a comedo . 
 = = = Acne = = = 
 Acne is a very common problem , particularly during puberty in teenagers , and is thought to relate to an increased production of sebum due to hormonal factors . The increased production of sebum can lead to a blockage of the sebaceous gland duct . This can cause a comedo , ( commonly called a blackhead or a whitehead ) , which can lead to infection , particularly by the bacteria Propionibacterium acnes . This can inflame the comedones , which then change into the characteristic acne lesions . <unk> generally occur on the areas with more sebaceous glands , particularly the face , shoulders , upper chest and back . <unk> may be ' black ' or ' white ' depending on whether the entire pilosebaceous unit , or just the sebaceous duct , is blocked . Sebaceous filaments — innocuous build @-@ ups of sebum — are often mistaken for whiteheads . 
 There are many treatments available for acne from reducing sugars in the diet , to medications that include antibiotics , benzoyl peroxide , retinoids and hormonal treatments . Retinoids reduce the amount of sebum produced by the sebaceous glands . Should the usual treatments fail , the presence of the Demodex mite could be looked for as the possible cause . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Other conditions that involve the sebaceous glands include : 
 <unk> refers to overactive sebaceous glands , a cause of oily skin or hair . 
 Sebaceous hyperplasia , referring to excessive proliferation of the cells within the glands , and visible macroscopically as small papules on the skin , particularly on the forehead , nose and cheeks . 
 <unk> dermatitis , a chronic , usually mild form of dermatitis effected by changes in the sebaceous glands . In newborn infants <unk> dermatitis can occur as cradle cap . 
 <unk> @-@ like psoriasis ( also known as " <unk> , " and " <unk> " ) is a skin condition characterized by psoriasis with an overlapping seborrheic dermatitis . 
 Sebaceous adenoma , a benign slow @-@ growing tumour — which may , however , in rare cases be a precursor to a cancer syndrome known as Muir @-@ Torre syndrome . 
 Sebaceous carcinoma , an uncommon and aggressive cutaneous tumour . 
 Sebaceous cyst is a term used to refer to both an epidermoid cyst and a <unk> cyst , though neither of these contain sebum , only keratin and do not originate in the sebaceous gland and so are not true sebaceous cysts . A true sebaceous cyst is relatively rare and is known as a <unk> . 
 <unk> rosacea is a cutaneous condition characterized by an overgrowth of sebaceous glands . 
 = = History = = 
 The word sebaceous , meaning " consisting of sebum " , was first termed in 1728 and comes from the Latin for tallow . Sebaceous glands have been documented since at least 1746 by Jean Astruc , who defined them as " ... the glands which separate the fat . " He describes them in the oral cavity , on the head , eyelids and ears , as " universally " acknowledged . , viii Astruc describes them being blocked by " small animals " that are " implanted " in the excretory ducts , and attributes their presence in the oral cavity to <unk> ulcers , noting " these glands naturally [ secrete ] a viscous humour , which puts on various colours and consistencies ... in its natural state is very mild , <unk> , and intended to wet and lubricate the mouth " In The Principles of Physiology 1834 , A. Combe noted that the glands were not present in the palms of the hands or soles of the feet . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 The preputial glands of mice and rats are large modified sebaceous glands that produce pheromones used for territorial marking . These and the scent glands in the flanks of hamsters have a similar composition to human sebaceous glands , are androgen responsive , and have been used as a basis for study . 
 Sebaceous <unk> is an autoimmune disease that affects sebaceous glands . It is mainly known to occur in dogs , particularly <unk> and <unk> , where it is thought to be generally autosomal recessively inherited . It has also been described in cats , and one report describes this condition in a rabbit . In these animals , it causes hair loss , though the nature and distribution of the hair loss differs greatly . 
 = = Additional images = = 
 = Nansen 's Fram expedition = 
 Nansen 's Fram expedition was an 1893 – 1896 attempt by the Norwegian explorer Fridtjof Nansen to reach the geographical North Pole by harnessing the natural east – west current of the Arctic Ocean . In the face of much discouragement from other polar explorers , Nansen took his ship Fram to the New Siberian Islands in the eastern Arctic Ocean , froze her into the pack ice , and waited for the drift to carry her towards the pole . Impatient with the slow speed and erratic character of the drift , after 18 months Nansen and a chosen companion , Hjalmar Johansen , left the ship with a team of dogs and sledges and made for the pole . They did not reach it , but they achieved a record Farthest North latitude of 86 ° 13 @.@ 6 ′ N before a long retreat over ice and water to reach safety in Franz Josef Land . Meanwhile , Fram continued to drift westward , finally emerging in the North Atlantic Ocean . 
 The idea for the expedition had arisen after items from the American vessel Jeannette , which had sunk off the north coast of Siberia in 1881 , were discovered three years later off the south @-@ west coast of Greenland . The wreckage had obviously been carried across the polar ocean , perhaps across the pole itself . Based on this and other debris recovered from the Greenland coast , the meteorologist Henrik Mohn developed a theory of transpolar drift , which led Nansen to believe that a specially designed ship could be frozen in the pack ice and follow the same track as the Jeannette wreckage , thus reaching the vicinity of the pole . 
 Nansen supervised the construction of a vessel with a rounded hull and other features designed to withstand prolonged pressure from ice . The ship was rarely threatened during her long imprisonment , and emerged unscathed after three years . The scientific observations carried out during this period contributed significantly to the new discipline of oceanography , which subsequently became the main focus of Nansen 's scientific work . Fram 's drift and Nansen 's sledge journey proved conclusively that there were no significant land masses between the Eurasian continents and the North Pole , and confirmed the general character of the north polar region as a deep , ice @-@ covered sea . Although Nansen retired from exploration after this expedition , the methods of travel and survival he developed with Johansen influenced all the polar expeditions , north and south , which followed in the subsequent three decades . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 1879 the Jeannette , an ex @-@ Royal Navy gunboat converted by the US Navy for Arctic exploration , and commanded by George Washington De Long , entered the pack ice north of the Bering Strait . She remained ice @-@ bound for nearly two years , drifting to the area of the New Siberian Islands , before being crushed and sunk on 13 June 1881 . Her crew escaped in boats and made for the Siberian coast ; most , including De Long , subsequently perished either during the boat journey or in the wastelands of the Lena River delta . Three years later , relics from the Jeannette appeared on the opposite side of the world , in the vicinity of <unk> on the southwest coast of Greenland . These items , frozen into the drifting ice , included clothing bearing crew members ' names and documents signed by De Long ; they were indisputably genuine . 
 In a lecture given in 1884 to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters Dr. Henrik Mohn , one of the founders of modern meteorology , argued that the finding of the Jeannette relics indicated the existence of an ocean current flowing from east to west across the entire Arctic ocean . The Danish governor of <unk> , writing of the find , surmised that an expedition frozen into the Siberian sea might , if its ship were to prove strong enough , cross the polar ocean and land in South Greenland . These theories were read with interest by the 23 @-@ year @-@ old Fridtjof Nansen , then working as a curator at the Bergen Museum while completing his doctoral studies . Nansen was already captivated by the frozen north ; two years earlier he had experienced a four @-@ month voyage on the sealer Viking , which had included three weeks trapped in drifting ice . An expert skier , Nansen was making plans to lead the first crossing of the Greenland icecap , an objective delayed by the demands of his academic studies , but triumphantly achieved in 1888 – 89 . Through these years Nansen remembered the east – west Arctic drift theory and its inherent possibilities for further polar exploration , and shortly after his return from Greenland he was ready to announce his plans . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 In February 1890 Nansen addressed a meeting of the Norwegian Geographical Society in Oslo ( then called Christiania ) . After drawing attention to the failures of the many expeditions which had approached the North Pole from the west , he considered the implications of the discovery of the Jeannette items , along with further finds of driftwood and other debris from Siberia or Alaska that had been identified along the Greenland coast . " Putting all this together , " Nansen said , " we are driven to the conclusion that a current flows ... from the Siberian Arctic Sea to the east coast of Greenland , " probably passing across the Pole . It seemed that the obvious thing to do was " to make our way into the current on that side of the Pole where it flows northward , and by its help to penetrate into those regions which all who have hitherto worked against [ the current ] have sought in vain to reach . " 
 Nansen 's plan required a small , strong and manoeuvrable ship , powered by sail and an engine , capable of carrying fuel and provisions for twelve men for five years . The vessel would follow Jeannette 's route to the New Siberian Islands , and in the approximate position of Jeannette 's sinking , when ice conditions were right " we shall plough our way in amongst the ice as far as we can . " The ship would then drift with the ice towards the pole and eventually reach the sea between Greenland and Spitsbergen . Should the ship founder , a possibility which Nansen thought very unlikely , the party would camp on a floe and allow itself to be carried towards safety . Nansen observed : " If the Jeannette Expedition had had sufficient provisions , and had remained on the ice @-@ floe on which the relics were found , the result would doubtless have been very different from what it was . " 
 When Nansen 's plans became public knowledge The New York Times was enthusiastic , deeming it " highly probable that there is a comparatively short and direct route across the Arctic Ocean by way of the North Pole , and that nature herself has supplied a means of communication across it . " However , most experienced polar hands were dismissive . The American explorer Adolphus Greely called it " an illogical scheme of self @-@ destruction " ; his assistant , Lieutenant David Brainerd , called it " one of the most ill @-@ advised schemes ever embarked on " , and predicted that it would end in disaster . Sir Allen Young , a veteran of the searches for Sir John Franklin 's lost expedition , did not believe that a ship could be built to withstand the crushing pressure of the ice : " If there is no swell the ice must go through her , whatever material she is made of . " Sir Joseph Hooker , who had sailed south with James Clark Ross in 1839 – 43 , was of the same opinion , and thought the risks were not worth taking . However , the equally experienced Sir Leopold McClintock called Nansen 's project " the most adventurous programme ever brought under the notice of the Royal Geographical Society " . The Swedish philanthropist Oscar Dickson , who had financed Baron Nordenskiöld 's conquest of the North @-@ East Passage in 1878 – 79 , was sufficiently impressed to offer to meet Nansen 's costs . With Norwegian nationalism on the rise , however , this gesture from their union partner Sweden provoked hostility in the Norwegian press ; Nansen decided to rely solely on Norwegian support , and declined Dickson 's proposal . 
 = = = Finance = = = 
 Nansen 's original estimate for the total cost of the expedition was NOK 300 @,@ 000 . After giving a passionate speech before the Parliament of Norway ( the Storting ) , Nansen was awarded a grant of NOK 200 @,@ 000 ; the balance was raised from private contributions which included 20 @,@ 000 kroner from King Oscar II of Norway and Sweden . The Royal Geographical Society in London gave £ 300 ( about NOK 6 @,@ 000 ) . Unfortunately , Nansen had underestimated the financing required — the ship alone would cost more than the total at his disposal . A renewed plea to the Storting produced a further NOK 80 @,@ 000 , and a national appeal raised the grand total to NOK 445 @,@ 000 . According to Nansen 's own account , he made up the remaining deficiency from his own resources . His biographer Roland Huntford records that the final deficit of NOK 12 @,@ 000 was cleared by two wealthy supporters , Axel Heiberg and an English expatriate , Charles Dick . 
 = = = Ship = = = 
 To design and build his ship Nansen chose Colin Archer , Norway 's leading shipbuilder and naval architect . Archer was well known for a particular hull design that combined seaworthiness with a shallow draught , and had pioneered the design of " double @-@ ended " craft in which the conventional stern was replaced by a point , increasing manoeuvrability . Nansen records that Archer made " plan after plan of the projected ship ; one model after another was prepared and abandoned " . Finally , agreement was reached on a design , and on 9 June 1891 the two men signed the contract . 
 Nansen wanted the ship in one year ; he was eager to get away before anyone else could adopt his ideas and forestall him . The ship 's most significant external feature was the roundness of the hull , designed so that there was nothing upon which the ice could get a grip . Bow , stern and keel were rounded off , and the sides smoothed so that , in Nansen 's words , the vessel would " slip like an eel out of the embraces of the ice " . To give exceptional strength the hull was sheathed in South American <unk> , the hardest timber available . The three layers of wood forming the hull provided a combined thickness of between 24 and 28 inches ( 60 – 70 cm ) , increasing to around 48 inches ( 1 @.@ 25 metres ) at the bow , which was further protected by a protruding iron stem . Added strength was provided by crossbeams and braces throughout the length of the hull . 
 The ship was rigged as a three @-@ masted schooner , with a total sail area of 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) . Its auxiliary engine of 220 horse @-@ power was capable of speeds up to 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 mph ) . However , speed and sailing qualities were secondary to the requirement of providing a safe and warm stronghold for Nansen and his crew during a drift that might extend for several years , so particular attention was paid to the insulation of the living quarters . At around 400 gross register tonnage , the ship was considerably larger than Nansen had first anticipated , with an overall length of 128 feet ( 39 m ) and a breadth of 36 feet ( 11 m ) , a ratio of just over three to one , giving her an unusually stubby appearance . This odd shape was explained by Archer : " A ship that is built with exclusive regard to its suitability for [ Nansen 's ] object must differ essentially from any known vessel . " On 6 October 1892 , at Archer 's yard at Larvik , the ship was launched by Nansen 's wife Eva after a brief ceremony . The ship was named Fram , meaning " Forward " . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 For his Greenland expedition of 1888 – 89 Nansen had departed from the traditional dependence on large @-@ scale personnel , ships and backup , relying instead on a small well @-@ trained group . Using the same principle for the Fram voyage , Nansen chose a party of just twelve from the thousands of applications that poured in from all over the world . One applicant was the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Roald Amundsen , future conqueror of the South Pole , whose mother stopped him from going . The English explorer Frederick Jackson applied , but Nansen wanted only Norwegians , so Jackson organised his own expedition to Franz Josef Land . 
 To captain the ship and act as the expedition 's second @-@ in @-@ command Nansen chose Otto Sverdrup , an experienced sailor who had taken part in the Greenland crossing . Theodore Jacobsen , who had experience in the Arctic as skipper of a sloop , signed on as Fram 's mate , and a young naval lieutenant , Sigurd Scott Hansen , took charge of meteorological and magnetic observations . The ship 's doctor , and the expedition 's botanist , was Henrik Blessing , who graduated in medicine just before Fram 's sailing date . Hjalmar Johansen , an army reserve lieutenant and dog @-@ driving expert , was so determined to join the expedition that he agreed to sign on as stoker , the only position by then available . Likewise Adolf <unk> , with 20 years ' experience at sea as mate and captain , took the post of cook on the Fram voyage . Ivar <unk> was an official at Gaustad psychiatric hospital , but his technical abilities as a handyman and mechanic impressed Nansen . The oldest man in the party , at 40 , was the chief engineer , Anton Amundsen ( no relation of Roald ) . The second engineer , Lars Pettersen , kept his Swedish nationality from Nansen , and although it was soon discovered by his shipmates , he was allowed to remain with the expedition , the only non @-@ Norwegian in the party . The remaining crew members were Peter Henriksen , Bernhard Nordahl and Bernt <unk> , the last – named joining the expedition in Tromsø at very short notice . 
 = = Voyage = = 
 = = = Journey to the ice = = = 
 Before the start of the voyage Nansen decided to deviate from his original plan : instead of following Jeannette 's route to the New Siberian Islands by way of the Bering Strait , he would make a shorter journey , taking Nordenskiöld 's North @-@ East Passage along the northern coast of Siberia . Fram left Christiania on 24 June 1893 , seen on her way by a cannon salute from the fort and the cheers of thousands of well @-@ wishers . This was the first of a series of farewells as Fram sailed round the coast and moved northward , reaching Bergen on 1 July ( where there was a great banquet in Nansen 's honour ) , Trondheim on 5 July and Tromsø , north of the Arctic Circle , a week later . The last Norwegian port of call was Vardø , where Fram arrived on 18 July . After the final provisions were taken on board , Nansen , Sverdrup , Hansen and Blessing spent their last hours ashore in a sauna , being beaten with birch twigs by two young girls . 
 The first leg of the journey eastward took Fram across the Barents Sea towards Novaya Zemlya and then to the North Russian settlement of <unk> where the first batch of dogs was brought on board . On 3 August Fram weighed anchor and moved cautiously eastward , entering the Kara Sea the next day . Few ships had sailed the Kara Sea before , and charts were incomplete . On 18 August , in the area of the Yenisei River delta , an uncharted island was discovered and named Sverdrup Island after Fram 's commander . Fram was now moving towards the <unk> Peninsula and Cape Chelyuskin , the most northerly point of the Eurasian continental mass . Heavy ice slowed the expedition 's progress , and at the end of August it was held up for four days while the ship 's boiler was repaired and cleaned . The crew also experienced the dead water phenomenon , where a ship 's forward progress is impeded by energy dissipation caused by a layer of fresh water lying on top of heavier salt water . On 9 September a wide stretch of ice @-@ free water opened up , and next day Fram rounded Cape Chelyuskin — the second ship to do so , after Nordenskiöld 's Vega in 1878 — and entered the Laptev Sea . 
 After being prevented by ice from reaching the mouth of the <unk> River , where a second batch of dogs was waiting to be picked up , Fram moved north and east towards the New Siberian Islands . Nansen 's hope was to find open water to 80 ° north latitude and then enter the pack ; however , on 20 September ice was sighted just south of 78 ° . Fram followed the line of the ice before stopping in a small bay beyond the 78 ° mark . On 28 September it became evident that the ice would not break up , and the dogs were moved from the ship to kennels on the ice . On 5 October the rudder was raised to a position of safety and the ship , in Scott Hansen 's words , was " well and truly moored for the winter " . The position was 78 ° 49 ′ N , 132 ° 53 ′ E. 
 = = = Drift ( first phase ) = = = 
 On 9 October Fram had her first experience of ice pressure . Archer 's design was quickly vindicated as the ship rose and fell , the ice being unable to grip the hull . Otherwise the first weeks in the ice were disappointing , as the unpredictable drift moved Fram in gyratory fashion , sometimes north , sometimes south ; by 19 November , after six weeks , Fram was south of the latitude at which she had entered the ice . 
 After the sun disappeared on 25 October the ship was lit by electric lamps from a wind @-@ powered generator . The crew settled down to a comfortable routine in which boredom and inactivity were the main enemies . Men began to irritate each other , and fights sometimes broke out . Nansen attempted to start a newspaper , but the project soon fizzled out through lack of interest . Small tasks were undertaken and scientific observations maintained , but there was no urgency . Nansen expressed his frustration in his journal : " I feel I must break through this <unk> , this inertia , and find some outlet for my energies . " And later : " Can 't something happen ? Could not a hurricane come and tear up this ice ? " Only after the turn of the year , in January 1894 , did the northerly direction become generally settled . The 80 ° mark was finally passed on 22 March . 
 Based on the uncertain direction and slow speed of the drift , Nansen calculated that it might take the ship five years to reach the pole . In January 1894 he had first discussed with both Henriksen and Johansen the possibility of making a sledge journey with the dogs , from Fram to the pole , though they made no immediate plans . Nansen 's first attempts to master dog @-@ driving were an embarrassing failure , but he persevered and gradually achieved better results . He also discovered that the normal cross @-@ country skiing speed was the same as that of dogs pulling loaded sledges . Men could travel under their own power , skiing , rather than riding on the sledge , and loads could be correspondingly increased . This , according to biographer and historian Roland Huntford , amounted to a revolution in polar travel methods . 
 On 19 May , two days after the celebrations for Norway 's National Day , Fram passed 81 ° , indicating that the ship 's northerly speed was slowly increasing , though it was still barely a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) a day . With a growing conviction that a sledge journey might be necessary to reach the pole , in September Nansen decreed that everyone would practice skiing for two hours a day . On 16 November he revealed his intention to the crew : he and one companion would leave the ship and start for the pole when the 83 ° mark was passed . After reaching the pole the pair would make for Franz Josef Land , and then cross to Spitsbergen where they hoped to find a ship to take them home . Three days later Nansen asked Hjalmar Johansen , the most experienced dog @-@ driver among the crew , to join him on the polar journey . 
 The crew spent the following months preparing for the forthcoming dash for the pole . They built sledges that would facilitate fast travel over rough terrain and constructed kayaks on the Inuit model , for use during the expected water crossings . There were endless trials of special clothing and other gear . Violent and prolonged tremors began to shake the ship on 3 January 1895 , and two days later the crew disembarked , expecting the ship to be crushed . Instead the pressure lessened , and the crew went back on board and resumed preparations for Nansen 's journey . After the excitement it was noted that Fram had drifted beyond Greely 's Farthest North record of 83 ° 24 , and on 8 January was at 83 ° 34 ′ N. 
 = = = March for the Pole = = = 
 On 17 February 1895 Nansen began a farewell letter to his wife , Eva , writing that should he come to grief " you will know that your image will be the last I see . " He was also reading everything he could about Franz Josef Land , his intended destination after the pole . The archipelago had been discovered in 1873 by Julius Payer , and was incompletely mapped . It was , however , apparently the home of countless bears and seals , and Nansen saw it as an excellent food source on his return journey to civilization . 
 On 14 March , with the ship at 84 ° 4 ′ N , the pair finally began their polar march . This was their third attempt to leave the ship ; on 26 February and again on the 28th , damage to sledges had forced them to return after travelling short distances . After these mishaps Nansen thoroughly overhauled his equipment , minimised the travelling stores , recalculated weights and reduced the convoy to three sledges , before giving the order to start again . A supporting party accompanied the pair and shared the first night 's camp . The next day , Nansen and Johansen skied on alone . 
 The pair initially traveled mainly over flat snowfields . Nansen had allowed 50 days to cover the 356 nautical miles ( 660 km ; 410 mi ) to the pole , requiring an average daily journey of seven nautical miles ( 13 km ; 8 @.@ 1 mi ) . On 22 March a sextant observation showed that the pair had travelled 65 nautical miles ( 120 km ; 75 mi ) towards the pole at a daily average of over nine nautical miles ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) . This had been achieved despite very low temperatures , typically around − 40 ° F ( − 40 ° C ) , and small scale mishaps including the loss of the <unk> that recorded mileage . However , as the surfaces became uneven and made skiing more difficult , their speeds slowed . A sextant reading on 29 March of 85 ° 56 ′ N indicated that a week 's travel had brought them 47 nautical miles ( 87 km ; 54 mi ) nearer to the pole , but also showed that their average daily distances were falling . More worryingly , a theodolite reading that day suggested that they were at only 85 ° 15 ′ N , and they had no means of knowing which of the readings was correct . They realised that they were fighting a southerly drift , and that distances travelled did not necessarily equate to northerly progression . Johansen 's diary indicated his failing spirits : " My fingers are all destroyed . All mittens are frozen stiff ... It is becoming worse and worse ... God knows what will happen to us " . 
 On 3 April , after days of difficult travel , Nansen privately began to wonder if the pole might , after all , be out of reach . Unless the surface improved , their food would not last them to the pole and then on to Franz Josef Land . The next day they calculated their position at a disappointing 86 ° 3 ' ; Nansen confided in his diary that : " I have become more and more convinced we ought to turn before time . " After making camp on 7 April Nansen scouted ahead on snowshoes looking for a path forward , but saw only " a veritable chaos of <unk> stretching as far as the horizon " . He decided that they would go no further north , and would head for Cape Fligely in Franz Josef Land . Nansen recorded the latitude of their final northerly camp as 86 ° 13 @.@ 6 ′ N , almost three degrees ( 169 @.@ 6 nautical miles , or 314 km ) beyond Greely 's previous Farthest North mark . 
 = = = Retreat to Franz Josef Land = = = 
 The change of direction to south @-@ west provided much better travelling conditions , probably because the course to Franz Josef Land was broadly parallel to the lines of disturbance in the ice instead of perpendicular to them . Progress was swift : " If this goes on , " Nansen recorded on 13 April , " the return journey will be quicker than I thought . " However , the same diary entry records a mishap that day : both men 's watches had stopped . Although Nansen 's journal comment is mild , the incident was potentially disastrous . Without the correct time they could not calculate their longitude and thus maintain the correct course to Franz Josef Land . They restarted the watches based on Nansen 's guesswork that their longitude was 86 ° E , but the pair were no longer certain where they were . If they were farther west than Nansen 's assumption , they might miss Franz Josef Land altogether , and head for the open Atlantic . 
 The direction of the drift became northerly , hampering the pair 's progress . By 18 April , after 11 days ' travel from Farthest North , they had only made 40 nautical miles ( 74 km ; 46 mi ) to the south . They now travelled over much more broken terrain with wide open leads of water . On about 20 April they were cheered by the sight of a large piece of driftwood stuck in a floe , the first object from the outside world they had seen since Fram had entered the ice . Johansen carved his and Nansen 's initials on it , with the latitude and date . A day or two later they spotted the tracks of an Arctic fox , the first trace of a living creature other than their dogs since leaving Fram . Other tracks soon appeared , and Nansen began to believe that land might be near . 
 The latitude calculated on 9 May , 84 ° 3 ′ N , was disappointing — Nansen had hoped they were farther south . However , as May progressed they began to see bear tracks , and by the end of the month seals , gulls and whales were plentiful . By Nansen 's calculations , they had reached 82 ° 21 ′ N on 31 May , placing them only 50 nautical miles ( 93 km ; 58 mi ) from Cape Fligely at the northern extremity of Franz Josef Land , if his longitude estimate was accurate . In the warmer weather the ice began to break up , making travel more difficult . Since 24 April dogs had been killed at regular intervals to feed the others , and by the beginning of June only seven of the original 28 remained . On 21 June the pair jettisoned all surplus equipment and supplies , planning to travel light and live off the now plentiful supplies of seal and birds . After a day 's travel in this manner they decided to rest on a floe , waterproof the kayaks and build up their own strength for the next stage of their journey . They remained camped on the floe for a whole month . 
 On 23 July , the day after leaving the camp , Nansen had the first indisputable glimpse of land . He wrote : " At last the marvel has come to pass — land , land , and after we had almost given up our belief in it ! " In the succeeding days the pair struggled towards this land , which seemingly grew no nearer , although by the end of July they could hear the distant sound of breaking surf . On 4 August they survived a polar bear attack ; two days later they reached the edge of the ice , and only water lay between them and the land . On 6 August they shot the last two Samoyed dogs , converted the kayaks into a catamaran by lashing sledges and skis across them , and raised a sail . 
 Nansen called this first land " <unk> " ( " White Island " ) . After making camp on an ice foot they ascended a slope and looked about them . It was apparent that they were in an archipelago , but what they could see bore no relation to their incomplete map of Franz Josef Land . They could only continue south in the hopes of finding a geographical feature they could pinpoint with certainty . On 16 August Nansen tentatively identified a headland as Cape Felder , marked on Payer 's maps as on the western coast of Franz Josef Land . Nansen 's objective was now to reach a hut and supplies that had been left by an earlier expedition at a location known as <unk> Harbour , at the southern end of the islands . However , contrary winds and loose ice made further progress in the kayak hazardous , and on 28 August Nansen decided that , with another polar winter drawing near , they should stay where they were and await the following spring . 
 = = = To Cape Flora = = = 
 As the base for their winter quarters , Nansen and Johansen found a beach in a sheltered cove on what is now called Jackson Island , with a plentiful supply of stones and moss for building materials . They excavated a hole three feet deep , raised walls around it using loose rocks and stones , and stretched walrus skins over the top to form a roof . A chimney was improvised using snow and walrus bones . This shelter , which they called " The Hole " , was finally ready on 28 September , and was to be their home for the next eight months . Their situation was uncomfortable , but not life @-@ threatening ; there was a plentiful supply of bear , walrus and seal to stock up their larder . The chief enemy was boredom ; to pass time they were reduced to reading Nansen 's sailing almanac and navigation tables by the light of their blubber lamp , and then reading them again . 
 At Christmas the pair celebrated with chocolate and bread from their sledging rations . On New Year 's Eve Johansen recorded that Nansen finally adopted the familiar form of address , having until then maintained formalities ( " Mr Johansen " , " Professor Nansen " ) throughout the journey . In the New Year they fashioned themselves simple outer clothing — smocks and trousers — from a discarded sleeping bag , in readiness for the resumption of their journey when the weather grew warmer . On 19 May 1896 , after weeks of preparation , they were ready . Nansen left a note in the hut to inform a possible finder : " We are going south west , along the land , to cross over to Spitsbergen " . 
 For more than two weeks they followed the shoreline southwards . Nothing they saw seemed to fit with their rudimentary map of Franz Josef Land , and Nansen speculated whether they were in uncharted lands between Franz Josef Land and Spitsbergen . On 4 June a change in conditions allowed them to launch their kayaks for the first time since leaving their winter quarters . A week later , Nansen was forced to dive into the icy waters to rescue the kayaks which , still tied together , had drifted away after being carelessly moored . He managed to reach the craft and , with a last effort , to haul himself aboard . Despite his frozen condition he shot and retrieved two guillemots as he paddled the catamaran back . 
 On 13 June walruses attacked and damaged the kayaks , causing another stop for repairs . On 17 June , as they prepared to leave again , Nansen thought he heard a dog bark and went to investigate . He then heard voices , and a few minutes later encountered a human being . It was Frederick Jackson , who had organised his own expedition to Franz Josef Land after being rejected by Nansen , and had based his headquarters at Cape Flora on Northbrook Island , the southernmost island of the archipelago . Jackson 's own account records that his first reaction to this sudden meeting was to assume the figure to be a shipwrecked sailor , perhaps from the expedition 's supply ship Windward which was due to call that summer . As he approached , Jackson saw " a tall man , wearing a soft felt hat , loosely made , voluminous clothes and long shaggy hair and beard , all reeking with black grease " . After a moment 's awkward hesitation , Jackson recognised his visitor : " You are Nansen , aren 't you ? " , and received the reply " Yes , I am Nansen . " 
 Johansen was rescued , and the pair taken to the base at Cape Flora , where they posed for photographs ( in one instance re @-@ enacting the Jackson – Nansen meeting ) before taking baths and haircuts . Both men seemed in good health , despite their ordeal ; Nansen had put on 21 pounds ( 9 @.@ 5 kg ) in weight since the start of the expedition , and Johansen 13 pounds ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) . In honour of his rescuer , Nansen named the island where he had wintered " Frederick Jackson Island " . For the next six weeks Nansen had little to do but await the arrival of Windward , worrying that he might have to spend the winter at Cape Flora , and sometimes regretting that he and Johansen had not pressed on to Spitsbergen . Johansen noted in his journal that Nansen had changed from the overbearing personality of the Fram days , and was now subdued and polite , adamant that he would never undertake such a journey again . On 26 July Windward finally arrived ; on 7 August , with Nansen and Johansen aboard , she sailed south and on 13 August reached Vardø . A batch of telegrams was sent , informing the world of Nansen 's safe return . 
 = = = Drift ( second phase ) = = = 
 Before his departure from Fram , Nansen appointed Sverdrup as leader of the rest of the expedition , with orders to continue with the drift towards the Atlantic Ocean unless circumstances warranted abandoning the ship and marching for land . Nansen left precise instructions about keeping up the scientific work , especially the ocean depth soundings and the tests for the thickness of the ice . He concluded : " May we meet in Norway , whether it be on board of this vessel or without her . " 
 Sverdrup 's main task now was to keep his crew busy . He ordered a thorough spring cleaning , and set a party to chip away some of the surrounding ice which was threatening to destabilise the ship . Although there was no immediate danger to Fram , Sverdrup oversaw the repair and overhaul of sledges , and the organisation of provisions should it after all be necessary to abandon ship and march to land . With the arrival of warmer weather as the 1895 summer approached , Sverdrup resumed daily ski practice . Amid these activities a full programme of meteorological , magnetic and oceanographic activities continued under Scott Hansen ; Fram had become a moving oceanographic , meteorological and biological laboratory . 
 As the drift proceeded the ocean became deeper ; soundings gave successive depths of 6 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) , 9 @,@ 000 feet ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) and 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) , a progression which indicated that no undiscovered land mass was nearby . On 15 November 1895 Fram reached 85 ° 55 ′ N , only 19 nautical miles ( 35 km ; 22 mi ) below Nansen 's Farthest North mark . From this point on , the drift was generally to the south and west , although progress was for long periods almost imperceptible . Inactivity and boredom led to increased drinking ; Scott Hansen recorded that Christmas and New Year passed " with the usual hot punch and consequent hangover " , and wrote that he was " getting more and more disgusted with drunkenness " . By mid @-@ March 1896 , the position was 84 ° 25 ′ N , 12 ° 50 ′ E , placing the ship north of Spitsbergen . On 13 June a lead opened and , for the first time in nearly three years , Fram became a living ship . It was a further two months , on 13 August 1896 , before she found open water and , with a blast from her cannon , left the ice behind . She had emerged from the ice just north and west of Spitsbergen , close to Nansen 's original prediction , proving him right and his detractors wrong . Later that same day a ship was sighted — <unk> , a seal hunter from Tromsø . Sverdrup rowed across for news , and learned that nothing had been heard from Nansen . Fram called briefly at Spitsbergen , where the Swedish explorer @-@ engineer Salomon Andrée was preparing for the balloon flight that he hoped would take him to the pole . After a short time ashore , Sverdrup and his crew began the trip south to Norway . 
 = = Reunion and reception = = 
 In the course of the expedition , rumours circulated that Nansen had reached the North Pole , the first as early as April 1894 , in the French Newspaper Le Figaro . In September 1895 Eva Nansen was informed that messages signed by Nansen had been discovered , " sent from the North Pole " . In February 1896 The New York Times ran a dispatch from Irkutsk , in Siberia , from a supposed Nansen agent , claiming that Nansen had reached the pole and found land there . Charles P. Daly of the American Geographical Society called this " startling news " and , " if true , the most important discovery that has been made in ages . " 
 Experts were sceptical of all such reports , and Nansen 's arrival in Vardø quickly put paid to them . In Vardø , he and Johansen were greeted by Professor Mohn , the originator of the polar drift theory , who was in the town by chance . The pair waited for the weekly mail steamer to take them south , and on 18 August arrived in Hammerfest to an enthusiastic reception . The lack of news about Fram was preying on Nansen 's mind ; however , on 20 August he received news that Sverdrup had brought the ship to the tiny port of <unk> , south of Hammerfest , and was now continuing with her to Tromsø . The next day , Nansen and Johansen sailed into Tromsø and joined their comrades in an emotional reunion . 
 After days of celebration and recuperation the ship left Tromsø on 26 August . The voyage south was a triumphal procession , with receptions at every port . Fram finally arrived in Christiania on 9 September , escorted into the harbour by a squadron of warships and welcomed by thousands — the largest crowds the city had ever seen , according to Huntford . Nansen and his crew were received by King Oscar ; on the way to the reception they passed through a triumphal arch formed by 200 gymnasts . Nansen and his family stayed at the palace as special guests of the king ; by contrast , Johansen remained in the background , largely overlooked , and writing that " reality , after all , is not so wonderful as it appeared to me in the midst of our hard life . " 
 = = Assessment and aftermath = = 
 The traditional approach to Arctic exploration had relied on large @-@ scale forces , with a presumption that European techniques could be successfully transplanted into the hostile polar climate . Over the years this strategy had brought little success , and had led to heavy losses of men and ships . By contrast , Nansen 's method of using small , trained crews , and harnessing Inuit and Sami expertise in his methods of travel , had ensured that his expedition was completed without a single casualty or major mishap . 
 Although it did not achieve the objective of reaching the North Pole , the expedition made major geographical and scientific discoveries . Sir Clements Markham , president of Britain 's Royal Geographical Society , declared that the expedition had resolved " the whole problem of Arctic geography " . It was now established that the North Pole was located not on land , nor on a permanent ice sheet , but on shifting , unpredictable pack ice . The Arctic Ocean was a deep basin , with no significant land masses north of the Eurasian continent — any hidden expanse of land would have blocked the free movement of ice . Nansen had proved the polar drift theory ; furthermore , he had noted the presence of a Coriolis force driving the ice to the right of the wind direction , due to the effect of the Earth 's rotation . This discovery would be developed by Nansen 's pupil , <unk> Walfrid Ekman , who later became the leading oceanographer of his time . From its programme of scientific observation the expedition provided the first detailed oceanographic information from the area ; in due course the scientific data gathered during the Fram voyage would run to six published volumes . 
 Throughout the expedition Nansen continued to experiment with equipment and techniques , altering the designs of skis and sledges and investigating types of clothing , tents and cooking apparatus , thereby revolutionising methods of Arctic travel . In the era of polar exploration which followed his return , explorers routinely sought Nansen 's advice as to methods and equipment — although sometimes they chose not to follow it , usually to their cost . According to Huntford , the South Pole heroes Amundsen , Scott , and Ernest Shackleton were all Nansen 's acolytes . 
 Nansen 's status was never seriously challenged , although he did not escape criticism . American explorer Robert Peary wondered why Nansen had not returned to the ship when his polar dash was thwarted after a mere three weeks away . " Was he ashamed to go back after so short an absence , or had there been a row ... or did he go off for Franz Josef Land from sensational motives or business reasons ? " Adolphus Greely , who had initially dismissed the entire expedition as infeasible , admitted that he had been proved wrong but nevertheless drew attention to " the single blemish " — Nansen 's decision to leave his comrades hundreds of miles from land . " It passes comprehension " , Greely wrote , " how Nansen could have thus deviated from the most sacred duty devolving on the commander of a naval expedition . " Nansen 's reputation nevertheless survived ; a hundred years after the expedition the British explorer Wally Herbert called the Fram voyage " one of the most inspiring examples of courageous intelligence in the history of exploration " . 
 The Fram voyage was Nansen 's final expedition . He was appointed to a research professorship at the University of Christiania in 1897 , and to a full professorship in oceanography in 1908 . He became independently wealthy as a result of the publication of his expedition account ; in his later career he served the newly independent kingdom of Norway in different capacities , and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for 1922 , in recognition of his work on behalf of refugees . Hjalmar Johansen never settled back into normal life . After years of drifting , debt and drunkenness he was given the opportunity , through Nansen 's influence , to join Roald Amundsen 's South Pole expedition in 1910 . Johansen quarreled violently with Amundsen at the expedition 's base camp , and was omitted from the South Pole party . He committed suicide within a year of his return from Antarctica . Otto Sverdrup remained as captain of Fram , and in 1898 took the ship , with a new crew , to the Canadian Arctic for four years ' exploration . In later years Sverdrup helped to raise funds that enabled the ship to be restored and housed in a permanent museum . He died in November 1930 , seven months after Nansen 's death . 
 Nansen 's farthest north record lasted for just over five years . On 24 April 1900 a party of three from an Italian expedition led by the Duke of the Abruzzi reached 86 ° 34 ′ N , having left Franz Josef Land with dogs and sledges on 11 March . The party barely made it back ; one of their support groups of three men vanished entirely . 
 = The Monkey Suit = 
 " The Monkey Suit " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the seventeenth season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 2006 . In the episode , Ned Flanders is shocked after seeing a new display at the museum about evolution . Together with Reverend Lovejoy , he spreads the religious belief of creationism in Springfield , and at a later town meeting , teaching evolution is made illegal . As a result , Lisa decides to hold secret classes for people interested in evolution . However , she is quickly arrested and a trial against her is initiated . 
 J. Stewart Burns wrote " The Monkey Suit " , for which he received inspiration from the 1925 Scopes Monkey Trial . The episode features a few references to this legal case , as well as several references to popular culture . Many analysts have commented on the episode 's treatment of the creation – evolution controversy , a dispute about the origin of humanity between those who support a creationist view based upon their religious beliefs , versus those who accept evolution , as supported by scientific evidence . 
 Critics have given the episode generally positive reviews , praising it for its satire of the creation – evolution debate . " The Monkey Suit " has won an award from the Independent Investigations Group ( IIG ) for being " one of those rare shows in the media that encourage science , critical thinking , and ridicule those shows that peddle pseudoscience and superstition . " In 2007 , a scene from the episode was highlighted in the scientific journal Nature . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the last day of summer vacation , Lisa brings the family to the museum to see a weaving exhibit as her summer activity , but they quickly discover that it has been canceled and replaced by a " History of Weapons " exhibit . Faced with an incredibly long line , Homer notices Ned Flanders and his children at the front of the line and cuts in front of them . Others start taking advantage of Ned ’ s kindness as well , until the Flanders family is stuck at the end . At the end of the day , they are still waiting , and are denied entry , as it is closing time for the weapons exhibit . They therefore decide to check out the evolution exhibit next door . Ned is horrified to hear that humans evolved from apes and that the creation account in the Genesis is characterized as a myth . Covering his children 's eyes , he drags them out of the exhibit . 
 Ned meets up with the church council to suggest promotion of creationism . The next day , he and Reverend Lovejoy blackmail Principal Skinner into introducing creationism in the school . Lisa is perturbed by this , and at a town meeting asks everyone to make a choice between creationism and Darwinism , as there is only one truth . The townspeople vote for creationism , much to her chagrin , and the act of teaching or learning Darwinism and evolution is made illegal . Lisa therefore decides to start holding secret classes for people interested in evolution . However , just as the first lesson is about to begin , she is arrested by Chief Wiggum . She asks why she 's being arrested when there are far worse crimes out there , and embarrassed he tells her they only have enough manpower to enforce the last three laws passed , even stating that it 's the worst law system there is . Lisa is brought to trial , which is dubbed Lisa Simpson v. God . Representing her is Clarice Drummond , a despised American Civil Liberties Union ( ACLU ) lawyer , while on God ’ s ( i.e. , Ned 's ) side is Wallace Brady , a beloved , overweight , southern lawyer . The trial does not go smoothly for Lisa , as Professor Frink ( called by Clarice ) gives ambiguous answers regarding God 's existence , while a creationist scientist says that evolution cannot be real , as there is no proof of a " missing link " ( depicted in a picture as a savage hominid , holding a rock over his head ) . 
 With Lisa now facing a long jail sentence , Marge decides to help her out . She starts reading Charles Darwin 's The Origin of Species and becomes addicted to it . When the trial resumes , Marge tells Lisa that she now knows a way that she can help her . While Ned is being cross @-@ examined by Clarice , Marge gives Homer a cold beer . Homer , ecstatic at getting a beer , tries to open it unsuccessfully . The more he tries , the more primitive he gets , hooting and banging the bottle on the bench , disrupting the trial . Finally , Ned loses his cool and refers to Homer as a " big monkey @-@ faced gorilla . " Clarice then asks Ned to compare the picture of the " missing link " and Homer shaking the beer over his head , and asks if he truthfully believes Homer cannot be related to apes . Ned cannot and concedes victory to Lisa . Lisa kindly tells Ned that she fully respects religious beliefs , but she just does not think it is proper for the church to dominate the school , the same way that Mr. Flanders and Reverend Lovejoy do not want scientists taking over the church . Ned agrees and offers to take Lisa and his kids out for ice cream . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Monkey Suit " was written by J. Stewart Burns and directed by Raymond S. Persi as part of the seventeenth season of The Simpsons ( 2005 – 2006 ) . Burns received inspiration for the episode from the Scopes Monkey Trial , a 1925 legal case in which high school science teacher John Scopes was accused of violating Tennessee 's Butler Act which made teaching evolution unlawful . Clarice Drummond , the ACLU lawyer who represents Lisa , is a reference to the ACLU lawyer Clarence Darrow who defended Scopes , while Wallace Brady is a reference to William Jennings Bryan , an attorney in the Scopes Monkey Trial . American actor Larry Hagman guest starred in the episode as Wallace Brady , while American actress Melanie Griffith played herself as the narrator of an audio tour at the museum . Burns did research for " The Monkey Suit " by reading Richard Dawkins ' book The Selfish Gene and watching Inherit the Wind ( a film based on the Scopes Monkey Trial ) . He also visited a natural history museum . 
 The opening of the episode , in which Bart rushes to do everything he planned on doing during summer vacation , was originally written and animated for the season fourteen episode " I 'm Spelling as Fast as I Can " ( 2003 ) but was cut . This episode came in short , and to fill in time , the sequence was added . Burns has said commented the episode " ended up being incredibly short because when you do an episode where there 's really just one good side of an argument [ creation vs. evolution ] , you don 't fill out as much time as you need to . " The opening sequence features a large number of allusions to popular culture , including references to The Natural ( 1984 film ) , Happy Days ( television sitcom ) , and Men in Black ( 1997 film ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 " The Monkey Suit " is an episode that tackles the creation – evolution controversy , and according to Theresa Sanders in her book Approaching Eden : Adam and Eve in Popular Culture , " skewered <unk> legislation . " The authors of the book Chronology of the Evolution @-@ Creationism Controversy commented that the episode " caricatures creationism as an intellectual joke . " Burns has cited the episode as " a nice example of The Simpsons really taking one clear side " . However , as pointed out by Sanders , it " should be pointed out that though the Simpsons episode clearly sides with Darwin , evolutionists come in for criticism as well . When Ned and his sons go into the museum 's Hall of Man , one of the exhibits they see in support of evolution is a collection of dinosaur bones with the title ' <unk> Fossil Records . ' The cartoon 's inclusion of the sign can be interpreted as mocking the pretension that science knows all and may not be questioned . " Sanders cited another scene as an example of this ; at the trial , Drummond asks Professor Frink if " this theory of evolution necessarily mean that there is no God ? " , to which he replies , " No , of course not . It just says that God is an impotent nothing from nowhere with less power than the undersecretary of Agriculture . " Sanders wrote that " His arrogance is clear , and equally clear is the show 's satirical presentation of science 's hubris . " 
 Ted Gournelos analyzed " The Monkey Suit " in his 2009 book Popular Culture and the Future of Politics : Cultural Studies and the Tao of South Park , writing : " More than anything , the episode is used to critique the demonization of evolutionary theory by religious propaganda , by an instructional video used in the school ( that shows a drunken Charles Darwin passionately kissing Satan ) as well as by the prosecuting attorney . This allows for a somewhat leftist discussion of the issue , but ultimately is unable to address the rise of Christian fundamentalism in the United States [ ... ] " . Gournelos noted that the episode focuses on the old Scopes Monkey Trial and does not address contemporary creation – evolution debates , adding : " Interestingly , The Simpsons continues to place creationism at a higher popular plain than evolution , as the jury and trial audience are obviously biased towards the creationists ( who , unlike in contemporary cases , are the prosecutors rather than the plaintiffs ) . " Gournelos concluded that the episode " pokes gentle fun at media rhetoric and the questioning of evolutionary theory [ ... ] , but is unable or unwilling to address the rise of intelligent design or contemporary court battles ( in Pennsylvania [ see Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District ] , Kansas [ see Kansas evolution hearings ] , and elsewhere ) that might encourage debate in its audience . " 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 14 , 2006 . During this broadcast , it was seen by approximately 8 @.@ 41 millions viewers , finishing forty @-@ sixth in the ratings for the week of May 8 – 14 , 2006 . Since airing , the episode has received generally positive reviews from critics . In a retrospective that was published on the twentieth anniversary of The Simpsons in 2010 , writers for BBC News selected " The Monkey Suit " as one of the show 's " 10 classic episodes " , one they said demonstrated that " the writers still have fire in their bellies . " TV Squad critic Adam Finley wrote that " Last night 's episode had some good moments , but it did feel like they were treading upon somewhat familiar ground and not saying anything especially new , " referring to the fact the issue of science and religion has been dealt with before on the show , " most notably in the ' Lisa the Skeptic ' episode in which the supposed skeleton of a dead angel is found . " In 2007 , " The Monkey Suit " won an award from the Independent Investigations Group ( IIG ) for being " one of those rare shows in the media that encourage science , critical thinking , and ridicule those shows that peddle pseudoscience and superstition . " J. Stewart Burns , the writer of the episode , was present at the awards ceremony to accept the award . 
 While reviewing the seventeenth season of The Simpsons , Jesse Hassenger of PopMatters noted that he thought the show had declined in quality compared to its earlier years , and added that the stronger episodes in the later seasons are that ones that " satirize topical issues " , giving " The Monkey Suit " as an example . Similarly , Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram staff writer Robert Philpot commented that " Even in its weak seasons , this show has always been good for at least one belly laugh per episode . Not this year [ season seventeen ] . Aside from an installment that took on the evolution <unk> edge and a couple of other bits , the satirical edge has really dulled , making the announcement that it will have at least two more seasons a cause for concern rather than celebration . " In the July 26 , 2007 issue of Nature , the scientific journal 's editorial staff listed among " The Top Ten science moments in The Simpsons " the scene from the episode in which " Flanders is flabbergasted that the science museum 's exhibit on the origins of man both highlights evolution and makes light of creationism — and , to top it all , has a unisex bathroom . " 
 = Horse = 
 The horse ( Equus ferus caballus ) is one of two extant subspecies of Equus ferus . It is an odd @-@ toed ungulate mammal belonging to the taxonomic family Equidae . The horse has evolved over the past 45 to 55 million years from a small multi @-@ toed creature , <unk> , into the large , single @-@ toed animal of today . Humans began to domesticate horses around 4000 BC , and their domestication is believed to have been widespread by 3000 BC . Horses in the subspecies caballus are domesticated , although some domesticated populations live in the wild as feral horses . These feral populations are not true wild horses , as this term is used to describe horses that have never been domesticated , such as the endangered Przewalski 's horse , a separate subspecies , and the only remaining true wild horse . There is an extensive , specialized vocabulary used to describe equine @-@ related concepts , covering everything from anatomy to life stages , size , colors , markings , breeds , locomotion , and behavior . 
 Horses ' anatomy enables them to make use of speed to escape predators and they have a well @-@ developed sense of balance and a strong fight @-@ or @-@ flight response . Related to this need to flee from predators in the wild is an unusual trait : horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down . Female horses , called mares , carry their young for approximately 11 months , and a young horse , called a foal , can stand and run shortly following birth . Most domesticated horses begin training under saddle or in harness between the ages of two and four . They reach full adult development by age five , and have an average lifespan of between 25 and 30 years . 
 Horse breeds are loosely divided into three categories based on general temperament : spirited " hot bloods " with speed and endurance ; " cold bloods " , such as draft horses and some ponies , suitable for slow , heavy work ; and " warmbloods " , developed from crosses between hot bloods and cold bloods , often focusing on creating breeds for specific riding purposes , particularly in Europe . There are more than 300 breeds of horse in the world today , developed for many different uses . 
 Horses and humans interact in a wide variety of sport competitions and non @-@ competitive recreational pursuits , as well as in working activities such as police work , agriculture , entertainment , and therapy . Horses were historically used in warfare , from which a wide variety of riding and driving techniques developed , using many different styles of equipment and methods of control . Many products are derived from horses , including meat , milk , hide , hair , bone , and pharmaceuticals extracted from the urine of pregnant mares . Humans provide domesticated horses with food , water and shelter , as well as attention from specialists such as veterinarians and farriers . 
 = = Biology = = 
 Specific terms and specialized language are used to describe equine anatomy , different life stages , colors and breeds . 
 = = = Lifespan and life stages = = = 
 Depending on breed , management and environment , the modern domestic horse has a life expectancy of 25 to 30 years . Uncommonly , a few animals live into their 40s and , occasionally , beyond . The oldest verifiable record was " Old Billy " , a 19th @-@ century horse that lived to the age of 62 . In modern times , Sugar Puff , who had been listed in Guinness World Records as the world 's oldest living pony , died in 2007 at age 56 . 
 Regardless of a horse or pony 's actual birth date , for most competition purposes a year is added to its age each January 1 of each year in the Northern Hemisphere and each August 1 in the Southern Hemisphere . The exception is in endurance riding , where the minimum age to compete is based on the animal 's actual calendar age . 
 The following terminology is used to describe horses of various ages : 
 Colt : A male horse under the age of four . A common terminology error is to call any young horse a " colt " , when the term actually only refers to young male horses . 
 Filly : A female horse under the age of four . 
 Foal : A horse of either sex less than one year old . A nursing foal is sometimes called a suckling and a foal that has been weaned is called a weanling . Most domesticated foals are weaned at five to seven months of age , although foals can be weaned at four months with no adverse physical effects . 
 <unk> : A castrated male horse of any age . 
 Mare : A female horse four years old and older . 
 Stallion : A non @-@ castrated male horse four years old and older . The term " horse " is sometimes used colloquially to refer specifically to a stallion . 
 Yearling : A horse of either sex that is between one and two years old . 
 In horse racing , these definitions may differ : For example , in the British Isles , Thoroughbred horse racing defines colts and fillies as less than five years old . However , Australian Thoroughbred racing defines colts and fillies as less than four years old . 
 = = = Size and measurement = = = 
 The height of horses is usually measured at the highest point of the withers , where the neck meets the back . This point is used because it is a stable point of the anatomy , unlike the head or neck , which move up and down in relation to the body of the horse . 
 In English @-@ speaking countries , the height of horses is often stated in units of hands and inches : one hand is equal to 4 inches ( 101 @.@ 6 mm ) . The height is expressed as the number of full hands , followed by a point , then the number of additional inches , and ending with the abbreviation " h " or " <unk> " ( for " hands high " ) . Thus , a horse described as " 15 @.@ 2 h " is 15 hands plus 2 inches , for a total of 62 inches ( 157 @.@ 5 cm ) in height . 
 The size of horses varies by breed , but also is influenced by nutrition . Light riding horses usually range in height from 14 to 16 hands ( 56 to 64 inches , 142 to 163 cm ) and can weigh from 380 to 550 kilograms ( 840 to 1 @,@ 210 lb ) . Larger riding horses usually start at about 15 @.@ 2 hands ( 62 inches , 157 cm ) and often are as tall as 17 hands ( 68 inches , 173 cm ) , weighing from 500 to 600 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 to 1 @,@ 320 lb ) . Heavy or draft horses are usually at least 16 hands ( 64 inches , 163 cm ) high and can be as tall as 18 hands ( 72 inches , 183 cm ) high . They can weigh from about 700 to 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 540 to 2 @,@ 200 lb ) . 
 The largest horse in recorded history was probably a Shire horse named Mammoth , who was born in 1848 . He stood 21 @.@ 2 1 ⁄ 4 hands ( 86 @.@ 25 inches , 219 cm ) high and his peak weight was estimated at 1 @,@ 524 kilograms ( 3 @,@ 360 lb ) . The current record holder for the world 's smallest horse is Thumbelina , a fully mature miniature horse affected by dwarfism . She is 17 in ( 43 cm ) tall and weighs 57 lb ( 26 kg ) . 
 = = = = Ponies = = = = 
 Ponies are taxonomically the same animals as horses . The distinction between a horse and pony is commonly drawn on the basis of height , especially for competition purposes . However , height alone is not dispositive ; the difference between horses and ponies may also include aspects of phenotype , including conformation and temperament . 
 The traditional standard for height of a horse or a pony at maturity is 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 58 inches , 147 cm ) . An animal 14 @.@ 2 h or over is usually considered to be a horse and one less than 14 @.@ 2 h a pony , but there are many exceptions to the traditional standard . In Australia , ponies are considered to be those under 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) , For competition in the Western division of the United States Equestrian Federation , the cutoff is 14 @.@ 1 hands ( 57 inches , 145 cm ) The International Federation for Equestrian Sports , the world governing body for horse sport , uses metric measurements and defines a pony as being any horse measuring less than 148 centimetres ( 58 @.@ 27 in ) at the withers without shoes , which is just over 14 @.@ 2 h , and 149 centimetres ( 58 @.@ 66 in ) , or just over 14 @.@ 2 ½ h , with shoes . 
 Height is not the sole criterion for distinguishing horses from ponies . Breed registries for horses that typically produce individuals both under and over 14 @.@ 2 h consider all animals of that breed to be horses regardless of their height . Conversely , some pony breeds may have features in common with horses , and individual animals may occasionally mature at over 14 @.@ 2 h , but are still considered to be ponies . 
 Ponies often exhibit thicker manes , tails , and overall coat . They also have proportionally shorter legs , wider barrels , heavier bone , shorter and thicker necks , and short heads with broad foreheads . They may have calmer temperaments than horses and also a high level of intelligence that may or may not be used to cooperate with human handlers . Small size , by itself , is not an exclusive determinant . For example , the Shetland pony which averages 10 hands ( 40 inches , 102 cm ) , is considered a pony . Conversely , breeds such as the <unk> and other miniature horses , which can be no taller than 30 inches ( 76 cm ) , are classified by their registries as very small horses , not ponies . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Horses have 64 chromosomes . The horse genome was sequenced in 2007 . It contains 2 @.@ 7 billion DNA base pairs , which is larger than the dog genome , but smaller than the human genome or the bovine genome . The map is available to researchers . 
 = = = Colors and markings = = = 
 Horses exhibit a diverse array of coat colors and distinctive markings , described by a specialized vocabulary . Often , a horse is classified first by its coat color , before breed or sex . Horses of the same color may be distinguished from one another by white markings , which , along with various spotting patterns , are inherited separately from coat color . 
 Many genes that create horse coat colors and patterns have been identified . Current genetic tests can identify at least 13 different alleles influencing coat color , and research continues to discover new genes linked to specific traits . The basic coat colors of chestnut and black are determined by the gene controlled by the Melanocortin 1 receptor , also known as the " extension gene " or " red factor , " as its recessive form is " red " ( chestnut ) and its dominant form is black . Additional genes control suppression of black color to point coloration that results in a bay , spotting patterns such as pinto or leopard , dilution genes such as palomino or dun , as well as graying , and all the other factors that create the many possible coat colors found in horses . 
 Horses which have a white coat color are often mislabeled ; a horse that looks " white " is usually a middle @-@ aged or older gray . Grays are born a darker shade , get lighter as they age , but usually keep black skin underneath their white hair coat ( with the exception of pink skin under white markings ) . The only horses properly called white are born with a predominantly white hair coat and pink skin , a fairly rare occurrence . Different and unrelated genetic factors can produce white coat colors in horses , including several different alleles of dominant white and the sabino @-@ 1 gene . However , there are no " albino " horses , defined as having both pink skin and red eyes . 
 = = = Reproduction and development = = = 
 Gestation lasts approximately 340 days , with an average range 320 – 370 days , and usually results in one foal ; twins are rare . Horses are a precocial species , and foals are capable of standing and running within a short time following birth . Foals are usually born in the spring . The estrous cycle of a mare occurs roughly every 19 – 22 days and occurs from early spring into autumn . Most mares enter an anestrus period during the winter and thus do not cycle in this period . Foals are generally weaned from their mothers between four and six months of age . 
 Horses , particularly colts , sometimes are physically capable of reproduction at about 18 months , but domesticated horses are rarely allowed to breed before the age of three , especially females . Horses four years old are considered mature , although the skeleton normally continues to develop until the age of six ; maturation also depends on the horse 's size , breed , sex , and quality of care . Larger horses have larger bones ; therefore , not only do the bones take longer to form bone tissue , but the epiphyseal plates are larger and take longer to convert from cartilage to bone . These plates convert after the other parts of the bones , and are crucial to development . 
 Depending on maturity , breed , and work expected , horses are usually put under saddle and trained to be ridden between the ages of two and four . Although Thoroughbred race horses are put on the track as young as the age of two in some countries , horses specifically bred for sports such as dressage are generally not put under saddle until they are three or four years old , because their bones and muscles are not solidly developed . For endurance riding competition , horses are not deemed mature enough to compete until they are a full 60 calendar months ( five years ) old . 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 = = = = Skeletal system = = = = 
 The horse skeleton averages 205 bones . A significant difference between the horse skeleton and that of a human is the lack of a collarbone — the horse 's forelimbs are attached to the spinal column by a powerful set of muscles , tendons , and ligaments that attach the shoulder blade to the torso . The horse 's legs and hooves are also unique structures . Their leg bones are proportioned differently from those of a human . For example , the body part that is called a horse 's " knee " is actually made up of the carpal bones that correspond to the human wrist . Similarly , the hock contains bones equivalent to those in the human ankle and heel . The lower leg bones of a horse correspond to the bones of the human hand or foot , and the fetlock ( incorrectly called the " ankle " ) is actually the proximal sesamoid bones between the cannon bones ( a single equivalent to the human metacarpal or metatarsal bones ) and the proximal phalanges , located where one finds the " knuckles " of a human . A horse also has no muscles in its legs below the knees and hocks , only skin , hair , bone , tendons , ligaments , cartilage , and the assorted specialized tissues that make up the hoof . 
 = = = = Hooves = = = = 
 The critical importance of the feet and legs is summed up by the traditional adage , " no foot , no horse " . The horse hoof begins with the distal phalanges , the equivalent of the human fingertip or tip of the toe , surrounded by cartilage and other specialized , blood @-@ rich soft tissues such as the laminae . The exterior hoof wall and horn of the sole is made of keratin , the same material as a human fingernail . The end result is that a horse , weighing on average 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) , travels on the same bones as would a human on tiptoe . For the protection of the hoof under certain conditions , some horses have horseshoes placed on their feet by a professional farrier . The hoof continually grows , and in most domesticated horses needs to be trimmed ( and horseshoes reset , if used ) every five to eight weeks , though the hooves of horses in the wild wear down and regrow at a rate suitable for their terrain . 
 = = = = Teeth = = = = 
 Horses are adapted to grazing . In an adult horse , there are 12 incisors at the front of the mouth , adapted to biting off the grass or other vegetation . There are 24 teeth adapted for chewing , the premolars and molars , at the back of the mouth . Stallions and geldings have four additional teeth just behind the incisors , a type of canine teeth called " <unk> " . Some horses , both male and female , will also develop one to four very small vestigial teeth in front of the molars , known as " wolf " teeth , which are generally removed because they can interfere with the bit . There is an empty interdental space between the incisors and the molars where the bit rests directly on the gums , or " bars " of the horse 's mouth when the horse is bridled . 
 An estimate of a horse 's age can be made from looking at its teeth . The teeth continue to erupt throughout life and are worn down by grazing . Therefore , the incisors show changes as the horse ages ; they develop a distinct wear pattern , changes in tooth shape , and changes in the angle at which the chewing surfaces meet . This allows a very rough estimate of a horse 's age , although diet and veterinary care can also affect the rate of tooth wear . 
 = = = = Digestion = = = = 
 Horses are herbivores with a digestive system adapted to a forage diet of grasses and other plant material , consumed steadily throughout the day . Therefore , compared to humans , they have a relatively small stomach but very long intestines to facilitate a steady flow of nutrients . A 450 @-@ kilogram ( 990 lb ) horse will eat 7 to 11 kilograms ( 15 to 24 lb ) of food per day and , under normal use , drink 38 to 45 litres ( 8 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 9 imp gal ; 10 to 12 US gal ) of water . Horses are not ruminants , they have only one stomach , like humans , but unlike humans , they can utilize cellulose , a major component of grass . Horses are hindgut fermenters , Cellulose fermentation by symbiotic bacteria occurs in the cecum , or " water gut " , which food goes through before reaching the large intestine . Horses cannot vomit , so digestion problems can quickly cause colic , a leading cause of death . 
 = = = = Senses = = = = 
 The horses ' senses are based on their status as prey animals , where they must be aware of their surroundings at all times . They have the largest eyes of any land mammal , and are lateral @-@ eyed , meaning that their eyes are positioned on the sides of their heads . This means that horses have a range of vision of more than 350 ° , with approximately 65 ° of this being binocular vision and the remaining 285 ° monocular vision . Horses have excellent day and night vision , but they have two @-@ color , or dichromatic vision ; their color vision is somewhat like red @-@ green color blindness in humans , where certain colors , especially red and related colors , appear as a shade of green . 
 Their sense of smell , while much better than that of humans , is not quite as good as that of a dog . It is believed to play a key role in the social interactions of horses as well as detecting other key scents in the environment . Horses have two olfactory centers . The first system is in the nostrils and nasal cavity , which analyze a wide range of odors . The second , located under the nasal cavity , are the <unk> organs , also called Jacobson 's organs . These have a separate nerve pathway to the brain and appear to primarily analyze pheromones . 
 A horse 's hearing is good , and the pinna of each ear can rotate up to 180 ° , giving the potential for 360 ° hearing without having to move the head . Noise impacts the behavior of horses and certain kinds of noise may contribute to stress : A 2013 study in the UK indicated that stabled horses were calmest in a quiet setting , or if listening to country or classical music , but displayed signs of nervousness when listening to jazz or rock music . This study also recommended keeping music under a volume of 21 decibels . An Australian study found that stabled racehorses listening to talk radio had a higher rate of gastric ulcers than horses listening to music , and racehorses stabled where a radio was played had a higher overall rate of ulceration than horses stabled where there was no radio playing . 
 Horses have a great sense of balance , due partly to their ability to feel their footing and partly to highly developed proprioception — the unconscious sense of where the body and limbs are at all times . A horse 's sense of touch is well developed . The most sensitive areas are around the eyes , ears , and nose . Horses are able to sense contact as subtle as an insect landing anywhere on the body . 
 Horses have an advanced sense of taste , which allows them to sort through fodder and choose what they would most like to eat , and their prehensile lips can easily sort even small grains . Horses generally will not eat poisonous plants , however , there are exceptions ; horses will occasionally eat toxic amounts of poisonous plants even when there is adequate healthy food . 
 = = = Movement = = = 
 All horses move naturally with four basic gaits : the four @-@ beat walk , which averages 6 @.@ 4 kilometres per hour ( 4 @.@ 0 mph ) ; the two @-@ beat trot or jog at 13 to 19 kilometres per hour ( 8 @.@ 1 to 11 @.@ 8 mph ) ( faster for harness racing horses ) ; the canter or <unk> , a three @-@ beat gait that is 19 to 24 kilometres per hour ( 12 to 15 mph ) ; and the gallop . The gallop averages 40 to 48 kilometres per hour ( 25 to 30 mph ) , but the world record for a horse galloping over a short , sprint distance is 70 @.@ 76 kilometres per hour ( 43 @.@ 97 mph ) . Besides these basic gaits , some horses perform a two @-@ beat pace , instead of the trot . There also are several four @-@ beat " ambling " gaits that are approximately the speed of a trot or pace , though smoother to ride . These include the lateral rack , running walk , and tölt as well as the diagonal fox trot . <unk> gaits are often genetic in some breeds , known collectively as gaited horses . Often , gaited horses replace the trot with one of the ambling gaits . 
 = = = Behavior = = = 
 Horses are prey animals with a strong fight @-@ or @-@ flight response . Their first reaction to threat is to startle and usually flee , although they will stand their ground and defend themselves when flight is impossible or if their young are threatened . They also tend to be curious ; when startled , they will often hesitate an instant to ascertain the cause of their fright , and may not always flee from something that they perceive as non @-@ threatening . Most light horse riding breeds were developed for speed , agility , alertness and endurance ; natural qualities that extend from their wild ancestors . However , through selective breeding , some breeds of horses are quite docile , particularly certain draft horses . 
 Horses are herd animals , with a clear hierarchy of rank , led by a dominant individual , usually a mare . They are also social creatures that are able to form companionship attachments to their own species and to other animals , including humans . They communicate in various ways , including vocalizations such as <unk> or <unk> , mutual grooming , and body language . Many horses will become difficult to manage if they are isolated , but with training , horses can learn to accept a human as a companion , and thus be comfortable away from other horses . However , when confined with insufficient companionship , exercise , or stimulation , individuals may develop stable vices , an assortment of bad habits , mostly stereotypies of psychological origin , that include wood chewing , wall kicking , " weaving " ( rocking back and forth ) , and other problems . 
 = = = = Intelligence and learning = = = = 
 Studies have indicated that horses perform a number of cognitive tasks on a daily basis , meeting mental challenges that include food procurement and identification of individuals within a social system . They also have good spatial discrimination abilities . Studies have assessed equine intelligence in areas such as problem solving , speed of learning , and memory . Horses excel at simple learning , but also are able to use more advanced cognitive abilities that involve categorization and concept learning . They can learn using habituation , desensitization , classical conditioning , and operant conditioning , and positive and negative reinforcement . One study has indicated that horses can differentiate between " more or less " if the quantity involved is less than four . 
 Domesticated horses may face greater mental challenges than wild horses , because they live in artificial environments that prevent instinctive behavior whilst also learning tasks that are not natural . Horses are animals of habit that respond well to regimentation , and respond best when the same routines and techniques are used consistently . One trainer believes that " intelligent " horses are reflections of intelligent trainers who effectively use response conditioning techniques and positive reinforcement to train in the style that best fits with an individual animal 's natural inclinations . 
 = = = = Temperament = = = = 
 Horses are mammals , and as such are warm @-@ blooded , or endothermic creatures , as opposed to cold @-@ blooded , or poikilothermic animals . However , these words have developed a separate meaning in the context of equine terminology , used to describe temperament , not body temperature . For example , the " hot @-@ bloods " , such as many race horses , exhibit more sensitivity and energy , while the " cold @-@ bloods " , such as most draft breeds , are quieter and calmer . Sometimes " hot @-@ bloods " are classified as " light horses " or " riding horses " , with the " cold @-@ bloods " classified as " draft horses " or " work horses " . 
 " Hot blooded " breeds include " oriental horses " such as the Akhal @-@ Teke , Arabian horse , Barb and now @-@ extinct Turkoman horse , as well as the Thoroughbred , a breed developed in England from the older oriental breeds . Hot bloods tend to be spirited , bold , and learn quickly . They are bred for agility and speed . They tend to be physically refined — thin @-@ skinned , slim , and long @-@ legged . The original oriental breeds were brought to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa when European breeders wished to infuse these traits into racing and light cavalry horses . 
 Muscular , heavy draft horses are known as " cold bloods " , as they are bred not only for strength , but also to have the calm , patient temperament needed to pull a plow or a heavy carriage full of people . They are sometimes nicknamed " gentle giants " . Well @-@ known draft breeds include the Belgian and the Clydesdale . Some , like the Percheron , are lighter and livelier , developed to pull carriages or to plow large fields in drier climates . Others , such as the Shire , are slower and more powerful , bred to plow fields with heavy , clay @-@ based soils . The cold @-@ blooded group also includes some pony breeds . 
 " Warmblood " breeds , such as the Trakehner or Hanoverian , developed when European carriage and war horses were crossed with Arabians or Thoroughbreds , producing a riding horse with more refinement than a draft horse , but greater size and milder temperament than a lighter breed . Certain pony breeds with warmblood characteristics have been developed for smaller riders . Warmbloods are considered a " light horse " or " riding horse " . 
 Today , the term " Warmblood " refers to a specific subset of sport horse breeds that are used for competition in dressage and show jumping . Strictly speaking , the term " warm blood " refers to any cross between cold @-@ blooded and hot @-@ blooded breeds . Examples include breeds such as the Irish Draught or the Cleveland Bay . The term was once used to refer to breeds of light riding horse other than Thoroughbreds or Arabians , such as the Morgan horse . 
 = = = = Sleep patterns = = = = 
 Horses are able to sleep both standing up and lying down . In an adaptation from life in the wild , horses are able to enter light sleep by using a " stay apparatus " in their legs , allowing them to doze without collapsing . Horses sleep better when in groups because some animals will sleep while others stand guard to watch for predators . A horse kept alone will not sleep well because its instincts are to keep a constant eye out for danger . 
 Unlike humans , horses do not sleep in a solid , unbroken period of time , but take many short periods of rest . Horses spend four to fifteen hours a day in standing rest , and from a few minutes to several hours lying down . Total sleep time in a 24 @-@ hour period may range from several minutes to a couple of hours , mostly in short intervals of about 15 minutes each . The average sleep time of a domestic horse is said to be 2 @.@ 9 hours per day . 
 Horses must lie down to reach REM sleep . They only have to lie down for an hour or two every few days to meet their minimum REM sleep requirements . However , if a horse is never allowed to lie down , after several days it will become sleep @-@ deprived , and in rare cases may suddenly collapse as it involuntarily slips into REM sleep while still standing . This condition differs from narcolepsy , although horses may also suffer from that disorder . 
 = = Taxonomy and evolution = = 
 The horse adapted to survive in areas of wide @-@ open terrain with sparse vegetation , surviving in an ecosystem where other large grazing animals , especially ruminants , could not . Horses and other equids are odd @-@ toed ungulates of the order <unk> , a group of mammals that was dominant during the Tertiary period . In the past , this order contained 14 families , but only three — Equidae ( the horse and related species ) , the tapir , and the rhinoceros — have survived to the present day . 
 The earliest known member of the family Equidae was the <unk> , which lived between 45 and 55 million years ago , during the Eocene period . It had 4 toes on each front foot , and 3 toes on each back foot . The extra toe on the front feet soon disappeared with the <unk> , which lived 32 to 37 million years ago . Over time , the extra side toes shrank in size until they vanished . All that remains of them in modern horses is a set of small vestigial bones on the leg below the knee , known informally as splint bones . Their legs also lengthened as their toes disappeared until they were a <unk> animal capable of running at great speed . By about 5 million years ago , the modern Equus had evolved . <unk> teeth also evolved from browsing on soft , tropical plants to adapt to browsing of drier plant material , then to grazing of tougher plains grasses . Thus proto @-@ horses changed from leaf @-@ eating forest @-@ dwellers to grass @-@ eating inhabitants of semi @-@ arid regions worldwide , including the steppes of Eurasia and the Great Plains of North America . 
 By about 15 @,@ 000 years ago , Equus ferus was a widespread <unk> species . Horse bones from this time period , the late Pleistocene , are found in Europe , Eurasia , Beringia , and North America . Yet between 10 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 600 years ago , the horse became extinct in North America and rare elsewhere . The reasons for this extinction are not fully known , but one theory notes that extinction in North America paralleled human arrival . Another theory points to climate change , noting that approximately 12 @,@ 500 years ago , the grasses characteristic of a steppe ecosystem gave way to shrub tundra , which was covered with unpalatable plants . 
 = = = Wild species surviving into modern times = = = 
 A truly wild horse is a species or subspecies with no ancestors that were ever domesticated . Therefore , most " wild " horses today are actually feral horses , animals that escaped or were turned loose from domestic herds and the descendants of those animals . Only two never @-@ domesticated subspecies , the Tarpan and the Przewalski 's Horse , survived into recorded history and only the latter survives today . 
 The Przewalski 's horse ( Equus ferus przewalskii ) , named after the Russian explorer Nikolai Przhevalsky , is a rare Asian animal . It is also known as the Mongolian wild horse ; Mongolian people know it as the <unk> , and the Kyrgyz people call it a <unk> . The subspecies was presumed extinct in the wild between 1969 and 1992 , while a small breeding population survived in zoos around the world . In 1992 , it was reestablished in the wild due to the conservation efforts of numerous zoos . Today , a small wild breeding population exists in Mongolia . There are additional animals still maintained at zoos throughout the world . 
 The tarpan or European wild horse ( Equus ferus ferus ) was found in Europe and much of Asia . It survived into the historical era , but became extinct in 1909 , when the last captive died in a Russian zoo . Thus , the genetic line was lost . Attempts have been made to recreate the tarpan , which resulted in horses with outward physical similarities , but nonetheless descended from domesticated ancestors and not true wild horses . 
 Periodically , populations of horses in isolated areas are speculated to be relict populations of wild horses , but generally have been proven to be feral or domestic . For example , the <unk> horse of Tibet was proposed as such , but testing did not reveal genetic differences from domesticated horses . Similarly , the Sorraia of Portugal was proposed as a direct descendant of the Tarpan based on shared characteristics , but genetic studies have shown that the Sorraia is more closely related to other horse breeds and that the outward similarity is an unreliable measure of relatedness . 
 = = = Other modern equids = = = 
 Besides the horse , there are seven other species of genus Equus in the Equidae family . These are the ass or donkey , Equus asinus ; the mountain zebra , Equus zebra ; plains zebra , Equus quagga ; Grévy 's zebra , Equus grevyi ; the kiang , Equus kiang ; and the onager , Equus hemionus . 
 Horses can crossbreed with other members of their genus . The most common hybrid is the mule , a cross between a " jack " ( male donkey ) and a mare . A related hybrid , a <unk> , is a cross between a stallion and a jenny ( female donkey ) . Other hybrids include the <unk> , a cross between a zebra and a horse . With rare exceptions , most hybrids are sterile and cannot reproduce . 
 = = Domestication = = 
 Domestication of the horse most likely took place in central Asia prior to 3500 BC . Two major sources of information are used to determine where and when the horse was first domesticated and how the domesticated horse spread around the world . The first source is based on <unk> and archaeological discoveries ; the second source is a comparison of DNA obtained from modern horses to that from bones and teeth of ancient horse remains . 
 The earliest archaeological evidence for the domestication of the horse comes from sites in Ukraine and Kazakhstan , dating to approximately 3500 – 4000 BC . By 3000 BC , the horse was completely domesticated and by 2000 BC there was a sharp increase in the number of horse bones found in human settlements in northwestern Europe , indicating the spread of domesticated horses throughout the continent . The most recent , but most irrefutable evidence of domestication comes from sites where horse remains were interred with chariots in graves of the Sintashta and Petrovka cultures c . 2100 BC . 
 Domestication is also studied by using the genetic material of present @-@ day horses and comparing it with the genetic material present in the bones and teeth of horse remains found in archaeological and <unk> excavations . The variation in the genetic material shows that very few wild stallions contributed to the domestic horse , while many mares were part of early domesticated herds . This is reflected in the difference in genetic variation between the DNA that is passed on along the paternal , or sire line ( Y @-@ chromosome ) versus that passed on along the maternal , or dam line ( mitochondrial DNA ) . There are very low levels of Y @-@ chromosome variability , but a great deal of genetic variation in mitochondrial DNA . There is also regional variation in mitochondrial DNA due to the inclusion of wild mares in domestic herds . Another characteristic of domestication is an increase in coat color variation . In horses , this increased dramatically between 5000 and 3000 BC . 
 Before the availability of DNA techniques to resolve the questions related to the domestication of the horse , various hypotheses were proposed . One classification was based on body types and conformation , suggesting the presence of four basic prototypes that had adapted to their environment prior to domestication . Another hypothesis held that the four prototypes originated from a single wild species and that all different body types were entirely a result of selective breeding after domestication . However , the lack of a detectable substructure in the horse has resulted in a rejection of both hypotheses . 
 = = = Feral populations = = = 
 Feral horses are born and live in the wild , but are descended from domesticated animals . Many populations of feral horses exist throughout the world . Studies of feral herds have provided useful insights into the behavior of prehistoric horses , as well as greater understanding of the instincts and behaviors that drive horses that live in domesticated conditions . 
 There are also semi @-@ feral horses in many parts of the world , such as Dartmoor and the New Forest in the UK , where the animals are all privately owned but live for significant amounts of time in " wild " conditions on undeveloped , often public , lands . Owners of such animals often pay a fee for grazing rights . 
 = = = Breeds = = = 
 The concept of purebred bloodstock and a controlled , written breed registry has come to be particularly significant and important in modern times . Sometimes purebred horses are incorrectly or inaccurately called " thoroughbreds " . Thoroughbred is a specific breed of horse , while a " purebred " is a horse ( or any other animal ) with a defined pedigree recognized by a breed registry . Horse breeds are groups of horses with distinctive characteristics that are transmitted consistently to their offspring , such as conformation , color , performance ability , or disposition . These inherited traits result from a combination of natural crosses and artificial selection methods . Horses have been selectively bred since their domestication . An early example of people who practiced selective horse breeding were the Bedouin , who had a reputation for careful practices , keeping extensive pedigrees of their Arabian horses and placing great value upon pure bloodlines . These pedigrees were originally transmitted via an oral tradition . In the 14th century , Carthusian monks of southern Spain kept meticulous pedigrees of bloodstock lineages still found today in the Andalusian horse . 
 Breeds developed due to a need for " form to function " , the necessity to develop certain characteristics in order to perform a particular type of work . Thus , a powerful but refined breed such as the Andalusian developed as riding horses with an aptitude for dressage . Heavy draft horses developed out of a need to perform demanding farm work and pull heavy wagons . Other horse breeds developed specifically for light agricultural work , carriage and road work , various sport disciplines , or simply as pets . Some breeds developed through centuries of crossing other breeds , while others descended from a single foundation sire , or other limited or restricted foundation bloodstock . One of the earliest formal registries was General Stud Book for Thoroughbreds , which began in 1791 and traced back to the foundation bloodstock for the breed . There are more than 300 horse breeds in the world today . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 Worldwide , horses play a role within human cultures and have done so for millennia . Horses are used for leisure activities , sports , and working purposes . The Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) estimates that in 2008 , there were almost 59 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 horses in the world , with around 33 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in the Americas , 13 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 in Asia and 6 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 in Europe and smaller portions in Africa and Oceania . There are estimated to be 9 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 horses in the United States alone . The American Horse Council estimates that horse @-@ related activities have a direct impact on the economy of the United States of over $ 39 billion , and when indirect spending is considered , the impact is over $ 102 billion . In a 2004 " poll " conducted by Animal Planet , more than 50 @,@ 000 viewers from 73 countries voted for the horse as the world 's 4th favorite animal . 
 Communication between human and horse is paramount in any equestrian activity ; to aid this process horses are usually ridden with a saddle on their backs to assist the rider with balance and positioning , and a bridle or related headgear to assist the rider in maintaining control . Sometimes horses are ridden without a saddle , and occasionally , horses are trained to perform without a bridle or other headgear . Many horses are also driven , which requires a harness , bridle , and some type of vehicle . 
 = = = Sport = = = 
 Historically , equestrians honed their skills through games and races . Equestrian sports provided entertainment for crowds and honed the excellent horsemanship that was needed in battle . Many sports , such as dressage , eventing and show jumping , have origins in military training , which were focused on control and balance of both horse and rider . Other sports , such as rodeo , developed from practical skills such as those needed on working ranches and stations . Sport hunting from horseback evolved from earlier practical hunting techniques . Horse racing of all types evolved from impromptu competitions between riders or drivers . All forms of competition , requiring demanding and specialized skills from both horse and rider , resulted in the systematic development of specialized breeds and equipment for each sport . The popularity of equestrian sports through the centuries has resulted in the preservation of skills that would otherwise have disappeared after horses stopped being used in combat . 
 Horses are trained to be ridden or driven in a variety of sporting competitions . Examples include show jumping , dressage , three @-@ day eventing , competitive driving , endurance riding , gymkhana , rodeos , and fox hunting . Horse shows , which have their origins in medieval European fairs , are held around the world . They host a huge range of classes , covering all of the mounted and harness disciplines , as well as " In @-@ hand " classes where the horses are led , rather than ridden , to be evaluated on their conformation . The method of judging varies with the discipline , but winning usually depends on style and ability of both horse and rider . Sports such as polo do not judge the horse itself , but rather use the horse as a partner for human competitors as a necessary part of the game . Although the horse requires specialized training to participate , the details of its performance are not judged , only the result of the rider 's actions — be it getting a ball through a goal or some other task . Examples of these sports of partnership between human and horse include jousting , in which the main goal is for one rider to unseat the other , and <unk> , a team game played throughout Central Asia , the aim being to capture a goat carcass while on horseback . 
 Horse racing is an equestrian sport and major international industry , watched in almost every nation of the world . There are three types : " flat " racing ; steeplechasing , i.e. racing over jumps ; and harness racing , where horses trot or pace while pulling a driver in a small , light cart known as a sulky . A major part of horse racing 's economic importance lies in the gambling associated with it . 
 = = = Work = = = 
 There are certain jobs that horses do very well , and no technology has yet developed to fully replace them . For example , mounted police horses are still effective for certain types of patrol duties and crowd control . Cattle ranches still require riders on horseback to round up cattle that are scattered across remote , rugged terrain . Search and rescue organizations in some countries depend upon mounted teams to locate people , particularly hikers and children , and to provide disaster relief assistance . Horses can also be used in areas where it is necessary to avoid vehicular disruption to delicate soil , such as nature reserves . They may also be the only form of transport allowed in wilderness areas . Horses are quieter than motorized vehicles . Law enforcement officers such as park rangers or game wardens may use horses for patrols , and horses or mules may also be used for clearing trails or other work in areas of rough terrain where vehicles are less effective . 
 Although machinery has replaced horses in many parts of the world , an estimated 100 million horses , donkeys and mules are still used for agriculture and transportation in less developed areas . This number includes around 27 million working animals in Africa alone . Some land management practices such as cultivating and logging can be efficiently performed with horses . In agriculture , less fossil fuel is used and increased environmental conservation occurs over time with the use of draft animals such as horses . Logging with horses can result in reduced damage to soil structure and less damage to trees due to more selective logging . 
 = = = Entertainment and culture = = = 
 Modern horses are often used to reenact many of their historical work purposes . Horses are used , complete with equipment that is authentic or a meticulously recreated replica , in various live action historical reenactments of specific periods of history , especially recreations of famous battles . Horses are also used to preserve cultural traditions and for ceremonial purposes . Countries such as the United Kingdom still use horse @-@ drawn carriages to convey royalty and other VIPs to and from certain culturally significant events . Public exhibitions are another example , such as the Budweiser Clydesdales , seen in parades and other public settings , a team of draft horses that pull a beer wagon similar to that used before the invention of the modern motorized truck . 
 Horses are frequently seen in television , films and literature . They are sometimes featured as a major character in films about particular animals , but also used as visual elements that assure the accuracy of historical stories . Both live horses and iconic images of horses are used in advertising to promote a variety of products . The horse frequently appears in coats of arms in heraldry , in a variety of poses and equipment . The mythologies of many cultures , including Greco @-@ Roman , Hindu , Islamic , and Norse , include references to both normal horses and those with wings or additional limbs , and multiple myths also call upon the horse to draw the chariots of the Moon and Sun . The horse also appears in the 12 @-@ year cycle of animals in the Chinese zodiac related to the Chinese calendar . 
 = = = Therapeutic use = = = 
 People of all ages with physical and mental disabilities obtain beneficial results from association with horses . Therapeutic riding is used to mentally and physically stimulate disabled persons and help them improve their lives through improved balance and coordination , increased self @-@ confidence , and a greater feeling of freedom and independence . The benefits of equestrian activity for people with disabilities has also been recognized with the addition of equestrian events to the Paralympic Games and recognition of para @-@ equestrian events by the International Federation for Equestrian Sports ( FEI ) . <unk> and therapeutic horseback riding are names for different physical , occupational , and speech therapy treatment strategies that utilize equine movement . In <unk> , a therapist uses the horse 's movement to improve their patient 's cognitive , coordination , balance , and fine motor skills , whereas therapeutic horseback riding uses specific riding skills . 
 Horses also provide psychological benefits to people whether they actually ride or not . " Equine @-@ assisted " or " equine @-@ facilitated " therapy is a form of experiential psychotherapy that uses horses as companion animals to assist people with mental illness , including anxiety disorders , psychotic disorders , mood disorders , behavioral difficulties , and those who are going through major life changes . There are also experimental programs using horses in prison settings . Exposure to horses appears to improve the behavior of inmates and help reduce recidivism when they leave . 
 = = = Warfare = = = 
 Horses have been used in warfare for most of recorded history . The first archaeological evidence of horses used in warfare dates to between 4000 and 3000 BC , and the use of horses in warfare was widespread by the end of the Bronze Age . Although mechanization has largely replaced the horse as a weapon of war , horses are still seen today in limited military uses , mostly for ceremonial purposes , or for reconnaissance and transport activities in areas of rough terrain where motorized vehicles are ineffective . Horses have been used in the 21st century by the Janjaweed militias in the War in Darfur . 
 = = = Products = = = 
 Horses are raw material for many products made by humans throughout history , including byproducts from the slaughter of horses as well as materials collected from living horses . 
 Products collected from living horses include mare 's milk , used by people with large horse herds , such as the Mongols , who let it ferment to produce <unk> . Horse blood was once used as food by the Mongols and other nomadic tribes , who found it a convenient source of nutrition when traveling . Drinking their own horses ' blood allowed the Mongols to ride for extended periods of time without stopping to eat . The drug <unk> is a mixture of estrogens extracted from the urine of pregnant mares ( pregnant mares ' urine ) , and was previously a widely used drug for hormone replacement therapy . The tail hair of horses can be used for making bows for string instruments such as the violin , viola , cello , and double bass . 
 Horse meat has been used as food for humans and carnivorous animals throughout the ages . It is eaten in many parts of the world , though consumption is taboo in some cultures , and a subject of political controversy in others . <unk> leather has been used for boots , gloves , jackets , baseballs , and baseball gloves . Horse hooves can also be used to produce animal glue . Horse bones can be used to make implements . Specifically , in Italian cuisine , the horse tibia is sharpened into a probe called a <unk> , which is used to test the readiness of a ( pig ) ham as it cures . In Asia , the saba is a horsehide vessel used in the production of <unk> . 
 = = = Care = = = 
 Horses are grazing animals , and their major source of nutrients is good @-@ quality forage from hay or pasture . They can consume approximately 2 % to 2 @.@ 5 % of their body weight in dry feed each day . Therefore , a 450 @-@ kilogram ( 990 lb ) adult horse could eat up to 11 kilograms ( 24 lb ) of food . Sometimes , concentrated feed such as grain is fed in addition to pasture or hay , especially when the animal is very active . When grain is fed , equine nutritionists recommend that 50 % or more of the animal 's diet by weight should still be forage . 
 Horses require a plentiful supply of clean water , a minimum of 10 US gallons ( 38 L ) to 12 US gallons ( 45 L ) per day . Although horses are adapted to live outside , they require shelter from the wind and precipitation , which can range from a simple shed or shelter to an elaborate stable . 
 Horses require routine hoof care from a farrier , as well as vaccinations to protect against various diseases , and dental examinations from a veterinarian or a specialized equine dentist . If horses are kept inside in a barn , they require regular daily exercise for their physical health and mental well @-@ being . When turned outside , they require well @-@ maintained , sturdy fences to be safely contained . Regular grooming is also helpful to help the horse maintain good health of the hair coat and underlying skin . 
 = Patience ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Patience " is the third episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 19 , 2000 . The episode was written and directed by series creator Chris Carter . " Patience " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 2 and was viewed by 13 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode received mixed to negative reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , John Doggett , after having been assigned to the X @-@ Files , joins Scully to investigate a series of gruesome murders that appear to be the work of a bat @-@ like creature . This being their first case together , Scully and Doggett find that their investigative techniques are less than similar . 
 Carter was inspired to write " Patience " to emulate the " back @-@ to @-@ basics stand alones [ … ] of the earlier seasons " . The episode was the first The X @-@ Files entry to neither feature actor David Duchovny nor feature his name in the opening credits . Furthermore , the episode was crafted to be the first to test Doggett 's skepticism of paranormal activity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Burley , Idaho , an undertaker and his wife are brutally murdered by some sort of flying creature . Later , Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , who has been assigned to the X @-@ Files , begin talking about the case . Scully explains about the death of the undertaker and his wife and notes that the cause of death being blood loss from human bite marks on their bodies . 
 Scully and Doggett arrive at the crime scene in Idaho and meet Detective Yale Abbott . He says they are less sure that the bites were made by a human and draws their attention to the strange footprint , believing that wild animals fed on the bodies after the fact . Scully points out that there is only one footprint , which looks ominously human , and that if it were left by an animal there would be more footprints leading to the bodies . Scully and Doggett check out the house and find prints leading upstairs and into the attic . Inside , Scully and Doggett find the missing fingers of the undertaker . They look like they have been regurgitated by something and the claw marks in the attic suggest something was hanging from the rafters . Meanwhile , elderly Mrs. McKesson is killed in her attic while looking at a photo album . 
 At the morgue , Scully explains that she studied the bite wounds and discovered that they are similar , but intrinsically different , than human bites ; the saliva on the regurgitated fingers has anti @-@ <unk> in it , which only bats have in their saliva . Doggett finds the evidence interesting , due to the newspaper article he brought Scully : in 1956 , a series of deaths was reported that ended when a group of hunters killed a man @-@ bat creature and brought it to the county morgue in part of Montana . The coroner said the creature was neither bat nor man . Then the coroner was killed a few days later and soon after a few more people were killed or disappeared . 
 Scully and Doggett join the investigation at McKesson ’ s home . Scully suggests a connection between the burned body of Ariel McKesson who disappeared in 1956 and her mother , the latest victim . Scully believes that the burned body should be exhumed to potentially learn the connection with the other deaths . Later , the gravediggers already have the coffin excavated when Detective Abbott shows up at the town cemetery . They tell him that they did not have to dig because somebody already dug the coffin up and scratched the lid up . While they drive off with the body , Abbott inspects a dead tree . The creature is within and it <unk> Abbott . 
 The police are upset about Abbott ’ s death and blame Scully while Doggett reminds them that only the thing that killed Abbott and the others is to blame . Scully explains Ariel McKesson died of heart failure and then was burned to cover something up . She realizes that all the victims were people who came in contact with the body of Ariel McKesson : Abbott investigated the crime , her mother identified the body , the undertaker prepared the body , and Myron Stefaniuk pulled the body from the river . All but Myron Stefaniuk are now dead . Doggett and Scully find Myron and ask him about Ernie Stefaniuk , one of the hunters from 1956 , who he reveals disappeared along time ago . The two eventually track down Ernie Stefaniuk , who tells them that he hid on an island in the middle of the town 's lake with his wife , Ariel , for 44 years . Ernie says that the bat creature kills anyone with Ernie ’ s scent on them , so he had burned his wife ’ s body to try and cover up the scent . He informs them that it hunts only at night and Myron is in danger . Doggett goes back to find Myron only to be attacked and badly torn up by the creature at the river . 
 Ernie says Scully is now marked and the creature will go after her too . When his ground radar goes off , Scully goes outside . Ernie stays inside and is butchered by the bat creature . Scully returns to see it ravaging Ernie ; she manages to shoot it before being knocked down . Doggett appears and shoots the creature several more times , saving Scully . The creature disappears into the night while Scully helps the injured Doggett . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Patience " was written and directed by series creator Chris Carter . The episode , inspired by the " back @-@ to @-@ basics stand alones [ … ] of the earlier seasons " , was the first episode of The X @-@ Files to neither feature actor David Duchovny nor feature his name in the opening credits . After settling his contract dispute with Fox , Duchovny quit full @-@ time participation in the show after the seventh season . In order to explain Mulder 's absence , Duchovny 's character was abducted by aliens in the seventh season finale , " Requiem " , and as such , did not appear in " Patience " . 
 The episode 's main villain , the human @-@ bat hybrid , was inspired by the 1970s comic book villain , Man @-@ Bat , one of the arch @-@ nemeses of Batman . During the filming of the episode , live bats were used ; the type of bat used in " Patience " was the Egyptian Fruit Bat . Furthermore , the episode was the first to test Doggett 's skepticism of paranormal activity . As Robert Patrick explained , " [ ' Patience ' ] is where it starts to toy with my willingness to believe in the paranormal and strange happenings . You 've got a guy that 's a bat , which is sort of out of the norm . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Patience " first aired on Fox on November 19 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 2 , meaning that it was seen by 8 @.@ 2 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 8 @.@ 27 million households , and 13 @.@ 3 million viewers . The episode ranked as the 42nd most @-@ watched episode for the week ending November 19 . The episode subsequently aired in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on July 28 , 2002 . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " More deadly than a man . More ruthless than a bat . A hungry predator waits in the darkness for its next prey ... Scully and Doggett . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Patience " received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Jay Anderson , writing for What Culture , was positive toward the episode . While noting the show 's return to its " dark , creepy [ ... ] roots " in the eighth season , Anderson described the episode as an " early success at returning to the realm of the scary " . Anderson ranked the human bat as the eighth creepiest creature of the show . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a D and criticized the episode 's references to Mulder 's absence , most notably the scene wherein Scully put Mulder 's nameplate away , asking , sardonically , " Is that supposed to be symbolic , I wonder ? " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted that , despite the fact that " a lot of [ the episode ] works [ … ] because the scenes between Doggett and Scully are so good " , the positive aspects of the episode were not " put to better use in a more exciting episode ; this particular case hardly stretched anyone 's deductive prowess . " Shearman and Pearson later wrote that if the episode had been " a Mulder and Scully adventure , this would have been bottom of the barrel stuff . " 
 Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and criticized both its monster , and its guest cast . Concerning the former , he wrote that it was " just ridiculous " and that its design was " bland and generic " . Concerning the latter , he wrote that the cast was filled with " actors hamming it up " . VanDerWerff did note that the episode was better " than its reputation " suggested , but that it still was " undone by some very strange story choices and a dumb monster " . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris bluntly wrote , " if you 're looking for a suspenseful , bite @-@ your @-@ nails , monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week X @-@ Files episode … this isn 't it . " Furthermore , she criticized the villain , calling it " a dull monster in fake @-@ looking make @-@ up " . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 " Patience " earned a nomination for an ASC Award by the American Society of Cinematographers for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography - Regular Series . 
 = First Massacre of Machecoul = 
 The Machecoul massacre is one of the first events of the War in the Vendée , a revolt against mass conscription and the civil constitution of the clergy . The first massacre took place on 11 March 1793 , in the provincial city of Machecoul , in the district of the lower Loire . The city was a thriving center of grain trade ; most of the victims were administrators , merchants and citizens of the city . 
