 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Contemporary = = = 
 The Monthly Review , Or , Literary Journal of 1770 listed the book , commenting only that " The Reviewers are sorry to own , but their regard to truth obliges them to it , that there are subjects with which , alas ! they are too little acquainted , to pretend to be judges of what the learned may publish concerning them . " 
 The Experienced English Housekeeper was " extremely successful " , going through 13 authorised editions and at least 23 pirated ones . To attempt to reduce the piracy , Raffald signed each copy on the first page of the main text in ink , and printed the message " N.B. No Book is genuine but what is signed by the Author " on the title page . Finally in 1773 , she sold the copyright to her publisher for £ 1400 , equivalent to about £ 160 @,@ 000 in 2015 . 
 As well as direct piracy , the book inspired other " experienced housekeepers " to try to profit by publishing books of culinary advice . In 1795 , Sarah Martin published The New Experienced English Housekeeper , for the Use and Ease of Ladies ' <unk> , Cooks , & c. written purely for her own practice . Similarly , Susanna Carter entitled her 1822 book The Experienced Cook and Housekeeper 's Guide . It included 12 engravings " for the arrangement of dinners of two courses " . 
 As an illustration of how familiar Raffald had made the idea of the experienced English housekeeper , The Critical Review , Or , Annals of Literature of 1812 wrote that " The arranging of a dinner @-@ table is attended in Iceland with little trouble , and would afford on scope for the display of the elegant abilities of an experienced English housekeeper . On the cloth was nothing but a plate , a knife and fork , a wine glass , and a bottle of claret , for each guest , except that in the middle stood a large and handsome glass @-@ castor of sugar , with a magnificent silver top . " 
 = = = Firsts = = = 
 The Experienced English Housekeeper was the first book to contain a recipe for what became the classic wedding cake complete with marzipan and royal icing . 
 The Oxford English Dictionary of 1888 credited Raffald as one of the earliest sources in English to mention barbecue in cookery . 
 = = = On modern cookery = = = 
 The Cambridge Guide to Women 's Writing in English noted in 1999 that Raffald distinguishes her work as purely from practice , unlike books of untried recipes copied from elsewhere , and that she apologises for " the plainness of the style " in her introductory letter . The Guide observes , however , that " this is the essence of her lasting appeal , and her clarity and economy with words find an echo in the work of Eliza Acton a century later . " 
 The cookery writer Sophie Grigson wrote in The Independent that her mother Jane made Raffald 's Orange Custards " every year when the Seville orange season was in full swing , a treat to look forward to . " 
 In 2013 , Raffald 's former workplace , Arley Hall , brought some of her recipes including lamb pie , pea soup and rice pudding back to their tables . The general manager Steve Hamilton however said they would avoid Raffald 's turtle and calf 's foot pudding . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Raffald states in her Preface that she personally " perused [ every sheet ] as it came from the press , having an opportunity of having it printed by a neighbour , whom I can rely on " . She writes that " The whole work being now compleated to my wishes " , she must thank her friends and subscribers ; she states that over 800 of them contributed , " raising me so large a subscription , which far <unk> my expectations " . She was thus a self @-@ publisher . 
 = The Bourne Identity ( 2002 film ) = 
 The Bourne Identity is a 2002 American @-@ German spy action thriller film adaptation of Robert Ludlum 's novel of the same name . It stars Matt Damon as Jason Bourne , a man suffering from extreme memory loss and attempting to discover his true identity amidst a clandestine conspiracy within the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . The film also features Franka Potente , Chris Cooper , Clive Owen , Julia Stiles , Brian Cox and Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje . This , the first in the Bourne film series , is followed by The Bourne Supremacy ( 2004 ) , The Bourne Ultimatum ( 2007 ) , The Bourne Legacy ( 2012 ) , and Jason Bourne ( 2016 ) . 
 The film was directed by Doug Liman and adapted for the screen by Tony Gilroy and William Blake Herron . Although Robert Ludlum died in 2001 , he is credited as the film 's producer alongside Frank Marshall . Universal Pictures released the film to theatres in the United States on June 14 , 2002 , and it received a positive critical and public reaction . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the Mediterranean Sea , Italian fishermen rescue an unconscious American ( Matt Damon ) floating adrift with two gunshot wounds in his back . They tend to his wounds , and when the man wakes , they find he suffers from dissociative amnesia . He has no memory of his own identity , while he retains his speech and finds himself capable of advanced combat skills and fluency in several languages . The skipper finds a tiny laser projector under the man 's hip that , when activated , gives a number of a safe deposit box in Zürich . Upon landing , the man heads to investigate the box . Arriving at the bank , the man finds the box contains a large sum of money in various currencies , numerous passports and identity cards with his picture on all of them , and a handgun . The man takes everything but the gun , and leaves , opting to use the name on the American passport , Jason Bourne . 
 After Bourne 's departure , a bank employee contacts Operation Treadstone , a CIA black ops program . Treadstone 's head , Alexander Conklin ( Chris Cooper ) , contacts CIA Deputy Director Ward Abbott ( Brian Cox ) about the reappearance of Bourne . Abbott warns that Bourne , a CIA agent , had been assigned the silent assassination of exiled African dictator <unk> Wombosi ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) , but the attempt failed , and Bourne must be dealt with . Conklin activates three agents to take down Bourne : Castel ( Nicky Naude ) , Manheim ( Russell Levy ) , and the Professor ( Clive Owen ) , while also issuing alerts to local police to capture Bourne . 
 Bourne attempts to evade the Swiss police by using his U.S. passport to enter the American consulate , but he is discovered by guards . He evades capture , leaves the embassy , and gives a German woman , Marie Kreutz ( Franka Potente ) , $ 20 @,@ 000 to drive him to an address in Paris listed on his French driving license . At the address , an apartment , he hits redial on the phone and reaches a hotel . He inquires about the names on his passports there , learning that a " John Michael Kane " had been registered but died two weeks prior in a car crash . Castel ambushes Bourne and Kreutz in the apartment , but Bourne gets the upper hand . Instead of allowing himself to be interrogated , Castel throws himself out a window to his death . Kreutz finds wanted posters of Bourne and herself , and agrees to continue to help Bourne . 
 Meanwhile , Wombosi approaches the police about the attempt on his life . Conklin , having anticipated this , had planted a body in the Paris morgue to appear as the assailant , but Wombosi is not fooled and threatens to report this . The Professor assassinates Wombosi on Conklin 's orders . Bourne , posing as Kane , learns about Wombosi 's yacht , and that the assailant had been shot twice during the escape ; Bourne now considers himself to have been the assailant . He and Kreutz take refuge at the French countryside home of her ex @-@ lover Eamon ( Tim Dutton ) and his children . Conklin tracks their position and sends the Professor there , but Bourne shoots him twice with Eamon 's shotgun , mortally wounding him . The Professor reveals their shared connection to Treadstone before dying . Bourne sends Kreutz , Eamon , and Eamon 's children away for their protection , and then contacts Conklin via the Professor 's phone to arrange a meeting . From a rooftop near the arranged location in Paris , Bourne sees Conklin has brought backup , so he abandons the meeting , but uses the opportunity to place a tracking device on Conklin 's car , leading Bourne to Treadstone 's safe house . 
 Bourne breaks in and holds Conklin and logistics technician Nicolette " Nicky " Parsons ( Julia Stiles ) at gunpoint . Bourne starts to recall fully the assassination attempt through successive flashbacks . As Kane , and working under orders from Treadstone , Bourne infiltrated Wombosi 's yacht but could not bring himself to kill Wombosi while Wombosi 's children were present , and instead fled , being shot during his escape . Bourne announces he is resigning from Treadstone and is not to be followed . As agents descend on the safe house , Bourne fights his way free . Meanwhile , when Conklin leaves the safe house , he is killed by Manheim , who was ordered by Abbott to terminate Treadstone . 
 Abbott reports to an oversight committee that Treadstone is " all but decommissioned " before discussion turns to a new project codenamed " <unk> " . In the final scene , Bourne finds Kreutz renting out scooters to tourists on Mykonos , and the two reunite . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Matt Damon as Jason Bourne 
 Franka Potente as Marie Helena Kreutz 
 Chris Cooper as Alexander Conklin 
 Clive Owen as The Professor 
 Brian Cox as Ward Abbott 
 Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje as <unk> Wombosi 
 Gabriel Mann as Danny Zorn 
 Julia Stiles as Nicolette " Nicky " Parsons 
 Josh Hamilton as Research Tech 
 Walton Goggins as Research Tech 
 Orso Maria <unk> as Giancarlo 
 Tim Dutton as Eamon 
 Nicky Naude as Castel 
 Russell Levy as Manheim 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Director Doug Liman has said that he had been a fan of the source novel by Robert Ludlum since he read it in high school . Near the end of production of Liman 's previous film Swingers , Liman decided to develop a film adaptation of the novel . After more than two years of securing rights to the book from Warner Bros. and a further year of screenplay development with screenwriter Tony Gilroy , the film went through two years of production . Universal Pictures acquired the film rights to Ludlum 's books in the hopes of starting a new film franchise . William Blake Herron was brought in to rewrite the script in 1999 . 
 The inner workings of the fictitious Treadstone organization were inspired by Liman 's father 's job in the National Security Agency ( NSA ) under Ronald Reagan . Of particular inspiration were Liman 's father 's memoirs regarding his involvement in the investigation of the Iran – Contra affair . Many aspects of the Alexander Conklin character were based on his father 's recollections of Oliver North . Liman admitted that he jettisoned much of the content of the novel beyond the central premise , in order to modernize the material and to conform it to his own beliefs regarding United States foreign policy . However , Liman was careful not to cram his political views down " the audience 's throat " . There were initial concerns regarding the film 's possible obsolescence and overall reception in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks , but these concerns proved groundless . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Liman approached a wide range of actors for the role of Bourne , including Brad Pitt , who turned it down to star in Spy Game , as well as Russell Crowe , Arnold Schwarzenegger , Tom Cruise and Sylvester Stallone , before he eventually cast Damon . Liman found that Damon understood and appreciated that , though The Bourne Identity would have its share of action , the focus was primarily on character and plot . Damon , who had never played such a physically demanding role , insisted on performing many of the stunts himself . With stunt choreographer Nick Powell , he underwent three months of extensive training in stunt work , the use of weapons , boxing , and eskrima . He eventually performed a significant number of the film 's stunts himself , including hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and climbing the safe house walls near the film 's conclusion . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 From the onset of filming , difficulties with the studio slowed the film 's development and caused a rift between the director and Universal Pictures , as executives were unhappy with the film 's pacing , emphasis on small scale action sequences , and the general relationship between themselves and Liman , who was suspicious of direct studio involvement . A number of reshoots and rewrites late in development , plus scheduling problems , delayed the film from its original release target date of September 2001 to June 2002 and took it $ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 over budget from the initial budget of $ 60 million ; screenwriter Tony Gilroy faxed elements of screenplay rewrites almost throughout the entire duration of filming . A particular point of contention with regard to the original Gilroy script were the scenes set in the farmhouse near the film 's conclusion . Liman and Matt Damon fought to keep the scenes in the film after they were excised in a third @-@ act rewrite that was insisted upon by the studio . Liman and Damon argued that , though the scenes were low key , they were integral to the audience 's understanding of the Bourne character and the film 's central themes . The farmhouse sequence consequently went through many rewrites from its original incarnation before its inclusion in the final product . 
 Other issues included the studio 's desire to substitute Montreal or Prague for Paris in order to lower costs , Liman 's insistence on the use of a French @-@ speaking film crew , and poor test audience reactions to the film 's Paris finale . The latter required a late return to location in order to shoot a new , more action @-@ oriented conclusion to the Paris story arc . In addition to Paris , filming took place in Prague , Imperia , Rome , Mykonos , and Zürich ; several scenes set in Zürich were also filmed in Prague . Damon described the production as a struggle , citing the early conflicts that he and Liman had with the studio , but denied that it was an overtly difficult process , stating , " When I hear people saying that the production was a nightmare it 's like , a ' nightmare ' ? Shooting 's always hard , but we finished . " 
 Liman 's directorial method was often hands @-@ on . Many times he operated the camera himself in order to create what he believed was a more intimate relationship between himself , the material , and the actors . He felt that this connection was lost if he simply observed the recording on a monitor . This was a mindset he developed from his background as a small @-@ scale indie film maker . 
 The acclaimed car chase sequence was filmed primarily by the second unit under director Alexander Witt . The unit shot in various locations around Paris while Liman was filming the main story arc elsewhere in the city . The finished footage was eventually edited together to create the illusion of a coherent journey . Liman confessed that " anyone who really knows Paris will find it illogical " , since few of the locations used in the car chase actually connect to each other . Liman took only a few of the shots himself ; his most notable chase sequence shots were those of Matt Damon and Franka Potente while inside the car . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received positive reviews . The film review collection website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film an 83 % approval rating based on 184 reviews collected , and an average score of 7 / 10 . The site 's consensus reads " <unk> blending genre formula with bursts of unexpected wit , The Bourne Identity is an action thriller that delivers — and then some . " 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times gave the film three out of four stars and praised it for its ability to absorb the viewer in its " <unk> " and " Damon 's ability to be focused and sincere " concluding that the film was " unnecessary , but not unskilled " . Walter <unk> of Film Freak Central praised the film for its pacing and action sequences , describing them as " kinetic , fair , and intelligent , every payoff packaged with a moment 's contemplation crucial to the creation of tension " and that the movie could be understood as a clever subversion of the genre . Charles Taylor of Salon.com acclaimed the film as " entertaining , handsome and gripping , The Bourne Identity is something of an anomaly among big @-@ budget summer blockbusters : a thriller with some brains and feeling behind it , more attuned to story and character than to spectacle " and praised Liman for giving the film a " tough mindedness " that never gives way into " cynicism or hopelessness " . 
 Ed Gonzalez of Slant Magazine also noted Doug Liman 's " restrained approach to the material " as well as Matt Damon and Franka Potente 's strong chemistry , but ultimately concluded the film was " smart , but not smart enough " . J. Hoberman of The Village Voice dismissed the film as " banal " and as a disappointment compared against Liman 's previous indie releases ; Owen Gleiberman also criticised the film for a " sullen <unk> that all of Liman 's supple handheld staging can 't disguise " . Aaron Beierle of DVDTalk gave particular praise to the film 's central car chase which was described as an exciting action highlight and one of the best realized in the genre . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In its opening weekend , The Bourne Identity took in US $ 27 @,@ 118 @,@ 640 in 2 @,@ 638 theaters . The film grossed $ 121 @,@ 661 @,@ 683 in North America and $ 92 @,@ 263 @,@ 424 elsewhere for a total worldwide gross of $ 214 @,@ 034 @,@ 224 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 On January 21 , 2003 , Universal Pictures released The Bourne Identity on VHS , and on DVD in the U.S. in two formats ; a single @-@ disc widescreen collector 's edition and a single @-@ disc full screen collector 's edition . Both contain supplemental materials including a making @-@ of documentary , a commentary from director Doug Liman and deleted scenes . On July 13 , 2004 , Universal released a new DVD of the film in the U.S. in preparation for the sequel 's cinema debut . This DVD came in the same two formats : a single @-@ disc widescreen ( Extended edition ) and a single @-@ disc full screen ( Extended edition ) . Both contain supplemental materials including interviews with Matt Damon , deleted scenes , alternative opening and ending , a documentary on the consulate fight and information features on the CIA and amnesia . The alternate ending on the DVD has Bourne collapsing during the search for Marie , waking up with Abbott standing over him , and getting an offer to return to the CIA . Neither contain the commentary or DTS tracks present in the collector 's edition . The film was also released on UMD for Sony 's PlayStation Portable on August 30 , 2005 and on HD DVD on July 24 , 2007 . With the release of The Bourne Ultimatum on DVD , a new DVD of The Bourne Identity was included in a boxed set with The Bourne Supremacy and The Bourne Ultimatum . The boxed set is entitled The Jason Bourne Collection . A trilogy set was released on Blu @-@ ray in January 2009 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The score for the Bourne Identity was composed by John Powell . Powell was bought in to replace Carter Burwell , who had composed and recorded a more traditional orchestral score for the film , which director Doug Liman rejected . Since a lot of the music budget had been spent recording the rejected score , Powell 's score was initially conceived to be entirely non @-@ orchestral , making extensive use of percussion , guitars , electronics and studio techniques . However , a string section was later overdubbed onto many of the cues to give them a ' cinematic ' quality . 
 The Bourne Identity : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on June 11 , 2002 . In addition to the score , the film also featured the songs " Extreme Ways " by Moby and " Southern Sun / Ready Steady Go " by Paul Oakenfold . The soundtrack won an ASCAP Award . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The Bourne Identity was followed by a 2004 sequel , The Bourne Supremacy , which received a similar positive critical and public reception , but received some criticism for its hand @-@ held camerawork , which observers argued made action sequences difficult to see . The Bourne Supremacy was directed by Paul Greengrass with Matt Damon reprising his role as Jason Bourne . A third film , The Bourne Ultimatum , was released in 2007 and again was directed by Paul Greengrass and starred Matt Damon . Like Supremacy , Ultimatum received generally positive critical and public reception , but also received similar criticism for the camera @-@ work . 
 The fourth film of the Bourne franchise , The Bourne Legacy was released in 2012 . Neither Damon nor Greengrass was involved . 
 = Typhoon Amy ( 1951 ) = 
 Typhoon Amy was an intense and deadly tropical cyclone that struck areas of the central Philippines in December 1951 . <unk> the archipelago during the 1951 eruption of Mount Hibok @-@ Hibok , Amy exacerbated the effects of the volcano , greatly increasing the number of resulting deaths . The fifteenth named storm and fourteenth typhoon within the western Pacific Ocean that year , Amy developed from an area of low pressure near the Kwajalein Atoll on December 3 . Tracking in a general westward direction , the storm quickly intensified to reach typhoon intensity the next day . However , the typhoon 's <unk> resulted in a fluctuation of intensity over the following few days . Afterwards , Amy intensified to reach its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) on December 8 . Over the ensuing two days , Amy moved over several islands in the central Philippines before emerging in the South China Sea on December 11 as the equivalent of a minimal typhoon . Shortly after , the tropical cyclone executed a tight anticyclonic loop while oscillating in strength several times before eventually weakening and dissipating on December 17 , just east of Vietnam . 
 Amy was considered one of the worst typhoons to strike the Philippines on record . Making its initial landfall along with the concurrent eruption of Mount Hibok @-@ Hibok on Camiguin , the typhoon disrupted volcanic relief operations and forced the displacement of victims already displaced by the volcano . Cebu City suffered the worst impacts of Amy – most of the city 's buildings were heavily damaged , and 29 people died in the city . Strong winds and rainfall in the city associated with Amy also set records which still remain unbroken today . Damage there was estimated at 560 million Philippine pesos . Along the east coast of Leyte , where Amy initially struck , ninety percent of homes were destroyed , and a large swath of coconut plantations were wiped out . In Panay , located on the western side of the Philippines , at least a thousand homes were destroyed in 41 towns . Overall , Amy caused $ 30 million in damage , and at least 556 fatalities , though the final death toll may have been as high as 991 , making the typhoon one of the deadliest in modern Philippine history . An additional 50 @,@ 000 people were displaced . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Typhoon Amy can be traced back to a low @-@ pressure area first detected over Kwajalein at 0500 UTC on November 29 . Tracking westward , the Fleet Weather Center in Guam began to monitor vorticity for potential development , assigning the numeric designation <unk> to the tropical system . Late on December 2 , a routine weather reconnaissance flight unexpectedly intercepted the disturbance and detected unusually strong westerly winds , a characteristic typically indicative of a tropical cyclone . As such , the flight , named Vulture George , was rerouted to investigate the area . After finding conclusive evidence of a closed low @-@ pressure area , the Fleet Weather Center in Guam classified the disturbance as a tropical storm with winds of 100 km / h ( 60 mph ) . At the time , Amy had two separate centers of circulation , resulting in an asymmetrical wind field . 
 Following tropical cyclogenesis , the fast @-@ moving tropical cyclone quickly intensified , reaching the equivalent of a Category 1 on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Between December 4 and 5 , however , Amy briefly weakened back to tropical storm intensity before restrengthening . Steady intensification followed afterwards , with the typhoon reaching the equivalent of a Category 3 hurricane by 0000 UTC on December 6 . By this time , the storm had slowed in forward speed . Later that day , the two , formerly separate circulation centers merged , resulting in an eye spanning 26 km ( 16 mi ) in diameter . At 1200 UTC on December 8 , Amy reached its peak intensity with winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) , which would classify it as a modern @-@ day Category 4 typhoon . At the same time , the tropical cyclone began to track slightly southwestward . At 0600 UTC the following day , Amy made its first landfall on southern Samar with an intensity equivalent of a Category 2 typhoon . Over the next two days , the typhoon weakened and moved over several islands in the Philippines including Leyte , Cebu , and Panay before emerging into the South China Sea on December 11 . 
 In the South of China Sea on December 11 , Amy quickly slowed in forward motion and began to execute a cyclonic loop . Late that day , the typhoon strengthened back to Category 2 intensity , and as such concurrently attained a tertiary peak intensity with winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 968 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 59 inHg ) . Late on December 13 , Amy weakened back to a Category 1 typhoon for a transient period of time before restrengthening and reaching a quaternary peak intensity as a Category 3 typhoon with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . Afterwards , the typhoon began to weaken , and at 0900 UTC on December 17 , the Fleet Weather Center in Guam issued their last bulletin on the tropical cyclone . Upon the issuance of the last advisory , Amy set records for most typhoon bulletins issued at 58 , and most reconnaissance fixes at 25 . However , Amy continued to persist through the next day before degenerating into a remnant low @-@ pressure area late on December 18 . The following day , the associated remnants of Amy dissipated east of Vietnam . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Beginning on September 1 , 1948 , the then @-@ active volcano Mount Hibok @-@ Hibok on Camiguin Island in the Philippines began to release lava in a series of eruption events which continued for the ensuing three years . On December 4 , 1951 , a large , Peléan eruption event later rated between a 2 and 3 on the Volcanic Explosivity Index , sending pyroclastic flows and lahars down the northeast flank of the volcano . The resultant ash flows alone killed an estimated 500 people on the island , making it one of the deadliest volcanic eruption events in recorded history . As the typhoon approached the archipelago , relief agencies were forced to divert aid operations to victims of the recent eruption , slowing the recovery process . 
 Upon making landfall on south Samar on December 10 , Hibok @-@ Hibok erupted six times in rapid succession , worsening the effects of both the typhoon and the volcano . Amy had also made landfall on an area impacted by a second typhoon three weeks prior . Strong winds displaced and destroyed residences and uprooted trees , while torrential rainfall caused rivers to overflow , resulting in the flooding of sugarcane fields and the washing away of bridges . Radio communications to and between most of the central Philippine islands were disrupted . 
 Cebu was one of the worst impacted cities . At the local airport , an anemometer recorded sustained winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) early on December 10 , which remains a record for the city . Rainfall peaked at 195 @.@ 3 mm ( 7 @.@ 69 in ) ; at the time this made the typhoon the wettest tropical cyclone in Cebu history . All buildings made of light construction materials were at least partially damaged , with many large structures sustaining roof or other damage . At least 29 people were killed in the city , including the drownings of three due to the resultant flooding . The typhoon 's effects caused the cessation of the city 's power supply . Damage in Cebu totaled 560 million Philippine pesos . At least a hundred other people in Cebu City were displaced . Offshore , 28 ships capsized due to winds caused by Amy , including 7 inter @-@ island vessels . This set a new record for vessels sunk by a typhoon in Cebu , and held until Typhoon Mike sunk 88 ships in 1990 . 
 On Samar , where Amy first struck , reports indicated that 27 people died , despite initial reports that stated that there were no fatalities . In Iloilo City on Visayas , two people were killed and seventeen others were injured . Property damage in Bacolod , Negros was estimated at $ 250 @,@ 000 , and 52 people died , with an additional 2 @,@ 250 persons rendered homeless . Elsewhere on Negros , 30 percent of the island 's vital sugar crop was destroyed . On the east coast of Leyte , the typhoon was considered the worst in living memory , and ninety percent of homes there were destroyed . In Negros Oriental , schoolhouses in <unk> , <unk> , Negros Oriental , and <unk> were blown down . An aerial survey mission estimated that at <unk> sq mi ( 78 km2 ) of coconut plantations were devastated ; other coconut plantations throughout the Philippines also suffered considerable damage . <unk> crops also suffered sizeable losses , though production was expected to remain at forecast levels . Tacloban 's San Jose Airfield was severely damaged by the strong storm surge from Amy . In the Tacloban and Surigao Strait area , an estimated 146 people were killed . In the <unk> town of <unk> , the mayor had announced that 176 people were killed in the town alone . Another 135 fatalities were confirmed in <unk> . More than 100 persons were injured by falling coconuts and other airborne debris . On Leyte alone , damage was estimated at $ 8 million . The Red Cross estimated over a thousand homes in 41 towns on Panay were destroyed by the storm . More than 20 percent of crops and infrastructure were destroyed . Four people were killed on the island . Upon looping in the South China Sea , Amy brought torrential rainfall to areas of Manila , though no damage was reported . 
 Overall , Amy caused at least an estimated $ 30 million in damage throughout the central Philippines . However , the total number of fatalities directly associated with the effects of the typhoon remain disputed , and may range anywhere from 569 to 991 , making Amy one of the deadliest typhoons to strike the island nation in recorded history . An additional 50 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless by the storm . The typhoon was characterized by the Philippine weather bureau to be the worst typhoon to strike the Philippines in at least 70 years . In the aftermath of Amy , then @-@ president of the Philippines Elpidio Quirino declared a state of public calamity for eleven central Philippine provinces including the island of Camiguin , which was heavily affected by both the typhoon and Mount Hibok @-@ Hibok . On December 24 , the American Red Cross granted $ 25 @,@ 000 to the Philippine Red Cross . 
 = Crazy for You ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Crazy for You " is a song by American singer Madonna from the soundtrack album to the 1985 film Vision Quest . It was released on March 2 , 1985 by Geffen Records as the first single from the soundtrack . The song appears remixed on the greatest hits compilation The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) and was re @-@ released on February 24 , 1991 by Sire Records to promote the album . The song was also included on the ballads compilation Something to Remember ( 1995 ) and the greatest hits compilation Celebration ( 2009 ) . Producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber , along with music director Phil Ramone , decided to use Madonna after listening to her previous recordings , employing John Bettis and Jon Lind to write the song . After reading the script of the film , Bettis and Lind wrote the song about the situation in which the lead characters meet at a nightclub . Initial recording sessions did not impress Bettis and Lind , and they felt that " Crazy for You " would be dropped from the soundtrack . However , a new version was recorded to their liking . 
 John " Jellybean " Benitez was the producer for the song , and it was a challenge for him , as previously he was associated with recording dance @-@ pop songs only . Initially Warner Bros. Records did not want the song to be released as a single , since they believed that it would take away the attention from Madonna 's second studio album Like a Virgin ( 1984 ) . In the end , Peters and Guber convinced Warner officials to greenlight its release . " Crazy for You " ushered a new musical direction for Madonna , as she had not previously released a ballad as a single . The track features instrumentation from snare drums , harp , bass synthesizer and electric guitar . Lyrically , the song speaks of sexual desire between two lovers and consists of innuendos . 
 " Crazy for You " received positive response from music critics and earned Madonna her first Grammy Award nomination in the Best Female Pop Vocal Performance category in 1986 . The song became Madonna 's second number @-@ one single on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , and reached the top position in the charts of Australia and Canada as well . It also peaked at number two in Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom , where it was released twice , once in 1985 and again in 1991 . Madonna has performed " Crazy for You " in three of her concert tours , The Virgin Tour in 1985 , Re @-@ Invention World Tour in 2004 and in some dates of Rebel Heart Tour in 2016 . The performance from The Virgin Tour was included in the home video releases on VHS and LaserDisc whereas the Re @-@ Invention World Tour remains unreleased . " Crazy for You " has been covered by a number of artists . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Crazy for You " was written by John Bettis and Jon Lind . The ballad was released as the first single from the soundtrack of the 1985 film Vision Quest , a coming of age drama about a high school wrestler , played by Matthew Modine . Producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber and music director Phil Ramone were aware of the then unknown Madonna , who was just signed to Sire Records . Ramone took her for dinner at his house in Carolwood Records , where she played some of her music videos . Ramone and the other Warner executives present there , were impressed by Madonna 's self @-@ possession and fishnet @-@ crucifix style , and they decided to test her voice in a New York studio . Peters assigned Joel Sill , an executive in charge of music at Warner Bros. Pictures , to handle the recording of the two songs for the film . Sill sent the script of the film to Bettis and Lind . After reading through the script , Bettis wanted to write a song about the situation where the main characters – a young boy and a girl boarding at a house – dance together at a nightclub . He elaborated : 
 " We were noodling around and ' Crazy for You ' was something that Jon was singing over that section of the song . It was really descriptive of the scene in the film . [ ... ] After that , I was out on vacation out in the desert and [ Sill ] called and said Phil Ramone was in love with the song and wanted to cut it on Madonna . [ Laughing ] ' Borderline ' was out at that time and I said , ' Excuse me ? This is for Madonna ? Really ? Can she sing a song like this ? ' Jon and I were surprised at the choice of artist at the time , if you want to know the truth . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 After Sill let Bettis and Lind know that Madonna was singing the song , some time elapsed before either of them heard anything from Warner Bros. Records . In between , they went to one of the recording sessions and were not impressed with the process of recording the song . Bettis commented , " We went to one of the sessions , and to be honest , that particular session did not go all that well . [ ... ] Jon and I were depressed about the way the song had come out . We heard nothing else about it and we were a little nervous that the song was going to be dropped from the picture . " Bettis went to England to work on the 1985 fantasy film Legend with music producer Jerry Goldsmith . It was there he received a call from Lind , who informed Bettis that a new version of " Crazy for You " was recorded and was made ready for a single release . Bettis was surprised and went over to Lind 's house , where he warmly received the new recorded version of the song . It had a different arrangement from the demo version , and the arrangement was done by composer Rob Mounsey who rearranged the original track and added the background vocals . Bettis said : " We owe a big debt of gratitude to [ Mounsey ] . He really made a hit record out of [ the song ] . " Mounsey was introduced in the project by record producer John " Jellybean " Benitez who was producing " Crazy for You " . Benitez was previously associated with producing dance @-@ pop themed songs and it was the first time that he produced a ballad . In Fred Bronson 's The Billboard Book of Number 1 Hits , Benitez commented , 
 " The song was recorded live . It was the first time that I produced a live session , as opposed to having synthesizers and drum machines do everything . [ ... ] I was tense because I had never done a record like this . [ ... ] Everything I did was totally on instinct . I tried to make the song stand on its own , but at the same time work in the two scenes in which it was used in the movie . " 
 Benitez also noted that " Crazy for You " was an important recording for Madonna , as the song being a ballad , was openly accepted at adult contemporary radios . She had already charted with her singles " Like a Virgin " and " Material Girl " , hence Madonna wanted to prove that she can sing in a different genre of music . However , Warner initially did not want the song to be released as a single , since the release of Vision Quest coincided with the release of Madonna 's second studio album Like a Virgin and releasing " Crazy for You " would have distracted attention from the album . Warner Bros. Records chief Mo Ostin went to Robert A. Daly , chairman of Warner , and requested him to pull out the Madonna tracks from the Vision Quest soundtrack . Daly summoned Peters and Guber to his office and informed them that they had to let @-@ go of the Madonna tracks . Peters protested and shouted at Daly , resulting him escaping in fright and Warner allowing " Crazy for You " to be released as a single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Crazy for You " was a new musical direction for Madonna , as she had not recorded ballad songs before . According to author Rikky Rooksby , the song is sophisticated compared to her previous singles . The introduction features a melody by a woodwind instrument and an electric guitar chord , sliding from one motif to the other . It has a snare drum on the last beat of the bar , leading to the spacey quality to most of the verses . Other instrumentation comes from a harp , a bass synthesizer and a chattering single note guitar lick . The fuller rhythm of the song does not start , until the chorus is reached . The turn of the melody allows Madonna 's voice to stretch further on the higher notes . 
 According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Publishing , " Crazy for You " is set in the time signature of common time , with a medium tempo of 104 beats per minute . It is set in the key of E major with Madonna 's voice spanning between the high note of C ♯ 5 to the low note of G ♯ 3 . The song has a basic sequence of E – A – B – A as its chord progression . Unlike her previous singles , the chord sequence does not repeat itself and the chorus slowly unravels to the climax of the song . Lyrically , the song talks about extreme love for one another . It contains innuendos similar to The Crystals ' 1963 song " Then He Kissed Me " . According to scholar Dave Marsh , the lyrics talk about frank sexual desire among two teenagers . He believed that the line " I 'm crazy for you , Touch me once and you 'll know it 's true " was not ambiguous and it helped Madonna to capitalize on such disambiguation . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Keith Caulfield of Billboard said that " Crazy for You " is " [ p ] erhaps the ultimate slow @-@ dance song . " Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , called the song sophisticated . Alex Henderson of Allmusic felt that the other Madonna song on the Vision Quest soundtrack , " Gambler " , should have been the more successful single . Biographer J. Randy Taraborrelli characterized the song as " sassy " and commented that the song provided proof that Madonna was vocally capable of delivering a serious ballad . Author Andrew Morton believed that the song cemented Madonna as a talented and serious singer which " had been missing from her past recordings . " Allen Metz and Carol Benson , authors of The Madonna Companion : Two Decades of Commentary , said that the song sounded like a " remake of sweet @-@ sixteen Connie Francis tune , dripping with old @-@ fashioned , hand @-@ held romance " especially in the line " It 's so brand new ; I 'm really crazy for you . " Edna Gundersen from USA Today felt that the song is " touching and beautifully arranged . " 
 Dave Marsh , author of The Heart of Rock & Soul : The 1001 Greatest Singles Ever Made , felt that with the coda of the song , Madonna transformed her record into an adult love song . William McKeen , author of Rock and Roll is Here to Stay : An Anthology , said that the song " offered an aggressive sexuality for women " . Maria Raha , author of Cinderella 's Big Score : Women of the Punk and Indie Underground , said that with the song , " Madonna brought a trunk full of trite lyrics on the long @-@ standing tradition of pop music , love . " " Crazy for You " was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at 1986 Grammy Awards , but lost to Whitney Houston 's " Saving All My Love for You " . The song was ranked number 38 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Love Songs " , and during the special it was revealed that " Crazy for You " was recorded in one take . In 2003 , Madonna fans were asked to vote for their Top 20 Madonna singles of all time by Q ; " Crazy for You " was allocated the eleventh spot . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Crazy for You " became Madonna 's second number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song debuted on the chart at number 54 on the issue dated March 2 , 1985 . After six weeks , the song reached the top of the chart , replacing " We Are the World " by USA for Africa . " Crazy for You " was the second number @-@ one song for Bettis as a songwriter , after " Top of the World " by The Carpenters ( 1973 ) . With " Crazy for You " , Bettis was in doubt whether the song would reach the top , after it was stuck at number two for three weeks , behind " We Are the World " . Both he and Lind commented , " If you gotta lose to something , it might as well be ' We Are the World ' . Luckily enough , the final week of the upsurge of the record , we topped ' We Are the World ' , which lets you know how hot the song and how hot the artist [ Madonna ] was . " " Crazy for You " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on July 16 , 1985 , for shipment of one million copies of the single across United States — the requirement for a gold single prior to 1989 . The song reached number two on the Adult Contemporary Singles and 80 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It placed at nine on the year @-@ end chart for 1985 , with Madonna becoming the top pop artist for the year . In Canada , the song debuted at number 70 on the RPM issue dated March 16 , 1985 . On its eleventh week on the chart , the song reached the top position . It was present on the chart for a total of 25 weeks and was ranked seventh on the RPM Year @-@ end chart for 1985 . A music video was released , featuring Madonna singing the song in a night @-@ club . The video was included in Celebration : The Video Collection , released in 2009 . 
 " Crazy for You " reached number one in Australia and displaced another Madonna release , " Angel " / " Into the Groove " , from the top spot on the Kent Music Report chart , making Madonna one of the few acts in Australian chart history to replace themselves at the number @-@ one spot . After the song was released in the United Kingdom on June 8 , 1985 , it debuted at number 25 and peaked at number two . In February 1991 , the song was re @-@ released and again reached a peak of number two . " Crazy for You " was certified gold by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies across United Kingdom . Such was Madonna 's popularity that when Vision Quest was released in home video in the UK , it was renamed as Crazy for You , to cash in on her success . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 670 @,@ 000 copies there . " Crazy for You " was also a number @-@ two hit in Ireland and New Zealand . The song reached the top 20 in Belgium , Europe , Italy , Japan , Netherlands , Spain , Sweden and Switzerland and top 40 in Austria , France and Germany . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna first performed " Crazy for You " on The Virgin Tour in 1985 . She wore a black top and long black skirt with her hair in knots and a crucifix attached . After an energetic performance of " Over and Over " , Madonna sat on some steps and sang " Crazy for You " . Paul Grein , music editor of Billboard , commented that " She was at her best on ' Crazy for You ' , making good use of a deeper , huskier vocal quality that mirrors the song 's deeper lyrical approach . The performance was included in the VHS release Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour recorded in Detroit , Michigan . 
 In the Re @-@ Invention World Tour of 2004 , Madonna performed the song in the last segment of the show , the Scottish segment . During that segment , she wore a Scottish kilt and a t @-@ shirt which had different captions in different venues ; usually it had the caption " Kabbalists Do It Better " , however she also had " Brits Do It Better " and " Irish Do It Better " on the British and Irish stops of the tour , respectively . Generally after finishing the performance of " Papa Don 't Preach " , Madonna would dedicate the next song to the fans of twenty years , and start singing " Crazy for You " on top of a rising platform . At the end of the performance , she would usually throw her t @-@ shirt to the audience . The performance was excluded from the album of the documentary on the tour titled I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret , which was released in 2006 . 
 On <unk> 25 , 2016 , Madonna performed " Crazy for You " during the Manila stop of her Rebel Heart Tour as a tribute to the 30th anniversary of the 1986 EDSA Revolution . Before the performance she said ; " I believe 30 years ago you fought for your freedom , am I correct ? It 's called People Power Freedom [ sic ] , did I say that right ? Up with democracy and freedom ! That is the revolution of love . And that 's what a rebel heart fights for . So on this very special occasion , I want to sing this song " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Several Filipino acts have recorded remakes of " Crazy for You " including Sponge Cola in 2004 , Michael Cruz in 2005 and <unk> on their album New Horizon ( 2006 ) . In 2007 , Groove Armada recorded a cover with Alan Donohoe of art rock band The Rakes on vocals for the compilation Radio 1 Established 1967 . New Found Glory recorded a pop punk cover of the song with Max Bemis for their 2007 album From the Screen to Your Stereo Part II . A cover of the song by Lion of Panjshir was included on the 2007 Madonna tribute compilation Through the Wilderness . Melissa Totten did a Hi @-@ NRG cover for her 2008 dance album , Forever Madonna . An instrumental version was played in the Full House episode 13 Candles when Kimmy dares D.J. to kiss Kevin at her party . The original Madonna recording was also featured in the 2004 film 13 Going on 30 , starring Jennifer Garner . At the end of the film , the song is played again , but to signify Jenna Rink 's life staying on the " good path " 17 years later , and a bigger , modern rock / string orchestration by the film 's composer Theodore Shapiro is added . Chris Griffin performed the song during the " Long John Peter " episode of Family Guy . Kelly Clarkson covered the song during her 2012 Stronger Tour per fan request in Bossier City , Louisiana . 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lead vocals , background vocals 
 John Bettis – writer 
 Jon Lind – writer 
 John " Jellybean " Benitez – record producer 
 Rob Mounsey – music arrangement 
 Greg <unk> – mastering 
 Credits adapted from the soundtrack 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Harry Shearer = 
 Harry Julius Shearer ( born December 23 , 1943 ) is an American actor , voice actor , comedian , writer , musician , author , radio host , director and producer . He is known for his long @-@ running roles on The Simpsons , his work on Saturday Night Live , the comedy band Spinal Tap and his radio program Le Show . Born in Los Angeles , California , Shearer began his career as a child actor . From 1969 to 1976 , Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap , a radio comedy group . Following the breakup of the group , Shearer co @-@ wrote the film Real Life with Albert Brooks and started writing for Martin Mull 's television series Fernwood 2 Night . 
 He was a cast member on Saturday Night Live on two occasions , between 1979 – 80 , and 1984 – 85 . Shearer co @-@ created , co @-@ wrote and co @-@ starred in the 1984 film This Is Spinal Tap , a satirical rockumentary , which became a cult hit . In 1989 , Shearer joined the cast of The Simpsons ; he provides voices for numerous characters , including Mr. Burns , Waylon Smithers , Ned Flanders , Reverend Lovejoy , Kent Brockman , and more . Shearer has appeared in several films , including A Mighty Wind and The Truman Show , has directed two , Teddy Bears ' Picnic and The Big Uneasy , and has written three books . Since 1983 , Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy / music program Le Show , a hodgepodge of satirical news commentary , music , and sketch comedy . 
 Shearer has won a Primetime Emmy Award , has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the radio category , and has received several other Emmy and Grammy Award nominations . He has been married to singer @-@ songwriter Judith Owen since 1993 . He is currently " artist in residence " at Loyola University , New Orleans . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Shearer was born December 23 , 1943 in Los Angeles , the son of Dora Warren ( née Kohn ) ( d . 2008 ) , a book @-@ keeper , and Mack Shearer . His parents were Jewish immigrants from Austria and Poland . Starting when Shearer was four years old , he had a piano teacher whose daughter worked as a child actress . The piano teacher later decided to make a career change and become a children 's agent , as she knew people in the business through her daughter 's work . The teacher asked Shearer 's parents for permission to take him to an audition . Several months later , she called Shearer 's parents and told them that she had gotten Shearer an audition for the radio show The Jack Benny Program . Shearer received the role when he was seven years old . He described Jack Benny as " very warm and approachable [ ... ] He was a guy who dug the idea of other people on the show getting laughs , which sort of spoiled me for other people in comedy . " Shearer said in an interview that one person who " took him under his wing " and was one of his best friends during his early days in show business was voice actor Mel Blanc , who voiced many animated characters , including Bugs Bunny , Daffy Duck and Barney Rubble . Shearer made his film debut in the 1953 film Abbott and Costello Go to Mars , in which he only had a small part . Later that year , he made his first big film performance in The Robe . Throughout his childhood and teenage years he worked in television , film , and radio . In 1957 , Shearer played the precursor to the Eddie Haskell character in the pilot episode of the television series Leave It to Beaver . After the filming , Shearer 's parents said they did not want him to be a regular in a series . Instead they wanted him to just do occasional work so that he could have a normal childhood . Shearer and his parents made the decision not to accept the role in the series if it was picked up by a television network . 
 Shearer attended UCLA as a political science major in the early 1960s and decided to quit show business to become a " serious person " . However , he says this lasted approximately a month , and he joined the staff of the Daily Bruin , UCLA 's school newspaper , during his first year. and as editor of the college humor magazine ( Satyr ) including the June 1964 parody , <unk> He also worked as a newscaster at KRLA , a top 40 radio station in Pasadena , during this period . According to Shearer , after graduating , he had " a very serious agenda going on , and it was ' Stay Out of the Draft ' . " He attended graduate school at Harvard University for one year and worked at the state legislature in Sacramento ( California ) . In 1967 and 1968 he was a high school teacher , teaching English and social studies . He left teaching following " disagreements with the administration . " 
 From 1969 to 1976 , Shearer was a member of The Credibility Gap , a radio comedy group that included David Lander , Richard Beebe and Michael McKean . The group consisted of " a bunch of newsmen " at KRLA 1110 , " the number two station " in Los Angeles . They wanted to do more than just straight news , so they hired comedians who were talented vocalists . Shearer heard about it from a friend so he brought over a tape to the station and nervously gave it to the receptionist . By the time he got home , there was a message on his answering machine asking , " Can you come to work tomorrow ? " The group 's radio show was canceled in 1970 by KRLA and in 1971 by <unk> @-@ FM , so they started performing in various clubs and concert venues . While at KRLA , Shearer also interviewed Creedence Clearwater Revival for the Pop Chronicles music documentary . In 1973 , Shearer appeared as Jim <unk> on How Time <unk> , an album by The Firesign Theatre 's David <unk> . The Credibility Gap broke up 1976 when Lander and McKean left to perform in the sitcom Laverne & Shirley . Shearer started working with Albert Brooks , producing one of Brooks ' albums and co @-@ writing the film Real Life . Shearer also started writing for Martin Mull 's television series Fernwood 2 Night . In the mid @-@ 1970s , he started working with Rob Reiner on a pilot for ABC . The show , which starred Christopher Guest , Tom Leopold and McKean , was not picked up . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Saturday Night Live = = = 
 In August 1979 , Shearer was hired as a writer and cast member on Saturday Night Live , one of the first additions to the cast , and an unofficial replacement for John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd , who were both leaving the show . Al Franken recommended Shearer to Saturday Night Live creator Lorne Michaels . Shearer describes his experience on the show as a " living hell " and " not a real pleasant place to work . " He did not get along well with the other writers and cast members and states that he was not included with the cast in the opening montage ( although he was added to the montage for latter episodes of the 1979 @-@ 80 season ) and that Lorne Michaels had told the rest of the cast that he was just a writer . Michaels left Saturday Night Live at the end of the fifth season , taking the entire cast with him . Shearer told new executive producer Jean <unk> that he was " not a fan of Lorne 's " and offered to stay with the show if he was given the chance to overhaul the program and bring in experienced comedians , like Christopher Guest . However , <unk> turned him down , so he decided to leave with the rest of the cast . 
 In 1984 , while promoting the film This Is Spinal Tap , Shearer , Christopher Guest and Michael McKean had a performance on Saturday Night Live . All three members were offered the chance to join to the show in the 1984 – 1985 season . Shearer accepted because he was treated well by the producers and he thought the backstage environment had improved but later stated that he " didn 't realize that guests are treated better than the regulars . " Guest also accepted the offer while McKean rejected it , although he would join the cast in 1994 . Dick Ebersol , who replaced Lorne Michaels as the show 's producer , said that Shearer was " a gifted performer but a pain in the butt . He 's just so demanding on the <unk> of things and he 's very , very hard on the working people . He 's just a nightmare @-@ to @-@ deal @-@ with person . " In January 1985 , Shearer left the show for good , partially because he felt he was not being used enough . Martin Short said Shearer " wanted to be creative and Dick [ Ebersol ] wanted something else . [ ... ] I think he felt his voice wasn 't getting represented on the show . When he wouldn 't get that chance , it made him very upset . " 
 = = = Spinal Tap = = = 
 Shearer co @-@ created , co @-@ wrote and co @-@ starred in Rob Reiner 's 1984 film This Is Spinal Tap . Shearer , Reiner , Michael McKean and Christopher Guest received a deal to write a first draft of a screenplay for a company called Marble Arch . They decided that the film could not be written and instead filmed a 20 @-@ minute demo of what they wanted to do . It was eventually greenlighted by Norman Lear and Jerry <unk> at Embassy Pictures . The film satirizes the wild personal behavior and musical pretensions of hard rock and heavy metal bands , as well as the hagiographic tendencies of <unk> of the time . The three core members of the band Spinal Tap — David St. Hubbins , Derek Smalls and Nigel Tufnel — were portrayed by McKean , Shearer and Guest respectively . The three actors play their musical instruments and speak with mock English accents throughout the film . There was no script , although there was a written breakdown of most of the scenes , and many of the lines were ad @-@ libbed . It was filmed in 25 days . 
 Shearer said in an interview that " The animating impulse was to do rock ' n ' roll right . The four of us had been around rock ' n ' roll and we were just amazed by how relentlessly the movies got it wrong . Because we were funny people it was going to be a funny film , but we wanted to get it right . " When they tried to sell it to various Hollywood studios , they were told that the film would not work . The group kept saying , " No , this is a story that 's pretty familiar to people . We 're not introducing them to anything they don 't really know , " so Shearer thought it would at least have some resonance with the public . The film was only a modest success upon its initial release but found greater success , and a cult following , after its video release . In 2000 , the film was ranked 29th on the American Film Institute 's list of the top 100 comedy movies in American cinema and it was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 Shearer , Guest and McKean have since worked on several projects as their Spinal Tap characters . They released three albums : This Is Spinal Tap ( 1984 ) , Break Like the Wind ( 1992 ) and Back From The Dead ( 2009 ) . In 1992 , Spinal Tap appeared in an episode of The Simpsons called " The Otto Show " . The band has played several concerts , including at Live Earth in London on July 7 , 2007 . In anticipation of the show , Rob Reiner directed a short film entitled Spinal Tap . In 2009 , the band released Back from the Dead to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the release of the film . The album features re @-@ recorded versions of songs featured in This Is Spinal Tap and its soundtrack , and five new songs . The band performed a one date " world tour " at London 's Wembley Arena on June 30 , 2009 . The <unk> , a mock band featured in the film A Mighty Wind that is also made up of characters played by Shearer , McKean and Guest – was the opening act for the show . 
 = = = The Simpsons = = = 
 Shearer is also known for his prolific work as a voice actor on The Simpsons . Matt Groening , the creator of the show , was a fan of Shearer 's work , while Shearer was a fan of a column Groening used to write . Shearer was asked if he wanted to be in the series , but he was initially reluctant because he thought the recording sessions would be too much trouble . He felt voice acting was " not a lot of fun " because traditionally , voice actors record their parts separately . He was told that the actors would record their lines together and after three calls , executive producer James L. Brooks managed to convince Shearer to join the cast . Shearer 's first impression of The Simpsons was that it was funny . Shearer , who thought it was a " pretty cool " way to work , found it peculiar that the members of the cast were adamant about not being known to the public as the people behind the voices . 
 Shearer provides voices for Principal Skinner , Kent Brockman , Mr. Burns , Waylon Smithers , Ned Flanders , Reverend Lovejoy , Dr. Hibbert , Lenny Leonard , Otto Mann , Rainier Wolfcastle , Dr. Marvin Monroe and many others . He has described all of his regular characters ' voices as " easy to slip into . [ ... ] I wouldn 't do them if they weren 't easy . " Shearer modeled Mr. Burns 's voice on the two actors Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan . Shearer says that Burns is the most difficult character for him to voice because it is rough on his vocal cords and he often needs to drink tea and honey to soothe his voice . He describes Burns as his favorite character , saying he " like [ s ] Mr. Burns because he is pure evil . A lot of evil people make the mistake of diluting it . Never adulterate your evil . " Shearer is also the voice of Burns ' assistant Smithers , and is able to perform dialogue between the two characters in one take . In the episode , " Bart 's Inner Child " , Harry Shearer said " wow " in the voice of Otto , which was then used when Otto was seen jumping on a trampoline . Ned Flanders had been meant to be just a neighbor that Homer was jealous of , but because Shearer used " such a sweet voice " for him , Flanders was broadened to become a Christian and a sweet guy that someone would prefer to live next to over Homer . Dr. Marvin Monroe 's voice was based on psychiatrist David <unk> . Monroe has been retired since the seventh season because voicing the character strained Shearer 's throat . 
 In 2004 , Shearer criticized what he perceived as the show 's declining quality : " I rate the last three seasons as among the worst , so season four looks very good to me now . " Shearer has also been vocal about " The Principal and the Pauper " ( season nine , 1997 ) one of the most controversial episodes of The Simpsons . Many fans and critics reacted negatively to the revelation that Principal Seymour Skinner , a recurring character since the first season , was an impostor . The episode has been criticized by both Shearer and Groening . In a 2001 interview , Shearer recalled that after reading the script , he told the writers , " That 's so wrong . You 're taking something that an audience has built eight years or nine years of investment in and just tossed it in the trash can for no good reason , for a story we 've done before with other characters . It 's so arbitrary and gratuitous , and it 's disrespectful to the audience . " Due to scheduling and availability conflicts , Shearer decided not to participate in The Simpsons Ride , which opened in 2008 , so none of his characters have vocal parts and many do not appear in the ride at all . In a 2010 interview on The Howard Stern Show , Shearer alluded that the reason he was not part of the ride was because he would not be getting paid for it . 
 Until 1998 , Shearer was paid $ 30 @,@ 000 per episode . During a pay dispute in 1998 , Fox threatened to replace the six main voice actors with new actors , going as far as preparing for casting of new voices . The dispute , however , was resolved and Shearer received $ 125 @,@ 000 per episode until 2004 , when the voice actors demanded that they be paid $ 360 @,@ 000 an episode . The dispute was resolved a month later , and Shearer 's pay rose to $ 250 @,@ 000 per episode . After salary re @-@ negotiations in 2008 , the voice actors received $ 400 @,@ 000 per episode . Three years later , with Fox threatening to cancel the series unless production costs were cut , Shearer and the other cast members accepted a 30 percent pay cut , down to just over $ 300 @,@ 000 per episode . 
 On May 13 , 2015 , Shearer announced he was leaving the show . After the other voice actors signed a contract for the same pay , Shearer refused , stating it was not enough . Al Jean made a statement from the producers saying " the show must go on , " but did not elaborate on what might happen to the characters Shearer voiced . On July 7 , 2015 , Shearer agreed to continue with the show , on the same terms as the other voice actors . 
 = = = Le Show and radio work = = = 
 Since 1983 , Shearer has been the host of the public radio comedy / music program Le Show . The program is a hodgepodge of satirical news commentary , music , and sketch comedy that takes aim at the " mega morons of the mighty media " . It is carried on many National Public Radio and other public radio stations throughout the United States . Since the merger of <unk> and XM satellite radio services the program is no longer available on either . The show has also been made available as a podcast on iTunes and by <unk> . On the weekly program Shearer alternates between DJing , reading and commenting on the news of the day after the manner of Mort Sahl , and performing original ( mostly political ) comedy sketches and songs . In 2008 , Shearer released a music CD called Songs of the Bushmen , consisting of his satirical numbers about former President George W. Bush on Le Show . Shearer says he criticizes both Republicans and Democrats equally , and also says that " the iron law of doing comedy about politics is you make fun of whoever is running the place " and that " everyone else is just running around talking . They are the ones who are actually doing something , changing people 's lives for better or for worse . Other people the media calls ' satirists ' don 't work that way . " 
 Since encountering satellite news feeds when he worked on Saturday Night Live , Shearer has been fascinated with the contents of the video that does not air . Shearer refers to these clips as found objects . " I thought , wow , there is just an unending supply of this material , and it 's wonderful and fascinating and funny and sometimes haunting – but it 's always good , " said Shearer . He collects this material and uses it on Le Show and on his website . In 2008 , he assembled video clips of newsmakers from this collection into an art installation titled " The Silent Echo Chamber " which was exhibited at The Aldrich Contemporary Art Museum in Ridgefield , Connecticut . The exhibit was also displayed in 2009 at Institut <unk> d 'Art Modern ( <unk> ) in Valencia , Spain and in 2010 at the New Orleans Contemporary Arts Center . 
 In 2006 Shearer appeared with Brian Hayes in four episodes of the BBC Radio 4 sitcom Not Today , Thank You , playing Nostrils , a man so ugly he cannot stand to be in his own presence . He was originally scheduled to appear in all six episodes but had to withdraw from recording two due to a problem with his work permit . 
 On June 19 , 2008 , it was announced that Shearer would receive a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in the radio category . The date of the ceremony where his star will be put in place has yet to be announced . 
 = = = Further career = = = 
 In 2002 , Shearer directed his first feature film Teddy Bears ' Picnic , which he also wrote . The plot is based on Bohemian Grove , which hosts a three @-@ week encampment of some of the most powerful men in the world . The film was not well received by critics . It garnered a 0 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , with all 19 reviews being determined as negative and received a rating of 32 out of 100 ( signifying " generally negative reviews " ) on Metacritic from 10 reviews . In 2003 , he co @-@ wrote J. Edgar ! The Musical with Tom Leopold , which spoofed J. Edgar Hoover 's relationship with Clyde Tolson . It premiered at the U.S. Comedy Arts Festival in Aspen , Colorado and starred Kelsey Grammer and John Goodman . 
 In 2003 , Shearer , Guest and McKean starred in the folk music mockumentary A Mighty Wind , portraying a band called The <unk> . The film was written by Guest and Eugene Levy , and directed by Guest . Shearer had a major role in the Guest @-@ directed parody of Oscar politicking For Your Consideration in 2006 . He played Victor Allan Miller , a veteran actor who is convinced that he is going to be nominated for an Academy Award . He also appeared as a news anchor in Godzilla with fellow The Simpsons cast members Hank Azaria and Nancy Cartwright . His other film appearances include The Right Stuff , Portrait of a White Marriage , The Fisher King , The Truman Show , <unk> and Small Soldiers . 
 Shearer has also worked as a columnist for the Los Angeles Times Magazine , but decided that it " became such a waste of time to bother with it . " His columns have also been published in Slate and Newsweek . Since May 2005 he has been a contributing blogger at The Huffington Post . Shearer has written three books . Man Bites Town , published in 1993 , is a collection of columns that he wrote for The Los Angeles Times between 1989 and 1992 . Published in 1999 , It 's the Stupidity , Stupid analyzed the hatred some people had for then @-@ President Bill Clinton . Shearer believes that Clinton became disliked because he had an affair with " the least powerful , least credentialed women cleared into his official compound . " His most recent book is Not Enough Indians , his first novel . Published in 2006 , it is a comic novel about Native Americans and gambling . Without the " pleasures of collaboration " and " spontaneity and improvisation which characterize his other projects " , Not Enough Indians was a " struggle " for Shearer to write . He said that " the only fun thing about it was having written it . It was lonely , I had no deal for it and it took six years to do . It was a profoundly disturbing act of self @-@ discipline . " 
 Shearer has released five solo comedy albums : It Must Have Been Something I Said ( 1994 ) , Dropping Anchors ( 2006 ) , Songs Pointed and Pointless ( 2007 ) , Songs of the Bushmen ( 2008 ) and Greed and Fear ( 2010 ) . His most recent CD , Greed and Fear is mainly about Wall Street economic issues , rather than politics like his previous albums . Shearer decided to make the album when he " started getting amused by the language of the economic meltdown – when ' toxic assets ' suddenly became ' troubled assets , ' going from something poisoning the system to just a bunch of delinquent youth with dirty faces that needed not removal from the system but just ... understanding . " 
 In May 2006 , Shearer received an honorary doctorate from Goucher College . 
 = = = The Big Uneasy = = = 
 Shearer is the director of The Big Uneasy ( 2010 ) , a documentary film about the impacts of Hurricane Katrina on New Orleans . Narrated by actor John Goodman , the film describes levee failures and catastrophic flooding in the New Orleans metropolitan area , and includes extended interviews with former LSU professor Ivor Van Heerden , Robert Bea , an engineering professor at the University of California at Berkeley , and Maria <unk> , an engineer and contract specialist for the Los Angeles district of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers . The film is critical of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and its management of flood protection projects in Southern Louisiana . Shearer maintains that Hurricane Katrina 's " ... tragic floods creating widespread damage were caused by manmade errors in engineering and judgment . " 
 Shearer 's film currently has a 74 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on twenty @-@ three reviews by approved critics . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Shearer married Penelope Nichols in 1974 . They divorced in 1977 . He has been married to singer @-@ songwriter Judith Owen since 1993 . In 2005 , the couple launched their own record label called <unk> Records . Shearer has homes in Santa Monica , California , the French Quarter of New Orleans , Louisiana , and London . He first went to New Orleans in 1988 and has attended every edition of New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival since . 
 Shearer often speaks and writes about the failure of the Federal levee system which flooded New Orleans during Hurricane Katrina , belittling the coverage of it in the mainstream media and criticizing the role of the United States Army Corps of Engineers . Prior to the DVD release of his film , The Big Uneasy , Shearer would hold screenings of the film at different venues and take questions from audience members . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 Shearer was the last of the six regular voice actors from The Simpsons to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Character Voice @-@ Over Performance . His win came for the season 25 episode " Four <unk> and a Funeral " . 
 = Over ( Lindsay Lohan song ) = 
 " Over " is a song by American actress and singer @-@ songwriter Lindsay Lohan from her debut studio album Speak ( 2004 ) . The song was written by Lohan , Kara DioGuardi and John Shanks , and produced by Shanks and DioGuardi . " Over " was released as the second single from Speak on December 13 , 2004 in the United States , by Casablanca Records . Lyrically , " Over " is about how her boyfriend will not commit and that their relationship feels " on again , off again " . 
 Critically , " Over " received positive reviews from music critics , who called the song " catchy " and praised Lohan 's vocal performance . " Over " also achieved moderate commercial success worldwide , reaching top thirty positions in Australia , Ireland and the United Kingdom . In the United States , the song peaked at number one on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles for three weeks . 
 Jake Nava directed the accompanying music video for " Over " , which <unk> Lohan and her love interest being distanced by his parents . The singer performed the track in TV programs such as Good Morning America , in addition to online performances . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Over " was written by Kara DioGuardi , John Shanks , and Lohan , produced by Shanks and DioGuardi , with Shanks playing the bass , guitar , keyboards , and doing the audio mixing , while DioGuardi provided background vocals for the song . Jeff Rothschild was responsible for Lohan 's vocal recording , which occurred at the Henson Recording Studios in Hollywood , California . He also handled the song 's mixing , programming and engineering . Other engineers involved were Dave Audé and Mark Valentine . " Over " is written in the time signature of common time with a moderate tempo of 90 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C minor with Lohan 's voice spanning from C4 to C5 . According to Spence D. of IGN , " Over " begins like a song by The Cure , complete with a " mournful acoustic guitar " and a " haunting piano @-@ tuned synth " . He wrote that since the song was not penned by Robert Smith , " it quickly turns into a slow rocker in which Lohan returns to her ' can 't live without you ' love torn subject matter " . In an interview with The Ellen DeGeneres Show on March 28 , 2014 , Lohan told DeGeneres the song was about her break @-@ up with Wilmer Valderrama . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Over " received positive reviews from music critics . While responding negatively to a majority of Speak , John Murphy of MusicOMH cited " Over " as being " actually rather good " and noted similarities between the song and the works of Michelle Branch . Nicholas Fonseca from Entertainment Weekly considered the track a " tween @-@ slumber @-@ party @-@ friendly " which " is perfect for singing into your curling iron in front of the mirror " . Sputnikmusic called " Over " " awesomely catchy " , and complimented its guitar tone . 
 " Over " achieved moderate commercial success worldwide . In the United States , the song reached on Billboard 's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart for three weeks , and reached number 39 on the Pop Songs component chart . In the United Kingdom , the song reached a peak of number 27 on its singles chart . In Australia , " Over " debuted at its peak of number 27 on the ARIA Charts , falling out of the chart seven weeks later . The song also attained the top thirty in Ireland , peaking at number 19 . On the European Hot 100 Singles , " Over " managed to reach number 79 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Over " was directed by Jake Nava in Los Angeles , California , who also directed the video for her previous single " Rumors " ( 2004 ) . It was inspired by the 1999 film American Beauty . In the video , Lohan is walking home , when she sees her love interest ( played by Drew Fuller ) looking out of a window in his house as his mother sets the table behind him . Then his father comes up to him , and they begin to argue . The curtains close and Lohan continues on to her house , next door to her boyfriend ’ s , and runs up to her bedroom . Looking out her window , she sees that he is looking back at her . As noted inside Lohan ’ s bedroom , she is starting to experiment with rebellious adolescence . There are Teletubbies and stuffed pandas , but also posters of bands such as L7 , the Dead Kennedys and CBGB . These imagery are intercut with shots of Lohan and her band playing in a garage , a pool party , and also her love interest destroying his father ’ s car in the family garage . 
 The video received positive reviews from critics . IGN 's Spence D. commented that " you 've got a somewhat cliched , but nonetheless hit @-@ worthy video montage " . Justin Moran , while ranking Lohan 's best music videos in Paper magazine , stated , 
 " In the video for angry rock @-@ pop track " Over , " Lindsay stares at a neighbor boy from her bedroom window , wears too much black eye makeup , hooks up with said boy in a random trailer and cries ... a lot . This video has a completely over @-@ the @-@ top dramatic ending with Lindsay doing donuts with the neighbor boy in a vintage car ( amazing ) , only to be interrupted by his abusive father . Lindsay cries more , breaks through a window with her heel and shatters a lamp on the ground . Yes , Lindsay , yes . We love it when you 're angry . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In order to promote the single , Lohan appeared on Sessions @ AOL on December 2 , 2004 , where she performed " Over " . Her first televised appearance was on Good Morning America , four days later , as a part of the Women Rule Concert Series , where she sang " Over " accompanied by a performance of " Rumors " . While she sung " Over " with no problems , her mouth was not moving for a second during the performance of " Rumors " , leading the media to accuse her of lip synching . Lohan denied that she was lip synching , claiming that there was a background track because she had fallen ill recently . Kim <unk> , of Casablanca Records , supported this statement by saying , " Yes , on the first song there were background tracks , which were not on the second song . " In addition to these performances , she sang the song on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on December 16 . In January 2005 , Lohan performed " Over " and " Speak " at Yahoo 's Live @ Launch , where she also gave an interview . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded and mixed at Henson Recording Studios at Los Angeles , California . 
 Personnel 
 Lindsay Lohan – songwriting , vocals 
 Kara DioGuardi – songwriting , producer , background vocals 
 John Shanks – songwriting , producer , bass , guitar , keyboards , mixing 
 Dave Audé – engineer 
 Jeff Rothschild – drums , engineer , mixing , programming 
 Mark Valentine – engineer 
 Credits are taken from Speak liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Gefjon = 
 In Norse mythology , Gefjon or Gefjun ( with the alternate spelling Gefion ) is a goddess associated with ploughing , the Danish island of Zealand , the legendary Swedish king Gylfi , the legendary Danish king Skjöldr , foreknowledge , and virginity . Gefjon is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources ; the Prose Edda and Heimskringla , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson ; in the works of skalds ; and appears as a gloss for various Greco @-@ Roman goddesses in some Old Norse translations of Latin works . 
 The Prose Edda and Heimskringla both report that Gefjon plowed away what is now lake Mälaren , Sweden , and with this land formed the island of Zealand , Denmark . In addition , the Prose Edda describes that not only is Gefjon a virgin herself , but that all who die a virgin become her attendants . Heimskringla records that Gefjon married the legendary Danish king Skjöldr and that the two dwelled in Lejre , Denmark . 
 Scholars have proposed theories about the etymology the name of the goddess , connections to fertility and ploughing practices , the implications of the references made to her as a virgin , five potential mentions of the goddess in the Old English poem Beowulf , and potential connections between Gefjon and Grendel 's Mother and / or the goddesses Freyja and Frigg . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The etymology of the name Gefjon has been a matter of dispute . In modern scholarship , the element <unk> in Gef @-@ <unk> is generally theorized as related to the element <unk> in the name Gef @-@ n . The name Gefn is one of the numerous names for the goddess Freyja , and likely means " she who gives ( prosperity or happiness ) . " The connection between the two names has resulted in etymological results of Gefjun meaning " the giving one . " The names Gefjun and Gefn are both related to the Matron groups the <unk> or <unk> . 
 Albert <unk> Sturtevant notes that " the only other feminine personal name which contains the suffix <unk> is Njǫr @-@ un , recorded only in the <unk> [ ... ] , and among the <unk> <unk> <unk> . Whatever the stem syllable <unk> represents ( perhaps * <unk> as in * Ner @-@ <unk> > <unk> ) , the addition of the n- and un @-@ suffixes seems to furnish an exact parallel to Gef @-@ n : <unk> @-@ un ( cf . Njǫr @-@ n : Njǫr @-@ un ) . " 
 A Finnish word for " bride 's outfit , trousseau " may derive from Gefjon 's name . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda , Gefjon appears solely in three stanzas of the poem Lokasenna , where an exchange occurs between Gefjun and Loki at a dinner feast , and the god Odin comes to Gefjon 's defense . After an exchange occurs between Loki and the goddess Iðunn , Gefjon questions why Loki wants to bring negativity into the hall with the assembled gods : 
 The last two lines of the stanza above differ greatly by translation . Henry Adams Bellows comments that the manuscript text for these two lines is " puzzling " and that as a result they have been " freely amended . " In the stanza that follows , Loki responds to Gefjon , commenting that a youthful male once gave her a necklace , and that with this youth Gefjon slept : 
 Odin interjects ; stating that Loki must be quite insane to incur the wrath of Gefjon , for she knows the destinies of mankind just as well as Odin himself : 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 The Prose Edda book Gylfaginning begins with a prose account stating that King Gylfi was once the ruler of " what is now called Sweden , " and that he was said to have given " a certain vagrant woman , as reward for his entertainment , one plough @-@ land in his kingdom , as much as four oxen could plow up in a day and night . " This woman was " of the race of the Æsir " and her name was Gefjun . Gefjun took four oxen from Jötunheimr in the north . These oxen were her sons from a jötunn ( name not provided ) . Gefjun 's plough " cut so hard and deep that it uprooted the land , and the oxen drew the land out into the sea to the west and halted in a certain sound . " Gefjun there placed the land , and bestowed upon it the name Zealand . Where the land had been taken from a lake stands . According to Snorri , the lake is now known as Lake <unk> , located in Sweden , and the inlets in this lake parallel the headlands of Zealand ; however , since this is much more true of Lake Vänern , the myth was probably originally about Vänern , not Mälaren . 
 As a reference , the prose account presents a stanza from a work attributed to the 9th century skald Bragi Boddason : 
 Gefjun dragged from Gylfi , 
 gladly the land beyond value . 
 Denmark 's increase , 
 steam rising from the swift @-@ footed bulls . 
 The oxen bore eight 
 moons of the forehead and four heads , 
 hauling as they went in front of 
 the grassy isle 's wide fissure . 
 In chapter 35 of Gylfaginning , the enthroned figure of High presents a list of goddesses . High presents Gefjun fourth , and says that Gefjun is a virgin , and all who die as virgins attend her . In relation , High notes that , like Gefjun , the goddess Fulla is also a virgin . At the beginning of the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Gefjun is listed among nine goddesses who attend a banquet for Ægir on the island of <unk> ( modern Læsø , Denmark ) . In chapter 32 , Gefjun is listed among six goddesses who attend a party held by Ægir . In chapter 75 , Gefjun is included among a list of 27 ásynjur names . In addition , Gefjun appears in a kenning for the völva <unk> ( " ale @-@ Gefjun " ) employed in the skald Þjóðólfr of Hvinir 's composition Haustlöng as quoted in chapter 17 of Skáldskaparmál . 
 = = = Heimskringla = = = 
 In chapter 5 of Ynglinga saga ( as collected in Heimskringla ) , an euhemerized prose account relates that Odin sent Gefjun from Odense , Funen " north over the sound to seek for land . " There , Gefjun encountered king Gylfi " and he gave her ploughland . " Gefjun went to the land of Jötunheimr , and there bore four sons to a jötunn ( whose name is not provided ) . Gefjun transformed these four sons into oxen , attached them to a plough , and drew forth the land westward of the sea , opposite to Odense . The saga adds that this land is now called Zealand , and that Gefjun married Skjöldr ( described here as " a son of Odin " ) . The two dwelled in Lejre thereafter . From where Gefjun took the land that formed Zealand , a lake was left behind call <unk> , and the saga posits that the bays in lake <unk> correspond to the nesses of Zealand . This is followed by the same stanza used in Gylfaginning above composed by the skald Bragi Boddason . 
 = = = Völsa þáttr = = = 
 Gefjun is sworn by in the þáttr Völsa þáttr , where the daughter of a thrall reluctantly worships a penis severed from a horse : 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Gefjon appears in some Old Norse translations of Latin works as a gloss on the names of goddesses from Greco @-@ Roman mythology . In several works , including <unk> sögur ( based on Geoffrey of Monmouth 's Historia Regum Britanniae ) the goddess Diana is glossed as Gefjon . In <unk> , Gefjon appears as a gloss for the goddess Aphrodite . In other works , Gefjon glosses the goddesses Athena and Vesta . 
 = = Theories = = 
 = = = Ploughing , folk customs , parallels , and fertility = = = 
 A reoccurring theme in legend and folktale consists of a man or , more often , a woman who is challenged to gain as much land as can be traveled within a limited amount of time . This motif is attested by Livy around 1 CE , 5th century BCE Greek historian Herodotus , and in folktales from Northern Europe . In six tales from Jutland , Denmark and one from Germany a plough is used similarly as in Livy 's account , though the conditions are often met by walking or riding . 
 Hilda Ellis Davidson points out a tale from Iceland that features a female settler " whose husband had died on the voyage out , establishing her claim to a piece of land by driving a young <unk> round it . " Davidson notes that in Landnámabók , this is recorded as a recognized method for a woman to claim land , and the work further details that " she might not possess more than she could encircle in this way between sunrise and sunset on a spring day . " Davidson comments that " this sounds like a ritual taking over of land rather than a legal requirement , like the custom of men lighting fires when taking new land , and it is possible that the women 's custom was linked with the fertility goddess . " In addition , Davidson notes that Zealand is the most fertile region of Denmark . 
 Davidson further links folk customs recorded in the 19th century involving ploughs in Northern and Eastern Europe to practices involving Gefjon from the heathen period . Davidson points out that in eastern Europe , a custom is recorded in Russia where women with loosened hair and clad in white would assemble and drag a plough three times around their village during serious disease outbreaks . In Western Europe , yearly ploughing rituals occurring in England and Denmark in preparation for spring sowing which are , in eastern England , held on Plough Monday after the Christmas break . Gangs of young men dragged round a plough , while taking various names . Davidson states that " Gefjon with her giant sons transformed into oxen seems a fitting patroness of ceremonies of this kind . " 
 Davidson finds similar elements and parallels in non @-@ Germanic traditions , such as a folktale regarding the Lady of the Lake from Wales recorded in the 19th century . In the tale , the Lady brings forth " a herd of wondrous cattle " from the water after she consents to marrying a local farmer . Years later , he unwittingly breaks conditions that she had laid down . As a result , the Lady returns to her dwelling beneath the lake , and calls for her cattle to accompany her , calling them by name . In one version of the tale , the Lady calls forth four gray oxen who were ploughing in a field six miles away . Responding to her call , the oxen dragged the plough with them , and the gash in the land that the plough produced was said to have once been clearly visible . 
 A woman was recorded in 1881 as having claimed to recall that people once gathered at the lake on the first Sunday of August , waiting to see whether or not the water would boil up as an indication that the Lady and her oxen would make an appearance . Davidson notes that " here again a supernatural woman is linked both with water and ploughing land . " 
 Davidson states that in Germanic areas of Europe , traditions also exist of supernatural women who travel about the countryside with a plough , examples including Holde and Holle ( from the western and central regions of Germany ) and <unk> and <unk> in traditions from upper Germany , Switzerland , and Austria . Davidson explains that " they were frequently said to travel with a plough around the countryside , in a way reminiscent of the journey of the fertility goddess to bless the land in pre @-@ Christian times , and on these occasions they might be accompanied by a host of tiny children ; it was suggested that these children who died unbaptized , or human offspring replaced by <unk> , but another possibility is that they were the souls of the unborn . " Davidson details that some local tales feature the plough breaking down , the supernatural woman gaining assistance from a helper , and the supernatural woman giving him wooden chips , only for the chips to later to turn to gold . 
 Regarding the plough and Gefjon , Davidson concludes that " the idea behind the taking of the plough round the countryside seems to be that it brought good fortune and prosperity , gifts of a benevolent goddess . Gefjon and her plough thus fit into a large framework of the cult of a goddess associated with fertility of both land and water . " 
 = = = Possible Gylfaginning manuscript alteration = = = 
 Questions have been proposed over the seemingly contradictory description of Gefjon as a virgin in Gylfaginning , yet also as attested as having sexual relations ( Lokasenna , Heimskringla ) and marrying ( Heimskringla ) . John Lindow says that the Gefjon / Gylfi story in Gylfaginning is absent in one branch of manuscripts of the work , and that " the fact that Gylfi is reintroduced directly after it in the other manuscripts , suggests that that it was not part of Snorri 's [ author of the Prose Edda and Heimskringla ] original text but may have been added by a later scribe . " Lindow says that if Snorri did not write it , the possibility exists that whoever added the story either was aware of an association made between Gefjon and the Greek goddess Diana ( as in the " glosses " section above ) " or took the view of the pagan gods as demons and therefore made a whore out of Gefjon . " However , Lindow adds that the reference to Gefjon made by Loki in Lokasenna suggest that the notion of Gefjon partaking in sexual activity may have been widespread . 
 = = = Beowulf = = = 
 Mentions of Gefjon may appear in Beowulf in five passages ( line 49 , line 362 , line 515 , line 1394 , and line 1690 ) . Scholar Frank Battaglia refers to these passages as " the Gefion passages , " and asks " Does Beowulf oppose the Earth Goddess of ancient Germanic religion ? The possibility of such an interpretation follows upon the discovery that the name Gefion , by which early Danes called their female chthonic deity , may occur in the Old English poem five times . " Battaglia further theorizes that : 
 The five Gefion passages seem to highlight the championing of a new order antagonistic to goddess worship . In light of what appears to be an elaborate thematic statement about <unk> in the poem , the new order may also have entailed a change in kinship systems . Grendel and his mother may stand as types of earlier , matrilineal tribes . Further the hall which is the object of struggle between Beowulf and the first two monsters may symbolize the consolidation of new hierarchical social organization among the northern Germanic peoples . 
 Battaglia says that if the passages are taken to represent Gefjon , <unk> mentioned in line 49 refers directly to Gefjon 's sadness at Skjöldr 's ( described as having wed Gefjon in Heimskringla ) death , and that here " we may with some confidence conclude that in a poem about Scyld 's funeral for an Anglo @-@ Danish audience , the word <unk> could probably not have been used without invoking Gefion . " 
 Battaglia posits translations for line 362 ( <unk> <unk> ) as " Gefion 's realm , " line 515 ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) as " Gefion welled up in waves , " line 1394 ( <unk> on <unk> <unk> , <unk> þær <unk> <unk> ) as " not ( even ) in the ground of Gefion , go where he will , " and line 1690 ( <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ; ) as " Gefion gushing , the race of giants . " 
 Scholar Richard North theorizes that Old English <unk> and Old Norse Gefjun and Freyja 's name Gefn may all descend from a common origin ; <unk> a Germanic goddess connected with the sea , whose name means " giving " . 
 = = = Frigg and Freyja = = = 
 Some scholars have proposed a connection between Gefjun and the goddesses Frigg and Freyja due to perceived similarities . Britt @-@ Mari Näsström theorizes that Gefjun is simply another aspect of Freyja , and that the " white youth " that Freyja is accused of sleeping with by Loki in Gylfaginning may be the god Heimdallr . 
 Hilda Ellis Davidson says that " there seems ample indication that Gefjon represents one aspect of a once powerful goddess of the north , the figure representing in Scandinavian myths as either Frigg , the wife of Odin , or Freyja , sister of fertility god Freyr . Freyja , desired by gods , giants and dwarves alike , acted as dispenser of bounty and inspirer of sexual love between men and women like the Greek Aphrodite . " In addition , Davidson says that " as Axel <unk> ( 1901 ) pointed out long ago , we know very little about Gefion , and it is possible that she can be identified with Frigg or Freyja " and not only does the Prose Edda associate her with an afterlife realm of the dead , " in Lokasenna , Loki claims that Gefion was given a jewel by a lover , traditions that would fit in very well with what we know of Freyja . " 
 Regarding parallels drawn between Freyja and Gefjon proposed from the exchange found in Lokasenna , Rudolf Simek says that Lokasenna is a " late composition and the reproach is too much of a stereotype to carry much weight . " Simek says that , regardless , even if Gefjon shouldn 't be identified with Freyja , Gefjon could still be considered " one of the fertility and protective goddesses because of the meaning of her name ( ' the giving one ' ) . " 
 = = Modern influence = = 
 Gefjon appears prominently as the allegorical mother of Norway , Sweden , and Denmark in the forty @-@ page Swedish Romantic poem Gefion , a Poem in Four Cantos by Eleonora Charlotta d <unk> ( 1770 – 1835 ) . A fountain depicting Gefjun driving her oxen sons to pull her plough ( The Gefion Fountain , 1908 ) by Anders <unk> stands in Copenhagen , Denmark , on the island of Zealand , as in the myth . The Gefion family , a family of asteroids , and asteroid 1272 Gefion ( discovered in 1931 by Karl Wilhelm <unk> ) both derive their names from that of the goddess . 
 The highest mountain in Queen Louise Land ( Danish : Dronning Louise Land ) , NE Greenland was named after Gefjon by the 1912 – 13 Danish Expedition to Queen Louise Land led by J.P. Koch . 
 = Brian Williamson = 
 Brian Williamson ( 4 September 1945 – 9 June 2004 ) was a Jamaican gay rights activist who co @-@ founded the Jamaica Forum for Lesbians , All @-@ Sexuals and Gays ( J @-@ FLAG ) . He was known for being one of the earliest openly gay men in Jamaican society and for being one of its best known gay rights activists . 
 Born to an upper @-@ middle @-@ class family in Saint Ann Parish , Williamson initially considered a life in the Roman Catholic clergy before deciding to devote himself to the cause of gay rights in Jamaica . In the 1990s , he purchased an apartment building in the New Kingston area of Kingston , in which he established a gay nightclub , which remained open for two years despite opposition from police . In 1998 , he co @-@ founded J @-@ FLAG with other lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) rights activists , soon becoming the public face of the organisation . As J @-@ FLAG 's representative , he argued in favour of LGBT rights during appearances on Jamaican television and radio programs . This attracted great hostility within Jamaica – a country with particularly high rates of anti @-@ gay prejudice – with J @-@ FLAG members receiving death threats and Williamson surviving a knife attack . For a time he left Jamaica , living in Canada and England for several years , before returning to Kingston in 2002 . 
 In June 2004 , Williamson was murdered in his apartment by an acquaintance , Dwight Hayden , whom he had been aiding with financial handouts . Police believed that Hayden 's motive was robbery , although J @-@ FLAG also suggested that homophobia may have played a part in the killing . Hayden was subsequently sentenced to life in prison . Upon learning of the murder , a crowd assembled in New Kingston to celebrate Williamson 's death , chanting homophobic slogans and lyrics . Conversely , the Jamaican LGBT community held a secret memorial for him , while protests against the killing were held by LGBT rights groups in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Williamson was born to an upper @-@ middle @-@ class family in the rural Saint Ann Parish . He initially considered joining the clergy of the Roman Catholic Church , studying for this position in Montego Bay , but eventually decided against this . In 1979 , he began to devote himself to the cause of gay rights in Jamaica , becoming the first individual to do so in such a public manner . Jamaica had a reputation for its widespread anti @-@ gay prejudice , an attitude that pervaded public discourse at all levels of society , with a number of popular Jamaican musicians inciting violence against gay men in their lyrics . Initially , Williamson offered his apartment in Kingston as a space in which gay Jamaicans could meet roughly every fortnight . In the early 1990s he purchased a large property on New Kingston 's gentrified Haughton Street , converting part of this building into a gay nightclub that he called Entourage . Many of those who attended the club worked in the city 's foreign embassies . Although the police tried to close it down , the club remained open for two years until Williamson was attacked by a patron carrying a knife , which was used to slash Williamson 's arm . Although same @-@ sex sexual relations between men were illegal in Jamaica , Williamson was openly gay . 
 Williamson and other members of Jamaica 's lesbian , gay , bisexual , and transgender ( LGBT ) community decided to form an organisation to campaign for their rights , resulting in the establishment of the Jamaica Forum for Lesbians , All Sexuals , and Gays ( J @-@ FLAG ) in December 1998 . J @-@ FLAG sought to enhance LGBT rights through advocacy and encouraging legal reform , as well as through educational and social service programs . They also kept a record of anti @-@ LGBT hate crimes including assaults , home invasions , and the corrective rape of lesbians , further recording the murder of 30 gay men between 1997 and 2004 . From the time of the group 's foundation , its members were subjected to repeated death threats . Williamson became the public face of the group , appearing on radio talk shows and television shows such as Perspective and Nationwide in which he argued against homophobia and called for greater government investment to tackle the HIV / AIDS pandemic . Unlike most other LGBT rights activists in Jamaica , Williamson did not seek to protect himself by using a pseudonym , disguising his voice , or hiding his appearance . Facing hostility and threats of violence , Williamson left Jamaica and moved to Canada and then England , before returning to the island in 2002 . There , he moved into an apartment in his Haughton Street compound and decided to take a renewed role within Jamaica 's LGBT rights movement . He lived in one room of his apartment block and rented out a number of others . 
 = = Murder = = 
 Financially affluent , Williamson would often offer money or odd jobs to his acquaintances in the LGBT community . Among those whom Williamson befriended was Dwight Hayden , a closeted gay man in his mid @-@ 20s who had been a user of crack cocaine prior to 2002 and who was known locally as " Dog " and " <unk> " . They met in New Kingston and Williamson helped Hayden out by purchasing newspapers which he could then sell on the streets . According to one of Williamson 's flatmates , Desmond Chambers , " I have seen [ Hayden ] here about six times ( and ) anything him want , Brian give him . Brian give him money , Brian give him food and help him to purchase ( newspaper ) to sell on the road . " On 7 June 2004 Hayden arrived at Williamson 's flat with another man , with Williamson welcoming them in and offering them bottles of Guinness . Hayden asked for money from Williamson , who agreed he would give it to him later in the evening . At this , Hayden attacked Williamson , stabbing him around seventy times . 
 Williamson 's body was discovered by Chambers at approximately <unk> Chambers noticed that the air conditioning had been left on , something that Williamson was unlikely to have done , and then realised that Williamson 's bedroom door had been left ajar . Investigating further , he opened the door and discovered Williamson 's corpse lying face down on the floor , with multiple stab wounds to the neck and surrounded by a pool of blood . Williamson 's dog , Tessa , was running about in the room and barking . 
 The scene of the crime was visited by Father Michael Lewis of the Stella Maris Church , who was accompanied by Williamson 's sister <unk> Williams ; she was convinced not to look at the body by Williamson 's friends . Crowds assembled outside the apartment block , made up of individuals who were laughing and celebrating Williamson 's death . Some of the assembled people shouted out statements such as " This is long overdue " , " <unk> he get killed " , " Let 's get them one at a time " , " That 's what you get for sin " , and " Batty man fi dead ! " ( " <unk> should die ! " ) . Others sang " Boom Bye Bye " , a line from a dancehall song by Buju Banton that discusses shooting and burning gay men . Rebecca Schleifer , a Human Rights Watch ( HRW ) researcher , had a meeting with Williamson planned for that day , and arrived at his home to find the assembled crowd ; she noted that " It was like a parade . They were basically partying " . 
 = = = Police investigation and conviction = = = 
 Police issued a statement declaring that they were searching for two men whom Chambers had observed at Williamson 's apartment prior to his death . Corporal Devon Hugh Williams of the Constabulary Communication Network ( CCN ) informed press that the police suspected that the motive of the attack had been robbery , as evidence pointing to the fact that Williamson 's apartment had been ransacked and a safe removed . However , both friends of Williamson and human rights organisations suggested that – given Williamson 's status as an openly gay man – robbery might have been a secondary issue , with homophobia being the main motive behind the crime . J @-@ FLAG expressed its suspicion that the killing was a " hate @-@ related crime " , articulating the view that Williamson had been killed because he was a publicly visible gay man . Amnesty International urged police not to dismiss alternative possible motives . Amnesty 's Piers Bannister informed press that " We do know that there 's a high level of homophobia in Jamaica , so there was a possibility that it was a hate crime . Many hate crime victims are robbed afterward . We 're not saying it wasn 't a robbery ; we just want a full investigation . " Schleifer publicly stated that it is " really important to investigate [ the crime ] thoroughly . Because there are really strong indications that it might have been a homophobic attack " . 
 On June 11 , two days after the murder , police arrested their suspect . Hayden provided a confession and subsequently pleaded guilty in court . Hayden 's legal representative , Randolph Williams , urged the judge to show leniency because the suspect had shown remorse for his crime from the moment of his arrest . The judge , Justice Basil Reid , sentenced Hayden to life in prison with the possibility of parole after fifteen years . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 After his death , the Jamaica Observer described Williamson as " Jamaica 's most prominent gay rights activist " , while both the BBC and The Independent called him the country 's " best @-@ known gay rights activist " , and Gary Younge of The Guardian termed him " the public face of gay rights in the country " . 
 Tony Hadn , a volunteer for J @-@ FLAG , stated that Williamson was " so courageous . He never stopped to think , ' oh , I might get in trouble for this , ' so in that sense he was very selfless . " He was succeeded as J @-@ FLAG 's leader by Gareth Williams , who informed press that Williamson " was the only out gay person in Jamaica who had the courage to put his face on television , I was very close to him ... His murder was really a traumatic loss for our community . " One member of J @-@ FLAG stated that " Brian Williamson is our Martin Luther King " . Four days later , J @-@ FLAG held a memorial devoted to Williamson , which was attended by almost two hundred people ; the memorial involved personal tributes , poetry slams , and lip synching to Whitney Houston songs . 
 On 23 June , the British LGBT rights group OutRage ! held a memorial vigil outside the High Commission of Jamaica in London . OutRage ! leader Peter Tatchell attended the vigil , there proclaiming that the Jamaican Prime Minister , P. J. Patterson , " shares responsibility for the wave of homophobic violence , culminating in the murder of Brian Williamson " because he had failed to decriminalize same @-@ sex sexual activity and clamp down on homophobic violence in Jamaican society . Also in attendance at the vigil were the Green Party 's London Assembly member Darren Johnson , Amnesty International 's Carol <unk> , Big Up 's Charles Anglin , <unk> 's Andrew Prince , and the Lesbian and Gay Immigration Group 's Barry O 'Leary . The London Gay Men 's Chorus attended , singing a rendition of " Let My People Go " . 
 In their 2012 study of the relationship between homophobic attitudes in Jamaica and Britain , Keon West and Miles <unk> described Williamson 's murder as the " most prominent " example of an anti @-@ gay murder on the island . 
 = = = Academic sources = = = 
 = Extra Large Medium = 
 " Extra Large Medium " is the 12th episode of the eighth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . Directed by John Holmquist and written by Steve Callaghan , the episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on February 14 , 2010 . In " Extra Large Medium " , the show 's main character , Peter , discovers that he has supposedly developed " extrasensory perception " ( ESP ) after his two sons , Chris and Stewie , go missing during a family hike in the woods . Soon after being rescued , Chris decides to ask out a classmate at his school , named Ellen , who has Down syndrome , and eventually takes her on a romantic date , which he goes on to regret . Meanwhile , Peter begins performing psychic readings , but is eventually discovered to be faking his ability once he is approached by the town 's police force . 
 The episode generated significant controversy . Former Governor of Alaska and 2008 Republican vice @-@ presidential nominee Sarah Palin , who is referenced briefly in the episode as being the mother of Ellen , took offense to the episode 's portrayal of Down syndrome , due to her son 's diagnosis of the disorder . Andrea Fay Friedman , who was also diagnosed with Down syndrome and portrayed the character of Ellen , publicly refuted Palin , instead supporting executive producer and series creator Seth MacFarlane , who defended the episode , and was also supported by Bill Maher , the host of Real Time . The episode got more criticism from the Parents Television Council during its original broadcast . 
 Despite the controversy , critical responses to the episode were mostly positive ; critics praised its storyline , numerous cultural references , and its portrayal of a person with Down syndrome . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 42 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Jennifer Birmingham , Jackson Douglas , Andrea Fay Friedman , Phil LaMarr , Michele Lee and Nana Visitor , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Music and Lyrics , for the episode 's song entitled " Down Syndrome Girl " , at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . Both Walter Murphy and MacFarlane were recognized for their work on the music and lyrics . " Extra Large Medium " was released on DVD , along with 11 other episodes from the season , on December 13 , 2011 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When the Griffin family decide to go for a hike in the local woods , Chris and Stewie get lost while chasing after a floating butterfly . As a result , they go missing for several days , with only limited supplies . As Lois is at her wits ' end , she decides to see a psychic medium who assures her of the children 's safety and well being . Eventually the boys are found and rescued by Bruce , and returned to their home in Quahog which only furthers Lois 's psychic obsession to the annoyance of a skeptical Brian . In defiance of Lois 's assertion that extrasensory perception exists , Brian has Peter perform a cold reading on a passerby in the park in order to demonstrate that psychic readings are purely an act , and not real . However , Peter is struck by his success as a medium , convincing himself that he actually has extrasensory perception , and decides to capitalize on it by opening his own psychic readings business and performing in front of a live audience . Soon after , Peter 's bluff is finally called when Joe requests his help in a frantic search for a missing person who has been strapped to a bomb . Peter stalls for time during the search ( as he just wants to feel the victim 's daughter 's breasts ) , eventually resulting in a gruesome death when the bomb explodes , prompting Peter to flatly admit that he actually has no psychic powers whatsoever . 
 Meanwhile , during the time when Chris and Stewie were lost in the woods , Chris promises to ask out Ellen , a school classmate with Down syndrome . After their rescue , Stewie helps prepare Chris for a date by dressing him up , and instructing him on how to act through a prolonged musical number . During the date , Ellen turns out to be pushy and demanding , and the relationship quickly falls apart . Chris admits that he had bought into a stereotype of people with Down syndrome being kind and loving , and breaks up with her . Stewie consoles Chris by congratulating him for overcoming his shyness and demonstrating confidence in asking her out on a date , as he had promised to do . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was directed by series regular John Holmquist , and written by series show runner Steve Callaghan before the conclusion of the eighth production season . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Seth MacFarlane and David Zuckerman working as staff writers for the episode . Composer Walter Murphy , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Extra Large Medium " . 
 Actress Andrea Fay Friedman , who was diagnosed with Down syndrome at birth , and who has appeared on several television shows , including Saving Grace and Life Goes On , voiced the character Ellen . Before performing on the show , Friedman stated in an interview that she had never watched Family Guy , but found it to be " funny " after watching several episodes from the series . In developing Friedman 's character , her physical appearance was largely used in creating Ellen , in addition to adding a " bossy " personality to the character , which Friedman was reluctant to perform at first . She eventually " had a nice time " performing the script , however , as it was her first voice acting performance . 
 " Extra Large Medium " , along with the eleven other episodes from the first half of Family Guy 's eighth season , was released on a three @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on December 13 , 2011 . The sets include brief audio commentaries by various crew and cast members for several episodes , a collection of deleted scenes and animatics , a special mini @-@ feature which discussed the process behind animating " And Then There Were Fewer " , a mini @-@ feature entitled " The Comical Adventures of Family Guy – Brian & Stewie : The Lost Phone Call " , and footage of the Family Guy panel at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actress Jennifer Birmingham , actor Jackson Douglas , Andrea Fay Friedman , voice actor Phil LaMarr , singer Michele Lee , and actress Nana Visitor guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Lori Alan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances . Recurring guest voice actors Patrick Warburton and Adam West made guest appearances as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Peter mentions starring in Starlight Express , which is a rock musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber ; although Peter 's role as shown onscreen has little to do with the actual performance . While Stewie and Chris are lost in the forest overnight , Stewie plays a guessing game with one of the answers being Thornton Melon . Stewie looks at the television audience wondering why the majority of them chose Thornton Melon , then Stewie notes that Thornton Melon was the character that Rodney Dangerfield played in the 1986 film Back to School . It was in fact a quote by Henry David Thoreau . Stewie 's reference to a newspaper headline saying " Stewie Defeats Truman " is a takeoff of the famous " Dewey Defeats Truman " headline , which erroneously predicted that Thomas E. Dewey would defeat Harry S. Truman in the 1948 presidential election . Peter 's new career as a psychic is a parody of John Edward and his TV series Crossing Over . While the police depend on Peter to help them find someone , Peter stalls by pretending to channel the spirit of Lou Costello ; his exchange with Joe about the missing man , Mr. Hu who lives on First Street , is a takeoff of the famous Abbott and Costello routine " Who 's on First ? " . Also , there was a cutaway to the Enterprise from the original Star Trek series showing Spock winning the lottery ( with the numbers 18 , 24 , 41 and 72 ) , then <unk> at everyone shortly before leaving . Nana Visitor voices the Enterprise viewscreen , while series writer and producer John Viener voices Spock in the cutaway . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Extra Large Medium " was broadcast on February 14 , 2010 in the United States as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was preceded by an episode of The Simpsons , and Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's spin @-@ off , The Cleveland Show . It was followed by MacFarlane 's second show American Dad ! . The episode was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 42 million viewers , according to the Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with the 2010 Winter Olympics on NBC , Undercover Boss on CBS and Extreme Makeover : Home Edition on ABC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 2 / 8 rating in the 18 – 49 <unk> The Simpsons , The Cleveland Show and American Dad ! , in addition to significantly edging out all three shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings were slightly up from the previous episode , " Dial Meg for Murder " . 
 Reviews of the episode were positive , citing the episode as " a pleasant surprise . " In a simultaneous review of the episodes of The Simpsons and American Dad ! that preceded and followed the episode respectively and The Cleveland Show , Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club commented that he felt that the Chris plot line was " hung together in a way the storylines usually don 't on this show , " adding that , " I 'll give the show points for both degree of difficulty and pulling off something I didn 't think it would . " In the conclusion of his review , VanDerWerff rated the episode as a B- , beating only The Cleveland Show episode " Buried Pleasure " . In a slightly less positive review , Ramsey Isler of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 , and began his assessment of the episode by stating , " This one will certainly get some politically correct Down syndrome advocates all riled up , but Family Guy is nothing without a little controversy . " Isler went on to call the plot " uneven in quality , " but with " some moments that could be in the Family Guy " greatest hits " archive . " Television critic Jason Hughes of the TV Squad called the Abbott and Costello joke " hilariously appropriate " , and stated that the episode 's portrayal of a person with Down syndrome was " refreshing . " 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 At one point , Ellen states that her mother is the former Governor of Alaska , which strongly implies that her mother is Sarah Palin , the only woman to have served in the office of governor in the state . Palin 's daughter Bristol publicly stated on her mother 's Facebook profile on February 16 , 2010 , that she took offense to the episode , feeling that it mocked her brother , Trig , who has Down syndrome , commenting , " If the writers of a particularly pathetic cartoon show thought they were being clever in mocking my brother and my family yesterday , they failed . All they proved is that they 're heartless jerks . " Sarah Palin also criticized the episode in an appearance on The O 'Reilly Factor , calling those who made the show " cruel , cold @-@ hearted people . " The writer of the episode , Steve Callaghan , addressed Palin 's criticism of the episode at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International on July 24 , 2010 , in talking about the upcoming ninth season of the show , stating , " This season , I decided that I 'd even things out and write something that would offend smart people . " 
 In an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Seth MacFarlane responded to Palin 's criticism , saying that the series always uses satire as the basis of its humor , and that the show is an " equal @-@ opportunity offender . " In addition , Andrea Fay Friedman , who voiced Ellen , and who herself has Down syndrome , also responded to the criticisms saying that the joke was aimed at Sarah Palin and not her son , and that " former Governor Palin does not have a sense of humor . " In a subsequent interview , Friedman rebuked Palin , accusing her of using her son , Trig , as a political prop to pander for votes , saying that she has a normal life and that Palin 's son should be treated as normal , rather than like a " loaf of French bread . " Later , MacFarlane addressed both Palin 's statement and Friedman 's rebuttal in an appearance on Real Time with Bill Maher calling Palin 's outrage a presumptuous attempt to defend people with Down syndrome , and characterizing Friedman 's statement as her way of saying that she does not need feigned pity from Palin . Family Guy cast member Patrick Warburton stated that he objected to the joke , saying , " I know that you have to be an equal @-@ opportunity offender , but there are some things that I just don 't think are funny . " While frequent MacFarlane critic Parents Television Council touched on the Palin controversy in its assessment of the episode , the rest of the show 's content — which contained " mean @-@ spirited pot @-@ shots , explicit language , and strong sexual content " — earned the watchdog group 's " Worst TV Show of the Week " title . The PTC specifically cited the Broadway @-@ style song , which the PTC said " contained all the stereotypes of mental retardation " and " disturbing sexual references , " and the climatic scene in the subplot , where Peter pretends to be a psychic , which the PTC said also contained sexual humor . 
 On July 8 , 2010 , the episode 's song entitled " Down Syndrome Girl " was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music and Lyrics at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . Series creator Seth MacFarlane and composer Walter Murphy were nominated for their work on the song 's lyrics and music . On July 24 , 2010 , MacFarlane gave a live performance of the song at the 2010 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , to an audience of nearly 4 @,@ 200 attendees . At the Creative Arts Awards on August 21 , 2010 , " Down Syndrome Girl " lost to the USA Network series Monk . 
 = Red fox = 
 The red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) is the largest of the true foxes and the most abundant wild member of the Carnivora , being present across the entire Northern Hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to North Africa , North America and Eurasia . It is listed as least concern by the IUCN . Its range has increased alongside human expansion , having been introduced to Australia , where it is considered harmful to native mammals and bird populations . Due to its presence in Australia , it is included among the list of the " world 's 100 worst invasive species " . 
 The red fox originated from smaller @-@ sized ancestors from Eurasia during the Middle Villafranchian period , and colonised North America shortly after the Wisconsin glaciation . Among the true foxes , the red fox represents a more progressive form in the direction of carnivory . Apart from its large size , the red fox is distinguished from other fox species by its ability to adapt quickly to new environments . Despite its name , the species often produces individuals with other colourings , including albinos and <unk> . Forty @-@ five subspecies are currently recognised , which are divided into two categories : the large northern foxes , and the small , basal southern foxes of Asia and the Middle East . 
 Red foxes are usually together in pairs or small groups consisting of families , such as a mated pair and their young , or a male with several females having kinship ties . The young of the mated pair remain with their parents to assist in caring for new kits . The species primarily feeds on small rodents , though it may also target rabbits , game birds , reptiles , invertebrates and young ungulates . Fruit and vegetable matter is also eaten sometimes . Although the red fox tends to kill smaller predators , including other fox species , it is vulnerable to attack from larger predators , such as wolves , coyotes , golden jackals and medium- and large @-@ sized felines . 
 The species has a long history of association with humans , having been extensively hunted as a pest and furbearer for many centuries , as well as being represented in human folklore and mythology . Because of its widespread distribution and large population , the red fox is one of the most important <unk> animals harvested for the fur trade . Too small to pose a threat to humans , it has successfully colonised many suburban areas . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 Females are called vixens , and young cubs , pups , or kits . Although the Arctic fox has a small native population in northern Scandinavia , while the corsac fox 's range extends into European Russia , the red fox is the only fox native to Western Europe , and so is simply called " the fox " in colloquial British English . 
 The word " fox " comes from Old English , which derived from Proto @-@ Germanic * <unk> . Compare with West Frisian <unk> , Dutch vos , and German Fuchs . This , in turn , derives from Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European * <unk> ‘ thick @-@ haired ; tail ' . Compare to the Hindi <unk> ̃ ch ‘ tail ' , <unk> B <unk> ‘ tail ; <unk> ' , and Lithuanian <unk> ‘ fur ' . The bushy tail also forms the basis for the fox 's Welsh name , <unk> , literally ‘ bushy ' , from <unk> ‘ bush ' . Likewise , Portuguese : <unk> from <unk> ‘ tail ' , Lithuanian <unk> from <unk> ‘ tail ' , and Ojibwa <unk> from <unk> , which refers to the up and down " bounce " or flickering of an animal or its tail . 
 The scientific term vulpes derives from the Latin word for fox , and gives the adjectives vulpine and <unk> . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The red fox is considered a more specialised form of Vulpes than the Afghan , corsac and Bengal foxes in the direction of size and adaptation to carnivory ; the skull displays much fewer neotenous traits than in other species , and its facial area is more developed . It is , however , not as adapted for a purely carnivorous diet as the Tibetan fox . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The species is Eurasian in origin , and may have evolved from either Vulpes alopecoides or the related Chinese V. <unk> , both of which lived during the Middle Villafranchian . The earliest fossil specimens of V. vulpes were uncovered in Baranya , Hungary dating from 3 @.@ 4 @-@ 1 @.@ 8 million years ago . The ancestral species was likely smaller than the current one , as the earliest red fox fossils are smaller than modern populations . The earliest fossil remains of the modern species date back to the mid @-@ Pleistocene in association with the refuse of early human settlements . This has led to the theory that the red fox was hunted by primitive humans as both a source of food and pelts . 
 = = = Colonisation of North America = = = 
 Red foxes colonised the North American continent in two waves : during or before the Illinoian glaciation , and during the Wisconsinan glaciation . Gene mapping demonstrates that red foxes in North America have been isolated from their Old World counterparts for over 400 @,@ 000 years , thus raising the possibility that speciation has occurred , and that the previous binomial name of Vulpes fulva may be valid . In the far north , red fox fossils have been found in Sangamonian deposits in the Fairbanks District and Medicine Hat . Fossils dating from the <unk> are present in 25 sites in Arkansas , California , Colorado , Idaho , Missouri , New Mexico , Tennessee , Texas , Virginia , and Wyoming . Although they ranged far south during the Wisconsinan , the onset of warm conditions shrank their range toward the north , and have only recently reclaimed their former American ranges because of human @-@ induced environmental changes . Genetic testing indicates two distinct red fox refugia exist in North America , which have been separated since the Wisconsinan . The northern ( or boreal ) refugium occurs in Alaska and western Canada , and consists of the large subspecies V. v. alascensis , V. v. <unk> , V. v. regalis , and V. v. <unk> . The southern ( or montane ) refugium occurs in the subalpine parklands and alpine meadows of the Rocky Mountains , the Cascade Range , and Sierra Nevada . It encompasses the subspecies V. v. macroura , V. v. <unk> , and V. v. necator . The latter clade has been separated from all other red fox populations since the last glacial maximum , and may possess unique ecological or physiological adaptations . 
 Although European foxes were introduced to portions of the United States in the 1900s recent genetic investigation indicates an absence of European fox haplotypes in any North American populations . Also , introduced eastern red foxes have colonized southern California , the San Joaquin Valley , and San Francisco Bay Area , but appear to have mixed with the Sacramento Valley red fox V. v. <unk> only in a narrow hybrid zone . In addition , no evidence is seen of interbreeding of eastern red foxes in California with the montane Sierra Nevada red fox V. v. necator or other populations in the Intermountain West ( between the Rocky Mountains to the east and the Cascade and Sierra Nevada ranges to the west . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 As of 2005 , 45 subspecies are recognised . In 2010 , another distinct subspecies , which inhabits the grasslands of the Sacramento Valley , V. v. <unk> , was identified through mitochondrial haplotype studies . 
 Substantial gene pool mixing between different subspecies is known ; British red foxes have crossbred extensively with foxes imported from Germany , France , Belgium , Sardinia , and possibly Siberia and Scandinavia . However , genetic studies suggest very little differences between red foxes sampled across Europe . Lack of genetic diversity is consistent with the red fox being a highly <unk> species , with one red fox covering 320 km ( 200 mi ) in under a year 's time . 
 Red fox subspecies in Eurasia and North Africa are divided into two categories : 
 Northern foxes are large and brightly coloured . 
 Southern grey desert foxes include the Asian subspecies V. v. <unk> , V. v. pusilla , and V. v. flavescens . These foxes display transitional features between northern red foxes and smaller fox species ; their skulls possess more primitive , neotenous traits than the northern forms , and they are much smaller ; the maximum sizes attained by southern foxes are invariably less than the average sizes of northern foxes . Their limbs are also longer , and their ears larger . 
 Red foxes living in Middle Asia show physical traits intermediate to the northern and southern forms . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Build = = = 
 The red fox has an elongated body and relatively short limbs . The tail , which is longer than half the body length ( 70 per cent of head and body length ) , is fluffy and reaches the ground when in a standing position . Their pupils are oval and vertically oriented . <unk> membranes are present , but move only when the eyes are closed . The forepaws have five digits , while the hind feet have only four and lack dewclaws . They are very agile , being capable of jumping over 2 @-@ m @-@ high fences , and swim well . Vixens normally have four pairs of teats , though vixens with seven , nine , or ten teats are not uncommon . The testes of males are smaller than those of Arctic foxes . 
 Their skulls are fairly narrow and elongated , with small <unk> . Their canine teeth are relatively long . Sexual dimorphism of the skull is more pronounced than in corsac foxes , with female red foxes tending to have smaller skulls than males , with wider nasal regions and hard palates , as well as having larger canines . Their skulls are distinguished from those of dogs by their narrower muzzles , less crowded premolars , more slender canine teeth , and concave rather than convex profiles . 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 Red foxes are the largest species of the genus Vulpes . However , relative to dimensions , red foxes are much lighter than similarly sized dogs of the genus Canis . Their limb bones , for example , weigh 30 per cent less per unit area of bone than expected for similarly sized dogs . They display significant individual , sexual , age and geographical variation in size . On average , adults measure 35 – 50 cm ( 14 – 20 in ) high at the shoulder and 45 – 90 cm ( 18 – 35 in ) in body length with tails measuring 30 – 55 @.@ 5 cm ( 11 @.@ 8 – 21 @.@ 9 in ) . The ears measure 7 @.@ 7 – 12 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 – 5 in ) and the hind feet 12 – 18 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 – 7 in ) . Weights range from 2 @.@ 2 – 14 kg ( 4 @.@ 9 – 30 @.@ 9 lb ) , with vixens typically weighing 15 – 20 % less than males . Adult red foxes have skulls measuring 129 – 167 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 6 in ) , while those of vixens measure 128 – 159 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) . The forefoot print measures 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) in length and 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) in width , while the hind foot print measures 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) long and 38 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) wide . They trot at a speed of 6 – 13 km / h , and have a maximum running speed of 50 km / h . They have a stride of 25 – 35 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 8 in ) when walking at a normal pace . North American red foxes are generally lightly built , with comparatively long bodies for their mass and have a high degree of sexual dimorphism . British red foxes are heavily built , but short , while continental European red foxes are closer to the general average among red fox populations . The largest red fox on record in Great Britain was a 17 @.@ 2 kg ( 38 @.@ 1 lbs ) , 1 @.@ 4 @-@ metre ( 4 ft 7 in ) long male , killed in Aberdeenshire , Scotland , in early 2012 . 
 = = = Fur = = = 
 The winter fur is dense , soft , silky and relatively long . For the northern foxes , the fur is very long , dense and fluffy , but is shorter , sparser and coarser in southern forms . Among northern foxes , the North American varieties generally have the <unk> guard hairs , while most Eurasian red foxes have coarser fur . There are three main colour morphs ; red , silver / black and cross ( see Mutations ) . In the typical red morph , their coats are generally bright reddish @-@ rusty with yellowish tints . A stripe of weak , diffuse patterns of many brown @-@ reddish @-@ chestnut hairs occurs along the spine . Two additional stripes pass down the shoulder blades , which , together with the spinal stripe , form a cross . The lower back is often a mottled silvery colour . The flanks are lighter coloured than the back , while the chin , lower lips , throat and front of the chest are white . The remaining lower surface of the body is dark , brown or reddish . During lactation , the belly fur of vixens may turn brick red . The upper parts of the limbs are rusty reddish , while the paws are black . The frontal part of the face and upper neck is bright brownish @-@ rusty red , while the upper lips are white . The backs of the ears are black or brownish @-@ reddish , while the inner surface is whitish . The top of the tail is brownish @-@ reddish , but lighter in colour than the back and flanks . The underside of the tail is pale grey with a straw @-@ coloured tint . A black spot , the location of the <unk> gland , is usually present at the base of the tail . The tip of the tail is white . 
 = = = = Mutations = = = = 
 Atypical colourations in red foxes usually represent stages toward full melanism , and mostly occur in cold regions . 
 = = = Senses = = = 
 Red foxes have binocular vision , but their sight reacts mainly to movement . Their auditory perception is acute , being able to hear black grouse changing roosts at 600 paces , the flight of crows at 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 16 – 0 @.@ 31 mi ) and the squeaking of mice at about 100 metres ( 330 ft ) . They are capable of locating sounds to within one degree at 700 – 3 @,@ 000 Hz , though less accurately at higher frequencies . Their sense of smell is good , but weaker than that of specialised dogs . 
 = = = Scent glands = = = 
 Red foxes have a pair of anal sacs lined by sebaceous glands , both of which open through a single duct . The anal sacs act as fermentation chambers in which aerobic and anaerobic bacteria convert sebum into odorous compounds , including aliphatic acids . The oval @-@ shaped caudal gland is 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) long and 13 mm ( 0 @.@ 51 in ) wide , and reportedly smells of violets . The presence of foot glands is equivocal . The interdigital cavities are deep , with a reddish tinge and smell strongly . Sebaceous glands are present on the angle of the jaw and mandible . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social and territorial behaviour = = = 
 Red foxes either establish stable home ranges within particular areas or are itinerant with no fixed abode . They use their urine to mark their territories . A male fox raises one hind leg and his urine is sprayed forward in front of him , whereas a female fox squats down so that the urine is sprayed in the ground between the hind legs . Urine is also used to mark empty cache sites , used to store found food , as reminders not to waste time investigating them . The use of up to 12 different urination postures allows them to precisely control the position of the scent mark . Red foxes live in family groups sharing a joint territory . In favourable habitats and / or areas with low hunting pressure , subordinate foxes may be present in a range . Subordinate foxes may number one or two , sometimes up to eight in one territory . These subordinates could be formerly dominant animals , but are mostly young from the previous year , who act as helpers in rearing the breeding vixen 's kits . Alternatively , their presence has been explained as being in response to temporary surpluses of food unrelated to assisting reproductive success . Non @-@ breeding vixens will guard , play , groom , provision and retrieve kits , an example of kin selection . Red foxes may leave their families once they reach adulthood if the chances of winning a territory of their own are high . If not , they will stay with their parents , at the cost of postponing their own reproduction . 
 = = = Reproduction and development = = = 
 Red foxes reproduce once a year in spring . Two months prior to oestrus ( typically December ) , the reproductive organs of vixens change shape and size . By the time they enter their oestrus period , their uterine horns double in size , and their ovaries grow 1 @.@ 5 – 2 times larger . Sperm formation in males begins in August – September , with the testicles attaining their greatest weight in December – February . The vixen 's oestrus period lasts three weeks , during which the dog @-@ foxes mate with the vixens for several days , often in burrows . Copulation is accompanied by a copulatory tie , which may last for more than an hour . The copulatory tie occurs when the male 's bulbus <unk> enlarges . The gestation period lasts 49 – 58 days . Though foxes are largely monogamous , DNA evidence from one population indicated large levels of polygyny , incest and mixed paternity litters . Subordinate vixens may become pregnant , but usually fail to whelp , or have their kits killed postpartum by either the dominant female or other subordinates . 
 The average litter size consists of four to six kits , though litters of up to 13 kits have occurred . Large litters are typical in areas where fox mortality is high . Kits are born blind , deaf and toothless , with dark brown fluffy fur . At birth , they weigh 56 – 110 g ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 9 oz ) and measure 14 @.@ 5 cm ( 5 @.@ 7 in ) in body length and 7 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) in tail length . At birth , they are short @-@ legged , large @-@ headed and have broad chests . Mothers remain with the kits for 2 – 3 weeks , as they are unable to thermoregulate . During this period , the fathers or barren vixens feed the mothers . Vixens are very protective of their kits , and have been known to even fight off terriers in their defence . If the mother dies before the kits are independent , the father takes over as their provider . The kits ' eyes open after 13 – 15 days , during which time their ear canals open and their upper teeth erupt , with the lower teeth emerging 3 – 4 days later . Their eyes are initially blue , but change to amber at 4 – 5 weeks . Coat colour begins to change at three weeks of age , when the black eye streak appears . By one month , red and white patches are apparent on their faces . During this time , their ears erect and their muzzles elongate . Kits begin to leave their dens and experiment with solid food brought by their parents at the age of 3 – 4 weeks . The lactation period lasts 6 – 7 weeks . Their woolly coats begin to be coated by shiny guard hairs after 8 weeks . By the age of 3 – 4 months , the kits are long @-@ legged , narrow @-@ chested and sinewy . They reach adult proportions at the age of 6 – 7 months . Some vixens may reach sexual maturity at the age of 9 – 10 months , thus bearing their first litters at one year of age . In captivity , their longevity can be as long as 15 years , though in the wild they typically do not survive past 5 years of age . 
 = = = Denning behaviour = = = 
 Outside the breeding season , most red foxes favour living in the open , in densely vegetated areas , though they may enter burrows to escape bad weather . Their burrows are often dug on hill or mountain slopes , ravines , bluffs , steep banks of water bodies , ditches , depressions , gutters , in rock clefts and neglected human environments . Red foxes prefer to dig their burrows on well drained soils . Dens built among tree roots can last for decades , while those dug on the steppes last only several years . They may permanently abandon their dens during mange outbreaks , possibly as a defence mechanism against the spread of disease . In the Eurasian desert regions , foxes may use the burrows of wolves , porcupines and other large mammals , as well as those dug by gerbil colonies . Compared to burrows constructed by Arctic foxes , badgers , marmots and corsac foxes , red fox dens are not overly complex . Red fox burrows are divided into a den and temporary burrows , which consist only of a small passage or cave for concealment . The main entrance of the burrow leads downwards ( 40 – 45 ° ) and broadens into a den , from which numerous side tunnels branch . Burrow depth ranges from 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 ft 8 in – 8 ft 2 in ) , rarely extending to ground water . The main passage can reach 17 m ( 56 ft ) in length , standing an average of 5 – 7 m ( 16 – 23 ft ) . In spring , red foxes clear their dens of excess soil through rapid movements , first with the forepaws then with kicking motions with their hind legs , throwing the discarded soil over 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) from the burrow . When kits are born , the discarded debris is trampled , thus forming a spot where the kits can play and receive food . They may share their dens with woodchucks or badgers . Unlike badgers , which fastidiously clean their earths and defecate in latrines , red foxes habitually leave pieces of prey around their dens . > The average sleep time of a captive red fox is 9 @.@ 8 hours per day . 
 = = Communication = = 
 = = = Body language = = = 
 Red fox body language consists of movements of the ears , tail and postures , with their body markings emphasising certain gestures . <unk> can be divided into aggressive / dominant and fearful / submissive categories . Some postures may blend the two together . 
 Inquisitive foxes will rotate and flick their ears whilst sniffing . Playful individuals will perk their ears and rise on their hind legs . Male foxes courting females , or after successfully evicting intruders , will turn their ears outwardly , and raise their tails in a horizontal position , with the tips raised upward . When afraid , red foxes grin in submission , arching their backs , curving their bodies , crouching their legs and lashing their tails back and forth with their ears pointing backwards and pressed against their skulls . When merely expressing submission to a dominant animal , the posture is similar , but without arching the back or curving the body . Submissive foxes will approach dominant animals in a low posture , so that their muzzles reach up in greeting . When two evenly matched foxes confront each other over food , they approach each other sideways and push against each other 's flanks , betraying a mixture of fear and aggression through lashing tails and arched backs without crouching and pulling their ears back without flattening them against their skulls . When launching an assertive attack , red foxes approach directly rather than sideways , with their tails aloft and their ears rotated sideways . During such fights , red foxes will stand on each other 's upper bodies with their forelegs , using open mouthed threats . Such fights typically only occur among juveniles or adults of the same sex . 
 = = = Vocalisations = = = 
 Red foxes have a wide vocal range , and produce different sounds spanning five octaves , which grade into each other . Recent analyses identify 12 different sounds produced by adults and 8 by kits . The majority of sounds can be divided into " contact " and " interaction " calls . The former vary according to the distance between individuals , while the latter vary according to the level of aggression . 
 Contact calls : The most commonly heard contact call is a three to five syllable barking " wow wow wow " sound , which is often made by two foxes approaching one another . This call is most frequently heard from December to February ( when they can be confused with the territorial calls of tawny owls ) . The " wow wow wow " call varies according to individual ; captive foxes have been recorded to answer pre @-@ recorded calls of their pen @-@ mates , but not those of strangers . Kits begin emitting the " wow wow wow " call at the age of 19 days , when craving attention . When red foxes draw close together , they emit <unk> greeting warbles similar to the clucking of chickens . Adults greet their kits with gruff huffing noises . 
 Interaction calls : When greeting one another , red foxes emit high pitched whines , particularly submissive animals . A submissive fox approached by a dominant animal will emit a <unk> siren @-@ like shriek . During aggressive encounters with conspecifics , they emit a throaty rattling sound , similar to a ratchet , called " <unk> " . <unk> occurs mostly during the courting season from rival males or vixens rejecting advances . 
 Another call that does not fit into the two categories is a long , drawn out , monosyllabic " <unk> " sound . As it is commonly heard during the breeding season , it is thought to be emitted by vixens summoning males . When danger is detected , foxes emit a monosyllabic bark . At close quarters , it is a muffled cough , while at long distances it is sharper . Kits make warbling whimpers when nursing , these calls being especially loud when they are dissatisfied . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Diet , hunting and feeding behaviour = = = 
 Red foxes are omnivores with a highly varied diet . In the former Soviet Union , up to 300 animal and a few dozen plant species are known to be consumed by them . They primarily feed on small rodents like voles , mice , ground squirrels , hamsters , gerbils , woodchucks , pocket gophers and deer mice . Secondary prey species include birds ( with <unk> , <unk> and waterfowl predominating ) , leporids , porcupines , raccoons , opossums , reptiles , insects , other invertebrates and flotsam ( marine mammals , fish and echinoderms ) . On very rare occasions , foxes may attack young or small ungulates . They typically target mammals up to about 3 @.@ 5 kg ( 7 @.@ 7 lb ) in weight , and they require 500 grams ( 18 oz ) of food daily . Red foxes readily eat plant material , and in some areas fruit can amount to 100 % of their diet in autumn . Commonly consumed fruits include blueberries , blackberries , raspberries , cherries , persimmons , mulberries , apples , plums , grapes , and acorns . Other plant material includes grasses , sedges and tubers . 
 Red foxes are implicated in the predation of game and song birds , hares , rabbits , muskrats , and young ungulates , particularly in preserves , reserves , and hunting farms where ground nesting birds are protected and raised , as well as in poultry farms . 
 While the popular consensus is that olfaction is very important for hunting , two studies that experimentally investigated the role of olfactory , auditory , and visual cues found that visual cues are the most important ones for hunting in red foxes and coyotes . 
 Red foxes prefer to hunt in the early morning hours before sunrise and late evening . Although they typically forage alone , they may aggregate in resource @-@ rich environments . When hunting mouse @-@ like prey , they first pinpoint their prey 's location by sound , then leap , sailing high above their quarry , steering in mid @-@ air with their tails , before landing on target up to 5 metres ( 16 ft ) away . They typically only feed on carrion in the late evening hours and at night . They are extremely possessive of their food and will defend their catches from even dominant animals . Red foxes may occasionally commit acts of surplus killing ; during one breeding season , four foxes were recorded to have killed around 200 black @-@ headed gulls each , with peaks during dark , windy hours when flying conditions were unfavorable . Losses to poultry and penned game birds can be substantial because of this . Red foxes seem to dislike the taste of moles but will nonetheless catch them alive and present them to their kits as playthings . 
 A 2008 – 2010 study of 84 red foxes in the Czech Republic and Germany found that successful hunting in long vegetation or under snow appeared to involve an alignment of the fox with the Earth 's magnetic field . 
 = = = Enemies and competitors = = = 
 Red foxes typically dominate other fox species . Arctic foxes generally escape competition from red foxes by living farther north , where food is too scarce to support the larger @-@ bodied red species . Although the red species ' northern limit is linked to the availability of food , the Arctic species ' southern range is limited by the presence of the former . Red and Arctic foxes were both introduced to almost every island from the Aleutian Islands to the Alexander Archipelago during the 1830s – 1930s by fur companies . The red foxes invariably displaced the Arctic foxes , with one male red fox having been reported to have killed off all resident Arctic foxes on a small island in 1866 . Where they are sympatric , Arctic foxes may also escape competition by feeding on lemmings and flotsam , rather than voles , as favoured by red foxes . Both species will kill each other 's kits , given the opportunity . Red foxes are serious competitors of corsac foxes , as they hunt the same prey all year . The red species is also stronger , is better adapted to hunting in snow deeper than 10 cm ( 4 in ) and is more effective in hunting and catching medium to large @-@ sized rodents . <unk> foxes seem to only outcompete red foxes in semi @-@ desert and steppe areas . In Israel , Blanford 's foxes escape competition with red foxes by restricting themselves to rocky cliffs and actively avoiding the open plains inhabited by red foxes . Red foxes dominate kit and swift foxes . Kit foxes usually avoid competition with their larger cousins by living in more arid environments , though red foxes have been increasing in ranges formerly occupied by kit foxes due to human @-@ induced environmental changes . Red foxes will kill both species , and compete for food and den sites . Grey foxes are exceptional , as they dominate red foxes wherever their ranges meet . Historically , interactions between the two species were rare , as grey foxes favoured heavily wooded or semiarid habitats as opposed to the open and mesic ones preferred by red foxes . However , interactions have become more frequent due to deforestation allowing red foxes to colonise grey fox @-@ inhabited areas . 
 Wolves may kill and eat red foxes in disputes over carcasses . In areas in North America where red fox and coyote populations are sympatric , fox ranges tend to be located outside coyote territories . The principal cause of this separation is believed to be active avoidance of coyotes by the foxes . Interactions between the two species vary in nature , ranging from active antagonism to indifference . The majority of aggressive encounters are initiated by coyotes , and there are few reports of red foxes acting aggressively toward coyotes except when attacked or when their kits were approached . Foxes and coyotes have sometimes been seen feeding together . In Israel , red foxes share their habitat with golden jackals . Where their ranges meet , the two canids compete due to near identical diets . Foxes ignore jackal scents or tracks in their territories , and avoid close physical proximity with jackals themselves . In areas where jackals become very abundant , the population of foxes decreases significantly , apparently because of competitive exclusion . 
 Red foxes dominate raccoon dogs , sometimes killing their kits or biting adults to death . Cases are known of foxes killing raccoon dogs entering their dens . Both species compete for mouse @-@ like prey . This competition reaches a peak during early spring , when food is scarce . In <unk> , red fox predation accounted for 11 @.@ 1 % of deaths among 54 raccoon dogs , and amounted to 14 @.@ 3 % of 186 raccoon dog deaths in north @-@ western Russia . 
 Red foxes may kill small mustelids like weasels , stone martens , pine martens , stoats , <unk> , polecats and young sables . Eurasian badgers may live alongside red foxes in isolated sections of large burrows . It is possible that the two species tolerate each other out of commensalism ; foxes provide badgers with food scraps , while badgers maintain the shared burrow 's cleanliness . However , cases are known of badgers driving vixens from their dens and destroying their litters without eating them . Wolverines may kill red foxes , often while the latter are sleeping or near carrion . Foxes in turn may kill unattended young wolverines . 
 Red foxes may compete with striped hyenas on large carcasses . Red foxes may give way to hyenas on unopened carcasses , as the latter 's stronger jaws can easily tear open flesh that is too tough for foxes . Foxes may harass hyenas , using their smaller size and greater speed to avoid the hyena 's attacks . Sometimes , foxes seem to deliberately torment hyenas even when there is no food at stake . Some foxes may <unk> their attacks , and are killed . Fox remains are often found in hyena dens , and hyenas may steal foxes from traps . 
 In Eurasia , red foxes may be preyed upon by leopards , caracals and Eurasian lynxes . The lynxes chase red foxes into deep snow , where their longer legs and larger paws give them an advantage over foxes , especially when the depth of the snow exceeds one metre . In the <unk> district in Russia , red foxes are absent or are seen only occasionally where lynxes establish permanent territories . Researchers consider lynxes to represent considerably less danger to red foxes than wolves do . North American felid predators of red foxes include cougars , Canadian lynxes and bobcats . Occasionally , large raptors such as Eurasian eagle owls will prey on young foxes , while golden eagles have been known to kill adults . 
 = = Range = = 
 Red foxes are wide ranging animals , whose range covers nearly 70 million km2 ( 27 million mi2 ) . They are distributed across the entire Northern Hemisphere from the Arctic Circle to North Africa , Central America , and Asia . They are absent in Iceland , the Arctic islands , some parts of Siberia , and in extreme deserts . 
 Red foxes are not present in New Zealand and are classed as a " prohibited new organism " under the Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996 , preventing them from being imported . 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 In Australia , 2012 estimates indicate that there are more than 7 @.@ 2 million red foxes with a range extending throughout most of the continental mainland . The species became established in Australia through successive introductions by settlers in 1830s in the British colonies of Van Diemen 's Land ( as early as 1833 ) and the Port Phillip District of New South Wales ( as early as 1845 ) for the purpose of the traditional English sport of fox hunting . A permanent fox population was not established on the island of Tasmania and it is widely held that they were outcompeted by the Tasmanian devil . On the mainland , however , the species was successful as an apex predator . It is generally less common in areas where the dingo is more prevalent , however it has , primarily through its burrowing behaviour , achieved niche differentiation with both the feral dog and the feral cat . As such it has become one of the continent 's most invasive species . The red fox has been implicated in the extinction and decline of several native Australian species , particularly those of the family <unk> including the desert rat @-@ kangaroo . The spread of red foxes across the southern part of the continent has coincided with the spread of rabbits in Australia and corresponds with declines in the distribution of several medium @-@ sized ground @-@ dwelling mammals , including brush @-@ tailed bettongs , burrowing bettongs , rufous bettongs , <unk> , numbats , bridled <unk> <unk> and <unk> . Most of these species are now limited to areas ( such as islands ) where red foxes are absent or rare . Local eradication programs exist , although eradication has proven difficult due to the denning behaviour and nocturnal hunting , so the focus is on management with the introduction of state bounties . According to the Tasmanian government , red foxes were introduced to the previously fox @-@ free island of Tasmania in 1999 or 2000 , posing a significant threat to native wildlife including the eastern bettong , and an eradication program conducted by the Tasmanian Department of Primary Industries and Water has been established . 
 = = = Sardinia = = = 
 The origin of the Sardinian <unk> subspecies is uncertain , as it is absent from Pleistocene deposits in their current homeland . It is possible it originated during the Neolithic following its introduction to the island by humans . It is likely then that Sardinian fox populations stem from repeated introductions of animals from different localities in the Mediterranean . This latter theory may explain the subspecies ' phenotypic diversity . 
 = = Diseases and parasites = = 
 Red foxes are the most important rabies vector in Europe . In London , arthritis is not uncommon in foxes , being particularly frequent in the spine . Foxes may be infected with leptospirosis and tularemia , though they are not overly susceptible to the latter . They may also fall ill from listeriosis and <unk> , as well as acting as vectors in spreading erysipelas , brucellosis and tick @-@ born encephalitis . A mysterious fatal disease near Lake <unk> in the Novosibirsk Oblast was noted among local red foxes , but the cause was undetermined . The possibility was considered that it was caused by an acute form of encephalomyelitis , which was first observed in captive bred silver foxes . Individual cases of foxes infected with Yersinia pestis are known . 
 Red foxes are not readily prone to infestation with fleas . Species like <unk> <unk> are probably only caught from the fox 's prey species , while others like <unk> <unk> are caught whilst travelling . Fleas that feed on red foxes include Pulex irritans , Ctenocephalides canis and <unk> melis . Ticks such as Ixodes <unk> and I. hexagonus are not uncommon in foxes , and are typically found on nursing vixens and kits still in their earths . The louse Trichodectes vulpis specifically targets foxes , but is found infrequently . The mite Sarcoptes scabiei is the most important cause of mange in red foxes . It causes extensive hair loss , starting from the base of the tail and hindfeet , then the rump before moving on to the rest of the body . In the final stages of the condition , foxes can lose most of their fur , 50 % of their body weight and may gnaw at infected extremities . In the epizootic phase of the disease , it usually takes foxes four months to die after infection . Other endoparasites include Demodex <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> ( which is frequently found in the ear canal ) , <unk> serrata ( which infects the nasal passages ) and <unk> . 
 Up to 60 helminth species are known to infect foxes in fur farms , while 20 are known in the wild . Several coccidian species of the genera Isospora and Eimeria are also known to infect them . The most common nematode species found in fox guts are Toxocara canis and <unk> <unk> , Capillaria <unk> and <unk> vulpis , the latter two infect their lungs . Capillaria plica infect the fox 's bladder . Trichinella spiralis rarely affects them . The most common tapeworm species in foxes are Taenia spiralis and T. <unk> . Others include <unk> <unk> and E. <unk> . Eleven trematode species infect red foxes , including Metorchis conjunctus . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 = = = In folklore and mythology = = = 
 Red foxes feature prominently in the folklore and mythology of human cultures with which they are sympatric . In Greek mythology , the Teumessian fox or <unk> vixen , was a gigantic fox that was destined never to be caught . The fox was one of the children of Echidna . 
 In Celtic mythology , the red fox is a symbolic animal . In the Cotswolds , witches were thought to take the shape of foxes to steal butter from their neighbours . In later European folklore , the figure of Reynard the Fox symbolises trickery and deceit . He originally appeared ( then under the name of " <unk> " ) as a secondary character in the 1150 poem " <unk> " . He reappeared in 1175 in Pierre Saint Cloud 's Le Roman de Renart , and made his debut in England in Geoffrey Chaucer 's The Nun 's Priest 's Tale . Many of Reynard 's adventures may stem from actual observations on fox behaviour ; he is an enemy of the wolf and has a fondness for blackberries and grapes . 
 Chinese folk tales tell of fox @-@ spirits called <unk> jing that may have up to nine tails , or <unk> as they are known in Korea . In Japanese mythology , the kitsune are fox @-@ like spirits possessing magical abilities that increase with their age and wisdom . Foremost among these is the ability to assume human form . While some folktales speak of kitsune employing this ability to trick others , other stories portray them as faithful guardians , friends , lovers , and wives . In Arab folklore , the fox is considered a cowardly , weak , deceitful , and cunning animal , said to feign death by filling its abdomen with air to appear bloated , then lies on its side , awaiting the approach of unwitting prey . The animal 's cunning was noted by the authors of the Bible , and applied the word " fox " to false prophets ( Ezekiel 13 : 4 ) and the hypocrisy of Herod Antipas ( Luke 13 : 32 ) . 
 The cunning Fox is commonly found in Native American mythology , where it is portrayed as an almost constant companion to Coyote . Fox , however , is a deceitful companion that often steals Coyote 's food . In the <unk> creation myth , Fox and Coyote are the co @-@ creators of the world , that leave just before the arrival of humans . The Yurok tribe believed that Fox , in anger , captured the sun , and tied him to a hill , causing him to burn a great hole in the ground . An Inuit story tells of how Fox , portrayed as a beautiful woman , tricks a hunter into marrying her , only to resume her true form and leave after he offends her . A Menominee story tells of how Fox is an untrustworthy friend to the Wolf . 
 = = = Hunting = = = 
 The earliest historical records of fox hunting come from the fourth century BC ; Alexander the Great is known to have hunted foxes and a seal dated from 350 BC depicts a Persian horseman in the process of spearing a fox . Xenophon , who viewed hunting as part of a cultured man 's education , advocated the killing of foxes as pests , as they distracted hounds from hares . The Romans were hunting foxes by 80 AD . During the Dark Ages in Europe , foxes were considered secondary quarries , but gradually grew in importance . Cnut the Great <unk> foxes as Beasts of the Chase , a lower category of quarry than Beasts of <unk> . Foxes were gradually hunted less as vermin and more as Beasts of the Chase , to the point that by the late 1200s , Edward I had a royal pack of <unk> and a specialised fox huntsman . In this period , foxes were increasingly hunted above ground with hounds , rather than underground with terriers . Edward , Second Duke of York assisted the climb of foxes as more prestigious quarries in his The Master of Game . By the Renaissance , fox hunting became a traditional sport of the nobility . After the English Civil War caused a drop in deer populations , fox hunting grew in popularity . By the mid @-@ 1600s , Britain was divided into fox hunting territories , with the first fox hunting clubs being formed ( the first was the Charlton Hunt Club in 1737 ) . The popularity of fox hunting in Britain reached a peak during the 1700s . Although already native to North America , red foxes from England were imported for sporting purposes to Virginia and Maryland in 1730 by prosperous tobacco planters . These American fox hunters considered the red species more sporting than grey species . 
 The grays furnished more fun , the reds more excitement . The grays did not run so far , but usually kept near home , going in a circuit of six or eight miles . ' An old red , , generally so called irrespective of age , as a tribute to his prowess , might lead the dogs all day , and end by losing them as evening fell , after taking them a dead stretch for thirty miles . The capture of a gray was what men boasted of ; a chase after ' an old red ' was what they ' <unk> ' about . 
 Red foxes are still widely persecuted as pests , with human @-@ caused deaths among the highest causes of mortality in the species . Annual fox kills are : UK 21 @,@ 500 – 25 @,@ 000 ( 2000 ) ; Germany 600 @,@ 000 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Austria 58 @,@ 000 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Sweden 58 @,@ 000 ( 1999 – 2000 ) ; Finland 56 @,@ 000 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Denmark 50 @,@ 000 ( 1976 – 1977 ) ; Switzerland 34 @,@ 832 ( 2001 ) ; Norway 17 @,@ 000 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Saskatchewan ( Canada ) 2 @,@ 000 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Nova Scotia ( Canada ) 491 ( 2000 – 2001 ) ; Minnesota ( US ) 4 @,@ 000 @-@ 8 @,@ 000 ( average annual trapping harvest 2002 @-@ 2009 ) ; New Mexico ( US ) 69 ( 1999 – 2000 ) . 
 = = = Fur use = = = 
 Red foxes are among the most important <unk> animals harvested by the fur trade . Their pelts are used for trimmings , scarfs , muffs , jackets and coats . They are principally used as trimming for both cloth coats and fur garments , including evening wraps . The pelts of silver @-@ morph foxes are popular as capes , while cross foxes are mostly used for scarves and rarely for trimming . The number of sold fox scarves exceeds the total number of scarves made from other <unk> . However , this amount is overshadowed by the total number of fox pelts used for trimming purposes . The silver morphs are the most valued by furriers , followed by the cross and red morphs respectively . > In the early 1900s , over 1 @,@ 000 American fox skins were imported to Britain annually , while 500 @,@ 000 were exported annually from Germany and Russia . The total worldwide trade of wild red foxes in 1985 – 86 was 1 @,@ 543 @,@ 995 pelts . Foxes amounted to 45 % of US wild @-@ caught pelts worth $ 50 million . Pelt prices are increasing , with 2012 North American wholesale auction prices averaging $ 39 , and 2013 prices averaging $ 65 @.@ 78 . 
 North American red foxes , particularly those of northern Alaska , are the most valued for their fur , as they have guard hairs of a silky texture , which , after dressing , allow the wearer unrestricted mobility . Red foxes living in southern Alaska 's coastal areas and the Aleutian Islands are an exception , as they have extremely coarse pelts that rarely exceed one @-@ third of the price of their northern Alaskan cousins . Most European peltries have coarse @-@ textured fur compared to North American varieties . The only exceptions are the Nordic and Far Eastern Russian peltries , but they are still inferior to North American peltries in terms of <unk> . 
 = = = Livestock and pet predation = = = 
 Red foxes may on occasions prey on lambs . Usually , lambs targeted by foxes tend to be physically weakened specimens , but not invariably . Lambs belonging to small breeds , such as Blackface , are more vulnerable than larger breeds such as Merino . Twins may be more vulnerable to foxes than <unk> , as ewes cannot effectively defend both simultaneously . Crossbreeding small , upland ewes with larger , lowland rams can cause difficult and prolonged labour for ewes due to the heaviness of the resulting offspring , thus making the lambs more at risk to fox predation . Lambs born from <unk> ( ewes breeding for the first time ) are more often killed by foxes than those of experienced mothers , who stick closer to their young . 
 Red foxes may prey on domestic rabbits and guinea pigs if they are kept in open runs or are allowed to range freely in gardens . This problem is usually averted by housing them in robust <unk> and runs . Urban foxes frequently encounter cats and may feed alongside them . In physical confrontations , the cats usually have the upper hand . <unk> cases of foxes killing cats usually involve kittens . Although most foxes do not prey on cats , some may do so , and may treat them more as competitors rather than food . 
 = = = Taming and domestication = = = 
 In their unmodified wild state , red foxes are generally unsuitable as pets . Many supposedly abandoned kits are adopted by well @-@ meaning people during the spring period , though it is unlikely that vixens would abandon their young . Actual orphans are rare , and the ones that are adopted are likely kits that simply strayed from their den site . Kits require almost constant supervision ; when still suckling , they require milk at four @-@ hour intervals day and night . Once weaned , they may become destructive to leather objects , furniture and electric cables . Though generally friendly toward people when young , captive red foxes become fearful of humans , save for their handlers , once they reach 10 weeks of age . They maintain their wild counterpart 's strong instinct of concealment , and may pose a threat to domestic birds , even when well fed . Although suspicious of strangers , they can form bonds with cats and dogs , even ones bred for fox hunting . Practical uses for tame foxes are few , though they can be encouraged to kill rats and mice in granaries . Tame foxes were once used to draw ducks close to hunting blinds . 
 A strain of truly domesticated red foxes was introduced by Russian geneticist Dmitry Konstantinovich <unk> who , over a 40 @-@ year period , bred several generations of silver morph foxes on fur farms , selecting only those individuals that showed the least fear of humans . Eventually , <unk> 's team selected only those that showed the most positive response to humans , thus resulting in a population of foxes whose behaviour and appearance was significantly changed . After about ten generations of controlled breeding , these foxes no longer showed any fear of humans , and often wagged their tails and licked their human caretakers to show affection . These behavioural changes were accompanied by physical alterations , which included piebald coats , floppy ears in pups , and curled tails , similar to traits that distinguish domestic dogs from wolves . 
 = = = Urban foxes = = = 
 = = = = Distribution = = = = 
 Red foxes have been successful in colonising built @-@ up environments , especially lower @-@ density suburbs . Throughout the twentieth century , they established themselves in many Australian , European , Japanese , and North American cities . The species first colonised British cities during the 1930s , entering Bristol and London during the 1940s , and later established themselves in Cambridge and Norwich . In Australia , red foxes were recorded in Melbourne as early as the 1930s , while in Zurich , Switzerland , they only starting appearing in the 1980s . Urban red foxes are most common in residential suburbs consisting of privately owned , low @-@ density housing . They are rare in areas where industry , commerce or council @-@ rented houses predominate . In these latter areas , the distribution is of a lower average density because they rely less on human resources ; the home range of these foxes average from 80 to 90 hectares , whereas those in more residential areas average from 25 to 40 hectares . 
 In 2006 it was estimated that there were 10 @,@ 000 foxes in London . City @-@ dwelling foxes may have the potential to consistently grow larger than their rural counterparts , as a result of abundant scraps and a relative dearth of predators . In cities foxes may scavenge food from litter bins and bin bags , although much of their diet will be similar to rural foxes . 
 = = = = Behaviour = = = = 
 Urban red foxes are most active at dusk and dawn , doing most of their hunting and scavenging at these times . It is uncommon to spot them during the day , but they can be caught sunbathing on roofs of houses or sheds . Foxes will often make their homes in hidden and undisturbed spots in urban areas as well as on the edges of a city , visiting at night for sustenance . While foxes will scavenge successfully in the city ( and the foxes tend to eat anything that the humans eat ) some urban residents will deliberately leave food out for the animals , finding them endearing . Doing this regularly can attract foxes to one 's home ; they can become accustomed to human presence , warming up to their providers by allowing themselves to be approached and in some cases even played with , particularly young cubs . 
 = = = = Urban fox control = = = = 
 Urban foxes can cause problems for local residents . Foxes have been known to steal chickens , disrupt rubbish bins and damage gardens . Most complaints about urban foxes made to local authorities occur during the breeding season in late January / early February or from late April to August , when the new cubs are developing . In the UK , hunting foxes in urban areas is banned , and shooting them in an urban environment is not suitable . One alternative to hunting urban foxes has been to trap them , which appears to be a more viable method . However , killing foxes has little effect on the population in an urban area ; those that are killed are very soon replaced , either by new cubs during the breeding season or by other foxes moving into the territory of those that were killed . A more effective method of fox control is to deter them from the specific areas they inhabit . <unk> such as creosote , diesel oil , or ammonia can be used . Cleaning up and blocking access to den locations can also discourage a fox 's return . 
 = = = = Relationship between urban and rural foxes = = = = 
 In January 2014 it was reported that " Fleet " , a relatively tame urban fox tracked as part of a wider study by the University of Brighton in partnership with the BBC 's <unk> , had unexpectedly travelled 195 miles in 21 days from his neighbourhood in Hove , at the western edge of East Sussex , across rural countryside as far as Rye , at the eastern edge of the county . He was still continuing his journey when the GPS collar stopped transmitting , due to suspected water damage . Along with setting a record for the longest journey undertaken by a tracked fox in the United Kingdom , his travels have highlighted the fluidity of movement between rural and urban fox populations . 
 = Steorn = 
 Steorn Ltd / <unk> / is a small , private technology development company based in Dublin , Ireland . It announced in August 2006 it had developed a technology which provides " free , clean , and constant energy " , apparently in violation of the law of conservation of energy , a fundamental principle of physics . 
 Steorn challenged the scientific community to investigate their claim and , in December 2006 , said that it had chosen a jury of scientists to do so . In June 2009 the jury gave its unanimous verdict that Steorn had not demonstrated the production of energy . 
 Steorn has also given two public demonstrations of their technology . In the first demonstration , in July 2007 at the Kinetica Museum in London , the device failed to work . The second demonstration , which ran from December 2009 to February 2010 at the Waterways Visitor Centre in Dublin , involved a motor powered by a battery and provided no independent evidence that excess energy was being generated . It was dismissed by the press as an attempt to build a perpetual motion machine , and a publicity stunt . 
 In December 2015 , Steorn began taking orders for the € 1 @,@ 200 Orbo Cube , a device claimed to power a mobile phone without the need for charging . While some Orbo Cubes were supplied to customers , no working device has been demonstrated . 
 = = History = = 
 Steorn was founded in 2000 and , in October 2001 , their website stated that they were a " specialist service company providing programme management and technical assessment advice for European companies engaging in e @-@ commerce projects " . Steorn is a Norse word meaning to guide or manage . 
 In May 2006 , The Sunday Business Post reported that Steorn was a former dot @-@ com company which was developing a <unk> product based on the same principle as self @-@ winding watches , as well as creating e @-@ commerce websites for customers . The company had also recently raised about € 2 @.@ 5 million from investors and was three years into a four @-@ year development plan for its <unk> technology . Steorn has since stated that the account given in this interview was intended to prevent a leak regarding their free energy technology . 
 The company 's investment history shows several share allotments for cash between August 2000 and October 2005 , the investments totalling € 3 million . In 2006 , Steorn secured € 8 @.@ 1 million in loans from a range of investors in order to continue their research , and these funds were also converted into shares . Steorn said that they would seek no further funding while attempting to prove their free @-@ energy claim in order to demonstrate their genuine desire for validation . 
 = = Free energy claim = = 
 In August 2006 , Steorn placed an advertisement in The Economist saying that they had developed a technology that produced " free , clean and constant energy " . Called Orbo , the technology was said to violate conservation of energy but had been validated by eight independent scientists . None of these scientists would talk to the media , and Steorn suggested that this was because they did not want to become embroiled in a controversy . 
 = = = Views on the technology = = = 
 No specific details of the workings of the claimed technology have been made public . Seán McCarthy stated in a 2006 RTÉ radio interview , " What we have developed is a way to construct magnetic fields so that when you travel round the magnetic fields , starting and stopping at the same position , you have gained energy " . In 2011 , Steorn 's website was updated to suggest that the Orbo is based on magnetic fields which vary over time . Barry Williams of the Australian Skeptics has pointed out that Steorn is " not the first company to claim they have suddenly discovered the miraculous property of magnetism that allows you to get free energy " while Martin Fleischmann says that it is not credible that positioning of magnetic fields could create energy . 
 Following a meeting between McCarthy and Professor Sir Eric Ash in July 2007 , Ash reported that " the Orbo is a mechanical device which uses powerful magnets on the rim of a rotor and further magnets on an outer shell . " During this meeting , McCarthy referred to the law of conservation of energy as scientific dogma . However , conservation of energy is a fundamental principle of physics , more specifically a consequence of the unchanging nature of physical laws with time by Noether 's Theorem . Ash said that there was no comparison with religious dogma since there is no flexibility in choosing to accept that energy is always conserved . Rejecting conservation of energy would undermine all science and technology . Ash also formed the opinion that McCarthy was truly convinced in the validity of his invention but that this conviction was a case of " prolonged self @-@ deception . " 
 Many people have accused Steorn of engaging in a publicity stunt although Steorn denies such accusations . Eric Berger , writing on the Houston Chronicle website , commented : " Steorn is a former e @-@ business company that saw its market vanish during the <unk> bust . It stands to reason that Steorn has retooled as a Web marketing company and is using the " free energy " promotion as a platform to show future clients how it can leverage print advertising and a slick Web site to promote their products and ideas " . Thomas Ricker at Engadget suggested that Steorn 's free @-@ energy claim was a ruse to improve brand recognition and to help them sell Hall probes , while Josh Catone , features editor for Mashable , believes that it was merely an elaborate hoax . 
 = = = Jury process = = = 
 In its advertisement in The Economist , Steorn challenged scientists to form an independent jury to test their technology and publish the results . Within 36 hours of the advertisement being published , 420 scientists contacted Steorn and , on 1 December 2006 , Steorn announced it had selected a jury . It was headed by Ian MacDonald , emeritus professor of electrical engineering at the University of Alberta , and the process began in February 2007 . 
 In June 2009 the jury announced its unanimous verdict that " Steorn 's attempts to demonstrate the claim have not shown the production of energy . The jury is therefore ceasing work " . Dick Ahlstrom , writing in the Irish Times , concluded from this that Steorn 's technology did not work . Steorn responded by saying that because of difficulties in implementing the technology the focus of the process had been on providing the jury with test data on magnetic effects for study . Steorn also said that these difficulties had been resolved and disputed its jury 's findings . 
 = = = Demonstrations = = = 
 On 4 July 2007 , the technology was to be displayed at the Kinetica Museum , Spitalfields Market , London . A unit constructed of clear plastic was prepared so that the arrangement of magnets could be seen and to demonstrate that the device operated without external power sources . The public demonstration was delayed and then cancelled because of technical difficulties . Steorn initially said that the problems had been caused by excessive heat from the lighting . 
 A second demonstration ran between 15 December 2009 and February 2010 at the Waterways Visitor Centre in Dublin , and was streamed via Steorn 's website . The demonstration was of a device powered by a rechargeable battery . Steorn said that the device produced more energy than it consumed and recharged the battery . No substantive details of the technology were revealed and no independent evidence of Steorn 's claim was provided . 
 On 1 April 2010 Steorn opened an online development community , called the Steorn Knowledge Development Base ( <unk> ) , which they said would explain their technology . Access is available only under licence on payment of a fee . 
 In May 2015 , Steorn put an " Orbo <unk> " on display behind the bar of a pub in Dublin . The <unk> was a small box which the pub website claimed contained a " perpetual motion motor " which required no external power source . The cube was shown charging a mobile phone . Steorn claimed to be performing some " basic field trials " in undisclosed locations . 
 = = = Orbo phone charger = = = 
 Beginning in December 2015 , Steorn began accepting orders for two products , including a phone charger , through email only . The announcement was posted only to a Facebook page titled " Orbo " and a Steorn YouTube channel . In early December , Steorn CEO Shaun McCarthy said that he was waiting for the first shipment of the two products , the Orbo Phone and the Orbo Cube , from a manufacturer in China . Steorn described the Orbo Cube as a showcase for the technology rather than a mass @-@ market product , with the Cube retailing at € 1 @,@ 200 . 
 = John Brunt = 
 Captain John Henry Cound Brunt VC , MC ( 6 December 1922 – 10 December 1944 ) was an English recipient of the Victoria Cross , the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that can be awarded to British and Commonwealth forces . He served in Italy during the Second World War and was twice decorated for bravery in action before he was killed by mortar fire . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Henry Cound Brunt was born on 6 December 1922 , on a farm in Priest Weston , near <unk> , Shropshire to Thomas Henry Brunt and Nesta Mary Brunt ( née Cound ) , and began his education at <unk> village school . He had an elder sister named Dorothy ( born 13 May 1920 ) and a younger sister Isobel ( born 5 October 1923 ) . When Dorothy was eight , the family moved to a farm near Whittington , Shropshire , where John grew up . As he became older , his fearless nature became more apparent ; every week , he read the comic " Tiny Tots " , which featured instructions on " How to teach yourself to swim " . One day , he asked Dorothy to take him to the Shropshire Canal , which went through their farmland . Before his sister could stop him , Brunt had taken off all his clothes and jumped into the canal . When they finally arrived home , their mother wanted to know why he had no clothes on , and John responded that he had been teaching himself to swim . As he got older , his daredevil attitude became even more serious ; on one occasion , he was found swinging himself along the guttering of a dutch barn sixty feet above the farmyard . 
 When old enough , Brunt was enrolled at Ellesmere College , where his mischievous streak became quickly apparent through pranks and dares ; once , while in the sanatorium with mumps , he slipped a laxative into the matron 's tea . Nevertheless , he is fondly remembered at the school . It was while he was at Ellesmere that he contracted measles , resulting in his need to wear glasses . An enthusiastic sportsman , Brunt played cricket , hockey , rugby , water polo and wrestling . He was the only pupil at the school to tackle the headmaster while playing rugby , injuring the older man 's knee in the process . 
 In 1934 , the Brunt family moved to Paddock Wood in Kent and , in his school holidays , " Young John " ( as he was known in the village ) would come home . Although he was still a reckless individual , he was thought of very highly , and helped train the Paddock Wood Home Guard between 1940 and 1943 , assisted by his father . He spent his last days in Paddock Wood helping with the hop harvest . 
 = = Military career = = 
 Brunt joined the British Army when he left school , training as a private with the Queen 's Own Royal West Kent Regiment in 1941 . He received a commission as a second lieutenant on 2 January 1943 , and was posted to North Africa . Although he was commissioned in the Sherwood Foresters , he never served with them , instead being posted to the 6th Battalion , Royal Lincolnshire Regiment , having become friendly with Captain Alan Money , an officer in the Lincolns , on the boat to Africa . 
 On 9 September 1943 , Brunt 's regiment landed at Salerno in Italy and Lieutenant Brunt was given command of No.9 Platoon in A Company . The unit subsequently moved south @-@ east to establish a base in a farm near the river Asa . 
 = = = Military Cross = = = 
 Between December 1943 and January 1944 , Brunt commanded a battle patrol and saw near @-@ constant action . In the early hours of 15 December , they received orders to destroy an enemy post based in some houses 200 yards ( 180 m ) north of the River <unk> . In efforts to break the enemy line , he crossed and re @-@ crossed the river so many times that the troops took to calling it " Brunt 's Brook " . After an intense five @-@ minute bombardment , Brunt led a section into an assault . The first two houses contained two enemy soldiers , but it was the third house that provided the most resistance . Using grenades and Tommy guns , they managed to kill eight enemy troops outside the house , as well as those inside , all belonging to the 1st Battalion , 2nd Herman Goering Panzer Grenadier Regiment . After thirty minutes of intense fighting , the patrol withdrew , having had one man killed and six wounded . While the rest of the section pulled back , Brunt remained behind with his sergeant and a private to retrieve a wounded soldier . For his actions , he was awarded the Military Cross . 
 On 5 January 1944 , Brunt was in a sick bed in a rear hospital . He pleaded with doctors to be allowed to leave to take part in an attack , and was given permission , leading his patrol under heavy fire . He was back in the hospital twenty @-@ four hours later with concussion after a piece of shrapnel almost split his helmet , but would have carried on fighting if it had not been for an non @-@ commissioned officer , who forcibly led him away from the front line . At the end of the campaign , Brunt is said to have commented to his friends , " I 've won the M.C. , now for the V.C. ! " 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 After resting in Syria and Egypt , Brunt returned to Italy on 3 July 1944 , having been promoted to temporary captain and appointed second in command of " D " Company . By early December 1944 , the regiment was operating near Ravenna , fighting German troops who were retreating north through Italy . On the night of 3 December , the regiment began their attack on the town of Faenza . By the evening of 6 December , they had taken the village of <unk> near Faenza , and after heavy fighting the Lincolns established defensive positions in Faenza itself . For his actions during the engagement , Brunt was awarded the Victoria Cross . The full citation for the award appeared in a supplement to the London Gazette of 6 February 1945 , reading : 
 The next morning , having won the battle and the acclaim of his regiment , Captain Brunt was as eager to return to the offensive , keeping alert for more trouble as breakfast was being prepared for the men , their first meal in 48 hours . He was standing in the doorway of the platoon headquarters , having a mug of tea and chatting with friends , when a stray German mortar bomb landed at his feet , killing him outright . He had celebrated his 22nd birthday just four days before . 
 John Brunt is buried at Faenza War Cemetery in Italy under a Commonwealth War Grave headstone ; his Victoria Cross was announced posthumously in February 1945 . 
 = = Victoria Cross presentation = = 
 On 18 December 1945 , King George VI presented Brunt 's Victoria Cross and Military Cross to his parents at Buckingham Palace . Brunt 's father met Field Marshal Sir Harold Alexander , the 15th Army Group commander for most of the Italian Campaign , at the ceremony and said to him " I expect that you know many men who should have been awarded this medal " , to which Alexander replied " No , because there is always only one who will do the unexpected and that day it was your son . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1946 , John Brunt 's sister Dorothy gave birth to a boy which she named John Brunt Miller , in honour of his heroic uncle . 
 On 3 September 1947 the Kent Arms public house in Paddock Wood , Kent , was named the John Brunt V.C. in his honour . In 1997 , the pub changed its name to The Hopping Hooden Horse ; after local outrage the original name was restored in 2001 . Behind the pub a small housing development called John Brunt VC Court was built . 
 During his military career , Brunt was awarded the Victoria Cross , Military Cross , 1939 @-@ 45 Star , Africa Star , Italy Star and the British War Medal 1939 – 1945 , all of which are on display in Royal Lincolnshire Regiment and Lincolnshire Yeomanry Collections in the Museum of Lincolnshire Life in Lincoln . In 1951 an altar rail in the Soldiers ' Chapel of St George in Lincoln Cathedral was dedicated to his memory by the regiment . 
 On 17 July 1965 The Victor comic featured a cover story named Brunt V.C. , a two @-@ page strip based on the actions that won Brunt the VC . 
 A John Brunt Memorial Cricket Pavilion was opened at Ellesmere College in 1970 , after funds were raised for it since 1945 . The College 's Ante Chapel holds a photograph of Brunt with a copy of his VC citation displayed below . 
 In May 2004 an outdoor plaque to his memory was unveiled in <unk> . 
 = The Hardy Boys = 
 The Hardy Boys , Frank and Joe Hardy , are fictional characters who appear in various mystery series for children and teens . 
 The characters were created by Edward Stratemeyer , the founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book @-@ packaging firm , and the books have been written by many different ghostwriters over the years . The books are published under the collective pseudonym Franklin W. Dixon . 
 The Hardy Boys have evolved in various ways since their first appearance in 1927 . Beginning in 1959 , the books were extensively revised , largely to eliminate racial stereotypes . The books were also written in a simpler style in an attempt to compete with television . Some critics argue that in the process , the Hardy Boys changed , becoming more respectful of the law and simultaneously more affluent , " agents of the adult ruling class " and the like . Most , however , saw the updates as an attempt to make the style of the books more modern , while lamenting the loss of the richer pre @-@ war descriptive style . Similar complaints were made about the updates to the comparable girls ' series Nancy Drew . 
 A new Hardy Boys series , the Hardy Boys Casefiles , was created in 1987 , and featured murders , violence , and international espionage . The original Hardy Boys Mystery Stories series ended in 2005 . A new series , Undercover Brothers , was launched the same year , featuring updated versions of the characters who narrate their adventures in the first person . The Undercover Brothers ended in 2012 and was replaced in 2013 by The Hardy Boys Adventures , also narrated in the first person . 
 Through all these changes , the characters have remained popular . The books sell more than a million copies a year . Several additional volumes are published annually , and the boys ' adventures have been translated into more than 25 languages . The Hardy Boys have been featured in computer games and five television shows and used to promote merchandise such as lunchboxes and jeans . 
 Critics have offered many explanations for the characters ' longevity , suggesting variously that the Hardy Boys embody simple wish fulfillment , American ideals of masculinity , American ideals of boyhood , a well @-@ respected father paradoxically argued to be inept , and the possibility of the triumph of good over evil . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The Hardy Boys are fictional teenage brothers and amateur detectives . They live in the city of Bayport on <unk> Bay with their father , detective Fenton Hardy , their mother , Laura Hardy , and their Aunt Gertrude . Frank , the older brother , is eighteen ( sixteen in earlier versions ) , and his younger brother Joe is seventeen ( fifteen in earlier versions ) . The brothers nominally attend high school in Bayport , where they are in the same grade , but school is rarely mentioned in the books and never hinders the Hardys in solving mysteries . In the older stories , the Hardy Boys ' cases are often linked to the confidential cases their detective father is working on . He sometimes asks them for help , while at other times they stumble upon villains and incidents that are connected to his cases . In the Undercover Brothers series , begun in 2005 , the Hardys are members of an organization known as American Teens Against Crime , which assigns them to cases . The Hardy Boys are sometimes assisted in solving mysteries by their friends Chet Morton , Phil Cohen , Biff Hooper , Jerry Gilroy , and Tony <unk> , and , less frequently , by their platonic girlfriends Callie Shaw and Iola Morton ( Chet 's sister ) . 
 The Hardy Boys are constantly involved in adventure and action . Despite frequent danger , the boys " never lose their nerve ... They are hardy boys , luckier and more clever than anyone around them . " They live in an atmosphere of mystery and intrigue : " Never were so many assorted felonies committed in a simple American small town . Murder , drug peddling , race horse kidnapping , diamond smuggling , medical malpractice , big @-@ time auto theft , even ( in the 1940s ) the hijacking of strategic materials and espionage , all were conducted with Bayport as a nucleus . " With so much in common , the boys are so little differentiated that one commentator facetiously describes them thus : " The boys ' characters basically broke down this way – Frank had dark hair ; Joe was blond . " In general , however , " Frank was the thinker while Joe was more impulsive , and perhaps a little more athletic . " The two boys are infallibly on good terms with each other and never engage in sibling rivalry , with the exception of the New Hardy Boys Casefiles series . 
 Frank and Joe do not lack for money and they travel frequently to far @-@ away locations , including Mexico in The Mark on the Door ( 1934 ) , Scotland in The Secret Agent on Flight 101 ( 1967 ) , Iceland in The Arctic Patrol Mystery ( 1969 ) , Egypt in The Mummy Case ( 1980 ) , and Kenya in The Mystery of the Black Rhino ( 2003 ) . The Hardys also travel freely within the United States by motorcycle , motor boat , <unk> , train and airplane , as well as their own car . 
 = = Creation of characters = = 
 The characters were conceived in 1926 by Edward Stratemeyer , founder of the Stratemeyer Syndicate , a book @-@ packaging firm . Stratemeyer initially pitched the new series to publishers Grosset & Dunlap and suggested that the boys might be called the Keene Boys , the Scott Boys , the Hart Boys , or the Bixby Boys . Grosset & Dunlap editors , for reasons unknown , chose the name " The Hardy Boys " and approved the project . Stratemeyer accordingly hired Canadian Leslie McFarlane to ghostwrite the first volumes in the series . McFarlane would author nineteen of the first twenty @-@ five volumes in the series . Subsequent titles have been written by a number of different ghostwriters , all under the pseudonym Franklin W. Dixon . The first three titles were published in 1927 , and were an immediate success : by mid @-@ 1929 over 115 @,@ 000 books had been sold . So successful was the series that Stratemeyer created the character of Nancy Drew as a female counterpart to the Hardys . 
 = = = Ghostwriters = = = 
 All the Hardy Boys novels have been written by ghostwriters . In accordance with the customs of Stratemeyer Syndicate series production , ghostwriters for the Syndicate signed contracts that have sometimes been interpreted as requiring authors to sign away all rights to authorship or future royalties . The contracts stated that authors could not use their Stratemeyer Syndicate pseudonyms independently of the Syndicate . In the early days of the Syndicate , ghostwriters were paid a fee of $ 125 , " roughly equivalent to two months ' wages for a typical newspaper reporter , the primary day job of the syndicate ghosts . " During the Great Depression this fee was lowered , first to $ 100 and later to $ 75 . All royalties went to the Syndicate ; all correspondence with the publisher was handled through a Stratemeyer Syndicate office , and the Syndicate was able to enlist the cooperation of libraries in hiding the ghostwriters ' names . 
 The Syndicate 's process for creating the Hardy Boys books consisted of creating a detailed outline , with all elements of plot ; drafting a manuscript ; and editing the manuscript . Edward Stratemeyer 's daughter , Edna Stratemeyer Squier , and possibly Stratemeyer himself , wrote outlines for the first volumes in the series . Beginning in 1934 , Stratemeyer 's other daughter , Harriet Stratemeyer Adams , began contributing plot outlines ; she and Andrew Svenson wrote most of the plot outlines for the next several decades . Other plot <unk> included Vincent Buranelli , James Duncan Lawrence , and Tom Mulvey . 
 Most of the early volumes were written by Canadian Leslie McFarlane , who authored nineteen of the first twenty @-@ five titles , as well as co @-@ authored volume 17 The Secret Warning , between 1927 and 1946 . Unlike many other Syndicate ghostwriters , McFarlane was regarded highly enough by the Syndicate that he was frequently given advances of $ 25 or $ 50 , and during the Depression , when fees were lowered , he was paid $ 85 for each Hardy Boys book when other Syndicate ghostwriters were receiving only $ 75 for their productions . According to McFarlane 's family , he despised the series and its characters . 
 After co @-@ authoring Volume 17 , John Button , with Volume 18 , The Twisted Claw ( 1939 ) , took over the series full @-@ time until 1942 ; McFarlane resumed with Volume 22 , The Flickering Torch Mystery ( 1943 ) . McFarlane 's last contribution was Volume 24 , The Short @-@ Wave Mystery ( 1945 ) ; his wife , Amy , authored Volume 26 , The Phantom Freighter ( 1947 ) . Over the next several decades , other volumes were written by Adams , Svenson , Lawrence , Buranelli , William Dougherty , and James Buechler ( a teenager at the time ) . Beginning in 1959 , the series was extensively revised and re @-@ written . Many authors worked on the revised books , writing new manuscripts ; some of them also wrote plot outlines and edited the books . Among the authors who worked on the revised versions were Adams , Svenson , Buechler , Lilo <unk> , Anne <unk> , Alistair Hunter , Tom Mulvey , Patricia Doll , and Priscilla Baker @-@ Carr . 
 In 1979 , the Hardy Boys books began to be published in paperback rather than hardcover . Lawrence and Buranelli continued to write titles ; other authors included Karl Harr III and Laurence Swinburne . In 1984 , the rights to the series were sold , along with the Stratemeyer Syndicate , to Simon & Schuster . New York book packager Mega @-@ Books subsequently hired authors to write the Hardy Boys Mystery Stories and a new series , the Hardy Boys Casefiles . 
 = = = Legal disputes = = = 
 In 1980 , dissatisfied with the lack of creative control at Grosset & Dunlap and the lack of publicity for the Hardy Boys ' 50th anniversary in 1977 , Harriet Adams switched publishers for the Hardy Boys and Nancy Drew , as well as other series , to Simon & Schuster . Grosset & Dunlap filed suit against the Syndicate and Simon & Schuster , citing " breach of contract , copyright infringement , and unfair competition " and requesting $ 300 million in damages . 
 The outcome of the case turned largely on the question of who had written the Nancy Drew series . Adams filed a countersuit , claiming that , as author of the Nancy Drew Mystery Stories , she retained the rights to her work . Although Adams had written many Nancy Drew titles after 1953 and edited others , she claimed to be the author of all of the early titles . In fact , she had rewritten the older titles , but was not the original author . When Mildred Benson , the author of the early Nancy Drew volumes , was called to testify about her work for the Syndicate , Benson 's role in writing the manuscripts of early titles was revealed in court with extensive documentation , contradicting Adams ' claims to authorship . The court ruled that Grosset had the rights to publish the original series of both Nancy Drew and the Hardy Boys as they were in print in 1980 , but did not own characters or trademarks . Furthermore , any new publishers chosen by Adams were completely within their rights to print new titles . 
 = = Evolution of characters = = 
 The Hardy Boys have gone through many permutations over the years . Beginning in 1959 , the books were extensively revised , and some commentators find that the Hardys ' characters changed in the process . Commentators also sometimes see differences between the Hardy Boys of the original Hardy Boys Mystery Stories and the Hardy Boys of the Hardy Boys Casefiles or the new Undercover Brothers series . 
 = = = 1927 – 1959 = = = 
 The early volumes , largely written by Leslie McFarlane , have been praised for their atmosphere and writing style , qualities often considered lacking in juvenile series books . McFarlane 's writing is clear and filled with specific details , making his works superior to many other Stratemeyer series titles . Such , at least , was McFarlane 's intention : " It seemed to me the Hardy Boys deserved something better than the slapdash treatment Dave Fearless had been getting ... I opted for Quality . " The volumes not written by McFarlane or his wife were penned by John Button , who wrote the series from 1938 to 1942 ; this period is sometimes referred to as the " Weird Period " as the writing is full of inconsistencies and the Hardy Boys ' adventures involve futuristic gadgetry and exotic locations . 
 In general , the world of these early volumes is a " [ dark ] and ... divided place " . In these early titles , the boys are cynical about human nature , an attitude apparently justified when the police , whom they have repeatedly helped , throw them into jail on slim evidence in The Great Airport Mystery ( 1930 ) . The police and authority figures in general come off poorly in these books , so much so that at one point Edward Stratemeyer wrote McFarlane to reprimand him for " grievous lack of respect for officers of the law . " The Hardys are less affluent than earlier Stratemeyer characters ; they eagerly accept cash rewards largely to finance college educations , and , with their parents , strive to please their Aunt Gertrude , because she possesses a small fortune . The rich are portrayed as greedy and selfish . This view of the world reflects McFarlane 's relative " lack [ of ] sympathy with the American power structure . " In his autobiography , McFarlane described his rationale for writing the books this way , writing : " I had my own thoughts about teaching youngsters that obedience to authority is somehow sacred .... Would civilization crumble if kids got the notion that the people who ran the world were sometimes stupid , occasionally wrong and even corrupt at times ? " 
 The books ' attitudes towards minority characters are a matter of disagreement . These early volumes have been called models of diversity for their day , since among the Hardys ' friends are Phil Cohen , who is Jewish , and the Italian immigrant Tony <unk> . However , these two friends are rarely involved in the Hardys ' adventures , a level of friendship reserved for Biff Hooper and Chet Morton . The books have been extensively criticized for their use of racial and ethnic stereotypes and their xenophobia . <unk> , for example , the villain in the The Sinister Sign @-@ Post ( 1936 ) , is described as " swarthy " and " a foreigner " , notes critic Steve Burgess . 
 We sense his untrustworthy nature immediately when he sits down beside the boys at a football game and doesn 't understand it , despite the boys ' best efforts to explain . When he does grasp something , you know it . " I <unk> <unk> , " he says . Later he adds <unk> , " I <unk> you <unk> I <unk> you now ! " Can 't quite place the accent ? It 's foreign . Twenty @-@ five chapters are not enough to solve the mystery of his nationality . 
 African Americans are the targets of much racism , being depicted as unintelligent , lazy , and superstitious , " bumpkin rescuers " at best and " secretive and conspiratorial villains " at worst . Benjamin Lefebvre notes that Harriet Adams at times rebuked Leslie McFarlane for not sufficiently following her instructions regarding the portrayal of African @-@ American characters ; he writes that it is not clear " whether Adams rewrote parts of McFarlane 's manuscripts to add [ racist ] details or to what extent these early texts would now be considered even more notoriously racist had McFarlane followed Adams 's instructions more carefully . " In Footprints Under the Window ( 1933 ) , Chinese American men are portrayed as effeminate threats both to national security and white <unk> . Native Americans received mixed treatment ; those living within the continental United States are portrayed as members of once @-@ noble tribes whose greatness has been diminished by the coming of white men , while those living outside the continental U.S. are " portrayed as uneducated , easily manipulated , or semi @-@ savage . " However , Hispanics are generally treated as equals ; the Hardy Boys as well as their father speak Spanish , and Mexico 's history and culture are treated with respect and admiration . 
 = = = 1959 – 1979 = = = 
 The Hardy Boys volumes were extensively revised beginning in 1959 at the insistence of publishers Grosset & Dunlap , and against the wishes of Harriet Adams . The revision project , which also encompassed the Nancy Drew Mystery Stories , was sparked largely by letters that parents had been writing to Grosset & Dunlap since at least 1948 , complaining about the prevalence of racial stereotypes in the books . Volume 14 in the Hardy Boys series , The Hidden Harbor Mystery ( 1935 ) , was singled out for particular and repeated attention for its portrayal of a black criminal who organizes a gang of black boys and treats whites disrespectfully . As one parent put it , the books were " <unk> the old race @-@ riot type of fear . " As such letters became more frequent , Grosset & Dunlap informed the Stratemeyer Syndicate that the books must be revised and such stereotypes excised . The end result , however , was less the removal of stereotypes than the removal of non @-@ white characters altogether and the creation of an " ethnically cleansed Bayport " . By the 1970s , however , the series began to re @-@ introduce black characters . 
 An additional rationale for the revisions was a drop in sales , which became particularly significant by the mid @-@ 1960s . Accordingly , the revisions focused on streamlining the texts , as well as eliminating stereotypes . The books were shortened from 25 chapters to 20 and the writing style was made terser . Difficult vocabulary words such as " ostensible " and " presaged " were eliminated , as was slang . As a result of the new , more streamlined writing style , the books focus more on non @-@ stop action than on building atmosphere , and " prolonged suspense [ is ] evaporated . " The books were also aimed at an increasingly younger audience with shorter attention spans . For this reason , many commentators find the new versions nothing less than " eviscerated " , foremost among them being the first Hardy Boys ghostwriter , Leslie McFarlane , who agreed with a reporter 's statement that the books had been " gutted " . 
 In the course of revising and modernizing the series , many plots were completely re @-@ written . The Flickering Torch Mystery ( 1943 ) , for example , was changed from a plot involving an actual flickering torch used as a signal by a gang to a plot featuring a rock club called " The Flickering Torch " . When plots were kept , their more lurid elements were eliminated ; <unk> , the villain in The Sinister Sign @-@ Post , was changed from a criminal who compulsively <unk> miniature models of his own hands to a car thief without such eccentricities , and another villain , Pedro Vincenzo , who branded his victims no longer does so in the revised version of The Mark on the Door ( 1934 , rev. 1967 ) . 
 The books became more respectful of law and authority . Even villains no longer smoked or drank , and scenes involving guns and shoot @-@ outs were compressed or eliminated , in favor of criminals simply giving themselves up . The boys , too , become more respectful of rules and of the law ; for example , they no longer drive faster than the speed limit even in pursuit of a villain . The Hardys also became more and more wealthy , prompting the criticism that the " major problem in [ these volumes ] is that the Hardy Boys have risen above any ability to identify with people like the typical boys who read their books . They are members and agents of the adult ruling class , acting on behalf of that ruling class . " 
 = = = 1979 – 2005 = = = 
 The Hardy Boys began to be published in paperback in 1979 . The Hardys were also featured in two new series , the Hardy Boys Casefiles and the Clues Brothers . The latter series , modeled on the Nancy Drew Notebooks , was aimed at a younger audience , and ran from 1997 to 2000 . In contrast , the Casefiles , begun a decade earlier in 1987 , was aimed at an older audience than the Hardy Boys Mystery Stories . In the new series , the Hardys ' work with a secret government organization simply called the " Network " , with which they collaborate to " infiltrate organized crime , battle terrorists and track down assassins around the world . " The Hardys ' personalities are portrayed as more separate and distinct , and they sometimes fight ; in the first of the series , Dead on Target , for example , the brothers brawl after Frank tries to restrain Joe after Joe 's girlfriend , Iola Morton , is killed by a car bomb . In general , the series is more violent , and the Hardy Boys carry various guns ; Lines like " Joe ! Hand me the Uzi ! " are not out of character . Barbara Steiner , a Casefiles ghostwriter , describes a sample plot outline : " I was told that Joe Hardy would get involved with a waitress , a black widow kind of character , and that Joe would get arrested for murder . I was told the emphasis was on high action and suspense and there had to be a cliff @-@ hanger ending to every chapter . " 
 = = = 2005 – present = = = 
 The long @-@ running Hardy Boys Mystery Stories series ended in 2005 and was replaced with a reboot series , The Hardy Boys : Undercover Brothers . In these volumes , the Hardys ' adventures are narrated in the first person , each brother alternating chapters . This fresh approach to telling the adventures reveals two boys quite foreign to how they have been portrayed before , egotistical and jealous , and longtime readers will find few connections with the boys ' previous personalities . The boys ' Aunt Gertrude becomes " Trudy " , their mother Laura is given a career as a librarian , and their father is semi @-@ retired . The boys are given their cases by a secret group known as ATAC , an acronym for American Teens Against Crime . In this new series , the Hardy Boys seem " more like regular kids – who have lots of wild adventures – in these books , which also deal with issues that kids today might have thought about . For example , the second book in the series , Running on Fumes , deals with environmentalists who go a little too far to try to save trees . " The Hardys are also featured in a new graphic novel series , begun in 2005 and produced by <unk> , and a new early chapter book series called The Hardy Boys : Secret Files , begun in 2010 by the publisher Simon & Schuster under their Aladdin imprint . The last Undercover Brothers books were released in January 2012 ( main series ) and July 2012 ( Nancy Drew / Hardy Boys Super Mystery ' 07 series ) . At the time of cancellation , there was one book that had been announced , but was ultimately shelved ( The Case Of The <unk> <unk> ) ; it is unknown whether this was going to be the final title of this unpublished book , since many bookstore websites and Simon & Schuster 's website always had the letters " <unk> " behind the title , meaning that it was a " working title . " 
 February 2013 saw the launch of The Hardy Boys Adventures , a series written in the first @-@ person . For the first time since 1985 , the books will be issued in hardcover , along with paperback editions . 
 = = Books = = 
 The longest @-@ running series of books to feature the Hardy Boys is the Hardy Boys Mystery Stories , sometimes also called the Hardy Boys Mysteries . The series ran from 1927 to 2005 and comprises 190 volumes , although some consider only the first 58 volumes of this series to be part of the Hardy Boys " canon " . The Hardy Boys also appeared in 127 volumes of the Casefiles series and 39 volumes of the Undercover Brothers series , and are currently the heroes of the Hardy Boys Adventures series . The brothers were also featured in a few standalone books , such as The Hardy Boys Ghost Stories , and some crossover titles where they teamed up with other characters such as Nancy Drew or Tom Swift . 
 = = = International publications = = = 
 Hardy Boys books have been extensively reprinted in the United Kingdom , with new illustrations and cover art . The Hardys ' adventures have also been translated into over twenty @-@ five languages , including Norwegian , Swedish , Spanish , Icelandic , Hebrew , French , German , Japanese , Russian , Malay , and Italian . The books are widely read in India , and Japan 's Kyoto <unk> University listed twenty @-@ one Hardy Boys books on its reading list for freshmen in the 1990s . 
 = = Television = = 
 There have been five separate Hardy Boys television adaptions . 
 In the late 1950s , Disney contracted with the Stratemeyer Syndicate and Grosset & Dunlap to produce two Hardy Boys TV serials , starring Tim Considine and Tommy Kirk . The first of the serials , The Mystery of the Applegate Treasure , was aired on The Mickey Mouse Club in 1956 during the show 's second season . To appeal to the show 's audience , the Hardy Boys were portrayed as younger than in the books , seeming to be twelve or thirteen years old ( Considine was 15 and Kirk was 14 during filming ) . The script , written by Jackson Gillis , was based on the first Hardy Boys book , The Tower Treasure , and the serial was aired in 19 episodes of fifteen minutes each with production costs of $ 5 @,@ 700 . A second serial , The Mystery of Ghost Farm , followed in 1957 , with an original story by Jackson Gillis . However , for unknown reasons , no more serials were produced . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s , sales of Hardy Boys books began to drop . The Stratemeyer Syndicate conducted a survey , which revealed that the decline in sales was due to the perceived high cost of the books and to competition from television . As a result , the Syndicate approved an hour @-@ long pilot for a new Hardy Boys television show . The pilot , based on The Mystery of the Chinese Junk , was aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) on September 8 , 1967 and starred Tim <unk> ( later Matheson ) as Joe Hardy and Rick Gates as Frank . Both actors were twenty at the time of production and portrayed the Hardy Boys as young adults rather than children , as they had been in the Mickey Mouse Club serials . The show did poorly , however , and the series was abandoned . 
 Two years later , in 1969 , the American Broadcasting Company aired a Saturday morning cartoon series based on the Hardy Boys ; the series was produced by Filmation and ran from 1969 to 1971 . In this series , the Hardys were members of a rock and roll band . A group of professional musicians performed all the songs on the series , and toured across the United States . The animated series produced two bubblegum music albums " of moderate quality with no commercial success . " The series was notable for being the first cartoon to include a black character . The show took note of current concerns ; although aimed at a young audience , some plot lines dealt with illegal drugs , and the animated Frank and Joe spoke directly to children about not smoking and the importance of wearing seat belts . 
 ABC aired another series featuring the Hardy Boys , The Hardy Boys / Nancy Drew Mysteries , from 1977 to 1979 . The prime time series starred Parker Stevenson and Shaun Cassidy as Frank and Joe Hardy ; Pamela Sue Martin and later Janet Louise Johnson played Nancy Drew . During the first season , the series alternated between episodes featuring the Hardy Boys one week and Nancy Drew the next . The Hardy Boys were cast as young adults ( Stevenson and Cassidy were twenty @-@ four and eighteen respectively during the filming of the first episodes ) to appeal to a prime time television audience . The series featured original plots as well as ones based on Hardy Boys books , among them The Clue of the Screeching Owl , The Disappearing Floor and The Flickering Torch Mystery . The series received an Emmy nomination and featured a number of guest stars , including Kim Cattrall , Ray Milland , Howard Duff , and Ricky Nelson . During the second season , the series format changed to focus more on the Hardy Boys , Nancy Drew appearing mostly in crossover episodes with the brothers ; midway through production of the second season , Martin quit and was replaced by Johnson . The series returned for a third season , dropping the Nancy Drew character completely and shortening its title to The Hardy Boys . 
 In 1995 , a TV show called The Hardy Boys was produced and syndicated by New Line Television , a division of New Line Cinema . The show was co @-@ produced by Canadian broadcasting company Nelvana and was dubbed in French for airing in Quebec and France as well as in the United States . Colin Gray starred as Frank Hardy and Paul <unk> played Joe . The characters were portrayed as in their early twenties , Frank working as a reporter and Joe still in college . The show lasted for only one season of thirteen episodes due to poor ratings . 
 = = Video games = = 
 Several Hardy Boys video games have been released : 
 Hardy Boys Adventure Series by <unk> 
 The Hidden Theft ( PC 2008 ) 
 The Perfect Crime ( PC 2009 ) 
 The Masked Phantom ( PC shelved ) 
 Hardy Boys Nintendo DS series by Her Interactive & Saga 
 Treasure on the Tracks ( Nintendo DS 2009 ) 
 = = In other media = = 
 The Hardy Boys have appeared in several titles in the Nancy Drew computer game series produced by Her Interactive . Her Interactive partnered with Sega to release its own series of Hardy Boys games . The first game in the series is titled " Treasure on the Tracks " and was released in 2009 for Nintendo DS . 
 JoWood Productions and <unk> Games have released a Hardy Boys computer game called The Hidden Theft . Jesse McCartney and Cody Linley are the voices of Frank and Joe . 
 The Hardy Boys have also been used to sell a variety of merchandise over the years , much of it tied to television adaptations . They have appeared in several board games , comic books , coloring books , and activity books , jigsaw puzzles , and lunch boxes ; two LP albums , Here Come the Hardy Boys and Wheels ; a <unk> set , a toy truck , charm bracelets , rings , wristwatches , greeting cards , jeans , and guitars . 
 The Hardy Boys have been parodied in the animated series South Park in an episode titled " The Mystery of the <unk> Deuce " , in which the " Hardly Boys " investigate a 9 / 11 conspiracy theory . 
 In the 1970s , Parker Brothers released The Hardy Boys Mystery Game . In the board game , two to four players take on the role of amateur sleuths and try to solve a mystery . 
 = = Thematic analysis = = 
 The Hardy Boys have been called " a cultural touchstone all over the world . " Their adventures have been continuously in print since 1927 . The series was an instant success : by mid @-@ 1929 over 115 @,@ 000 books had been sold , and as of 2008 the books were selling over a million copies a year ( the first Hardy Boys book , The Tower Treasure , alone sells over 100 @,@ 000 copies a year ) . Worldwide , over 70 million copies of Hardy Books have been sold . A number of critics have tried to explain the reasons for the characters ' longevity . 
 One explanation for this continuing popularity is that the Hardy Boys are simple wish fulfillment . Their adventures allow readers to vicariously experience an escape from the mundane . At the same time , Frank and Joe live ordinary lives when not solving mysteries , allowing readers to identify with characters who seem realistic and whose parents and authority figures are unfailingly supportive and loving . The Hardy Boys also embody an ideal of masculinity : by their very name they " set the stage for a gentrified version of hardness and constructed hardiness as an ideal for modern American males " , part of the " cultural production of self @-@ control and mastery as the revered ideal for the American man . " More controversially , to Meredith Wood , the characters embody not just an ideal of masculinity , but an ideal of white masculinity . She tries to argue that " racist stereotypes are ... fundamental to the success of the Hardy Boys series . " In support of this claim , Wood cites what she says is the replacement of one stereotype ( evil Chinese ) with another ( evil Latin Americans ) in the original and revised versions of Footprints Under the Window . She further claims that this is the reason for the popularity of the Applewood Books reprints of the original , unrevised texts rather that the widely cited blandness of the rewrites . 
 Critic Gary Westfahl considers the Hardy Boys to not display any sexuality . The Hardys ' ignorance of sex and their increasing respect for the law have led to some negative perceptions and many parodies of the characters . They are " well @-@ scrubbed Boy Scout types " who " fetishized <unk> " . They have been parodied numerous times , in such works as The Hardy Boys and the Mystery of Where Babies Come From by Christopher Durang , The Secret of the Old Queen : A Hardy Boys Musical by Timothy Cope and Paul <unk> , and Mabel Maney 's novel A Ghost in the Closet : A Hardly Boys Mystery . National Lampoon ran an article in 1985 entitled " The Undiscovered Notebooks of Franklin W. Dixon " , in which the authors " purport to have stumbled upon some unpublished Hardy Boys manuscripts " , including " The Party Boys and the Case of the Missing Scotch " and " The Hardly Boys in the Dark Secret of the Spooky Closet " . It should be noted that the original series contained references to the attraction felt by Frank and Joe to the female leads . 
 Others have pointed to the Hardy Boys ' relationship with their father as a key to the success of the series . As Tim Morris notes , while Fenton Hardy is portrayed as a great detective , his sons are usually the ones that solve cases , making Fenton Hardy a paradoxical figure : 
 He is always there , he knows everything . He is infallible but always failing . When the boys rescue him , he is typically emaciated , dehydrated , semi @-@ conscious , delirious ; they must succor him with candy bars and water . He can take on any shape , but reveals his identity within moments of doing so . He never discusses a case except the one he 's working on in a given novel , so that his legendary close @-@ <unk> turns to <unk> when a Hardy Boys novel begins , which is of course the only time we ever get to see him . All the same , he only discusses the case in enough detail to mislead his sons and put them in mortal danger . He has systems of information and data @-@ gathering that put the FBI to shame , yet he is always losing his case notes , his ciphers , his microfilm , or some other valuable clue , usually by leaving it in his extra pair of pants , meaning that the Boys have to drive to Canada or Florida or somewhere to retrieve it . I suppose he isn 't mysterious at all ; he simply embodies what many think of their own fathers : utterly powerful , <unk> inept . 
 As a result , the Hardy Boys are able both to be superior to their father and to gain the satisfaction of " fearlessly making their dad proud of them . " 
 In the end , many commentators find that the Hardy Boys are largely successful because their adventures represent " a victory over anxiety " . The Hardy Boys series teaches readers that " although the world can be an out @-@ of @-@ control place , good can triumph over evil , that the worst problems can be solved if we each do our share and our best to help others . " 
 = Brazilian ironclad Rio de Janeiro = 
 The Brazilian ironclad Rio de Janeiro was an armored gunboat ( Portuguese : <unk> <unk> Nr. 3 ) built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the mid @-@ 1860s . Like the other two gunboats she was built in Brazil and was designed as a casemate ironclad . Commissioned in April 1866 , the ship did not enter combat until September , when she bombarded Paraguayan fortifications at Curuzu . Rio de Janeiro hit two mines on 2 September and rapidly sank , taking 53 of her crew with her . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Rio de Janeiro was designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for a small , simple , shallow @-@ draft armored gunboat capable of withstanding heavy fire . A casemate ironclad design was chosen for ease of construction and a bronze ram , 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 5 ft 11 in ) long , was fitted . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . For sea passages the ship 's freeboard could be increased to 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 ft 7 in ) by use of removable bulwarks 1 @.@ 1 meters ( 3 ft 7 in ) high . On riverine operations , the bulkwarks and the ship 's masts , were usually removed . 
 The ship measured 56 @.@ 69 meters ( 186 ft 0 in ) long overall , with a beam of 9 @.@ 19 meters ( 30 ft 2 in ) and had a mean draft of 2 @.@ 62 meters ( 8 ft 7 in ) . Rio de Janeiro normally displaced 871 metric tons ( 857 long tons ) and 1 @,@ 001 metric tons ( 985 long tons ) at deep load . Her crew numbered 148 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Rio de Janeiro had a single John Penn & Sons 2 @-@ cylinder steam engine driving a single 2 @-@ bladed propeller . Her engine was powered by two tubular boilers . The engine produced a total of 420 indicated horsepower ( 310 kW ) which gave the ship a maximum speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . The ship 's funnel was mounted directly in front of her casemate . Rio de Janeiro carried enough coal for six days ' steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Rio de Janeiro mounted two 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loaders and two 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore guns in her casemate . To minimize the possibility of shells or splinters entering the casemate through the gunports they were as small as possible , allowing only a 24 ° -arc of fire for each gun . The rectangular , 9 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 32 ft 2 in ) casemate had two gun ports on each side as well as the front and rear . 
 The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . The gun had a maximum range of 5 @,@ 540 meters ( 6 @,@ 060 yd ) . The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of Rio de Janeiro was made from three layers of wood , each 203 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The ship had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 1 @.@ 52 meters ( 5 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters ( 4 in ) covering the machinery and magazines , 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) elsewhere . The curved deck , as well as the roof of the casemate , was armored with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . The casemate was protected by 102 millimeters of armor on all four sides , backed by 609 millimeters ( 24 @.@ 0 in ) of wood capped with a 102 mm layer of peroba hardwood . 
 = = Service = = 
 Rio de Janeiro was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 28 June 1865 , during the Paraguayan War , which saw Argentina and Brazil allied against Paraguay . She was launched on 18 February 1866 and completed on 1 March 1866 . Commissioned in April she reached the combat zone on 4 May . The ship reached Corrientes , with the ironclad Lima Barros , in July 1866 . On 1 September Rio de Janeiro bombarded the Paraguayan fortifications at Curuzú in company with the other Brazilian ironclads . A 68 @-@ pounder shell entered one of her gunports during the bombardment , killing four men and wounding five . The next day , after her damage was repaired , the ship struck two mines in the Apa River while trying to rendezvous with the other Brazilian ironclads bombarding Curupaity . Rio de Janeiro sank instantly with the loss of 53 of her crew . She remains there , entombed under some 15 meters ( 49 ft 3 in ) of sand . 
 = Action of 18 August 1798 = 
 The Action of 18 August 1798 was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars , fought between the British fourth rate ship HMS Leander and the French ship of the line Généreux . Both ships had been engaged at the Battle of the Nile three weeks earlier , in which a British fleet under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson had destroyed a French fleet at Aboukir Bay on the Mediterranean coast of Egypt . Généreux was one of only four French ships to survive the battle , while Leander had been detached from the British fleet by Nelson on 6 August . On board , Captain Edward Berry sailed as a passenger , charged with carrying despatches to the squadron under Earl St Vincent off Cadiz . On 18 August , while passing the western shore of Crete , Leander was intercepted and attacked by Généreux , which had separated from the rest of the French survivors the day before . 
 Captain Thomas Thompson on Leander initially tried to escape the much larger French ship , but it rapidly became clear that Généreux was faster than his vessel . At 09 : 00 the ships exchanged broadsides , the engagement continuing until 10 : 30 , when Captain Louis @-@ Jean @-@ Nicolas Lejoille made an unsuccessful attempt to board Leander , suffering heavy casualties in the attempt . For another five hours the battle continued , Thompson successfully raking Généreux at one stage but ultimately being outfought and outmanoeuvered by the larger warship . Eventually the wounded Thompson surrendered his dismasted ship by ordering his men to wave a French tricolour on a pike . As French sailors took possession of the British ship , Lejoille encouraged systematic looting of the sailors ' personal possessions , even confiscating the surgeon 's tools in the middle of an operation . Against the established conventions of warfare , he forced the captured crew to assist in bringing Leander safely into Corfu , and denied them food and medical treatment unless they co @-@ operated with their captors . 
 Lejoille 's published account of the action greatly exaggerated the scale of his success , and , although he was highly praised in the French press , he was castigated in Britain for his conduct . Thompson , Berry and most of the British officers were exchanged and acquitted at court martial , and the captains were knighted for their services , while Leander and many of the crew were recaptured in March 1799 by a Russian squadron that seized Corfu , and returned to British control by order of Tsar Paul . Généreux survived another year in the Mediterranean , but was eventually captured off Malta in 1800 by a British squadron under Lord Nelson . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 1 August 1798 a British fleet of 13 ships of the line and one fourth rate ship under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson discovered a French fleet of 13 ships of the line and four frigates at anchor in Aboukir Bay on the Mediterranean coast of Egypt . Nelson had been in pursuit of the French for three months , crossing the Mediterranean three times in his efforts to locate the fleet and a convoy under its protection which carried the French army commanded by Napoleon Bonaparte intended for the invasion of Egypt . The convoy successfully eluded Nelson and the army landed at Alexandria on 31 June , capturing the city and advancing inland . The fleet was too large to anchor in Alexandria harbour and instead Bonaparte ordered its commander , Vice @-@ Admiral François @-@ Paul Brueys D 'Aigalliers to take up station in Aboukir Bay . 
 On discovering the French Nelson attacked immediately , ordering his ships to advance on the French line and engage , beginning the Battle of the Nile . As he closed with the French line , Captain Thomas Foley on the lead ship HMS Goliath realised that there was a gap at the head of the French line wide enough to allow his ship passage . Pushing through the gap , Foley attacked the French van from the landward side , followed by four ships , while Nelson engaged the van from the seaward side with three more . The remainder of the fleet attacked the French centre , except for HMS Culloden which grounded on a shoal and became stuck . The smaller ships in the squadron , the fourth rate HMS Leander and the sloop HMS Mutine , attempted to assist Culloden , but it was soon realised that the ship was immobile . Determined to participate in the battle , Captain Thomas Thompson of Leander abandoned the stranded Culloden and joined the second wave of attack against the French centre , focusing fire on the bow of the 120 @-@ gun French first rate Orient . Within an hour , Orient caught fire under the combined attack of three ships and later exploded , effectively concluding the engagement in Nelson 's favour . During the next two days , the lightly damaged Leander was employed in forcing the surrender of several grounded French vessels , and by the afternoon of 3 August Nelson was in complete control of Aboukir Bay . Only four French ships , two ships of the line and two frigates , escaped , sailing north out of the bay on the afternoon of 2 August under the command of Rear @-@ Admiral Pierre @-@ Charles Villeneuve . 
 Having won the battle , Nelson needed to send despatches to his commander , Vice @-@ Admiral Earl St. Vincent reporting on the destruction of the French Mediterranean fleet . These messages were entrusted to Captain Edward Berry , who had served as Nelson 's flag captain on HMS Vanguard during the battle . Thompson was ordered to escort Berry to St. Vincent , believed to be with the blockade squadron off Cadiz , in Leander . Although Leander had not suffered serious damage in the battle , Thompson had manning problems : casualties from the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife in July 1797 had never been replaced , 14 men had been wounded in the battle at Aboukir Bay and two officers and fifty men had been detached to man the captured French prizes . This left Thompson with just 282 men on board Leander . Following Nelson 's orders , Thompson sailed on 5 August . 
 = = Battle = = 
 After fleeing Aboukir Bay , Admiral Villeneuve had been delayed in the Eastern Mediterranean by northeasterly winds , and on 17 August he decided to split his forces , sailing for Malta with his flagship Guillaume Tell and the two frigates while Captain Louis @-@ Jean @-@ Nicolas Lejoille on Généreux was ordered to Corfu . Before they departed , a number of men were transferred to Généreux , which was already carrying survivors from Timoléon , one of the ships destroyed in Aboukir Bay , giving Généreux a crew of 936 men . As Généreux rounded the island of <unk> off the western tip of Crete ( then known as Candia ) on the following morning , his lookouts reported a sail to the northwest . This vessel was Leander . Learning of the strange ship to the southeast , Captain Thompson deduced that it must be one of Villeneuve 's ships and immediately ordered all sails set in an effort to avoid an unequal combat : Généreux carried 30 more guns than Leander and was more strongly built , carrying a broadside of over 1 @,@ 000 lbs to Leander 's 432 lbs . 
 Assisted by a strong breeze behind his ship that did not carry to Thompson 's vessel , Lejoille rapidly gained on the fourth rate , hoisting Neapolitan and then Ottoman flags in an unsuccessful attempt to confuse Thompson into approaching his ship . By 09 : 00 it was inevitable that Généreux would catch Leander and Thompson responded by shortening sail and turning northwards to aim his broadside at the French ship . Within minutes Généreux had fired a shot across Leander 's bows and Thompson responded to the threat by ordering a full broadside against Généreux . Lejoille replied with his own broadside , and the two ships continued firing as they sailed to the east , Généreux gradually closing the range with Leander . The smaller British vessel took the worst of the damage and at 10 : 30 the combatants were so close that Lejoille decided to attempt to board the British ship , Thompson unable to manoeuvre the battered Leander out of the way . Généreux 's bow collided with the bow of Leander and the French ship swung alongside , Lejoille preparing his men to board . Thompson was prepared for this manoeuvre and mustered his Royal Marines and teams of sailors armed with muskets along the rail of the quarterdeck and poop deck . The volleys of musket fire were sufficient to kill any Frenchman who attempted to board the British ship and the tangled ships turned southwards together , their main batteries continuing to exchange broadsides at extreme close range . Gradually the strengthening breeze dragged Généreux free of Leander , the French ship faster as more of its sails and rigging were intact . 
 As Généreux pulled away to the west , Thompson , who had already been wounded several times , succeeded in turning his battered ship so that his broadside was directed at the stern of Généreux . Despite the collapsed wreckage of the mizzenmast and fore topmast , his gunnery teams managed to cut away enough of the obstruction to fire a raking broadside at the French vessel . Although Leander had inflicted severe damage , the size and power of the French ship was beginning to tell , and Lejoille was able to turn Généreux southwards again . The ships continued exchanging broadsides until 15 : 30 , by which time Leander 's crew had run out of regular shot and were firing scrap metal at the French ship . Eventually Lejoille succeeded in bringing Généreux across Leander 's bow and hailed the British ship , asking if they had surrendered . Unable to continue fighting due to the wreckage that lay across the forward guns , Thompson ordered a French flag raised on a pike , which was sufficient for Lejoille to cease firing . 
 The French were initially unable to take possession of the fourth rate as every single one of the boats on board had been smashed by British shot . In the end , a French midshipman and a boatswain dived into the sea and swam to the British ship to take the formal surrender . Leander had lost a third of the crew : 35 men killed and 57 wounded , the latter including Thompson three times and Berry , who had a piece of human skull lodged in his arm . The ship had been completely dismasted except the stubs of the fore and main masts and the bowsprit , and was leaking badly from dozens of shot holes . Généreux had also been damaged , losing the mizzen topmast and almost losing the foremast as well . Losses on the crowded decks had been far more severe than on Leander , with casualties estimated at 100 killed and 188 wounded , again approximately a third of the total . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The two French sailors that reached Leander immediately began a systematic pillaging of the British officers ' personal effects . Rather than tossing the men into the sea , as historian William James suggests they should have done , Thompson instead ordered one of the British boats to be repaired and launched to transport him to the French ship and bring back Captain Lejoille in the belief that he would end the looting . However , when the French captain arrived he immediately joined his officers , commandeering all but two of Captain Thompson 's shirts and the wounded officer 's cot . When Captain Berry complained that a pair of ornamental pistols had been stolen from him , Lejoille summoned the thief to the quarterdeck and took them for himself . The sailors who accompanied Lejoille were equally voracious : among the many things taken were the ship surgeon Mr Mulberry 's operating tools , stolen in the middle of an operation . Without the correct equipment , the surgeon could not assist the many wounded , including Captain Thompson , who had a musket ball still embedded deeply in his arm . When Captain Berry complained , Lejoille replied " J 'en suis <unk> , mais le fait est , que les Français sont bons au pillage " ( " I 'm sorry , but the fact is , that the French are good at plunder " ) . 
 Dividing the captured British sailors , Lejoille transferred half to Généreux and left half on Leander with a French prize crew under Louis Gabriel <unk> . In direct contravention of the established conventions of war , both sets of prisoners were immediately ordered to effect repairs to the vessels . Only once both ships were ready for the journey to Corfu were the prisoners given bread and water , although the wounded were still denied medical attention . For ten days after the engagement the battered ships sailed northwards against the wind , Généreux forced to attach a tow to Leander to avoid leaving the prize behind . On 28 August , a sail appeared to the south . Panic broke out on Généreux , and Lejoille ordered the prisoners confined below and for preparations to be made to abandon Leander and make all speed for Corfu . The new arrival was in fact the 16 @-@ gun British sloop HMS Mutine under Lieutenant Thomas Bladen Capel , carrying the second copies of Nelson 's despatches to Britain . Capel sighted the ships to the north , but assumed that they were Généreux and Guillaume Tell and so passed by displaying French colours . Lejoille was not fooled by the disguise but did not pursue the small vessel , continuing his passage to Corfu once Mutine had sailed out of sight . 
 At Corfu the prisoners were confined but the wounded were still not provided with treatment : Thompson was only able to have the musket ball removed from his arm when Mulberry was smuggled aboard Généreux in Corfu harbour without Lejoille 's knowledge or permission . The British officers were eventually paroled and returned to Britain , although the carpenter Thomas <unk> was detained because he refused to supply Lejoille with the specifications of Leander 's masts . Most of the ship 's regular seamen were held prisoner at Corfu . They were subsequently encouraged to join the French Navy , Lejoille attempting to enlist them on Généreux when a Russian squadron blockaded the port . Lejoille 's demands were met with a response from a <unk> named George Bannister , who called out " No , you damned French rascal , give us back our little ship , and we 'll fight you again until we sink " . Généreux subsequently escaped from Corfu and anchored off Brindisi , where Lejoille was killed by artillery fire from the Neapolitan castle overlooking the town . The ship was captured in a battle in February 1800 by a squadron under Nelson , off Malta . Leander was captured by a Russian force that seized Corfu in March 1799 and was returned to the Royal Navy by Tsar Paul , along with the sailors held on the island . 
 The account of the battle Captain Lejoille sent to France was inaccurate in a number of important features , describing Leander as a 74 @-@ gun ship and claiming that his men actually boarded the British ship , only to subsequently retreat . Coming so soon after their disaster at the Battle of the Nile and encouraged by Lejoille 's highly inaccurate reports , French newspapers exaggerated the scale of the victory , Le Moniteur Universel publishing several imaginative accounts in the months after the battle . Despite the defeat the action was celebrated in Britain , Thompson and Berry praised for their defiance against a much larger vessel rather than criticised for losing their ship . Lejoille 's conduct in the treatment of his prisoners was derided in the popular press and on 17 December 1798 Thompson , Berry and the ship 's officers were brought before a court martial on HMS America at Sheerness for the loss of their ship and honourably acquitted , the court announcing that ; 
 " The Court having heard the evidence brought forward in support of Captain Thompson 's narrative of the capture of Leander , and having very maturely and deliberately considered the whole , is of opinion , that the gallant and almost unprecedented defence of Captain Thompson , of his majesty 's late ship Leander , against so superior force as that of the Généreux , is deserving of every praise his Country and this Court can give ; and that his conduct , with that of the officers and men under his command , reflects not only the highest honour upon himself and them , but on their Country at large , and the court does therefore most honourably acquit Captain Thompson , his officers , and ship 's company ; and he and they are most honourably acquitted accordingly . " 
 Thompson and Berry were subsequently voted the thanks of Parliament and in December 1798 Berry was made a Knight Bachelor , given the Freedom of the City of London and a chest worth 100 guineas . He was subsequently made commander of the new 80 @-@ gun HMS Foudroyant in early 1799 , and returned to the Mediterranean to operate as Nelson 's flag captain again during the Siege of Malta . Thompson was knighted in January 1799 and given a pension of £ 200 per annum , returning to service that spring as captain of HMS Bellona attached to the Channel Fleet under Lord Bridport . 
 Captain <unk> , who had commanded the bomb @-@ ship chartered to ferry Thompson and his staff from Corfu to Trieste , wrote a letter to answer the charges of pillage . He stated that the 30 @-@ men French prize crew was unarmed , having had to swim to Leander because all the boats on Généreux and Leander had been destroyed in the battle , and that the 200 men still able on Leander would have stopped them from plundering their effects ; that neither the captain not the surgeon of the ship had complained at Corfu nor at Trieste ; and that on his ship , he had seen Thompson with three trunks of personal effects , and the other members of his staff with their own as well . In his <unk> <unk> de la France , Troude accuses William James of further " augmenting " the accusations originally published in the Gazette de Vienne . The allegations are not present in Thompson 's account in The Gentleman 's Magazine . 
 = Cyclone Vaianu ( 2006 ) = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Vaianu ( RSMC Nadi designation : 12F , JTWC designation : 11P ) was the fourth named tropical cyclone of the 2005 – 06 South Pacific cyclone season . The system formed on February 11 , and moved generally towards the south throughout its life . Vaianu ultimately peaked with winds corresponding to Category 1 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , and passed between Fiji and Tonga . Moving into cooler waters , the storm dissipated on February 16 . Although the cyclone avoided land for the most part , it caused heavy rainfall and gusty winds in portions of Tonga . Flooding hit the capital city of Nuku 'alofa , and on some islands , the storm destroyed crops . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on February 9 , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji reported that Tropical Depression 12F had developed within a convergence zone which was located about 140 km ( 87 mi ) to the northeast of Vanua Levu . The depression tracked southeastward , although further development was initially inhibited by wind shear . During the next day , the depression turned towards the southeast and moved into a more favorable environment for intensification . It was then designated as Tropical Depression 11P at 1800 UTC by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . On February 11 , the system significantly organized , and at 1200 UTC that day , RSMC Nadi reported that the depression had intensified into a Category 1 tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale ; it was assigned the name Vaianu . 
 At the time of being upgraded to a cyclone , Vaianu was situated about 190 km ( 120 mi ) to the northwest of Vavaʻu , a Tonga island chain . The storm turned southwestward under the steering currents of a ridge to the southeast . The JTWC recognized the system as a tropical storm on February 12 , and upgraded it into a tropical cyclone shortly thereafter . Vaianu continued to strengthen , and passed west of Tonga . The JTWC reported that the cyclone peaked in intensity at 1200 UTC on February 13 , with maximum sustained 1 @-@ minute winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . RSMC Nadi assessed the storm as having peaked slightly later , with 10 @-@ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , which made it a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone . 
 The storm held its strength for some time as it moved southward between Ono @-@ i @-@ Lau and Tongatapu . Beginning to accelerate , Vaianu entered the area of responsibility of the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre in Wellington , New Zealand . It curved southeastward and slowly deteriorated due to increasing wind shear and colder sea surface temperatures . The JTWC downgraded it to a tropical storm on February 15 , and by the next day it was undergoing an extratropical transition . At 0600 UTC , the JTWC classified it as extratropical , but it remained a powerful storm system for several days as it tracked over the open ocean . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Early on February 10 , RSMC Nadi placed Niuafo 'ou and Niuatoputapu under a tropical cyclone alert , before early the next day extending the alert to the whole of Tonga . Later that day the <unk> , <unk> , and Nomuka islands were placed under a gale warning . The warnings stayed in force until late on February 12 when the gale warning was canceled , and concurrently , southern Tonga was placed under a tropical cyclone warning . These warnings were canceled on February 14 . During the cyclone , RSMC Nadi placed the Lau Islands under a strong wind warning , and a damaging swell warning was declared for Fiji . Businesses in Nuku 'alofa closed as the storm passed by . 
 At the <unk> station , sustained winds blew at 68 km / h ( 42 mph ) during the worst of the storm , with gusts reaching 100 km / h ( 62 mph ) . Barometric pressure there fell to 995 millibars at 1400 UTC on February 13 , and 97 @.@ 7 mm ( 3 @.@ 85 in ) of rain fell . Since the cyclone remained predominately over water , its effects were limited . Nonetheless , portions of Tongan experienced torrential rainfall and high winds . On Tongatapu and Eua , the storm inflicted extensive crop damage , and it is estimated that 70 % of the banana crop was destroyed . While little property damage took place , the storm caused power outages across its path that took up a week to fully restore . In Nuku 'alofa , the capital of Tonga , flooding of low @-@ lying areas reportedly shut down the city for two days . The high winds brought down trees and dispersed debris throughout the region , while schools were forced to close . 
 = Air India Express Flight 812 = 
 Air India Express Flight 812 was a scheduled passenger service from Dubai to Mangalore , which , at around 01 : 00 UTC on 22 May 2010 , overshot the runway on landing , fell over a cliff , and caught fire , spreading wreckage across the surrounding hillside . Of the 160 passengers and six crew members on board , only eight passengers survived . 
 With its 158 fatalities , the accident was the third deadliest aviation disaster in India , after the 1996 <unk> <unk> mid @-@ air collision , which killed 349 , and the 1978 crash of Air India Flight 855 , which killed 213 . It marked the first major Indian aviation accident since the July 2000 crash of Alliance Air Flight <unk> in Patna . The accident is the deadliest crash of a 737 aircraft ( all series ) and the eighth hull loss of a Boeing 737 @-@ 800 aircraft . The crash caused the highest number of aviation fatalities in 2010 and was the second of the year to involve a 737 @-@ 800 . It was the second time that an aircraft had overshot a runway at Mangalore . 
 = = Aircraft and crew = = 
 The accident involved a Boeing 737 @-@ 800 aircraft , one of Boeing 's 737 Next Generation series , with aircraft registration VT – <unk> and manufacturer 's serial number <unk> , line number <unk> . The aircraft first flew on 20 December 2007 with the Boeing test registration <unk> and was delivered on 18 January 2008 . Commanded by Captain Zlatko Glušica , the remaining crew consisted of first officer <unk> Singh Ahluwalia and four flight attendants . Glušica ( a former employee of Jat Airways of Serbia ) , aged 55 , a British and Serbian national with over 10 @,@ 000 hours of flying and over 7 @,@ 500 hours of command experience , and Ahluwalia ( a former employee of Jat Airways who joined Air India Express in April 2009 ) were both killed in the incident . Both pilots were based in Mangalore . 
 = = Flight = = 
 The flight departed Dubai International Airport at 01 : 06 GST ( 21 : 06 UTC ) . It crashed upon landing at Mangalore International Airport at 06 : 05 IST ( 00 : 35 UTC ) . Situated in a hilly area , the airport is one of seven Indian airports designated as a " critical airfield " by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( DGCA ) . DGCA rules at critical airfields prohibit " supervised take offs and landings " , so that only the captain ( not the first officer ) may pilot an aircraft during take @-@ off and landing . The airport is one of three airports in India having table top runways ( the others being Kozhikode and <unk> ) that require heightened awareness and a very precise landing approach . 
 = = Crash = = 
 After touching down on the 8 @,@ 033 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 448 m ) runway 24 , the plane overran and crashed down the hill at its far end . The final conversations between Air traffic control ( ATC ) and the pilot prior to the landing showed no indication of distress . 
 The then Civil Aviation Minister , Praful Patel said that the aircraft was following an Instrument landing system ( ILS ) approach for landing on the newer , longer , runway , which was commissioned in 2006 . The pilot reported to ATC that it was ' established ' on an ILS approach about 4 @.@ 3 miles ( 6 @.@ 9 km ) from touchdown ; landing clearance was then given at 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) from touchdown . The aeroplane concluded its ILS approach on runway 24 , touching down 5 @,@ 200 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) from the start of the runway , leaving 2 @,@ 800 feet ( 850 m ) in which to stop . It overran the runway and ploughed through a 90 @-@ metre ( 300 ft ) sand arrestor bed which did not stop it . As the aircraft passed the arrestor bed , its starboard wing collided with the concrete socket of the ILS localiser antenna ; it finally plunged over the edge of the table @-@ top about 790 feet ( 240 m ) beyond the end of the runway and down the steep hillside coming to a stop 660 to 980 feet ( 200 to 300 m ) metres past the top of the slope . 
 " The plane broke in two " said one survivor " and a dense black smoke invaded the cabin . I jumped out through an opening in the window . Six other passengers followed me . We fled , with the help of the inhabitants of the nearby village " . Television footage from shortly after the crash showed the remains of the aircraft on fire and lying on its belly with smoke rising from the wreckage . The minister also stated that weather conditions were normal with a visibility of 3 @.@ 7 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) , and said wind conditions were calm and there was no rain at the time of the crash . A drizzle started only after the accident . 
 = = Victims = = 
 Apart from the six crew members , a total of 160 passengers were on board at the time of the crash . Although there were 169 names on the original passenger list , nine did not board the flight . All the bodies were recovered from the wreckage . Karnataka Home Minister V. S. Acharya said eight people were initially reported to have survived , although one person died of his injuries — this was however refuted by an Air India spokesman who confirmed that all initial survivors were alive . This confusion arose after fire fighters rescued a little girl who died on the way to hospital . The airport manager at Mangalore , Peter Abraham confirmed that there were difficulties when trying to reach the plane . 
 After the crash , some comments surfaced online , which poke fun at the victims and their families . The comments appeared on a news website , which has been taken down . 
 On 27 July 2010 , the names of all the victims were inscribed on a memorial installed near the crash site which was destroyed by vandals on 5 October 2010 . 
 = = Rescue and response = = 
 Local villagers were among the first on the scene to help while an estimated 15 fire trucks , 20 ambulances and 100 rescue workers were immediately allocated to rescue operations . Karnataka Western Range Inspector General of Police , Gopal <unk> , said that eight to ten people had been moved to hospitals , and that the Karnataka Police force , bomb squad , Karnataka Fire and Emergency Services , Karnataka State Reserve Police and all hospitals were working together to help out . The Central Industrial Security Force ( CISF ) sent 150 personnel to Mangalore to help in the relief and rescue operations . Bodies of all of the deceased were recovered from the crash site on the day of the crash , with relatives of the deceased receiving 87 of the bodies . 
 After the rapid establishment of a special emergency information service , Praful Patel , Indian Civil Aviation minister , arrived from New Delhi to be at the scene and the one @-@ year @-@ in @-@ office celebrations of the UPA government 's second tenure were postponed . Patel was soon followed by Karnataka Chief Minister B. S. Yeddyurappa and Kerala Chief Minister V. S. <unk> to take control of the situation . The chairperson of the governing UPA , Sonia Gandhi issued a message of grief and wished a " speedy recovery " to all . The Indian Minister for Civil Aviation , Praful Patel , took moral responsibility for the accident and offered to resign his post , an offer rejected by the Prime Minister of India , Manmohan Singh . Many countries and organisations expressed sorrow and condolences to the people of India over the crash . The accident was predicted to cost the insurers , and their <unk> ₹ 4 billion ( US $ 60 million ) . Air India 's insurance company paid out ₹ 900 million ( US $ 10 million ) in settlement of the hull loss , and the company had already received ₹ 1 @.@ 38 billion ( US $ 20 million ) , that is 60 per cent of the estimated ₹ 2 @.@ 3 billion ( US $ 30 million ) . School of social Work , <unk> <unk> conducted a study on Psychosocial Support for Survivors and Families of the Victims of Mangalore Air Crash to give the <unk> @-@ emotional support . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Initial investigations revealed that the plane landed at least 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) beyond the usual touch down point on Mangalore 's new 8 @,@ 040 @-@ foot ( 2 @,@ 450 m ) runway 24 . A team of airline officials , staff and officials from the Airports Authority of India and officers of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( India ) were rushed to the scene to investigate the accident and assist with rescue efforts . Boeing also announced that a team would be sent to provide technical assistance following a request from Indian authorities . The Directorate General of Civil Aviation ordered an inquiry into the crash , which began the same day . The NTSB also assisted the investigation by sending a team of specialists including a senior air safety investigator , a flight operations specialist , an aircraft systems specialist and technical advisers for Boeing and the Federal Aviation Administration . 
 Captain Glušica was given clearance to land , however , he suddenly aborted the attempted landing . The aircraft 's throttle handle was found in the forward position , suggesting that the pilot had attempted to abort the landing and take off again . The co @-@ pilot Ahluwalia had warned his commander three times to go around instead of landing ; the first of these warnings had come 2 @.@ 5 miles before the runway threshold . 
 The cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) was recovered on 23 May , and the flight data recorder ( FDR ) two days later . The recorders were sent to New Delhi by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation for data acquisition and analysis and subsequently to the US NTSB for investigation . DGCA official Zaidi claimed " better data protection " while unnamed officials mentioned heavy damage to the devices . In direct response to the accident the Government of India decided to set up an independent air accident enquiry board called the Civil Aviation Authority that would function independently of the DGCA . Effectively this meant that the DGCA would be the regulator and the CAA the investigator . The Director General of the DGCA said that it would be set up though legislation , and would comply with the recommendations of the International Civil Aviation Organization . 
 The enquiry report submitted by the Civil Aviation Ministry claimed that Glušica slept for over 90 minutes during the flight . The Air India Express IX 812 Boeing 737 @-@ 800 carrying 166 people from Dubai including the crew , crashed while negotiating a tricky landing at Mangalore city 's " table @-@ top " airport overlooking a ravine . The American National Transportation Safety Board says it was the first instance of snoring recorded on a Cockpit Voice Recorder ( CVR ) . Analysis of the accident revealed that had the pilot " deployed détente reverse thrust and applied maximum manual braking at touchdown " , the aircraft could have been stopped within the paved overrun area of the runway . The captain had exacerbated the long landing by attempting a go @-@ around following deployment of the thrust reversers . 
 = = Court of Inquiry = = 
 On 3 June 2010 , the Government of India appointed Former Vice Chief of Air Staff , Air Marshal Bhushan Nilkanth Gokhale as head of a Court of Inquiry to investigate the air crash . The " Gokhale Inquiry " was to investigate the reasons behind the crash , and submit its findings by 31 August 2010 , a deadline later extended by a month to 30 September 2010 . The Government also appointed four experts to this Court of Inquiry to assist in the investigation . The Court of Inquiry started its investigations by visiting the crash site on 7 June 2010 , and visited all eight crash survivors to gather information . 
 On 17 August 2010 , the Court of Inquiry began a three @-@ day public hearing in Mangalore to interview airport officials and witnesses . On day one , airport and airline officials deposed that the aircraft had approached at an altitude higher than usual , and that it had landed beyond the landing zone ( <unk> ) . They also mentioned that the airport 's radar was operational from 20 May 2010 . The airport chief fire officer testified that crash tenders had taken four minutes to reach the aircraft because the road leading away from the airport perimeter to the crash site was very narrow and undulating . On day two , a transcript of the cockpit to ATC conversation was released , which indicated that the co @-@ pilot had suggested a " go around " after the pilot informed ATC that it was ' clear to land ' . 
 Doctors who conducted post mortems on the bodies recovered recorded that most victims had died of burns . On day four Air India 's flight safety officer informed the inquiry that the aircraft 's thrust lever and thrust reverse levers were both in the forward position , possibly indicating that the pilot intended to go around . The inquiry panel stated that information from the FDR would be released at the next hearing of the Court of Inquiry in New Delhi on 3 September 2010 , and that of the CVR soon after . The Court of Inquiry would submit its report on 30 September 2010 . 
 On 8 September 2010 , details from the CVR and FDR were presented to the Court of Inquiry . The CVR analysis revealed that one of the pilots was asleep in the cockpit . For 110 minutes the CVR had picked up no conversation from the pilots , with the report adding that the sound of nasal snoring and deep breathing could be heard during this recording . The FDR analysis indicated that the flight started its final descent at an altitude of 4 @,@ 400 feet ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) , instead of the normal 2 @,@ 000 feet ( 610 m ) . The aircraft also touched down at the 4 @,@ 638 @-@ foot ( 1 @,@ 414 m ) mark on the runway instead of the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 300 m ) mark , whereupon the pilot then tried to take off with just 800 feet ( 240 m ) of the runway remaining which resulted in the crash . Both pilots had been aware of the wrong flight path since they are both heard saying " Flight is taking wrong path and wrong side " , while the aircraft 's instruments had given repeated warnings of this . 
 On 16 November 2010 , five months after the Court of Inquiry was constituted , it submitted its report with input from the NTSB and Boeing , and stated that pilot error was the cause of the accident since the flight path was incorrect . 
 As of Jan 2013 , Directorate General of Civil Aviation ( DGCA ) , AAI and Ministry of Aviation , and the Government of India have not implemented the recommendations of the 812 crash inquiry committee . Work on runway lengthening has not started . 812 Foundation , a Mangalore @-@ based trust , has filed the criminal charges for negligence against regulatory authorities and the airline . Regulatory authority and other organisations named in the petition are thinking of seeking anticipatory bail for their top officials , as the petition seeks non @-@ bailable arrest warrants against those responsible . 
 = = Compensation = = 
 The Prime Minister of India , Manmohan Singh announced ₹ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 000 ) or € 3 @,@ 390 ) for the families of the dead and ₹ 50 @,@ 000 ( US $ 740 ) for the injured to be allocated from the Prime Minister 's National Relief Fund . Karnataka Chief Minister Yeddyurappa has also announced compensation of ₹ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 000 ) to the families of the dead . In addition to this , the Civil Aviation Ministry advised that the Airline will provide up to ₹ 7 @.@ 2 million ( US $ 106 @,@ 990 ) to family members of each victim as per the provisions of the Indian Carriage by Air ( Amendment ) Act which follows the Montreal Convention . 
 The Airline announced interim compensation of ₹ 1 million ( US $ 14 @,@ 860 ) for passengers above 12 years of age , ₹ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 7 @,@ 400 ) for passengers below 12 years of age and ₹ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 3 @,@ 000 ) for every injured passenger . This compensation is over and above the ex @-@ gratia payment announced by the Prime Minister . Additionally , Air India has said it would offer jobs to the survivors . As of 11 June 2010 an amount of ₹ 170 million ( US $ 3 million ) had been distributed as compensation to the families of the victims and to the eight survivors . Victims ' families have become increasingly vocal as to the inequitable nature of compensation paid out by Air India , and also of the alleged hostile attitude of the airline 's counsel . 
 Members of the Democratic Youth Federation of India ( DYFI ) along with Kasargod MP P <unk> staged a protest on 8 September 2010 at the airline 's office in Mangalore where they submitted a memorandum to officials demanding that families of the victims receive early and equitable settlements of compensation due . They also demanded the settlement process be made more transparent by opening it to the media rather than holding sessions in camera . 
 On 20 July 2011 , the Kerala High Court based on the petition filed by one of the victims ruled that Air India was liable to pay a no fault liability of one lakh SDR or the Indian rupee equivalent of ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 111 @,@ 450 ) . In its ruling the court noted that India was a signatory to the Montreal Convention , " It is clear that the intention of lawmakers was to bring about a parity in the matter of payment of compensation to the passengers , irrespective of class of travel , while providing for a ' two tier system ' of compensation as adopted in Montreal convention . " The court further ruled that this was over and above any other compensation that the petitioners are entitled to . Air India appealed this order in the Kerala High Court and on 25 August 2011 , the division bench stayed the single bench order on compensation of ₹ 7 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 111 @,@ 450 ) . However , on 5 September 2011 based on a petition by relatives of one of the deceased passengers the Kerala High Court ordered Air India to pay an interim compensation of ₹ 1 million ( US $ 14 @,@ 860 ) . 
 = Ji Yeon = 
 " Ji Yeon " ( / <unk> <unk> / ; from Korean <unk> [ <unk> <unk> ] ) is the seventh episode of the American Broadcasting Company 's fourth season of Lost and 79th episode overall . The episode was written by co @-@ executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz , and directed by regular Lost editor Stephen Semel . It was first aired in the United States and Canada on March 13 , 2008 . It is the first episode to feature Harold Perrineau since his departure at the last episode of the second season , and features Zoë Bell as a guest star . " Ji Yeon " was watched by 12 million American viewers and received mostly positive reviews . Before the premiere of the fourth season , the principal cast of Lost called " Ji Yeon " the most shocking of the first seven episodes . The title of the episode is the name of Sun 's daughter , and means " flower of wisdom . " 
 The episode 's story focuses on married couple Sun ( Yunjin Kim ) and Jin Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) . In late 2004 , on the island , they debate whether to defect to the rival faction of survivors led by John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) . Intercut throughout the episode , a series of off @-@ island scenes show Sun about to give birth and Jin experiencing a series of difficulties in his efforts to reach the hospital with a gift of a stuffed panda . The ending shows that Jin 's and Sun 's scenes do not focus on the same birth ; Jin 's scenes are flashbacks to events before the plane crash , while Sun 's are flashforwards to sometime after she escapes the island . A subplot follows Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) and Desmond Hume ( Henry Ian Cusick ) on board the Kahana , where they learn more about the freighter 's mission and find somebody they once knew . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode presents four storylines , three of which follow Jin and Sun . The other storyline focuses upon Sayid and Desmond on the freighter Kahana . 
 On the island , Sun becomes increasingly worried about the intentions of Kahana crew . Despite Juliet Burke 's ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) warning to Sun that women who conceive on the island die during their second trimester , Sun arranges to defect with Jin to the rival faction led by John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , who does not want to leave the island . Juliet tries to stop Sun from leaving by telling Jin that Sun had an affair , causing him to angrily back out of the journey at the last minute . After having a heartfelt conversation while fishing with Bernard Nadler , the only other married man on the island , he forgives Sun , who assures him that the baby is his . 
 On the Kahana , Desmond and Sayid are still waiting to speak to the captain of the freighter , Gault ( Grant Bowler ) . When they are taken to see him , Regina ( Zoë Bell ) jumps off the side of the ship , having wrapped herself in chains , but Gault dismisses it as " a heightened case of cabin fever " , and asserts that losing her is better than losing several more in saving her . He says that he is employed by Charles Widmore ( Alan Dale ) , Desmond 's girlfriend 's father , and later takes them into his cabin , and tells that Benjamin Linus ( Michael Emerson ) faked the plane crash by expending tremendous resources in the process and procured 324 dead bodies to make everybody believe that all the passengers were dead . Gault proceeds by saying that is one of the reasons why Mr. Widmore is keen on finding Benjamin Linus and the island . After their meeting , Desmond and Sayid are relocated to a different part of the ship , where they meet Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau , Jr . ) working as a deckhand under the alias " Kevin Johnson " . 
 The episode 's off @-@ island storyline seemingly depicts Jin rushing to the hospital while Sun , who has become one of the " Oceanic Six " , goes into labor . Jin 's journey to the hospital is marred by several unfortunate incidents , including difficulty in purchasing a stuffed panda and his cell phone being broken . Sun gives birth to a girl , who she names " Ji Yeon " , the name chosen by Jin . The final off @-@ island scenes establish that Jin and Sun 's stories are separate ; Jin 's story is set in the past , two months into his marriage to Sun . He was rushing to the birth of a Chinese ambassador 's grandchild to deliver the panda as a gift on behalf of his employer , Sun 's father . In the final flashforward , Sun and her daughter are visited by Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) , who takes her to pay her respects to Jin . His tombstone indicates that he died on the day of the crash of Oceanic 815 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was filmed in late October and early November 2007 , primarily on the island of Oahu , where Lost is filmed . Several days before shooting , Daniel Dae Kim was arrested for driving under the influence of alcohol . His arrest prompted speculation about his future on the series , due to co @-@ stars Michelle Rodriguez ( Ana @-@ Lucia Cortez ) and Cynthia Watros ( Libby ) leaving Lost after DUI arrests . With the revelation of Sun as one of the Oceanic Six , all six members have been revealed . Executive producers and writers Carlton Cuse and Damon Lindelof left the identity of the sixth deliberately ambiguous to provoke debate after the episode . 
 " Ji Yeon " is the first episode since the second season finale , " Live Together , Die Alone " , in which Harold Perrineau , Jr. appears as Michael Dawson . Perrineau was the only actor from the original cast of fourteen to not appear in the third season of Lost . Perrineau was " really hurt " by the creative decision to leave him out , and went on to appear in the British horror film 28 Weeks Later and Demons , a pilot for CBS . When the latter was not picked up by CBS , Perrineau returned to Lost ; his return was confirmed during Lost 's slot at the 2007 Comic @-@ Con International . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Ji Yeon " was watched live or recorded and watched within six hours of broadcast by 12 @.@ 083 million viewers in the United States , achieving a 4 @.@ 9 / 13 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic and ranking fourth for the week in viewers . The episode brought in 689 000 viewers in Australia and was in the top five key adults 25 – 54 and 18 – 49 demographics for the night . 
 Mark Madley of the National Post praised the episode for " [ continuing ] the near @-@ perfect season four " . He asked " has there ever been an episode that answered so many questions yet advanced the plot so little ? " , but immediately noted that the question was not negative . He also found Jin 's line " I will hunt you down and rip your head off ! " particularly humorous . Tim Goodman , critic for the San Francisco Chronicle , thought highly of the romantic plot of the episode , and more generally the characters of Jin and Sun , noting that " Lost has always treated the Jin and Sun relationship with both interest and respect " and " few primetime televised portrayals of intimacy among Asians have been this well done . " Matt Roush of TV Guide stated that the episode made him cry , the " ultimate compliment in the Roush playbook " . Later in his review , he commented he was " already a puddle of emotion before the climactic reveal " . In comparison , the TMZ.com staff gave a largely negative review . The reviewer thought that " [ they ] feel like [ Lindelof and Cuse ] purposely manipulated us with Jin 's flashback and the reveal really wasn 't even all that interesting as a result . And the reveal of Michael being the man on the boat was as un @-@ suspenseful as it was predictable " , and thought Sun 's request for Jin to be at her bedside was deceptive , and rehashed Jack Shephard 's ( Matthew Fox ) comment about his deceased father in " Through the Looking Glass " . Television Without Pity 's LTG gave the episode an " A- " , called it " trippy " and " confusing " and also praised Yunjin Kim and Daniel Dae Kim 's performances as " fantastic " . 
 = Russian monitor Admiral Chichagov = 
 The Russian monitor Admiral Chichagov ( Russian : <unk> <unk> ) was the second and last of the two Admiral Spiridov @-@ class monitors built for the Imperial Russian Navy in the late 1860s . The ship was assigned to the Baltic Fleet upon completion and remained there for her entire career . Aside from an incident where she ran aground , her service was uneventful . The sister ships were reclassified as coast @-@ defense ironclads in 1892 before they became training ships in 1900 . Admiral Spiridov was stricken from the Navy List in 1907 and became a target ship . Her ultimate fate is unknown . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Admiral Spiridov @-@ class monitors were significantly larger than their predecessors , the Charodeika class , and were 254 feet ( 77 @.@ 4 m ) long at the waterline . They had a beam of 43 feet ( 13 @.@ 1 m ) and a maximum draft of 21 feet ( 6 @.@ 4 m ) . The ships were designed to displace 3 @,@ 196 long tons ( 3 @,@ 247 t ) , but turned out to be overweight and actually displaced 3 @,@ 505 to 3 @,@ 587 long tons ( 3 @,@ 561 to 3 @,@ 645 t ) . Their crew consisted of 280 officers and crewmen . The Admiral Spiridov class had a single two @-@ cylinder horizontal direct @-@ acting steam engine . It drove a single propeller using steam provided by four rectangular fire @-@ tube boilers . The engine was designed to produce a total of 2 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) which gave the ships speeds between 9 @.@ 1 – 9 @.@ 5 knots ( 16 @.@ 9 – 17 @.@ 6 km / h ; 10 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 9 mph ) when they ran their initial sea trials in 1869 . The ship carried 280 long tons ( 280 t ) of coal which gave her a range of 1 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ; 1 @,@ 600 mi ) at full speed . She was fitted with three masts in a light fore @-@ and @-@ aft rig to steady her and aid in maneuvering . 
 The monitors were ultimately designed to be armed with four Obukhov 9 @-@ inch rifled guns , a pair in each turret . In 1874 – 75 the guns were replaced by a single 11 @-@ inch ( 279 mm ) gun . During the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 78 , a 9 @-@ inch mortar was fitted to attack the thin deck armor of enemy ships , but accuracy was poor and they were later removed , probably in the early 1880s . An improved , more powerful , 11 @-@ inch gun was installed aboard Admiral Chichagov during the 1880s . Light guns for use against torpedo boats were added to the Admiral Spiridov @-@ class ships during the Russo @-@ Turkish War when a pair of 4 @-@ pounder 3 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 86 mm ) guns were mounted on the roofs of each gun turret . A variety of other small guns are known to have been fitted , but details are lacking . The ships could also carry 12 to 15 mines . 
 The hull of the Admiral Spiridov @-@ class monitors was completely covered by wrought @-@ iron armor that was 5 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 5 inches ( 140 to 165 mm ) thick amidships and thinned to 3 @.@ 25 inches ( 83 mm ) aft and 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 89 mm ) forward of the main belt . The turrets had 6 inches of armor , except around the gun ports , where it thickened to 6 @.@ 5 inches . The conning tower was 5 inches ( 127 mm ) thick and the deck armor was in two layers with a total thickness of 1 inch . 
